
Tourism starting to bleed the Lickan Antay people of the Atacama desert dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/31/tourism-bleed-lickan-antay-atacama-desert-chile-los-flamencos>
The drive for conservation around the world is coming at a heavy human cost, 
with the world’s most vulnerable people being evicted in the name of protecting 
fragile habitats.John Vidal reveals the many indigenous peoples evicted from 
their land in recent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/28/exiles-human-cost-of-conservation-indigenous-peoples-eco-tourism>
, from the San in Botswana to the Baiga of India. WriterMarine Gauthier and 
photographerRiccardo Pravettoni also provide in-depth reports on three tribal 
peoples under pressure. TheMongolian Dukha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/28/reindeer-conservation-threatens-ruination-mongolia-dukha>
 are facing ruination after the snow forest in which they live became a 
national reserve. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, theindigenous Mbuti 
people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/30/clashing-conservation-saving-democratic-republic-congo-forest-pygmies-drc>
 were initially banned from their ancestral lands when the government created 
the Itombwe nature reserve, but are now working with conservationists to 
preserve the forest. And in northern Chile, the Los Flamencos reserve is the 
first in the country to be co-managed by the state and indigenous people – the
Lickan Antay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/31/tourism-bleed-lickan-antay-atacama-desert-chile-los-flamencos>
 of the Atacama desert – yet with tourism encroaching on water sources their 
existence is still a battle.

West Africa correspondent Ruth Maclean reports on the latest study into 
poverty in Africa, and the toll it will take on the continent’s children. 
Research from the Overseas Development Institute reveals thathigh birth rates 
and poverty would undermine a generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/high-birth-rates-poverty-undermine-generation-african-children-odi-report>
. If nothing is done to reverse existing trends, the young people of Africa 
will represent nearly half the world’s poorest by 2030. Maclean also 
investigates the dire situation fornewborn babies and their mothers in Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/29/giving-birth-guinea-maternal-health-life-death-lottery-bereft-midwives-medicine>
, where maternal health services are desperately scarce: of every 1,000 babies 
born, 123 die before their fifth birthday.


Elsewhere
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftribes-under-threat-conservation-africa-children-locked-in-poverty-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb71566986ac0d860ea02ed4016168636636f33e1%2F0_0_795_477%2F795.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tribes%20under%20threat%20from%20conservation%2C%20and%20Africa's%20children%20locked%20in%20poverty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftribes-under-threat-conservation-africa-children-locked-in-poverty-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tribes%20under%20threat%20from%20conservation%2C%20and%20Africa%27s%20children%20locked%20in%20poverty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftribes-under-threat-conservation-africa-children-locked-in-poverty-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb71566986ac0d860ea02ed4016168636636f33e1%2F0_0_795_477%2F795.jpg>
Girls learn app coding to navigate a way out of Mumbai slum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/30/girls-india-learn-app-coding-navigate-way-out-mumbai-slum>

‘We just want to live’ – on the road with South Sudan’s refugees  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/south-sudanese-refugees-scars-civil-war-uganda>


BK Gulf dragged its heels over Qatar labour abuses, claim migrant workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/bk-gulf-labour-abuses-qatar-migrant-workers-nepal-balfour-beatty>


Brazil’s Sea Angels sign up to save more lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/01/brazil-sea-angels-lifeguard-cant-swim-save-lives-rnli-water-safety>

India’s silk road offers path to prosperity but not equality for female weavers
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/05/india-silk-road-prosperity-not-equality-female-weavers-west-bengal>


Decrepit infrastructure denies millions urgent natural disaster aid  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/decrepit-infrastructure-denies-millions-urgent-natural-disaster-aid-report-says>

Why are Kenya’s students torching their own dormitories? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/02/why-are-kenya-students-torching-their-own-dormitories>


Children taught to prepare for Bangladesh’s killer quakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/24/lessons-in-disaster-children-taught-to-prepare-for-bangladesh-killer-quakes-south-asia>

England is the dream for many migrants trapped on the Italian Riviera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/31/england-dream-migrants-italian-riviera-ventimiglia-french-border>

Women walk alone to reclaim India’s streets from fear and harassment  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/26/women-walk-alone-blank-noise-india-reclaim-streets-fear-harrassment>


Multimedia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftribes-under-threat-conservation-africa-children-locked-in-poverty-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3767a8c38a33bce834c5aefa12726402a9f8be68%2F0_873_3339_2003%2F3339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tribes%20under%20threat%20from%20conservation%2C%20and%20Africa's%20children%20locked%20in%20poverty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftribes-under-threat-conservation-africa-children-locked-in-poverty-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tribes%20under%20threat%20from%20conservation%2C%20and%20Africa%27s%20children%20locked%20in%20poverty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Ftribes-under-threat-conservation-africa-children-locked-in-poverty-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3767a8c38a33bce834c5aefa12726402a9f8be68%2F0_873_3339_2003%2F3339.jpg>
Remote Congo town gets water on tap for first time in a generation – in 
pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/02/water-on-tap-democratic-republic-congo-remote-town-world-water-week-in-pictures>

Child soldiers in Burundi swap conflict for classroom – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/05/child-soldiers-burundi-swap-conflict-for-classroom-in-pictures>


Keeping faeces, flies and food separate to save lives in Angola – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/aug/29/keeping-faeces-flies-and-food-separate-to-save-lives-in-angola-in-pictures>


Drowning: do you know enough about this global killer? – quiz  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/01/drowning-do-you-know-enough-global-killer-quiz>


Book extract

In an excerpt from Should Rich Nations Help the Poor? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/26/looking-good-making-fast-buck-should-rich-nations-help-the-poor-david-hulme-book-extract>
 David Hulme examines the mix of altruism and self-interest that rich states 
use to justify support for foreign aid.

What you said

On Marine Gauthier’s report on the state co-managing a national reserve with 
theLickan Antay people of the Atacama desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/31/tourism-bleed-lickan-antay-atacama-desert-chile-los-flamencos>
, petermcclure said:

By far the most participatory configuration I’ve ever seen. And it includes 
the recognition that indigenous people have a good understanding of their world.

But on the other side is the same kind of exploitation we’ve seen in other 
parks worldwide, where outsiders with the capital to buy the tour buses and 
advertise their “attractions” bring in the tourists and send all the profits 
away to their shareholders.

The cooperative model only works if it includes equal opportunities for local 
people to make money, too.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Humanosphere reports on how Uganda is edging closer to eradicating river 
blindness 
<http://www.humanosphere.org/global-health/2016/09/uganda-scores-major-victory-against-river-blindness-nears-eradication/>
. Tom Murphy writes that the government has announced that it has eliminated 
the disease in four areas of focus in the country, leaving only two more 
regions with active transmission of the parasite.

And finally …


Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian> on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 