
Try as it might to instil an element of professionalism on its site, 
Kickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> disasters 
still seem to be an alarmingly common occurrence.

Even so, it’s rare for two major projects to run into trouble on the same day, 
but that’s what happened on Tuesday. First,the British “nano drone” Zano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/07/nano-drone-zano-kickstarter-crowdfunding>
 declared bankruptcy less than a year after it raised a record £2.3m in 
funding. And then the Coolest Cooler, the second highest-grossing kickstarter 
campaign of all time, angered its backers by turning to Amazon to sell stock in 
an effort to raise enough money to continue production of its units for backers 
themselves.

In January 2015, Zano was a success story. The company managed to raise 
millions on Kickstarter for what it called “the world’s most sophisticated nano 
drone”. The device as planned would be controllable from mobile phones – like 
many drones – but could also be ordered to “follow” its owner by maintaining a 
constant position from their smartphone.

Unsurprisingly, the £170 device was marketed partially on its potential for 
self-portraits: “Taking your selfies to new heights” was one tagline. It went 
on to become the most successful European project on Kickstarter to date.


But since the Kickstarter campaign ended, questions were raised over whether 
backers would ever see the fruits of their purchase. The drone’s release date 
slipped, from June in January to July by May, and then further and further. 
Visits from theBBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/34787404> and Ars Technica 
<http://arstechnica.com/business/2015/05/dirt-cheap-drones-is-europes-largest-kickstarter-in-over-its-head/>
 were met with a failure to demonstrate a finished product – or, in the case of 
Ars, to demonstrate anything at all.

Eventually, the first batches of finished drones began to ship, to still 
further problems: users reported widespread technical errors with their 
devices, and were given little remedy. To date, the company has only shipped 
600 of the 15,000 drones ordered. And then, on 11 November, the company’s lead 
engineer, Ivan Reedman, resigned “due to personal health issues and 
irreconcilable differences”.

So few were surprised when, on Wednesday, the company behind Zano sent a 
statement to all backers: “Having explored all options known to us, and after 
seeking professional advice, we have made the difficult decision to pursue a 
creditors’ voluntary liquidation. All creditors will be contacted by an 
insolvency practitioner next week.

“We are greatly disappointed with the outcome of the Zano project and we would 
like to take this opportunity to thank everyone who has supported us during 
this difficult period, especially our loyal employees whose commitment has 
exceeded all expectations.”

And with that, Zano seems to be no more: its website is now offline, and its 
twitter feed is silent.

Backers of the Coolest Cooler can be more comfortable. That product, a $499 
beer cooler with built in bluetooth speaker, iPhone dock, ice-crushing blender, 
USB charger, bottle opener, LED light, plates, knife corkscrew and cutting 
board (yes, all in one package) exists, works, and is in the hands of backers.

Unfortunately, it’s not in the hands of all backers – which is a problem, 
because someone who didn’t back the cooler on Kickstarter,can now buy one on 
Amazon 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/B016VXVLFC?tag=skim1x139863-20&ref=spks_0_0_2290285542&qid=1447888279&pf_rd_p=2290285542&pf_rd_m=ATVPDKIKX0DER&pf_rd_t=301&pf_rd_s=desktop-auto-sparkle&pf_rd_r=0Q7W2P3BT65PP7MWDFRQ&pf_rd_i=coolest+cooler>
. In other words, the people who provided the company the capital it needed to 
enter production with the coolers will now be among the last to actually 
receive one, with the final shipping date not arriving until April 2016.

The decision to sell on Amazon will, according to the company’s chief 
executive Ryan Grepper, “keep the lights on”. Coolest needs to sell the coolers 
to “make certain that every single backer’s Coolest can get made and shipped”.

Gripper explained that the blender motor is a key bottleneck, with the company 
that manufacturs it currently on strike, and production slowing down as a 
result.

The cooler’s initial shipping date was February 2015, but the first units 
didn’t make it out the door until July this year. To Coolest’s credit, it has 
shipped to tens of thousands of backers, but the backlog remains huge.

Both companies illustrate the continuing risks with ploughing money into 
projects on Kickstarter. Although the site has matured over the years, withan 
increasing number of very professionally-run campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/24/kickstarter-why-brands-like-pebble-smartwatch-come-back-for-more>
 offering a slick experience to backers, it still offers a unique opportunity 
for everything to go horribly wrong. And when it does, unlike when buying goods 
from a store, there’s little for backers to do but sit, wait and hope they get 
what they paid for.
 