
It has been a fantastic year for podcasting in Australia. The ABC continued to 
raise its game as independent podcasters took off internationally and all kinds 
of different organisations threw their hats into the ring, from venues to 
newspapers tonational dictionaries 
<http://www.writingwa.org/articles/word-for-word-new-podcast-from-macquarie-dictionar>
.

This list aims to pick out some of the best stuff of the year, concentrating 
not on the most popular pods but the stuff you might not have heard.

All the Best – Lead Affected 
<http://allthebestradio.com/our-picks/1606-lead-affected/>

The podcast: A weekly storytelling show that covers everything from 
documentaries to fiction and personal stories, All the Best is produced from 
the Sydney community station FBi Radio in association with SYN, Triple R and 
4ZZZ.

The episode: The show’s then executive producer, Heidi Pett, visited the 
regional New South Wales town of Broken Hill, which was developed to mine and 
smelt the minerals it was built around, a process that over time has spread 
toxins around the town. A lot has been cleaned up and things are improving but 
there are still children with higher lead levels than those considered safe.

This episode isn’t about the history of the town, the clean up or what should 
be done; it’s about how people rationalise the decision to stay and what pushes 
them to leave.

The Little Dum Dum Club – featuring Lawrence Mooney and Fiona O’Loughlin 
<http://littledumdumclub.com/?p=2054>

The podcast: One of Australia’s most popular comedy podcasts, The Little Dum 
Dum Club features comedians Tommy Dassalo and Karl Chandler bringing guests in 
each week to chat about whatever they want. The show has featured most of the 
top comedians you can think of, this year including Hannibal Buress, Becky 
Lukas, Shaun Micallef, Aunty Donna, Hannah Gadsby and Scott Aukerman ofComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Bang Bang.

The episode: I’ve never listened to anything that so effectively bounces from 
the depths of human despair to one-liners in a single sentence. Fiona 
O’Loughlin and Lawrence Mooney have appeared on the show before to talk about 
depression and addiction – but this episode takes us to the peak of 
O’Loughlin’s alcoholism and the depths of her hitting rock bottom.

After almost dying in hospital and alienating herself from her family, she 
found herself in New Zealand, homeless and later living with a drug dealer 
masquerading as a healer – and speaks at length about what drove her to that 
moment and how she managed to pull herself out.

There are frustrating moments, such as when the hosts and Mooney crack jokes 
to interrupt O’Loughlin as she tries to express a deep revelation, but, on the 
flip side, listening to her story in full would be too difficult without them 
pulling us out of the darkness to laugh at things no one should find funny.

Bowraville – The Case for Jay 
<https://soundcloud.com/the-australian-1/bowraville-episode-5-the-case-for-jay>

The podcast: Between September 1990 and February 1991, 16-year-old Colleen 
Walker-Craig, four-year-old Evelyn Greenup and 16-year-old Clinton 
Speedy-Duroux disappeared in Bowraville, a small town in northern NSW. All 
three were Indigenous and police now say the original investigations were 
marked by racism.

In a podcast for the Australian newspaper, reporter Dan Box tracks the history 
of the investigation and failed prosecution over Evelyn and Clinton, 
interviewing family members and re-interviewing witnesses. Box and producer 
Eric George went on to win a Walkley award for the podcast but their greatest 
achievement was to push the NSW attorney general to ask the supreme court for a 
retrial. In December, a man wassummonsed to attend court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/bowraville-case-man-to-appear-in-court-over-deaths-of-indigenous-children>
 in relation to the disappearance of Evelyn and Clinton.

The episode: In the fifth and final episode, Box and George set out in search 
of the man accused and acquitted at separate trials of the murder of Evelyn and 
Clinton. It begins with some classic true crime sleuthing but quickly becomes 
unbearably tense. The man does not give interviews and has rarely even spoken 
in court, and his friends and family are equally tight-lipped. After a terse 
interview with his uncle, Box and George stake out his house. Then the 
neighbours arrive and demand to see identification.

It’s a masterclass in both journalism and editing. The audio is 
claustrophobic. George and Box are in a car, surrounded by angry voices. It 
feels dangerous. I listened standing in my kitchen with my finger hovered above 
the pause button, expecting someone to get hit. Then, after weeks of dodging, 
the man returns Box’s phone call.

 – Calla Wahlquist

Think: Digital Futures – How We See the world 
<http://www.2ser.com/component/k2/itemlist/category/640>

The podcast: Made by 2SER, where I’m now employed as special projects manager, 
Digital Futures looks at how technology is shaping the future and how people 
are shaping technology. The show covers everything from why people pick 
analogue technology over digital to how mobile phones have become a 
battleground in the fight against domestic violence.

The episode: Although its focus is on technology, Digital Futures is at its 
best when it tells people’s stories. This episode is ostensibly about how 
computers are programmed to recognise images but to get to that point we first 
learn about ourselves: that what we see is an illusion stitched together by our 
brain.

By hearing from someone whose brain can’t do that, we get insight into how 
little we really understand about how the brain works. So how can we create 
computer programs that can see, when we’re not sure howwe do it? Let the 
computer teach itself …

Background Briefing – Death in Kalgoorlie 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/backgroundbriefing/2016-10-30/7964472>

The podcast: Often overlooked in the Australian radio landscape, the team 
behind Background Briefing create some of the most interesting investigative 
journalism you can find. If you’re looking for in-depth documentaries about 
everything from science to politics to crime, it’s an excellent addition to any 
podcast app.

The episode: A remarkable look at the aftermath of the death of a 14-year-old 
Indigenous boy who was run over in Kalgoorlie this year.

Walkley award-winning Sarah Dingle takes us through what happened, but her 
investigation isn’t just about this single case; it’s about the realities of 
life in a town with a strong divide between Indigenous and white communities.

The picture painted is unbelievable: a golf course with 400 members subsidised 
by $25.5m of local government money; the lack of any affordable activities for 
disadvantaged youth; a mayor that blames increasing Aboriginal social 
dysfunction on welfare handouts and the granting of native title rights – when 
there have been no native title rights given in Kalgoorlie.

Science Vs – G-Spot <https://gimletmedia.com/episode/6-the-g-spot/>

The Podcast: Science Vs is now being produced in the US by Gimlet Media but we 
are claiming it as our own: it started at the ABC and is still being made by 
the original Aussie host, Wendy Zuckerman, and producer, Kaitlyn Sawrey. The 
show examines one topic each week in a down-to-earth way but, behind the jokes 
and cheesy music, everything is grounded in a thorough review of academic 
research.

Why we picked this episode: As the name implies, the episode looks at the 
discovery and debunking of the G-spot – but it’s really about much more than 
that. The show charts the history of the study of female sexual anatomy and 
ultimately shows us that, over the course of human history, it just wasn’t a 
priority to research women until women took it upon themselves.

Better Off Dead – It Can Never be Perfect, So Why Try to Improve It? 
<http://www.wheelercentre.com/broadcasts/podcasts/better-off-dead>

The podcast: Andrew Denton’s podcast for the Wheeler Centre explores the case 
for and against assisted dying through personal anecdotes, insight from the 
industry and cross-cultural exploration.

The episode: This early episode tells the story of what it is like assisting 
your parents with their death, from the perspective from someone who watched 
their parents in pain, tried to end their suffering and then was charged and 
convicted of attempted murder and assisting a suicide.

Like many others in the series, it’s crushing to listen to – but it manages to 
encapsulate all of the best elements of an excellent podcast.

The Full Catastrophe – Annabel Crabb: You Shall Have all the Towels You Require

The podcast: This was recorded from a live event at Giant Dwarf in Sydney 
which invited people to share the type of story that everyone has one of: a 
catastrophic moment in their lives that they retell at parties. Storytelling 
nights are perfect for podcasts, with each story parcelled up into a single 
episode you can laugh along to at home.

The episode: Your waters break, your husband is drunk, your nurse makes an 
embarrassing mistake that leads to a room full of disappointed surgeons … Have 
I said too much? I don’t want to ruin the episode but Crabb – who hosts her own 
podcast with Leigh Sales,Chat 10 Looks 3 <http://www.chat10looks3.com/> – knows 
how to spin an incredible yarn about the comedy of errors that resulted in the 
birth of her first child.

The Real Thing – Nineteen 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/realthing/story-behind-redgum-john-schumann-i-was-only-19/8005180>

The podcast: A new podcast from Radio National, The Real Thing is “searching 
for the real Australia”. Hosts Mike Williams and Timothy Nicastri tell a single 
story each episode, from the serious to the hilarious, and sometimes both at 
the same time.

The episode: Redgum’s Only Nineteen is an iconic song and this episode tells 
the story of how it came together and who it was based on: a real Australian 
soldier from the Vietnam war. The show has one of the best pieces of audio I’ve 
ever heard: when they cut together the story of the first time Redgum frontman 
John Schumann played the song for its subject, Mick Storen.

Hearing both of their perspectives about that moment is the closest you could 
ever get to actually being there.

Outer Sanctum – Episode 15 
<https://soundcloud.com/outer-sanctum/outer-sanctum-podcast-15>

The podcast: A fun weekly look at the AFL by “two fans, an author, a poet, a 
broadcaster and a lawyer”, Outer Sanctum offers great analysis by six 
passionate fans – all of whom happen to be women, who are hugely 
under-represented on usual sports panels. But what makes the show great is 
their enthusiasm for the game and the laid-back style of chatter – it’s like 
being in a room with friends.

The episode: This podcast has had a lot of great moments but, about four 
minutes into episode 14, one of our hosts, Emma Race, brought upEddie McGuire’s 
comments about holding the AFL writer Caroline Wilson under water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/eddie-mcguire-under-fire-over-comments-about-afl-writer-caroline-wilson>
. This episode was the reason that story came to light; it ended up being 
covered nationally and led to repercussions for Collingwood’s sponsors.

For the following episode, the show tackled everything that happened after: 
they spoke with Wilson as well as the sex discrimination commissioner and the 
Indigenous sports broadcaster Shelley Ware. Together they take a close look at 
the role sport and the media have in shaping our society.

This is About – The Lesson 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/thisisabout/thelesson/8103734>, 
featuring Stan Grant Sr

The podcast: Yep, another for Radio National. Born from the ashes of 
Radiotonic, this new program features everyday people telling their own 
stories, without the help of a narrator. Each episode goes deep into the 
reasons behind people’s actions.

The episode: This episode is a revelation: it starts as a tale of how a man’s 
depression and agoraphobia almost ended his life but turns into one about how 
acknowledging your cultural heritage can give you a new perspective.

Wiradjuri lessons from Stan Grant Sr not only changed his life but made a 
impact on many others.

Mike Check – So I Married an Axe Murderer 
<http://mikecheck.libsyn.com/10-so-i-married-an-axe-murderer-w-wil-anderson-redux>
, featuring Wil Anderson


The podcast: Self-described, accurately, as “the only intensive Mike 
Myers-themed podcast on the web, baby!”, this show presents an in-depth 
analysis of each of Myers’ films, in order of appearance.

Created by the comedians Cameron James and Alexei Toliopoulos of The Blank 
Slate Movie Podcast 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/podcast/the-blank-slate-movie-podcast/id999728026?mt=2>
, each episode also features a guest. It’s a lot of fun but also manages to 
bring in surprisingly robust critique of the work – with interesting results.


The episode: This episode was actually anomalous, being the second time they 
have analysed this 90s classic, but I think it actually makes the whole thing 
better. Joined by Anderson, the hosts are on top of all the minute details and 
it’s interesting to hear them shift their opinions from the last time they 
looked at the film.

Off Track – The Sinking of the Blythe Star 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/offtrack/sinking-of-the-blythe-star/6959120>

The podcast: This long-running Radio National show steps outdoors to see how 
Australians live with the natural world. Off Track covers everything from 
farmers’ stories to wildlife surveys and how the landscape shaped Aboriginal 
culture.

The episode: In 1973 the crew of a ship abandoned it when it sank but not all 
10 men made it back to their families. Never found by a search party, this 
podcast tells the story of how these men took matters into their own hands to 
survive the 11 days they were missing.

As Guardian Australia’s podcast producer, Miles wasn’t able to highlight his 
own work – but we did ask him for his favourite moments.

Behind the Lines – Ms Dhu: How an Aboriginal Death in Custody Unfolded

Behind the Lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/series/behind-the-lines-podcast> is 
a behind-the-scenes look at some of Guardian Australia’s biggest stories, with 
journalists, editors and others involved discussing what happened, and how it 
was reported. In this episode, reporter Calla Wahlquist brought her interviews 
with Ms Dhu’s family into the studio – and laid out the chilling sequence of 
events that led to her death.

Australian Politics Live

Helmed by Katharine Murphy and Guardian Australia’s political team, Australian 
Politics Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/series/australian-politics-live> 
examines what’s happening in Australian politics and why it matters to you. The 
highlight this year had to be when Lenore Taylor attempted to talk to Mathias 
Cormann about his job as Liberal party campaign adviser – and produced three 
minutes of comedy gold. (The rest of the episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/may/13/australian-politics-live-podcast-with-lenore-taylor-and-katharine-murphy>
 is also worth a listen as Penny Wong admits to getting “hangry”.)



 