
One of the most pressing questions Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> leaders will want 
answered at their Wednesday meeting with President-elect Donald Trump is 
whether his administration will clamp down on the immigration policies that 
technology companies have come to rely on.

You only have to look at the executive boards of some of the world’s fastest 
growing companies to see the contribution immigrants have made. According to a
study by the National Foundation for American Policy 
<http://nfap.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Immigrants-and-Billion-Dollar-Startups.NFAP-Policy-Brief.March-2016.pdf>
, immigrants founded more than half (51%) of the current crop of US-based 
startups valued at more than $1bn.


Ctrl+Z: Silicon Valley leaders U-turn on Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/11/silicon-valley-donald-trump-critics-tech-reactions>
All of this could be under threat if we are to take some of the comments the 
Trump campaign made in the run-up to the election at face value. The outspoken 
candidate claimed that Mark Zuckerberg’s push for specialist H1B visas (the 
main visa used to hire foreign talent to tech companies)was a threat to jobs 
for American women and minorities 
<http://money.cnn.com/2015/08/17/news/companies/donald-trump-mark-zuckerberg-immigration/>
. Meanwhile, Trump’s chief strategist Steve Bannon suggested thatAsians have 
too much power in Silicon Valley 
<http://sfist.com/2016/11/16/bannon_asian_ceos.php>.

About a dozen members of Silicon Valley’s elite – including Apple CEO Tim 
Cook, Alphabet CEO Larry Page,Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> CEO Satya Nadella and 
Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg – will meet with Trump in New York. The meeting is 
likely to provide an opportunity for them to highlight their concerns and 
priorities with the incoming administration.


Trump was critical of Silicon Valley business practices during his campaign – 
from wantingApple to stop making phones in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-apple-tim-cook-phone-call-manufacturing-us>
 to saying Amazon founder Jeff Bezos bought the Washington Post toexert 
political power and avoid paying taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/13/amazon-getting-away-with-on-tax-says-donald-trump>
.

“If you look at the history of Silicon Valley, it’s clear that drawing on 
immigrants has been a big part of the vitality, creativity and success of that 
entrepreneurial melange,” said Marjory Blumenthal, senior policy analyst atRand 
Corporation <http://www.rand.org/>.

The incoming administration is leaving some highly skilled tech workers 
nervous about their immigration status. “I am worried that I might have to go 
back to India,” said Sandeep Purwar, the founder and CEO of the tech recruiting 
platformJobAnts <http://www.jobants.com/>. He came into the US on an H1B visa 
but has since gotten a green card. He’s applying for citizenship as soon as 
possible to secure his position in the US.

A lot of his talk about building a wall and sending back immigrants was to 
attract Republicans. But he’s a businessman
Sandeep Purwar 
He hopes that Trump’s pro-business stance will outshine his anti-immigration 
rhetoric.

“During his campaign, a lot of his talk about building a wall and sending back 
immigrants was to attract and energize the rightwing Republican base. But he’s 
a businessman. He knows the importance of having manpower in this country, so 
hopefully he’ll be softening on these policies.”

Zoltan Istvan, a futurist who ran as an independent presidential candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/16/transhumanist-party-immortality-zoltan-istvan-presidential-campaign>
, said: “It’s in our very best interest to steal the best engineers from over 
the world and have them live in America,.”

Since the election, the Internet Association, a group of technology companies 
that includes Facebook, Google, Twitter, Netflix and Amazon, haswritten to Trump
 
<http://internetassociation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/111416transitionletter.pdf>
 asking him to support a sector that accounts for 6% of the economy by 
increasing immigration.

“The US immigration system must allow more high-skilled graduates and workers 
to stay in the United States and contribute to our economy,” the association 
said in anopen letter 
<http://internetassociation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/111416transitionletter.pdf>
.

The letter echoes the demands of Fwd.us <http://www.fwd.us/>, a lobby group 
set up by tech leaders including Zuckerberg, Bill Gates and Eric Schmidt in 
2013 to support immigration reform and expand the H1B visa program, which 
admits 65,000 workers and another 20,000 graduate student workers each year.

While Silicon Valley relies on H1B to bring in skilled foreign workers, the 
immigration schemehas also been exploited in a way that drives down wages and 
in some cases displaces American jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/tech-workers-visas-h-1b-reduction-trump-administration>
, said Daniel Costa, of the Economic Policy Institute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-tech-summit-immigration-automation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F886164b19ad3361edc416c2f028f27516343db90%2F0_573_3431_2059%2F3431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20to%20meet%20tech%20firms%20including%20Apple%2C%20Facebook%20and%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-tech-summit-immigration-automation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20to%20meet%20tech%20firms%20including%20Apple%2C%20Facebook%20and%20Google&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fdonald-trump-tech-summit-immigration-automation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F886164b19ad3361edc416c2f028f27516343db90%2F0_573_3431_2059%2F3431.jpg>
 Apple CEO Tim Cook will also attend the meeting. Photograph: Marcio Jose 
Sanchez/AP 
When tech companies such as Microsoft and Google use H1B as intended – to hire 
skilled, well-paid foreign workers in short supply – they might also help them 
get green cards to extend their stays. However, the system is frequently 
abused, particularly by large contracting firms such as Infosys and Tata 
Consultancy Servicesthat use the visas to deploy lower-paid contractors that 
critics say rarely end up with green cards 
<http://www.epi.org/blog/top-h-1b-employers-use-visa-program-for-temporary-labor-not-as-bridge-to-permanent-immigration/>
.

This exploitation of the system could be fixed by making sure contractors pay 
H1B workers a fair wage and advertise all jobs to US workers first, Costa 
explained. But Silicon Valley tech companies have even lobbied against this. 
Why? “It’s very possible they have shadow workforces staffed with people from 
outsourcing companies and they don’t want their labor costs to increase,” Costa 
said.

Strong-arm Apple and tax China bigly: a guide to Trump's possible tech policies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/trump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax>
All of the talk about immigrants taking American jobs ignores another looming 
challenge: robots or artificial intelligence taking American jobs.

“Automation, not immigration, is the bigger issue. AI, software and robots are 
just starting to destroy the very core economy of America,” Istvan said.

“You could try to put legal restrictions on automation but then you can’t 
create new jobs. It’s a much bigger issue.”

According to Sebastian Thrun <http://robots.stanford.edu/>, the German-born 
founder of the educational organizationUdacity <https://www.udacity.com/us> and 
a former Google employee, automation won’t eliminate jobs, but will create very 
different ones. Policymakers and workers have no choice but to embrace the 
change. “If you try to re-create the past we will be left behind,” he said.

He argues that automation will free people from the drudgery of repetitive 
office work and allow them to become inventors. “We’ll enter an age of 
unparalleled creativity and innovation.”

For Trump’s administration, this will mean shifting away from some of the 
anti-science rhetoric in order to make America a superpower in science and 
technology. “We are in a scientific Olympic Games with China, so let’s win 
this,” said Istvan, who has applied to be an adviser to Trump.

“I just hope the vice-president [Mike Pence, who isopposed to abortion rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/abortion-vice-presidential-debate-tim-kaine-mike-pence>
 anddoesn’t believe in evolution 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2016/08/17/trump_s_vice_presidential_pick_mike_pence_is_a_creationist.html>
] and other more religious candidates don’t get in the way of things like 
genetic editing or artificial intelligence, which crosses a few religious 
lines.”
 