
Australia is starting to see the beginnings of popular disaffection with the 
political class which has led to the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and the Brexit vote, 
according to the authors of a major academic review of the 2016 federal 
election.

Key measures, including satisfaction with democracy, trust in government and 
loyalty to major parties, are at record lows among Australian voters while 
party leaders are suffering sustained falls in popularity unlike any other 
period in recent history.

The Australian National University has been tracking post-election voter 
sentiment since 1987, and its lead researcher Ian McAllister warned Australian 
politicians they should address the dissatisfaction because it was a clear 
trend.
Lifetime voting 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-20T01:27:44/embed.html>
“Dissatisfaction with democracy, lack of trust in politicians, these are 
reaching historic lows,” McAllister said.

“What it looks to me like is you are seeing the stirrings among the public of 
what has happened in the United States of the likes of Trump, Brexit in 
Britain, in Italy and a variety of other European countries.

“Now it’s not a crisis of democracy but what you are seeing is the start of 
something which has happened overseas. It’s coming here and I would have 
thought this is a wake up call for the political class that they need to start 
addressing this or it will continue.”
trust in government 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-20T02:01:28/embed.html>
The latest survey was based on 2,818 people over three months beginning on the 
Mondayafter the 2 July election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-election-2016>. It has 
been conducted on a similar basis for 30 years and some of the measures have 
been tracked back to 1969.

The most recent study found:

 * only 26% of people think the government can be trusted, the lowest level 
since it was first measured in 1969 
 * 40% of Australians were not satisfied with democracy in Australia, the 
lowest level since the periodfollowing the dismissal of Gough Whitlam in the 
1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/oct/31/gough-whitlam-40-years-on-the-dismissals-bastardry-still-intrigues>

 * a record low level of interest (30%) in the 2016 election 
 * a record low number (34%) who followed how to vote cards, a drop of 10% 
since 2013 
 * 74% think the government makes little difference to household finances 
 * 69% think government policies make little difference to the country’s 
finances. 
On a leadership evaluation out of 10, the three most recent prime ministers – 
Julia Gillard, Tony Abbott andMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> – measured lower 
than five in the review.
leadership: turnbull v shorten 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-20T01:41:44/embed.html>
Previous prime ministers, including Bob Hawke, John Howard and Kevin Rudd 
scored above five, but notPaul Keating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/paul-keating2>, who scored below 
five. Of prime ministers since the 1980s, Hawke and Rudd enjoyed most 
popularity, scoring over six.

As leader of the Nationals in 2016, Barnaby Joyce scored lower (4.13) than his 
predecessor Warren Truss (4.34) in the 2013 election while Greens leader 
Richard Di Natale (4.13) scored higher than his predecessor Christine Milne 
(3.81).

Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> was 
evaluated more poorly than any other major party leader since the study started 
asking the question in 1993. The study rates leaders on nine characteristics; 
compassionate, trustworthy, inspiring, honest, strong leadership, sensible, 
competent, knowledgable and intelligent.

Here's a formula for bursting elitist anti-elitism | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/heres-a-forumla-for-bursting-elitist-anti-elitism>
When compared with Malcolm Turnbull, Shorten only rated better than the prime 
minister for compassion. In seven of the nine characteristics, Shorten rated 
more negatively than any previous major party leader throughout the 1990s and 
2000s, since the question was asked.

But Turnbull scored lower than any previous election-winning prime minister 
covered by the survey on characteristics of compassionate, sensible, strong 
leadership and honest. He scored second to lowest for election winners on 
trustworthiness (Gillard was lowest) and competence (Abbott was lowest).

McAllister said voters were clearly frustrated at the lack of connection with 
politicians and broken promises. He named Labor’s broken promise on the 
introduction of a carbon tax and the Coalition’s broken promise not to change 
superannuation policy.

He said the practice of government ministers leaving parliament to take plum 
postings or related jobs had fostered distrust among citizens. “Voters tend to 
disapprove of this sort of activity and there’s actually quite a lot of it in 
Australia compared to other countries,” McAllister said.

“We don’t have rampant corruption in the political system in Australia … but 
we have a lot of this grey area where politicians are perceived to be getting a 
lot of perks. And in a situation where economic performance is not doing very 
well, where people are under economic pressure, this is something that grates 
with a lot of people.”

The study also found attitudes becoming more liberal on various social and 
economic policies in the past 30 years. For example, there has been a steady 
decline since 1987 in the percentage of Australians who would prefer to pay 
less tax while there has been a relative increase in the percentage who favour 
more government spending on social services.


There is majority support for constitutional recognition of Indigenous 
Australians, marriage equality and legalised abortion. There has been a 
long-term decline in support for the reintroduction of the death penalty for 
murder and the continued criminalisation of smoking marijuana.

Immigration and asylum seeker policies were more important to voters at the 
2016 election than any other election since the so-called Tampa election in 
2001, when John Howard ordered commandos to to steer MV Tampa out of Australian 
waters.
election issues 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-20T01:51:20/embed.html>
While immigration and asylum seeker policy were in the top 10 issues, 
Australians have maintained a positive attitude towards the immigration program 
with a majority agreeing immigrants make Australia more open and cultured and 
are good for the economy. Only 30% believe immigrants take jobs from local-born 
workers and 37% believe they increase the crime rate.

One of the study’s authors, Jill Sheppard, said as the major parties moved 
closer on economic policies, voters looked increasingly to social issues to 
determine their vote.
policy economy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-20T02:28:02/embed.html>
“As voters are increasingly not finding economic differences between the 
parties – they are increasingly not believing parties can make a difference to 
the household finances or to the country’s finances in this recent election – 
that social issues will increasingly play a role in the next few Australian 
elections,” Sheppard said.
 