
With this year’s season drawing to a close, the Turkish tourism sector is 
reeling from a year of devastating losses. Bomb attacks, unrest in the 
south-east of the country and a violent coup attempt – followed by mass arrests 
during a state of emergency – have kept tourists away. According to estimates 
by the Association of Turkish Travel Agencies (Türsab),Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> might lose between £2bn and £2.5bn 
in tourism revenue by the end of this year.

Bomb attacks in Istanbul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/turkey-airport-explosions-ataturak-istanbul>
, thecapital, Ankara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/ankara-explosion-turkey-injures-large-number-of-people-reports-say>
, and other cities have severely affected the country’s tourism industry. In 
June, suspected Islamic State (Isis) militants killed 45 and injured many more 
in an attack on Istanbul’s main Atatürk airport. According to those working in 
the industry, the effects were immediate. In Istanbul alone, the number of 
foreign visitors dropped by over a quarter. The situation worsened still 
further whenTurkey was hit by a failed coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt> on 15 July, in which at 
least 240 people were killed.

Akif, 41, who has been in tourism for over 20 years and now runs the aptly 
namedOptimist <http://optimisthotel.com/> boutique hotel in Istanbul’s historic 
Sultanahmet district, said that business had been suffering since last year, 
but that a suicide bomb attack in January that killed 12 German and one 
Peruvian visitor, only metres from his hotel, led to a string of cancellations.

“The occupancy rate was never more than 30% all of this season for us,” he 
said. “Now we are renting out rooms for €25 that usually go for €80. That 
doesn’t cover our costs, even if we were fully booked.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f5577e219717840e2bf78fc1afa2f07c07ac80c%2F0_51_3565_2139%2F3565.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f5577e219717840e2bf78fc1afa2f07c07ac80c%2F0_51_3565_2139%2F3565.jpg>
 Tour guides have suffered from falling visitor numbers, with the reduction in 
cruise ship visitors particularly notable. Photograph: Chris McGrath/Getty 
Images 
He added that after each bomb attack in the country, more reservations were 
cancelled. Turkey experienced a dramatic drop in hotel occupancy rates, both in 
July and August, usually the two busiest months in the season, with a decrease 
to around 50% for each month, according to theHoteliers Association of Turkey 
<http://english.turob.com/> (Türob).

Others in the sector are being hit equally hard by the slump. Berk Eren, 28, 
who has been working as a tourist guide all over Turkey for six years, said 
visits dropped continuously after the Sultanahmet bombing in January.

I used to work between 16 and 20 days each month, sometimes 25 days. For three 
months now, I have hardly worked at all
Berk Eren, tour guide 
“But the worst was the Atatürk airport attack in June,” he added. “Not just 
because it killed what was left of the tourism industry here, but also 
psychologically. The airport is a place I frequent almost daily because of my 
clients.” He said that the decision of several big cruise ship operators not to 
call in Turkey this year had a devastating effect on his working hours as a 
freelance guide.

“These ships carry up to 4,000 tourists and they need guides. I used to work 
between 16 and 20 days each month, sometimes 25 days. For three months now, I 
have hardly worked at all.” He said that he and his wife, who also works as a 
guide, are looking to change jobs.

Before the bomb attacks, the tourism sector, which contributes around 4.5% to 
Turkey’s gross domestic product 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-security-economy-poll-idUSKCN1021IV>, 
had already been hard hit by friction with Moscowover a downed fighter jet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/nato-and-un-seek-calm-over-turkish-downing-of-russian-jet>
, which led to Russian tourists boycotting Turkey. Antalya, sometimes called 
“Turkey’s tourism capital”, and where 60% of all business relies on the sector, 
saw a massive drop in revenue as the number of overall arrivals dropped by over 
50% in the first eight months of this year. Russian visitors decreased by 95%. 
Ties with Moscow have since been mended, but recovery remains slow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c4fbde710fa334933ecbed7a15a8ce5e5f7964%2F0_52_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c4fbde710fa334933ecbed7a15a8ce5e5f7964%2F0_52_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
 The coastal resort town of Antalya has seen a 95% decrease in Russian tourists 
in 2016. Photograph: Alexander Demianchuk/TASS 
Antalya was not the only coastal town affected by the slump in business. 
Popular resorts, such as Fethiye, Kemer or Belek, also suffered heavy losses. 
Many hotels and restaurants had to make staff redundant, and some did not open 
their doors at all. More than 30% of hotels in Alanya remained closed this 
season. Cumali Bora, a seller of handmade soaps who says he even supplies 
former British prime minister David Cameron with his wares, told Turkish 
reporters that business has decreased by half this season. In June, Bodrum made 
headlines when two shop ownersstarted a fist fight that grew to involve 50 
people 
<https://www.turkishminute.com/2016/06/19/14-injured-25-detained-clothing-shop-employees-brawl-two-tourists/>
 over attempts to attract two tourists to their shops.

In the predominantly Kurdish south-east, the fledgling tourism industry came 
to a standstill after thebreakdown of a two-year peace process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/turkey-erdogan-not-possible-peace-process-kurdish-militants>
 between the Turkish state and the outlawed Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK). 
With the resumption of armed conflict in the region, the British Foreign Office 
has warned against all but essential travel to south-eastern Turkey. Mardin, an 
ancient hilltop city popular with cultural tour operators, that had seen hotel 
occupancy rates of 100% in 2014, is now struggling to attract any tourists at 
all.

“The small businesses and traders are desperate,” said one silversmith on the 
high street of historic Mardin. “Mardin is now only mentioned in relation to 
armed clashes in the news, but the city itself is quite safe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2edac45be0ae3bdf078c1d2ed379c9ea2f211d70%2F0_79_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2edac45be0ae3bdf078c1d2ed379c9ea2f211d70%2F0_79_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Mardin, in south-eastern Turkey, is renowned for its silverware – and its 
traders. Photograph: Alamy 
The Grand Bazaar in Sultanahmet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/sep/06/istanbul>, a main tourist 
attraction in Istanbul, houses more than 3,000 shops and used to see up to half 
a million visitors each day. Now, the usually crowded shopping streets of the 
550-year-old market are almost empty.

Alper, 42, a carpet trader for almost 20 years, said that the streams of 
tourists who used to visit the market each day have trickled to a halt.

We used to sell wares for 2,000 lira a day. Now we don’t even make half that 
each month
Alper, carpet trader, Istanbul 
“We now sell kilims [rugs] that used to go for 700 lira or more for half that. 
We sell them at the price we buy them for, just to be able to cover at least 
some of our costs,” he said. “We used to sell wares for 2,000 lira a day. Now 
we don’t even make half that each month.”

The lack of business forced him to dispense with his one employee in July, and 
he fears that he will have to close down his shop altogether by the end of the 
year. Alper adds that his family’s carpet shop in the picturesque seaside town 
of Datça, in the past a popular destination for cruise ship tourists from 
Europe, is getting no business at all.

His associate Ömer, 50, who has worked in the Grand Bazaar since the age of 
nine, says that he cannot remember a worse time in the sector.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08d798681548cebfa7154cffd9a39443b47113db%2F0_0_4508_3000%2F4508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%E2%80%99s%20tourism%20industry%20reels%20from%20a%20year%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fturkey-tourism-industry-reels-year-to-forget-istanbul-antalya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08d798681548cebfa7154cffd9a39443b47113db%2F0_0_4508_3000%2F4508.jpg>
 The Grand Bazaar in Istanbul. Photograph: Alamy 
“Turkey has faced many crises, but traders here have never suffered as much as 
now. All of us have debts,” he said. “We need to provide for our families. We 
have not been able to pay back the people who sell us their wares either, so 
this problem concerns them, too.”

The Turkish government has recently announced that it would come up with 
measures to help its troubled tourism sector get back on its feet. “The tourism 
industry, in particular, depends on subsidie 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-security-tourism-idUSKCN10N1OV>s,” 
said the country’s tourism minister Nabi Avcı at an industry event in Germany 
in August. “Concrete measures will be discussed in dialogue with the industry 
and announced within the next [few] days.” Fuel subsidies for flights into five 
popular seaside holiday destinations, such as Antalya, İzmir, or Dalaman, were 
recently extended until the end of the year. However, further measures are yet 
to be announced.

Ahmet Kökler, head of the Grand Bazaar management board since January, 
promised the launch of a promotional campaign that aims to raise brand 
awareness for the covered market worldwide.

“We aim to make our bazaar an exemplary cultural, commercial, historic and 
tourism centre,” he told Turkish media. “We aim to attract more tourists to our 
bazaar and to double the business volume through our promotional campaign.”

But bazaar traders, such as Alper, are impatient and hope for more government 
support to bridge the recent slump in tourism, without having to close up shop. 
“Debt relief, interest-free loans or lower taxes would be possibilities,” he 
says. “If they don’t come up with anything soon, we are finished.”
 