
Turkey’s tourism industry continues to suffer as a result of terrorist attacks 
in the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/19/istanbul-hit-by-deadly-bomb-attack>
, with summer bookings down by up to 50% on 2015, according to holiday firms.

The latest attack, a suicide bombing in central Istanbul on 19 March, killed 
five and took place just six days after a bombing in Ankara that killed 37 
people.

Turkey has experienced six bombings in the past eight months, with President 
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan stating that the country is suffering “one of the biggest 
waves of terrorism in its history”. This, combined with a decline in Russian 
tourists caused by sanctions imposed by Moscow after a Russian warplane wasshot 
down by Turkish forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/turkey-shoots-down-jet-near-border-with-syria>
 in Syria, has significantly affected the tourist trade.

In January it was reported that Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> expects to lose 4.5 million Russian 
tourists – its second biggest visitor group – after the country effectively 
banned tours to the country.

I understand that the Spanish coast is filling up already and prices are being 
driven up by demand
Akin Koç, ​Anatolian Sky Holidays 
Tourism accounts for around 11% of Turkey’s GDP and provides employment for 
over a million people. According to theWall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/tourists-steer-clear-of-turkey-after-bombings-russia-clash-1458504437>
, hundreds of hotels, B&Bs and boutique resorts have already been put up for 
sale.

“This year so far has undeniably been hard for bookings to Turkey,” said Akin 
Koç, owner of Anatolian Sky Holidays, which has been running holidays to Turkey 
for 25 years.

“January and February are traditionally a busy time for us, as people book 
their summer breaks, but to date bookings to all our Turkish destinations are 
down by around 50%, which is very concerning.”

Package holidays to coastal resorts have been the worst affected, with 
customers choosing to switch to other destinations. Major operators have been 
shifting aircraft and accommodation options to the western Mediterranean.

“I understand that the Spanish coast is filling up already and prices are 
being driven up by demand,” says Koç.

Other operators are experiencing a similar slowdown in bookings. 


“We haven’t had many bookings for Turkey this year and the numbers are 
declining dramatically,” said Zekiye Yucel, founder of the Discovery 
Collection, which offers cultural tours around the Mediterranean and Middle 
East. “If the bombings continue, it will get worse.”

Trade body Aito <https://www.aito.com/> said its Turkey specialists were 
reporting lower-than-usual booking levels. However, tours will continue to 
operate unless the Foreign Office changes its travel advice.

Currently, the Foreign Office has not put out any warning against visiting the 
vast majority of Turkey, though itcontinues to advise against 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/turkey> all travel to areas near the 
south-eastern border with Syria and Iraq.
 