
The Turnbull government will save $170.4m over two years by terminating one of 
Tony Abbott’s signature policies – a pilot scheme subsidising childcare by 
nannies – and a further $154m by not proceeding with another part of Abbott’s 
legacy, the marriage equality plebiscite.

The savings are part of a list unveiled on Monday in the latest midyear 
economic forecast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/australias-budget-deficit-hit-by-weaker-wage-and-profit-growth-myefo-reveals>
,which, as expected, axed another Abbott-era initiative, the “green army” 
program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/05/tony-abbotts-green-army-expected-to-be-abolished-in-budget-update>
, and also the “asset recycling” initiative, which was a major economic program 
unveiled in the Abbott government’s first budget to encourage the states to 
privatise assets.

The new economic statement also reveals the government is planning to save 
more than $7bn in payments relating to childcare benefits and rebates over the 
next four years compared with previous projections – although the number of 
children accessing subsidised childcare is forecast to grow.

The government in its explanation of the marriage equality plebiscite saving 
has moved to reassure conservatives that the idea has only been shelved, not 
canned.

Morrison will be hoping for a wages breakout. It may be the only way to save 
the budget | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/morrison-will-be-hoping-for-a-wages-breakout-it-may-be-the-only-way-to-save-the-budget>
The midyear economic forecast says the government will book the marriage 
equality plebiscite as a saving but “if the parliament passes legislation for a 
plebiscite on same-sex marriage in the future, the government will allocate the 
necessary funding at that point”.

Abbott’s nannies pilot program – which was a key part of his political pitch 
on childcare in opposition and in government – has been canned effective 30 
June 2018 on the basis take-up was “much lower” than expected.

The pilot will be closed to new applicants from 1 January 2017 and families 
already participating in the scheme will have their care subsidised until June 
2018.

The government also used the update forecast to dump a controversial plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/selling-off-asics-trove-of-company-data-would-hinder-tax-enforcement>
 to sell the Australian Securities and Investments Commission corporate 
registry to a private company.

The Australian Council of Social Service, the Tax Justice Network, the Uniting 
church and GetUp, among other groups, had urged the government to desist from 
the sale.


On Monday the government said it decided not to proceed with the sale because 
the final bids received “did not deliver a net financial benefit for the 
commonwealth”. Not proceeding with the initiative will return $4.5m to the 
budget.

The government has also nipped the youth internship program it unveiled in 
May, taking $5.7m out of the Youth Jobs PaTH program – at the same time setting 
aside $20m over four years for an “awareness strategy” for that and other youth 
employment programs.
 