
1 Turner In January

JMW Turner <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jmw-turner>’s watercolour 
landscapes blaze and swirl, roar and storm in a way that belies the gentleness 
many associate with the medium. The collector Henry Vaughan left Scotland a 
spectacular bequest of these great works of art with the stipulation that all 
must go on view together every January, free of charge. So here they are, as 
every year, to redeem the winter with sublime light.
Scottish National Gallery, Edinburgh, to Tuesday 31 Jan 
<https://www.nationalgalleries.org/whatson/on-now-coming-soon/turner-in-january-2017/>

2 Adventures In Moominland

Finnish artist and writer Tove Jansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jun/30/guardianobituaries.books> 
published the first of herMoomin books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/moomins> in 1945. Her happy fantasy 
universe features beings who are shaped like bipedal hippos cavorting in a 
colourful edenic world. No wonder the Moomins were popular in a bleak postwar 
Europe. Their wacky charm became still more famous in the era of pop art and 
their innocent appeal endures today. This show is designed to attract children 
as well as adults with interactive exhibits that offer a multisensory journey 
through a gentle comic universe.
Royal Festival Hall: Exhibition Space Level 1, SE1, to Sunday 23 Apr 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/119314-adventures-moominland-201617>

3 Ken Price

If you thought Grayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry> was the first to 
create subversive ceramics, think again. California’s Ken Price was playing 
with the sculptural and comic possibilities of clay in the 1960s. The works of 
immense style and wit in this survey range from drawings of frogs crawling on 
cups to multicoloured experiments in reinventing ceramic vessels. Mugs can have 
noses or become paintings in Price’s funny reinventions of everyday pottery.
Hauser & Wirth, W1, to Saturday 4 Feb 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/exhibitions/2984/ken-price-a-survey-of-sculptures-and-drawings-1959-y-2006/view/>

4 War In The Sunshine

The Estorick Collection, a small museum specialising in modern Italian art, 
reopens with this show of British war artists working in Italy during the first 
world war. Mountain landscapes, biplanes with all guns blazing, and the 
suffering of displaced civilians feature in the work of Sydney Carline, Ernest 
Brooks and William Joseph Brunell. The rugged landscapes could not contrast 
more with the muddy plains of France that shape our mental image of the 
conflict.
Estorick Collection, N1, Fri to Sunday 19 Mar 
<http://www.estorickcollection.com/exhibitions/>

5 An Amateur’s Passion

When Charles Darwin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/charles-darwin> was 
an undergraduate at Cambridge, he often visited the recently founded 
Fitzwilliam Museum to educate himself about art. A lot of the pictures he 
enjoyed there were not paintings but prints. The works that Darwin loved are on 
view in this display of the collection of Lord Fitzwilliam,the museum’s founder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/04/fitzwilliam-museum-in-cambridge-celebrates-its-200th-birthday>
.
Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge, to 29 Jan 
<http://www.fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk/calendar/whatson/amateurs-passion-lord-fitzwilliams-print-collection>
 