
It is happening again. More specifically, it’s happening again on 21 May when 
Twin Peaks will return to US television screens,more than 25 years after its 
finale aired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/10/twin-peaks-final-scene-anniversary-showtime>
.

Can the new Twin Peaks keep up with today’s TV?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/22/twin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch>
Showtime, the US station which is bringing back the show, revealed the 
premiere date at the Television Critics Association (TCA) meeting in 
California, where the channel’s president and CEO, David Nevins, revealed the 
first episode would be a two-hour special.


Fans will then have 18 hours of action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/11/twin-peaks-david-lynch-long-movie-episodes>
 from the mysterious Pacific northwest town, which gave the world characters 
like the double denim villain Bob, detective Dale Cooper, with his coffee and 
cherry pie addiction, andthe log lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/29/log-lady-twin-peaks-catherine-coulson>
.

Nevin said that the show is the “pure heroin vision of David Lynch”, and that 
he is very excited to be putting it out.

To date, few details have been revealed about the new series, other than the 
extensive cast list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/25/twin-peaks-revival-cast-monica-bellucci-david-duchovny>
, which includes many of the original members, and Lynch favorites Naomi Watts, 
Balthazar Getty and musician Trent Reznor. Creators David Lynch and Mark Frost 
revealed in August 2015 that the new series was written as one long film that 
will be cut down into individual episodes.

Lynch had pulled out of the production in April 2015 over a pay dispute, but 
after a video from the cast pleading for him to return, the director agreed to 
get back on board a month later.

The original series, which centered on the murder of Laura Palmer and aired in 
1990, is widely considered to be one of the most influential andunique TV shows 
ever created 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/21/twin-peaks-to-cracker-your-favourite-tv-episodes-of-all-time>
. It’s legacy has been attributed to everything from the X-Files to Stranger 
Things, and the revival is one ofthe most anticipated TV events of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/07/must-see-tv-shows-of-2017-girls-twin-peaks-game-of-thrones>
.
 