
Twitch, the popular video-streaming site, has altered its rules of conduct 
<http://help.twitch.tv/customer/portal/articles/983016-twitch-rules-of-conduct> 
to prohibit users from appearing in a state of undress, requesting that 
streamers dress “appropriately”.

The new Twitch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitch> rule opens with 
the tried-and-tested rule of flattery:



 Nerds are sexy, and you’re all magnificent, beautiful creatures, but let’s 
try and keep this about the games, shall we?

The statement then goes on to outlaw “sexually suggestive” clothing and 
“pasties” – thenipple covers <http://www.thefreedictionary.com/pasty>, not the 
cheese and onion variety:


Wearing no clothing or sexually suggestive clothing - including lingerie, 
swimsuits, pasties, and undergarments – will most likely get you suspended, as 
well as any full nude torsos*, which applies to both male and female 
broadcasters. You may have a great six-pack, but that’s better sharedon the 
beach during a 2-on-2 volleyball game blasting “Playing with the Boys.” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HNR_HofJ_Fs>

Perhaps the most refreshing thing about Twitch’s new rule is that both male 
and female torsos are banned from appearing on webcams, a level playing field 
which often does not apply IRL.

The company then goes on to offer the following handy tips to streamers 
struggling with not being naked:

• If it’s unbearably hot where you are, and you happen to have your shirt off 
(gents) or a bikini top (ladies), then just crop the webcam to your face.

• If your lighting is hot, get fluorescent bulbs to reduce the heat. Xbox One 
Kinect doesn’t zoom? Move it closer to you, or turn it off. There is always a 
workaround.

• We sell T-shirts, and those are always acceptable. #Kappa

Twitch has become hugely popular since its launch in 2011, largely due to the 
gaming community live-streaming playthroughs.

The company was acquired by Amazon.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/26/amazon-buys-video-streaming-website-twitch-1bn-dollars>
 in August this year for just under $1bn, after long speculation it would be
purchased by Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/may/19/twitch-youtube-live-games-google-acquisition-pokemon>
.

• Twitch: Why Amazon’s $1bn purchase is all about the ads 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/26/amazon-billion-twitch-advertising-games-live-google-youtube>
 