
Two women carried out suicide bombings at a bustling market in the north-east 
Nigerian town of Madagali on Friday morning, killing at least 30 people and 
wounding 67, the army said.

The attack came as the Nigerian government claimed it was routing the Boko 
Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> extremists blamed for the 
blasts.

The explosions occurred on the edge of the extremist group’s Sambisa forest 
stronghold, which the Nigerian military has been bombing ahead of ground 
assaults. Since the military dislodged the insurgents from towns and villages 
this year, they have been attacking “soft targets”.

The small African region with more refugees than all of Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/boko-haram-nigeria-famine-hunger-displacement-refugees-climate-change-lake-chad>
Madagali was liberated last year after months in the hands of Boko Haram. It 
is 95 miles south-east of the biggest north-eastern city, Maiduguri.

Friday’s blasts came simultaneously at opposite ends of the market selling 
grains and vegetables, according to Ahmadu Gulak, a driver who was buying tea 
there.

Rescue workers took away the bodies of 30 people and took 67 wounded victims 
to a nearby hospital, army spokesman Maj Badere Akintoye said.

A bus station near the same market was targeted by two female suicide bombers 
last December, when at least 30 people were killed. In June, Boko Haram 
extremists opened fire on mourners at a funeral in Madagali, killing 18 people.

The attacks continue despite government and military assertions that the 
insurgents are on the run. The president, Muhammadu Buhari, declared the 
extremist group was “technically defeated” in December 2015.

Last week, a year later, he said a multinational force from Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> and neighbouring states was getting 
ready to “move simultaneously and spontaneously for us to see the end of Boko 
Haram”.

Tens of thousands of children at risk of starvation in Nigeria crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/displaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram>
Buhari said the insurgents were “done for” in the Lake Chad basin bordering 
Nigeria, Chad and Niger. But the United Nations says more than a million people 
are believed trapped there by ongoing fighting without food or medical help.

Boko Haram’s seven-year uprising has killed more than 20,000 people and forced 
2.6 million from their homes. The UNhas launched a $1bn appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/displaced-people-refugee-nigeria-starvation-death-un-boko-haram>
 to help 5.1 million people in danger of starvation, calling the crisis in 
north-east Nigeria the worst on the African continent.

Buhari has accused the UN and aid agencies of exaggerating the crisis to seek 
donations.

“The government seems to be more interested in managing perception,” 
Lagos-based analysts from SBM Intelligence said on Friday. They said much of 
the crisis was “rooted in the ineptitude of the (state) agencies involved, rife 
corruption causing diversion of the food aid, and the still-present threat of 
Boko Haram ambushes, which make the provision of supplies a risky undertaking”.
 