
Grains for breakfast, vegetables for lunch, smoked salmon for dinner. No 
wheat, no dairy, no sugar; 45 minutes of exercise every day. It’s a draconian 
and unbalanced regime even for someone with a sensible reason to lose excess 
weight. If you’re a 21-year-old who weighs eight stone, it’s clearly both 
unnecessary and profoundly unhealthy. And yet this was Rosie Nelson’s daily 
intake and expenditure of energy for four months back in 2014, as a result of a 
visit to one of the country’s most powerful modelling agencies.

Nelson had started modelling work at the age of 18, when her body was still 
developing. When she moved from her native Australia to Britain, her intention 
was to continue. And the agency in question liked her look – except for the 
fact that she was, they said, too big. Specifically her hips, which were around 
the 37- or 38-inch mark, but needed to shrink to 35.

Fashion industry told to end its quest for ‘unattainable thinness’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/04/minimum-bmi-checks-uk-models-womens-equality-party>
I ask Nelson, now 24 and still modelling, what that moment felt like. “You get 
sucked into thinking that what they say is the only way to be,” she replies. 
“They control your life. They’re getting you your jobs, they’re providing you 
with your income, and you become like a slave to it. The industry’s so 
consuming that you forget about the real world. In the real world I’m 
incredibly thin, but in the modelling world I’m still too big. So when they 
asked me to lose weight, I accepted it.” But worse was to come. Grains 
consumed, exercise taken, social life shunned, she slimmed her hips down to 35 
inches and went back to the agency.

“They said, just lose more weight – get down to the bone,” remembers Nelson. 
“They pressed on my hips and I just sat there thinking, no, I can’t. I can’t 
physically lose more weight. I was in shock. I didn’t know what to say.”

It turned out to be a pivotal moment. In its aftermath, Nelson decided she 
couldn’t return to her previous weight-loss programme, which she describes as 
“a horrible routine of essentially killing myself”.

She started working with smaller agencies, where she was encouraged to remain 
at a healthy weight. At the same time she began to speak and write about her 
experiences, committed to raising awareness of the potentially destructive 
power the fashion industry wields. That’s why, after a day’s work, she has 
joinedSophie Walker, leader of the Women’s Equality party (WEP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/womens-equality-party-leader-sophie-walker-its-complex-but-not-complicated>
, and Jada Sezer, a plus-size model on the verge of launching her own clothing 
range, to talk about WEP’s forthcoming campaign, which will operate on social 
media under the hashtag #NoSizeFitsAll 
<http://www.bombbehavior.com/#!JOIN-THE-NOSIZEFITSALL-CAMPAIGN/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f3a48dd4bb4114b741ea26b454509b5509d941f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20models%2C%20one%20goal%3A%20to%20free%20women%20from%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20weight%20tyranny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20models%2C%20one%20goal%3A%20to%20free%20women%20from%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20weight%20tyranny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f3a48dd4bb4114b741ea26b454509b5509d941f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Jada Sezer, pictured in 2013, was the face of London Fashion Week’s first 
plus-size show. Right, Rosie Nelson in her ultra-thin days. Composite: Rio 
Romaine and courtesy Rosie Nelson 
For Walker, whose organisation has existed for a little over a year and is 
committed to change through cross-party collaboration, we are in the middle of 
a public health crisis that includes 1.6 million sufferers of eating disorders, 
89% of them women and girls, and brings with it an economic cost of £1.3bn a 
year in lost productivity and healthcare bills. WEP’s campaign, which is backed 
by industry commentator and professor of diversity in fashion Caryn Franklin, 
will focus on what Walker believes is at the root of the problem: the sample 
sizes used by the fashion industry.

These “tiny, tiny little clothes”, says Walker, “are such that normal-sized 
women have to starve themselves to fit into them. And we’re not talking a 
three-day soup diet here, which would be bad enough; we’re talking weeks and 
weeks and weeks of systematic malnutrition, for which young women are paid to 
fit into these tiny little sizes. And so the first part of this campaign is to 
say that we think that by this time next year, when London Fashion week kicks 
off, the British Fashion Council should have in place a system whereby the 
designers showing in London must show at least two sample sizes, one of which 
must be more than a UK size 12.”

In addition, WEP is calling for legislation that will require all models hired 
or rehired by agencies to have a minimum body mass index (BMI) of 18.5; any 
lower, and they will have to see a doctor from a list of accredited medical 
experts to be signed off as healthy. This, says Walker, would bring the UK into 
line with law in France, Spain and Italy. She deems it “frankly embarrassing 
that we haven’t done this yet”. Her party’s campaign also calls on UK fashion 
magazines to feature at least one editorial piece per issue that includes 
plus-size models, and for body image to become a compulsory part of personal, 
social and health education at school.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8845b6f01aefb12882617161d01858317f5b88aa%2F0_466_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20models%2C%20one%20goal%3A%20to%20free%20women%20from%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20weight%20tyranny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20models%2C%20one%20goal%3A%20to%20free%20women%20from%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20weight%20tyranny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8845b6f01aefb12882617161d01858317f5b88aa%2F0_466_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Sophie Walker, head of the Women’s Equality party, is leading the campaign 
against ‘tiny, tiny little clothes’. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer 
How likely does Walker think a change in legislation really is? She points to 
the fact that her party is the only one to work across political divides to 
achieve change, and to what happened when she ran in the London mayoral race, 
suggesting that it led “proud feminist”Sadiq Khan to launch a gender pay audit 
in City Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/08/sadiq-khan-to-tackle-gender-issues-in-london-mayoral-bid>
. “He stole the policy because he was worried about losing the votes.” Her 
party, she argues, can bring its thousands of members and registered supporters 
to the table – the campaign will mobilise them to write to the British Fashion 
Council in support.

Does she worry that one plank of their demands – the insistence that models’ 
BMIs be monitored – will seem to some as if women are once again being 
medicalised or placed under enforced scrutiny? “You think that’s not already 
happening?” says Walker. “What we’re doing is the first step towards liberating 
women from that scrutiny. We have all lived with that pressure all of our lives.

“I have been everything from a size eight to a size 18, and I can tell you at 
every point in my life which size I’ve been and when. We live with this. And I 
am 45 years old. I have been living with it for 30 years and I’m tired of it. 
I’m seeing it happen to my children, I’m seeing my daughters – my 
seven-year-old and my 14-year-old – under the same pressures.” She adds that 
there are girls in her younger daughter’s class who talk about their “thigh 
gap” – the crucial space that indicates one’s legs are thin enough to be 
considered attractive. “What we are doing here is about removing that scrutiny, 
not adding to it. We are creating a situation where women can be healthy and 
work, rather than being paid to be unhealthy and contribute to this awful 
public health issue.”

The images that bombard women and girls are nothing new. For as long as there 
has been mass media, idealised pictures of the human body (generally, thin 
women and muscled men) have permeated cinema, television, newspapers and 
magazines – sometimes attempting to sell consumers products, sometimes simply 
illustrating a story. But in the age of the internet, says Sezer, an additional 
layer of imagery has appeared – not courtesy of businesses advertising their 
wares, but produced instead by the individual, via such platforms as Instagram 
or YouTube. Often, she says, such images are Photoshopped, or highly selective 
– and yet they are presented as authentic everyday life. In that category one 
might put extreme“clean eating” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/16/prophets-of-modern-dieting-want-you-to-feel-guilty-about-food>
 and hardcore exercise regimes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12a073f9c3df36666d4635a4168e60460b077b2%2F0_0_2599_3259%2F2599.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20models%2C%20one%20goal%3A%20to%20free%20women%20from%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20weight%20tyranny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20models%2C%20one%20goal%3A%20to%20free%20women%20from%20fashion%E2%80%99s%20weight%20tyranny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmodels-women-weight-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa12a073f9c3df36666d4635a4168e60460b077b2%2F0_0_2599_3259%2F2599.jpg>
 Mark Fast Catwalk show at London fashion week in 2010. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Yet Sezer also believes that social media has brought much that is positive, 
and can be utilised as a force for good. Now 27, she was doing a master’s 
degree in child psychotherapy when she realised that she was drawn to finding 
out the root causes of people’s lack of confidence and “flipping it on its head 
and saying, you can do anything you want”. The immense popularity of her own 
Instagram feed <https://www.instagram.com/jadasezer/?hl=en>led to her being 
signed to agency Models 1 and becoming the face of London Fashion week’s first 
ever plus-size show.

She stuck to modelling for the following two and a half years, including a 
stint in New York. It was there, she says, “I became really flat, and stripped 
back of everything. I felt like I’d hit a glass ceiling, and I felt like they 
weren’t pushing the boundaries fast enough, they weren’t seeing a gap could be 
broken into.” She was also segregated, a plus-size model restricted to working 
with plus-size brands. “I felt, surely that’s not right? When I got into 
modelling, I didn’t even know I was a plus-size model. I had no perception of 
what my body looked like.” Returning to live in London, she began to develop 
other strings to her bow, working as an ambassador for the charity Young Minds, 
and designing her own range of clothes, Sezer, which will launch online this 
month.

Both Sezer and Nelson are realistic about the fashion industry, and the paths 
they’ve pursued. Sezer accepts that, in New York, “I didn’t feel like I could 
be as much of an activist. I didn’t feel like I had much control. You’re a 
model. You do as you’re told... you’re being hired to look beautiful on set, 
and that’s it.” Nelson acknowledges that the bigger agencies “are the ones that 
get you the greater jobs – the high fashion, the Top Shop, the H&M”. Does she 
feel that she’s lost out? “Definitely. I definitely would have had better 
clients being with a bigger agency, because they have the contacts for it. So I 
have potentially ruined my career by not being a slave to the industry. But I 
chose my own health and happiness over my career, which is the best decision I 
could have made.”

Sezer ascribes the continuing power of such agencies to the ingrained idea 
that they can make would-be models’ dreams come true. But, she says, it’s a 
flawed idea, because the agencies themselves are always chopping and changing, 
telling their charges to alter their appearance according to their latest guess 
of what will appeal. And, as she points out, “agents have a role to play, but 
they’re the middle man between the designer and the model. If a designer is 
producing such a small size, then agents can only give them the models that fit 
into their sizes.”

Which brings the argument back to the issue of the sample size, which all 
agree trickles down into the wider fashion and retail culture. Given that 
women’s bodies are so various, why has its dominance persisted for so long? 
Walker argues that we’ve collectively bought into “the myth that creative 
integrity is dependent on the fantasy of a tiny woman. Which to me is like 
saying that the tobacco industries were presenting a myth of the wild west, and 
that actually it was nothing to do with them that we all got lung cancer”.

And, adds Sezer: “If you look back at the history of fashion, the majority [of 
designers] were men, and it was their ideal of what beauty was. And that seeped 
down into being these frail, almost boy-like figures.”

What does Walker hope will happen now? Her ambition is that the landscape will 
have changed by next year’s London fashion week. She is soon to approach Sadiq 
Khan to ask that, if it doesn’t, he should be withdrawing LFW funding. She’s 
also writing to Maria Miller, chair of the women and equalities select 
committee, to consider holding a public hearing “with those fashion designers 
to explore why they believe that their success is so intrinsically linked to an 
unattainable level of thinness in women”.

And underlying all this activity is her belief that the fashion industry, 
quite apart from its ethical responsibilities, has allowed itself to be 
constrained by its own rules, and is thereby marginalising a potentially huge 
market.

She is determined that the campaign represent a step change, in which the onus 
is no longer on women and girls to resist the messages that surround them, but 
on the disappearance of the messages themselves.

“The previous work that’s been done to contest this has been a very gentle, 
softly-softly approach, and there was a lot that had to be done in terms of 
raising awareness,” she says. “All of those campaigns are valid and important, 
but now we’re at the point where we’ve got to say, enough: this has got to 
stop.”
 