
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> released a new set of rules 
for passengers on Thursday, banning vandalism, “vomiting due to excessive 
alcohol consumption” and flirting.


It is the first time Uber has published specific guidelines for passengers. 
The rules set out specific examples of unacceptable behaviour, and people 
flouting the rules could be permanently banned from the service.

“Most riders show drivers the respect they deserve,” the company said in a 
statement <https://newsroom.uber.com/the-golden-rule/>. “But some don’t – 
whether it’s leaving trash in the car, throwing up in the back seat after too 
much alcohol or asking a driver to break the speed limit so they can get to 
their appointment on time.

“This kind of poor behavior is not OK.”

Some of the guidelines relate to sexual misconduct. There have been a number 
of cases where Uber drivers have been accused of rape and sexual assault since 
its inception.

While setting out rules for passenger-driver interactions, some of the 
guidelines <https://www.uber.com/legal/community-guidelines/us-en/> appear to 
be aimed at people using UberPool – the money-saving service where separate 
passengers are collected and dropped off at different locations in the same car.

“Don’t touch or flirt with other people in the car,” the rules state. Drivers 
are also banned from flirting.

“As a reminder, Uber has a no sex rule. That’s no sexual conduct between 
drivers and riders, no matter what.”

The regulations also note that it is “common courtesy not to shout, swear or 
slam the car door” and tell passengers not to bring a gun into the car. 
Discrimination based on race, religion or sex will also be punished.

“Any behavior involving violence, sexual misconduct, harassment, 
discrimination, or illegal activity while using Uber can result in the 
immediate loss of your account,” the rules state.

Uber’s release of the passenger rules come at the end of a troubled year for 
the company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/07/uber-hits-back-sexual-assault-complaints>
.

In October, an Uber driver in California was charged 
<http://orangecountyda.org/civica/press/display.asp?layout=1&Entry=4987> with 
four counts of sexual assault after allegedly raping an unconscious 17-year-old 
girl. In November,Uber settled a lawsuit 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-03/uber-settles-lawsuit-over-driver-sexual-assault-claims>
 brought by two women, from Boston, and Charleston, South Carolina, who said 
the company was responsible for alleged sexual assault by Uber drivers.

In May, it was revealed 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/uber-drivers-accused-of-32-rapes-and-sex-attacks-on-london-passengers-a7037926.html>
 that Uber drivers in London had been accused of 32 rapes and sexual assaults 
over a 12-month period.
 