
Uber has admitted that there is a “problem” with the way autonomous vehicles 
cross bike lanes, raising serious questions about the safety of cyclists days 
after the company announced it wouldopenly defy California regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
 over self-driving vehicles.


An Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> spokeswoman said on 
Monday that engineers were working to fix a flaw in the programming that 
advocates feared could have deadly consequences for cyclists.

Uber began piloting its self-driving vehicles in its home town of San 
Francisco last week, despite state officials’ declaration that the ride-share 
company needed special permits to test its technology. On day one, numerous 
autonomous vehicles – which have a driver in the front seat who can take 
control – werecaught running red lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
 and committing a range of traffic violations.

Self-driving cars: Uber's open defiance of California shines light on brazen 
tactics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
Despite threats of legal action from the department of motor vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
 (DMV) andCalifornia’s attorney general, Kamala Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
, Uber refused to back down on Friday, claiming its rejection of government 
authority was “an important issue of principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
”.

Concerns are mounting about how the cars behave in dense urban environments, 
particularly in San Francisco, where there are an estimated82,000 bike trips 
<http://www.sfexaminer.com/annual-bike-count-shows-commutes-sf-nearly-9-percent/>
 each day across more than200 miles of cycling lanes 
<https://www.sfmta.com/about-sfmta/blog/san-francisco%E2%80%99s-surge-biking-continues>
.

The San Francisco Bicycle Coalition has released a warning about Uber’s cars 
<http://www.sfbike.org/news/a-warning-to-people-who-bike-self-driving-ubers-and-right-hook-turns/>
 based on staff members’ first-hand experiences in the vehicles. When the car 
was in “self-driving” mode, the coalition’s executive director, who tested the 
car two days before the launch, observed it twice making an “unsafe 
right-hook-style turn through a bike lane”.

That means the car crossed the bike path at the last minute in a manner that 
posed a direct threat to cyclists. The maneuver also appears toviolate state law
 <https://www.sfbike.org/news/bike-lanes-and-right-turns/>, which mandates that 
a right-turning car merge into the bike lane before making the turn to avoid a 
crash with a cyclist who is continuing forward.

“It’s one of the biggest causes of collisions,” said coalition spokesman Chris 
Cassidy, noting that the group warned Uber of the problem. Company officials 
told the coalition that Uber was working on the issue but failed to mention 
that the self-driving program would begin two days later without permits, he 
said.

“The fact that they know there’s a dangerous flaw in the technology and 
persisted in a surprise launch,” he said, “shows a reckless disregard for the 
safety of people in our streets.”

The fact that they know there’s a dangerous flaw in the technology and 
persisted … shows reckless disregard for safety
Chris Cassidy, San Francisco Bicycle Coalition 
Uber spokeswoman Chelsea Kohler told the Guardian in an email that “engineers 
are continuing to work on the problem”, and said that the company has 
instructed drivers to take control when approaching right turns on a street 
with a bike lane. She did not respond to questions about how the cars, Volvo 
XC90s, detect cyclists and what kind of training and testing the firm conducted 
before implementation.

Linda Bailey, executive director of the National Association of City 
Transportation Officials, which has raised formal objections topartially 
automated vehicles 
<http://nacto.org/2016/06/23/nacto-releases-policy-recommendations-for-automated-vehicles/>
, said research raises serious alarms about the ability of drivers to properly 
intervene in semi-autonomous cars.

“It’s very clear that people are not good at paying attention,” she said, 
adding, “We’re waiting for enough people to die for something to happen. It’s 
not a great way to make policy.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&media=>
Uber self-driving car drives through red light in San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
Local advocates noted that the Uber cars have been caught doing four out of the
top five causes 
<http://sfgov.org/scorecards/percentage-citations-top-five-causes-collisions> 
of collisions or injuries in the city – running red lights, going through stop 
signs, unsafe turns and failing to yield to pedestrians.

“These behaviors we’re seeing,” said Nicole Ferrara, executive director of 
advocacy group Walk San Francisco, “are some of the most dangerous behaviors in
San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> that lead to 
traffic deaths and severe injuries.”

Carlo Ratti, Massachusetts Institute of Technology professor and director of 
the Senseable City Lab, noted that the only way to expand self-driving 
technology is to start testing cars in the real world. But he said the programs 
must be done in cooperation with regulators, especially considering that the 
vehicles have to makecomplex ethical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/23/self-driving-car-safety-study-pedestrian-crashes>
 andmoral decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/self-driving-cars-moral-dilemmas>
.

“It’s important that government has a say into how the car is programmed,” he 
said.

Imperfect self-driving vehicles could still be significantly safer 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2014/09/08/self-driving-cars-safer-than-those-driven-by-humans-bob-lutz.html>
 than traditional cars, said Jeffrey Tumlin, director of Oakland’s department 
of transportation.

But he also noted that “bike lanes present a unique challenge for driverless 
technology”, because cyclists are agile and can travel at high speeds. “It can 
be more difficult to predict their behavior,” he said, explaining that 
engineers are already struggling to navigate vehicle responses to pedestrians, 
which tend to be simpler.

Tumlin said the technology could help improve safety in the long run, but 
added, “I get uncomfortable with private industry doing their experimentation 
in the public right of way without first collaborating with the public.”

Contact the author: sam.levin@theguardian.com
 