
Uber employees regularly abused the company’s “God view” to spy on the 
movements of “high-profile politicians, celebrities and even personal 
acquaintances ofUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> employees, 
including ex-boyfriends/girlfriends, and ex-spouses”, according to testimony 
from the company’s former forensic investigator Samuel Ward Spangenberg. Even 
Beyoncé’s account was monitored, the investigator said.

Spangenberg, who is suing the minicab company alleging age discrimination and 
whistleblower retaliation, made the claims ina court declaration 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3227535-Spangenberg-Declaration.html> 
in October. He says he told Uber executives including the company’s head of 
information security, John Flynn, and its HR chief Andrew Wegley, of his 
concerns around the lack of security, and was fired 11 months later.

As well as a lack of oversight regarding customer data, Spangenberg alleges 
numerous other ethical breaches at Uber. The company stored driver and employee 
information in an insecure manner, he says, while it operated a vulnerability 
management policy which allowed data to be stored that way if the company 
deemed there to be a “legitimate business purpose” for doing so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fuber-employees-spying-ex-partners-politicians-beyonce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F898608f50b829b75df396d535e4ca7189c35cbfe%2F0_0_3507_2104%2F3507.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20employees%20'spied%20on%20ex-partners%2C%20politicians%20and%20Beyonc%C3%A9'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fuber-employees-spying-ex-partners-politicians-beyonce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20employees%20%27spied%20on%20ex-partners%2C%20politicians%20and%20Beyonc%C3%A9%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fuber-employees-spying-ex-partners-politicians-beyonce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F898608f50b829b75df396d535e4ca7189c35cbfe%2F0_0_3507_2104%2F3507.jpg>
 Uber said it ‘continues to increase our security investments and many of these 
efforts, like our multi-factor authentication checks and bug bounty program, 
have been widely reported’. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
In his testimony, given under penalty of perjury, Spangenberg also objected to 
Uber’s protocols to deal with raids on its offices – a relatively common 
occurrence at the company, which has been frequently criticised for riding 
roughshod over local regulations.

“As part of Uber’s incident response team, I would be called when governmental 
agencies raided Uber’s offices due to concerns regarding noncompliance with 
governmental regulations,” Spangenberg said. “In those instances, Uber would 
lock down the office and immediately cut all connectivity so that law 
enforcement could not access Uber’s information. I would then be tasked with 
purchasing all new equipment for the office within the day, which I did when 
Uber’s Montreal office was raided.”


Spangenberg’s allegations were reported by the Centre for Investigative 
Reporting’s (CIR) Reveal project 
<https://www.revealnews.org/article/uber-said-it-protects-you-from-spying-security-sources-say-otherwise/>
, but it isn’t the first time Uber has been accused of mistreating customer 
data. In 2014, Buzzfeedrevealed the existence 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/johanabhuiyan/uber-is-investigating-its-top-new-york-executive-for-privacy?utm_term=.ayWzOXxmW4#.eyoM7RdDZv>
 of the “God View” tool, after Uber’s New York general manager discussed using 
it to track a reporter’s journey. The tool’s existence appears to date back to 
2011, whenventure capitalist Peter Sims says he was tracked 
<https://medium.com/@petersimsie/can-we-trust-uber-c0e793deda36> by a visitor 
to Uber’s Chicago offices, where the God View data was shown on a large public 
screen.

In a statement given to a number of media outlets, Uber said it “continues to 
increase our security investments and many of these efforts, like our 
multi-factor authentication checks and bug bounty program, have been widely 
reported. We have hundreds of security and privacy experts working around the 
clock to protect our data. This includes enforcing to authorised employees 
solely for purposes of their job responsibilities, and all potential violations 
are quickly and thoroughly investigated.”

Spangenberg told CIR that Uber had increased security provisions during his 
time there, as well as renaming the tool “Heaven View”. Uber confirmed that 
some employees – “fewer than 10” – had been fired for abusing the tool, and 
said that it needs to provide relatively widespread access for a number of 
reasons, including refunding customers and investigating accidents. To prevent 
spying on celebrities, Uber implemented a flag for searches for customers 
considered “MVP”, but Spangenberg pointed out that that did nothing to protect 
non-MVPs.

The news comes just two weeks after Uber updated its app to increase the 
amount of location information collected about users 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/11/28/uber-background-location-data-collection/>. 
The company said the new collection practices, which continue to send the 
user’s location for five minutes after they are dropped off, would be used to 
improve drop-offs and pick-ups, but it faced a backlash from users worried 
about the increased permissions.
 