
More than a hundred Uber drivers have mounted a go-slow protest through 
central London to put pressure on the city’s mayor,Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, to insist the US company 
guarantee the minimum wage.

At least 100 Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> minicabs drove 
at walking pace down Edgware Road and Park Lane towards Westminster on Tuesday, 
honking their horns and blocking traffic as drivers angry at low pay for long 
hours stepped up direct action against the San Fransisco-based firm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0913c9ed6497ccd8c27a49beb1861e13e6d71b0a%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20drivers%20stage%20go-slow%20protest%20through%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20drivers%20stage%20go-slow%20protest%20through%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0913c9ed6497ccd8c27a49beb1861e13e6d71b0a%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Protest by Uber taxi drivers in London. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
The protest infuriated some drivers who found themselves blocked behind a line 
of slow-moving Toyota Prius cars. One angry black-cab driver shouted: “Do the 
knowledge!” a reference to the way cabbies have to memorise streets before 
getting their license rather than rely on GPS maps as Uber drivers do.

The Guardian view on employment law: an overhaul is needed | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/the-guardian-view-on-employment-law-an-overhaul-is-needed>
The action was organised by James Farrar and Yaseen Aslam, who three weeks ago 
won a crucial employment tribunal verdict thatUber should treat its drivers as 
workers rather then self-employed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
. The ruling means drivers should be paid the national minimum wage, receive 
sick pay and holidays. Uber said it would appeal the judgment. Farrar and Aslam 
have established a representative group for minicab drivers, mostly working for 
Uber, called United Private Hire Drivers (UPHD).

The battle over Uber and driverless cars is really a debate about the future 
of humanity | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/paul-mason-driverless-cars-uber-artificial-intelligence-unemployment>
“In May 2017, Uber’s licence comes up for renewal and the mayor has a duty to 
assess whether they are fit and proper to hold a licence,” said Farrar. “He 
must assess that Uber respects workers’ rights in order to continue having an 
operator’s licence inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.”

UPHD also sent a letter to Khan apologising for the disruption of its protest, 
but suggested Uber’s business model resulted in “abuses that would be more 
fitting of Victorian era London than a 21st-century global mega city”.

It said: “The fact that such abuses are carried out in a trade which is 
licensed and supervised byTfL <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tfl> [Transport 
for London] on behalf of all Londoners is nothing short of a public scandal. 
More than that, drivers working up to 90 hours a week on £5 per hour presents a 
significant public safety risk.”

Uber insists that its drivers earn more and said that the only case of a 
driver earning £5 per hour over 90 hours was because they were declining fares. 
But several drivers who took time off work to join the protest said their 
earnings were below the legal minimum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fecd0145daddd05480414f4159fffccf3fc0030%2F0_74_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20drivers%20stage%20go-slow%20protest%20through%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20drivers%20stage%20go-slow%20protest%20through%20central%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fuber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fecd0145daddd05480414f4159fffccf3fc0030%2F0_74_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 An Uber driver takes part in the protest. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
“I am working 70 to 80 hours a week, which comes out at £4 an hour which is 
below the minimum wage,” said Ibrahim, 30, an Uber driver for 18 months.

“With these hours, people are going to be falling sick and filling up the NHS 
and they will be falling back on to benefits,” said Mujeeb, an Uber driver who 
said he worked 70 to 80 hours a week and only took home about £250after paying 
his expenses. “If the government doesn’t act, it will cost them.”


An Uber spokesperson defended the business model, and said: “Tens of thousands 
of licensed drivers in London choose to partner with Uber because they love the 
freedom and flexibility of being their own boss.”

It claimed its own polling showed 90% of drivers were “satisfied with driving 
with Uber, and a majority say the amount of money they make, as well their 
ability to balance work and family life, has increased since they started 
driving with us.

“We’re proud of the economic opportunities we have created for people who can 
choose to drive when and where they want. Drivers using our app made average 
payments of more than £16 an hour after Uber’s service fee this September, and 
20% of drivers were logged into the app for 10 hours or less a week with just 
25% logged in for 40 or more hours per week.”
 