
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> regulators ordered 
Uber to remove its self-driving vehicles from the road on the same day that the 
company’s vehicles were caught running red lights – violations the company 
immediately blamed on “human error”.

“It is essential that Uber takes appropriate measures to ensure safety of the 
public,” the California department of motor vehicles (DMV) wrote to Uber on 
Wednesday after it defied government officials and began piloting the cars in
San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> without 
permits. “If Uber does not confirm immediately that it will stop its launch and 
seek a testing permit, DMV will initiate legal action.”

An Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> spokesperson said two 
red-light violations were due to mistakes by the people required to sit behind 
the steering wheel and said the company has suspended the drivers.

A video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_CdJ4oae8f4> posted by Charles 
Rotter, an operations manager at Luxor, a traditional cab company, shows one of 
Uber’s computer-controlled cars plowing through a pedestrian crosswalk in 
downtown about four seconds after the light turned red. Elsewhere, aphoto 
<https://twitter.com/AnnieGaus/status/809092604503560192> from a San Francisco 
writer showed one of the Uber vehicles entering an intersection against a red 
light.

“People could die,” Rotter said in an interview later. “This is obviously not 
ready for primetime.”

People could die. This is obviously not ready for primetime
Charles Rotter 
The traffic violations and threat of legal action are a significant blow to 
Uber in its home town, where the California department of motor vehicles hassaid
 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/2016/12/14/uber-self-driving-car-program-already-stirring-controversy-california/>
 that Uber requires permits to test the technology on its roads.

Despite that stated mandate from a government agency, Uber declared in a 
blogpost 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/san-francisco-your-self-driving-uber-is-arriving-now/>
 that it did not believe it needed a “testing permit” to launch self-driving 
vehicles in San Francisco, arguing that the rules don’t apply since the cars 
have people in them monitoring movements.

“Most states see the potential benefits, especially when it comes to road 
safety,” wrote Anthony Levandowski, head of Uber’s advanced technology group. 
His post announcing the Wednesday launch noted the Volvo XC90s’ “core safety 
capabilities”.

In his letter to Levandowski, the DMV’s deputy director, Brian Soublet, noted 
that 20 companies have already been approved to test self-driving vehicles in 
California.

“They are obeying the law and are responsibly testing and advancing their 
technology,” he said, adding, “This technology holds the promise of true safety 
benefits on our roadways, but must be tested responsibly.” 

The self-driving vehicles of the popular car-sharing company were first 
unveiled in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-ford-fusion>
 in September. The vehicles havetechnology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/26/uber-self-driving-passengers-pittsburgh-injury-death-waiver>
 that allows them to navigate on their own, thoughlicensed drivers sit behind 
the wheel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/uber-self-driving-pittsburgh-what-drivers-think>
 and can take control as necessary.

Annie Gaus, a San Francisco writer and producer, said she was riding to work 
on Wednesday in a Lyft, Uber’s biggest competitor, when she saw one of the Uber 
self-driving vehicles nearly crash into her.
Annie Gaus (@AnnieGaus) 
Just passed a 'self-driving' Uber that lurched into the intersection on Van 
Ness, on a red, nearly hitting my Lyft.
 <https://twitter.com/AnnieGaus/status/809092604503560192> December 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AnnieGaus/status/809092604503560192> 
She tweeted a photo of the car in the intersection after it ran the red light. 
Annie Gaus (@AnnieGaus) 
(Not enough time to get a good shot, but...whoops!) pic.twitter.com/XK49nMF2Q4 
<https://t.co/XK49nMF2Q4>
 <https://twitter.com/AnnieGaus/status/809092789388472320> December 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AnnieGaus/status/809092789388472320> 
“The Uber car sort of jutted out into the intersection,” she told the Guardian 
by phone, noting that she and her Lyft driver were both taken aback. “It was 
close enough that we were both kind of like, ‘Woah.’ It’s close enough that you 
kind of react and are sort of rattled.”

Gaus, who has written about technology and has contributed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/29/hipster-churches-sillicon-valley-evangelical-new-home>
 to the Guardian, said the red-light violations on day one of the pilot seem to 
highlight how the implementation of the technology in a place like San 
Francisco may be premature.

“I don’t think anybody has a good understanding of how this works in a city 
context.”

An Uber spokesperson said both cars running red lights were not part of the 
pilot and were not carrying customers.

“These incidents were due to human error. This is why we believe so much in 
making the roads safer by building self-driving Ubers,” the statement said. 
“The drivers involved have been suspended while we continue to investigate.”

The company did not immediately respond to questions about the state’s order 
to remove the cars from the road.

It’s unclear how law enforcement may address these kinds of violations. 

Asked how the San Francisco police department would respond to a self-driving 
Uber running a red light, officer Giselle Talkoff said: “I don’t even know. I 
guess we could pull them over.”

After the Guardian sent Talkoff footage of the Uber violation, first reported 
by theSan Francisco Examiner 
<http://www.sfexaminer.com/uber-self-driving-vehicle-appears-launch-red-light-first-day-sf/>
, she said the police were not investigating the specific incident. But she 
noted officers would follow up in cases in which there was an injury or if they 
witnessed a violation in person – though she said she wasn’t sure if the 
“secondary driver” or the company would be held accountable.

“There was a person that was walking very closely,” she said of the footage, 
pointing out that a pedestrian was entering the street when the Uber car ran 
the red.

Talkoff further noted that there aren’t state or federal laws governing 
self-driving cars.

“First comes technology, then comes policy. It’s going to be a matter of 
setting some precedents,” she said, adding, “The companies that are putting 
these vehicles on the road should have their vehicles operate with due regard 
to the rules of the road.”

A sergeant with the police traffic division said his department was not even 
aware 
<http://www.sfexaminer.com/sfpd-traffic-division-unaware-self-driving-uber-fleet-city-streets/>
 that Uber had started using autonomous cars in San Francisco.

Rotter argued that the technology company should be held responsible for 
sending the vehicles out on the road despite government objections.

“What this company has done is start operating illegally and push for 
permission later.”

Contact the author: sam.levin@theguardian.com
 