
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> drivers are not 
self-employed and should be paid the “national living wage”, a UK employment 
court has ruled in a landmark case which could affect tens of thousands of 
workers in the gig economy.

The ride-hailing app could now be open to claims from all of its 40,000 
drivers in the UK, who are currently not entitled to holiday pay, pensions or 
other workers’ rights. Uber immediately said it would appeal against the ruling.

Uber ruling is a massive boost for a fairer jobs market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-ruling-is-a-massive-boost-for-a-fairer-jobs-market>
Employment experts said other firms with large self-employed workforces could 
now face scrutiny of their working practices and the UK’s biggest union, Unite, 
announced it was setting up a new unit to pursue cases of bogus self-employment.

Research by Citizens Advice has suggested that as many as 460,000 people could 
be falsely classified as self-employed, costing up to £314m a year in lost tax 
and employer national insurance contributions.Four courier firms are already 
facing legal action from cyclists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/06/uk-firms-reliant-on-gig-economy-uber-deliveroo->
 who want similar recognition as staff employees and the rights that go with 
that status,while delivery firm Hermes is under investigation by HM Revenue & 
Customs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/delivery-giant-hermes-faces-hmrc-inquiry-into-low-pay-allegations>
.

The Uber ruling could force a rethink of the gig economy business model, where 
companies use apps and the internet to match customers with workers. The firms 
do not employ the workers, but take commission from their earnings, and many 
have become huge global enterprises. Uber now operates around the world, with 
the company valued at more than £50bn.

Self-employed earn less than in 2001 – and will be hit by welfare cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/self-employed-earn-less-than-2001-hit-welfare-cuts>
The decision of the employment tribunal comes amid mounting concern within 
government about the growing trend towards self-employed workforces.The 
government has recently announced a six-month review of modern working practices
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-hires-former-tony-blair-policy-boss-to-review-workers-rights>
 andHMRC is setting up a new unit, the employment status and intermediaries team
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/hmrc-launch-crackdown-gig-economy-firms-agency-self-employed-staff>
, to investigate firms.

MPs launched an inquiry last week into pay and working conditions in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/mps-inquiry-uk-working-conditions-pay-exploitation-gig-economy>
 which will look at the status and rights of agency and casual workers and the 
self-employed for the purposes of tax, benefits and employment law, and how to 
protect them.

Friday’s ruling by a London employment tribunal involves a case taken by two 
drivers, James Farrar and Yaseen Aslam, on behalf of a group 19 Uber workers 
who argued that they were employed by the San Francisco-based firm, rather than 
working for themselves.

At a hearing in July, Farrar told how he was put under “tremendous pressure” 
to work long hours and accept jobs and said that there were “repercussions” 
from the company if he cancelled a pickup.He said some months he earned as 
little as £5 an hour – far below the £7.20 that employers are obliged to pay 
workers aged over 25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/oct/28/nightmare-over-for-uber-workers-following-court-decision-says-driver-video>
.

Uber argued that it was a technology firm not a transport business and that 
its drivers were independent self-employed contractors who could choose where 
and when they worked.

The judges were scathing about Uber’s arguments,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-tribunal-judges-fictions-twisted-language-appeal>
however, accusing the firm of “resorting in its documentation to fictions, 
twisted language and even brand new terminology” and even quoting Hamlet to 
suggest that the group’s UK boss was protesting too much about its position.

“The notion that Uber in London is a mosaic of 30,000 small businesses linked 
by a common ‘platform’ is to our minds faintly ridiculous,” the judges said. 
“Drivers do not and cannot negotiate with passengers … They are offered and 
accept trips strictly on Uber’s terms.”

Nigel Mackay from the employment team at law firm Leigh Day, which represented 
the drivers, said: “We are pleased that the employment tribunal has agreed with 
our arguments that drivers are entitled to the most basic workers’ rights, 
including to be paid the [national living wage] and to receive paid holiday, 
which were previously denied to them.

“This is a ground-breaking decision. It will impact not just on the thousands 
of Uber drivers working in this country, but on all workers in the so-called 
gig economy whose employers wrongly classify them as self-employed and deny 
them the rights to which they are entitled.”

The GMB union, which took up the case for the drivers, said that it was a 
“monumental victory” which would have an impact on thousands of workers in 
other industries “where bogus self-employment is rife”.

Maria Ludkin, GMB’s legal director, said: “Uber drivers and thousands of 
others caught in the bogus self-employment trap will now enjoy the same rights 
as employees. This outcome will be good for passengers, too. Properly rewarded 
drivers are the same side of the coin as drivers who are properly licensed and 
driving well-maintained and insured vehicles.”

Farrar said he was thrilled with the “emphatic” ruling. He said his industry 
had seen the deterioration in workers’ rights since Uber entered the market. 
“We’ve brought that to a halt,” he said.

Employment experts said that other firms with large self-employed workforces 
could now face similar action. “This judgment is likely to have massive 
implications, as we see an increasing number of start-up businesses effectively 
adopting Uber’s model,” said Tim Goodwin of law firm Winckworth Sherwood. “The 
effect of this judgment is that those kinds of business may owe a lot more to 
their workers, such as paid holiday and minimum wage, than they had bargained 
for.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fuber-ruling-an-enormous-decision-says-employment-lawyer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20ruling%20%E2%80%98an%20enormous%20decision%E2%80%99%20says%20employment%20lawyer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fuber-ruling-an-enormous-decision-says-employment-lawyer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20ruling%20%E2%80%98an%20enormous%20decision%E2%80%99%20says%20employment%20lawyer%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fuber-ruling-an-enormous-decision-says-employment-lawyer-video&media=>
Uber ruling ‘an enormous decision’ says employment lawyer – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/oct/28/uber-ruling-an-enormous-decision-says-employment-lawyer-video>
The ruling should be regarded as “ a salutary lesson by businesses who try to 
arbitrarily ‘classify’ workers as contractors to avoid affording them their 
full rights as workers,” Goodwin said.

The GMB’s Ludkin said employers should be “on notice” that it was reviewing 
similar contracts. “This is old-fashioned exploitation under new-fangled 
jargon, but the law will force you to pay GMB members what they are rightfully 
due,” she said.

There were calls for more clarity over employment status, with Citizens Advice 
pointing out that many people were locked out of employment tribunals by fees 
of up to £1,200.

“The fact it takes an employment tribunal to decide whether these drivers are 
self-employed shows that proving employment status is an extremely complicated 
and costly process,” said its chief executive, Gillian Guy. “For many people 
struggling at the sharp end of insecure work, such as in false self-employment, 
taking such a case is simply not an option.”

The ruling is not the end of the process for Uber. The firm will take the case 
to the employment appeal tribunal, and following its decision there could be 
further hearings in the court of appeal and then the supreme court. Any 
payments due to drivers will not be calculated until that process is over.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fuber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40195da9e9ca61064252f544a2871dee337d33da%2F0_387_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20loses%20right%20to%20classify%20UK%20drivers%20as%20self-employed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fuber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20loses%20right%20to%20classify%20UK%20drivers%20as%20self-employed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fuber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40195da9e9ca61064252f544a2871dee337d33da%2F0_387_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
 Jo Bertram. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
Other drivers with the firm will not automatically receive payouts but, if the 
firm accepts the ruling, it will have to change its contracts to avoid more 
cases being taken by drivers. Lawyers say that its terms and conditions are 
similar for all of its UK employees.

Jo Bertram, the regional general manager of Uber in the UK, said many of the 
firm’s drivers did not want to be classified as workers: “Tens of thousands of 
people in London drive with Uber precisely because they want to be 
self-employed and their own boss.

“The overwhelming majority of drivers who use the Uber app want to keep the 
freedom and flexibility of being able to drive when and where they want.”

Uber in numbers

40,000 The number of Uber drivers in the UK

£5 The hourly wage received in some months by one of the drivers who took the 
case.

$62.5bn Uber’s valuation based on its last round of funding.

Seven The years that Uber has been in operation.

460,000 The number of people who could be falsely classified as self-employed 
in the UK

£314m The yearly estimated cost in lost tax and employer national insurance 
contributions from falsely classified employees, according to Citizens Advice














 