
Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> defended its business model 
in Europe’s highest court on Tuesday, saying its service had made it easier for 
people to get around and cut pollution as it fights a case which could leave 
app-based startups facing tougher regulation.

The ride-hailing app, which expanded into Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> five years ago, has come under 
attack from established taxi companies and some EU countries because it is not 
bound by strict local licensing and safety rules which apply to some of its 
competitors.

Uber drivers stage go-slow protest through central London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/22/uber-drivers-go-slow-protest-central-london-minimum-wage-guarantee>
Uber’s dispute with Barcelona’s main taxi operator, which in 2014 accused it 
of running an illegal taxi service via its UberPOP service, is seen as a 
landmark case which could lead the Court of Justice of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> (ECJ) to label it a transport company 
rather than a digital service.

 Such a ruling would subject the company to stricter rules on licensing, 
insurance and safety, with possible knock-on effects on other startups such as 
the onlinehome rental company Airbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/29/airbnb-denies-liability-after-guests-plunge-two-storeys-from-balcony>
 and the food delivery companyDeliveroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/deliveroo-union-recognition-iwbg-camden-london-uber>
, other big brands in thesharing economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/02/eu-commission-backs-sharing-economy-uber-airbnb>
.

 It could also limit efforts by the European Commission to boost e-commerce, a 
sector where the EU lags behind Asia and the United States, to drive economic 
growth and create jobs.

 “Uber is part of a wave of technology which radically changes the way we 
shop, obtain information,” Uber’s lawyer Cani Fernandez told a panel of 15 
judges at the ECJ.

 “Uber contributes to linking drivers and passengers more efficiently,” she 
added, pointing to improvements in getting around, lower pollution and easier 
access to parking.

 Uber is valued at more than $60bn and its investors include Goldman Sachs and 
GV, formerly known as Google Ventures.

 It has faced protests, bans and legal action around the world, including in 
the United States andmuch of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/11/cab-drivers-europe-protest-taxi-app-uber-london-madrid>
, as it disrupts existing business practices.

The future: where borrowing is the norm and ownership is luxury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/17/sharing-economy-capitalism-uber-airbnb-ownership>
 In this latest case, Barcelona’s main taxi operator argues Uber has an unfair 
advantage because it does not bear the costs which taxi companies face.

 “If there is a transport service provided, a company should not be able to 
hide behind the thin veil of a different service,” its lawyer Montse Balague 
Farre said.

 Lawyers for Spain, Ireland and France also argued that Uber should be treated 
as a transport company.

 The Netherlands – where Uber has its European headquarters – as well as 
Estonia and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), however, said the 
company merely provided a connecting service between the passenger and a driver.

 The court should “send a message that innovation and new business 
opportunities in the European Union should be encouraged and not hindered by 
submitting them to unnecessary rules”, EFTA’s lawyer said.

 An ECJ adviser is expected to give a non-binding opinion in the coming months 
before the judges give their verdict.
 