
California has forced Uber to remove its self-driving vehicles from the road, 
canceling the company’s controversial pilot program in San Francisco after a 
week ofembarrassing reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
 of traffic violations and repeatedlegal threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
 from state officials.

The department of motor vehicles (DMV) announced late on Wednesday that it had 
revoked the registration of 16 autonomousUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> cars, which the corporation 
deployed without proper permits last week and which were caught on numerous 
occasions running red lights.

Self-driving cars: Uber's open defiance of California shines light on brazen 
tactics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
Uber, which had previously declared that its rejection of government 
regulations was an “important issue of principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
”, confirmed that it has stopped its pilot in a statement, adding: “We’re now 
looking at where we can redeploy these cars but remain 100 percent committed to 
California and will be redoubling our efforts to develop workable statewide 
rules.”

DMV officials and the state attorney attorney general, Kamala Harris, have 
noted that Uber must get a testing permit for its Volvo XC90s, which are 
navigated by a computer system but have a driver in the front seat who can 
intervene when needed.

“It was determined that the registrations were improperly issued for these 
vehicles because they were not properly marked as test vehicles,” the DMV said 
in a statement. “Concurrently, the department invited Uber to seek a permit so 
their vehicles can operate legally inCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.”

The removal of the cars is a major blow to Uber in its home town and a sign 
that California will not allow the company to skirt regulations – a tactic that 
has been acentral component of the corporation’s rapid growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fuber-cancels-self-driving-car-trial-san-francisco-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddbe9f6d4a362a54e2838afa5619428bf46895fd%2F0_253_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20cancels%20self-driving%20car%20trial%20in%20San%20Francisco%20after%20state%20forces%20it%20off%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fuber-cancels-self-driving-car-trial-san-francisco-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20cancels%20self-driving%20car%20trial%20in%20San%20Francisco%20after%20state%20forces%20it%20off%20road&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fuber-cancels-self-driving-car-trial-san-francisco-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddbe9f6d4a362a54e2838afa5619428bf46895fd%2F0_253_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 An Uber self-driving car in San Francisco. The company had quietly launched 
its pilot program last week. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
The car-sharing company’s autonomous cars were first unveiled in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-ford-fusion>
 in the fall, and Uber quietly startedtesting 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/09/21/self-driving-uber-vehicles-spotted-on-the-streets-of-san-francisco/>
 the technology on the roads of San Francisco in September. 

The company officially launched a pilot program accessible to riders last 
week, claiming that it did not need self-driving permits since the cars have 
humans inside monitoring. Anthony Levandowski, head of Uber’s advanced 
technology group, also justified the company’s unpermitted vehicles byclaiming 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/san-francisco-your-self-driving-uber-is-arriving-now/>
 that they have “state-of-the-art” technology and “core safety capabilities”.

But within hours of the formal pilot program’s start, a video emerged of one 
of the vehiclesrunning a red light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
 in downtown San Francisco as a pedestrian began to cross the street. Reports 
of similar errors quickly spread on social media, and Uber blamed the mistakes 
on “human error”, saying the self-driving technology was not at fault and that 
they would be suspending drivers.

That defense earned widespread criticism from transportation experts and 
safety advocates, who argued that Uber should take responsibility for the 
actions of its cars and should collaborate with regulators instead of brazenly 
defying them.

One witness said he saw a self-driving Uber run a red light and nearly cause a 
collision while the vehicle wasin self-driving mode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/21/witness-says-self-driving-uber-ran-red-light-on-its-own-disputing-ubers-claims>
.

Uber also admitted to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/19/uber-self-driving-cars-bike-lanes-safety-san-francisco>
 this week that the self-driving technology had a “problem” with bike lanes, 
raising concerns about serious safety risks in a city where there are an 
estimated82,000 bike trips 
<http://www.sfexaminer.com/annual-bike-count-shows-commutes-sf-nearly-9-percent/>
 each day.

The DMV has repeatedly pointed out that 20 manufacturers have gone through 
proper protocols and obtained permits for self-driving technology.

“California’s testing regulations for autonomous vehicles strike a balance 
between protecting public safety and embracing innovation,” the statement said. 
“Uber is welcome to test its autonomous technology in California like everybody 
else.”

Witness says self-driving Uber ran red light on its own, disputing Uber's 
claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/21/witness-says-self-driving-uber-ran-red-light-on-its-own-disputing-ubers-claims>
The DMV statement also said it could take less than 72 hours for Uber to get 
its permits after completing an application: “The department stands ready to 
assist Uber in obtaining a permit as expeditiously as possible.”

Some have suggested that Uber has aggressively tried to avoid permits so that 
it does not have to face the public scrutiny of a regulatory process.

Companies with permits are required to disclose crashes to the government and 
submit annual “disengagement reports”, which outline situations when a human 
operator intervened, sometimes due to technology failures.

San Francisco’s mayor, Ed Lee, said he supported the removal of the cars in a 
statement: “I have always been a strong supporter of innovation and autonomous 
vehicle development and testing, but only under conditions that put human, 
bicyclist and pedestrian safety first.”

John M Simpson, privacy project director for Consumer Watchdog, an advocacy 
group that has staunchly opposed the pilot program, praised the “DMV’s decisive 
action”, but said he still had doubts about Uber’s cars and practices.

“Given Uber’s safety record over the last two days,” he said, “where they’ve 
been blasting through red lights and threatening cyclists’ safety, we have 
fundamental questions about whether the robot cars are even ready to be tested 
on public highways.”
 