
A gentle drizzle beats an insistent rhythm on the rusty, corrugated iron 
classroom roof at Katwe primary school in a suburb of Kampala, Uganda’s capital.


It is a chilly morning and children in the primary one class are learning the 
alphabet. “A, B, C,” they repeat after their teacher. But many of these 
children will not finish their seven years of primary education.

What is the millennium development goal on education all about?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-education-explainer>
Irene Namusuubo Guloba, the headteacher, says: “Around 250 of our pupils did 
not come back this year. We cannot tell exactly where they went.” This exodus 
of pupils is not unusual here – some transfer to other schools, but others drop 
out completely, Guloba says.

Katwe primary is one of the government schools implementing the Universal 
Primary Education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/universal-primary-education> 
(UPE) scheme.

When the initiative started in 1997, as part of a national policy to provide 
free primary education for underprivileged children, it was a dream come true 
for most poor parents in the east African state. Wealthier parents take their 
children to private schools.

In record time, numbers in UPE schools soared. Enrolment increased 
<http://www.education.go.ug/files/downloads/Abstract_2013.pdf> from 3.1 million 
pupils in 1996 to 8.4 million in 2013.

The numbers are evenly spread between boys and girls. And the country has been 
commended for achieving more than 90% ofMDG2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/aug/05/millennium-development-goal-universal-primary-education>
, which aimed to ensure that all children – boys and girls alike – complete 
primary school.

But this success seems to be falling apart amid a very high number of dropouts 
<http://www.unicef.org/uganda/OUT_OF_SCHOOL_CHILDREN_STUDY_REPORT__FINAL_REPORT_2014.pdf>
 and poor-quality schooling for some of those who complete primary school.

The UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (Unesco) has estimated
 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/dakar/about-this-office/single-view/news/42_of_african_school_children_will_drop_out_before_the_end_of_primary_education/#.VSfJ5vAqiCk>
 that 68% of children in Uganda who enrol in primary school are likely to drop 
out before finishing the prescribed seven years.

Chad has the highest dropout rate in sub-Saharan Africa, at 72%. In east Africa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Kenya has the highest completion 
rateof 84%.

At a cabinet ministers’ retreat last month, Uganda’s President Yoweri Museveni 
expressed his rage over the rate at which pupils were leaving school, even when 
the country spent 900bn Ugandan shillings ($302m; $201m) annually on the 
scheme. He said: “We should get an answer, and if you think it [UPE] needs to 
be restructured, we do that.”

The scheme faces a myriad of issues: gender challenges, child labour, early 
marriages, less motivated teachers, and lack of awareness among parents. 
However, the biggest challenge is poverty.

Dr Nicholas Itaaga, a UPE expert and a lecturerat Makerere University’s School 
of Education, says poorer parents still struggle to meet requirements for 
school. “UPE was a good development for any government to implement. Our 
problem inUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> [is that] it was 
not adequately planned. We are losing out.”

The major setback for UPE is that it is not entirely free, contrary to the 
general perception that parents are not supposed to pay for anything.

For poorer parents, especially in rural Uganda, the cost of pens, exercise 
books and clothing is beyond their reach

In practice they still have to buy scholastic materials including pens, 
exercise books, clothing and even bricks for classroom construction. They also 
have to provide or buy lunch for their children. For poorer parents, especially 
in rural Uganda, who live on about $1 a day, the cost is beyond reach.

Charles Mugerwa is the father of an 11-year-old boy in Kasenyi village, 
Kalangala district, in central Uganda. On a school day, his son is at home. 
Asked why, Mugerwa said: “He has no uniform.”

The poorer regions – northern and eastern Uganda – experience higher dropout 
rates. Western and central regions are regarded as better off.

Government figures 
<http://www.finance.go.ug/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_details&gid=423&Itemid=7>
 indicate poverty levels have declined in Uganda, from 24.5% in 2009-10 to 
19.7% in 20012-13.

“Do not expect a pupil who comes to school and there is no hope for a 
lunch[time] meal to stay in school,” Guloba says.

Some schools now ask parents to pay between $2 and $5 a pupil for every 
three-month term so that they can prepare lunch for them. But some parents 
still cannot afford to pay, and their children end up dropping out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fuganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429096484977%2F62425443-e372-4c76-a7f6-f397f87d7c12-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uganda%E2%80%99s%20success%20in%20universal%20primary%20education%20falling%20apart%20%7C%20Alon%20Mwesigwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fuganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uganda%E2%80%99s%20success%20in%20universal%20primary%20education%20falling%20apart%20%7C%20Alon%20Mwesigwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fapr%2F23%2Fuganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429096484977%2F62425443-e372-4c76-a7f6-f397f87d7c12-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Four brothers watch over the family’s cattle in Obolokome village, Agago 
district, Uganda. All of them missed school because of the chore. Photograph: 
Ric Francis/Zuma/Alamy 
“I have been to the deep rural areas and a simple thing such as an exercise 
book or sanitary pads for the girls is a very big issue,” Itaaga says.

An estimated 30% of girls leave school when they start their periods, often 
because of alack of sanitary pads 
<http://www.newvision.co.ug/news/645725-30-of-girls-leaving-school-for-lack-of-sanitary-pads.html>
.

At Katwe, the school steps in for parents and buys pads for the pupils. “I 
actually have big girls here. The school provides some money to buy sanitary 
pads. The senior woman talks to them and they are comfortable,” Guloba says. 
“We are able to keep them in class”.

But not all girls have that chance so they end up dropping out, deterred by 
inadequate facilities, particularly the lack of privacy when boys and girls 
share latrines.

Fagil Mandy, former chairman of Uganda’s National Examinations Board, feels 
that the critical role schools can play is insufficiently acknowledged and 
evaluated. “The school as an institution has not been focused on by any major 
authority. It is a life-nurturing place, and should be overseen and monitored 
all the time,” Mandy says.

Government statistics show that for every 71 pupils there is one latrine. NGOs 
and bodies including the World Bank have funded the construction of classrooms 
and toilets for some schools, but much more help is needed to provide adequate 
facilities for the huge numbers of pupils involved.

Millennium development goal 2: 15 achievements on education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-2-15-achievements-on-education>
The education minister, Jessica Alupo, says the high dropout rate is a great 
concern for the government: “We want to know why all parents send a child to 
school when they are in primary one and the numbers decrease as they ascend to 
upper classes. We want to engage them [parents] much more than before.”

Margaret Rwabushaija, chair of Uganda’s National Teachers’ Union, says the 
government must increase funding to schools. Since 1997, she says, it has not 
revised the amount of money it pays to educate a child annually, which stands 
at 7,560 shillings. “How do you expect headteachers to run schools without 
money?” she asks.

 Another major issue has been quality of teaching. A 2012 study 
<http://www.twaweza.org/go/uwezo-kenya-2012ala> found that three out of 10 
pupils in primary three could read and comprehend a primary two-level story. At 
primary seven, the final class in the primary cycle, two out of 10 pupils could 
not read a primary two-level story. This has created a huge knowledge gap 
between children of the “haves”, studying in private schools, and the 
“have-nots”, in government schools.

Betty Bitainensha, deputy head teacher at government-aided Kitante primary 
school in Kampala, says public schools often have the best-trained teachers, 
but they are less motivated to work. Teachers are among the lowest paid public 
servants in Uganda. The government has pledged to increase teachers’ salaries 
in the 2015-16 financial year.

Alupo says she is optimistic about the future, but only if they can focus on 
the key obstacles: “Are teachers at school at all times? Are they are motivated 
to teach? Is the environment conducive for the learners? And finally is there a 
special programme to talk to parents about their role and obligation?”
 