
In December of last year, Kitson, a small chain of boutiques on the west coast 
of America, announced it was going out of business. The first Kitson store had 
opened back in 2000 on Robinson Boulevard, just on the edge of Beverly Hills; 
it was the kind of shop where you could impulse-buy a cupcake-printed tote bag 
or, during a crucial Hollywood breakup, “Team Aniston” and “Team Jolie” 
T-shirts. The biggest tabloid stars of the early millennium – Paris Hilton, 
Lindsay Lohan, Britney Spears – flocked to Kitson, and were often photographed 
by paparazzi as they walked out with the store’s signature baby blue shopping 
bags draped on their arms. Kitson was an ideal place to pick up the unofficial 
uniform of that era’s celebrity set: a candy-coloured Juicy Couture velour 
tracksuit and a pair of sheepskin-linedUgg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/ugg> boots.

When Kitson, so emblematic of a certain pre-financial crisis excess, announced 
that it was closing its doors for good, it felt like the death knell to a ditzy 
and much-derided era. Many of the stars of that time – Lohan, for example – 
have lost their lustre, and leggings have replaced velour tracksuits as the 
modern woman’s errand-running outfit of choice. (The hot pink Juicy Couture 
sweats are now literally museum pieces: they will be on display at the V&A 
later this spring.) As a result, they have come to embody a particularly 
repellent cultural moment that everyone is glad to be over with. In 2012, while 
filmingThe Bling Ring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/07/bling-ring-review> – based on the 
true story of a gang of southern California teenagers who burgled the homes of 
celebrities (including Paris Hilton) in 2008 and 2009 – Emma Watson tweeted a 
picture of herself in character as Nicki, wearing a short-sleeved pink Juicy 
Couture tracksuit and a pair of Uggs. “Nicki likes Lip Gloss, Purses, Yoga, 
Pole Dancing, Uggs, Louboutins, Juice Cleanses, Iced coffee and Tattoos.”

Uggs are certainly ugly, or at least inelegant. They look like something 
Frankenstein’s monster would wear if he were an elf. The shapeless, 
unstructured boots, pulled on in a hurry, can make anyone look like a slob, 
which has made them the target of special scorn. For as long as Uggs have been 
popular, it hasn’t been hard to find someone furiously denouncing them. “Ugg 
boots are not sexy,” the Independent declared in 2003, “unless you’re Mrs 
Bigfoot on a lone mission across Antarctica to find Mr Bigfoot.” When wearing 
the boots, a writer at the online beauty magazine The Gloss complained, 
“there’s nothing to indicate that you don’t have square, hideous shoe boxes in 
place of human feet”. In 2015, one coffee shop on Brick Lane in east London 
even banned Ugg-wearers from its premises – calling the boots “slag wellies”.

Ugg: the look that refused to die
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/apr/25/ugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die>
And yet, over the years, plenty of odd and unflattering shoes – pool sliders, 
clogs, tall platforms – have met with the approval of the fashion 
establishment. The problem with Uggs wasn’t that they were ugly; it’s that they 
were common.

But a funny thing happened on the way to fashion’s graveyard of regrettable 
fads: the ubiquitous Ugg has not gone anywhere. Uggs have quietly lingered on 
since their heyday, unnoticed but omnipresent – once you start paying 
attention, you’ll be shocked to discover how many people are still wearing 
them. Walk down any high street and focus on footwear, and you will see an army 
of sheepskin boots coming at you. They are worn by mothers running errands in 
town and in the country, paired with denim cut-off shorts at rock festivals, 
worn by teenagers on Saturday shopping trips.

In the reception area at Ugg corporate headquarters in Southern California, 
there is a bound album filled with snapshots of celebrities wearing the 
company’s products. It is arranged in alphabetical order, with separate 
sections for women and men, and is the size of the September issue of a fashion 
magazine, or maybe a small phone book. Many of the photographs are from the 
brand’s peak cultural moment in the mid-2000s, including six different pictures 
of Blake Lively and four of Leighton Meester, wearing Uggs between takes on the 
set of Gossip Girl. But there are enough photos from the past few years to make 
it clear that Uggs remain a perennial off-duty uniform for the famous: Ariana 
Grande wearing classic boots at an airport, paired with a massive Louis Vuitton 
bag; Charlize Theron wearing the Cardy boot, whose knitted exterior is meant to 
resemble a buttoned cardigan; Emma Watson (again) shopping in a white pair; 
Rosie Huntington-Whiteley crossing the street wearing Coquettes (Ugg slippers 
shaped like a flat clog or a boot with the top sliced off, which can be worn 
indoors or out); Hugh Jackman and the designer Valentino (separately) wearing 
the Butte snow boot. Last winter, I spotted Grace Coddington, the revered 
creative director-at-large of American Vogue, striding into work in a pair of 
short black Ugg boots, paired with a Céline bag.
Emma Watson (@EmWatson) 
Nicki likes Lip Gloss, Purses, Yoga, Pole Dancing, Uggs, Louboutins, Juice 
Cleanses, Iced coffee and Tattoos.@blingringmovie 
<https://twitter.com/BlingRingMovie>
 <https://twitter.com/EmWatson/status/197762302282440704> May 2, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/EmWatson/status/197762302282440704> 
The message of all these images – and perhaps the secret of Ugg’s apparently 
unstoppable success – is that if there is a dividing line between public 
glamour and private style, it might be a pair of cosy shearling boots. They are 
undeniably comfortable – soft and squishy and warm, as if your feet were in the 
embrace of someone who really loves you. The look and feel telegraphs a message 
of “I’m worth it” but also “this is me, off-duty”. At £150 a pair, they are 
neither cheap nor entirely out of range. They reside in the overlap of a Venn 
diagram for casual and indulgent.

Somehow Uggs, the boots that so many people loved to hate, have managed to 
defy the cruel logic of the fashion cycle and carry on – whether you approve of 
them or not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c0ee343fe0c3af30c145a4816d0ec71ca703ea0%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c0ee343fe0c3af30c145a4816d0ec71ca703ea0%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
 Rosie Huntington-Whiteley. Photograph: The Guardian 
Ugg has sold so many products – mostly footwear, but also clothing and home 
goods – that there are 3.7 items for every woman in America; 3.0 for every 
woman in the UK; 2.1 for Japan. (This doesn’t include the 2.5 million pairs of 
counterfeit Uggs have been seized since 2007.) After a brief dip earlier this 
decade – when the haters proclaimed the long-overdue death of the Ugg – sales 
are climbing again: in 2014-15, Ugg sales were up 12.6% on the previous year, 
to $1.49bn, according to the most recent earnings report from Deckers Brands, 
the California-based footwear company that has owned Ugg since 1995.

I visited the original Ugg retail store, in Soho, New York, one Thursday 
evening in January. Even though the city was experiencing an unusually warm 
winter, it was packed. The words “Weather rated to -20c -4F” are printed on the 
shop window. In the front of store, on prominent display, were sturdy snow 
boots called the Adirondack and the Ostrander – names meant to conjure visions 
of bracing walks in snow-capped mountains. Of course, there were many 
iterations of the eight-inch-tall classic boot, which has now been made in 379 
different colours, and will top 400 by next year. (Ugg calls the original 
colour, a brown a few shades darker than beige, “chestnut”.)

Uggs, the boots that people loved to hate, have managed to defy the cruel 
logic of the fashion cycle and carry on

For those who find the originals too pedestrian, there were Luxe boots – a 
high-end version of the classic that retail for around $200 and somehow feel 
even more cushiony than regular Uggs, as if the wearer is walking in chocolate 
mousse. The 1990s model Carolyn Murphy can be seen wearing them in a recent ad 
campaign, while reclining in a shearling-lined egg chair, which Ugg was 
offering for $2,900. (It sold out.) The new arrivals section featured a boot 
with a vaguely Moroccan pattern, and white, round-toed tennis shoes in suede 
and leather. There were also pool sliders made of shearling in tan, blue and 
pink.

A group of young women was gathered around a display of baby Ugg boots, 
cooing. A lone man was shopping for slippers. (A recent photo of Drake showed 
the rapper lounging in a recording studio, wearing grey sweatpants and a hoodie 
with a pair of chestnut Ugg slippers.) The overall vibe was aggressively cosy. 
Employees were a diverse bunch: black and white, male and female, gay and 
straight. They were attractive, but in an attainable way, each one probably the 
best-looking person on their block growing up. They wore their Uggs with 
stretch jeans and flannel shirts, a far cry from the willowy shopgirls at 
Chanel or the pinups at Agent Provocateur, both nearby.

There were options to customise boots with Swarovski crystals in the shape of 
a skull, an American flag or the hashtag “#soho”. These choices were in no way 
fashionable, but they were fancy and, at least on the night I visited, a beacon 
for tourists who paused in front of the display. Nearly everyone in the store 
had an accent that made me suspect they were from out of town; at least half 
the shoppers were Asian tourists. In Asia, “Ugg represents, yeah, like a 
western lifestyle,” Nicks Ericsson, the global marketing director for Ugg’s 
women’s line, told me. (In China the brand name is pronouncedyew-gee-gee.) 
“It’s all about conspicuous consumption, to show that you have status and you 
have money. It’s very much a status symbol there.” Shoppers from Japan and 
China flock to the Ugg store in Honolulu, which has the company’s highest sales 
in the world. Despite the fact that the average temperature in Hawaii hovers 
around 27C, lines of tourists often wrap around the block.

Ugg boots are over – the fashion world rejoices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/nov/06/ugg-boots-over-fashion>
Such is the allure of comfort: once you have permission to wear Uggs, it is 
hard to ever take them off. “They’re addictive. There isn’t anything as 
comfortable and it would be quite hard to get a customer off those,” said 
Rebecca Farrar-Hockley, the creative director at Kurt Geiger, who oversees Ugg 
merchandising at House of Fraser, Selfridges, Liberty, and Harrods. “Mostly you 
get these spikes of sales when something becomes the ‘It’ item from a trend 
point of view, and then they drop away,” she explained. “That never happened 
with Ugg.”

At the Soho store, one woman slipped on a pair of tall black boots. A young 
female shop assistant told her that they would stretch. “I know,” said the 
customer. “This will be my fourth pair.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9733f6923fa024242736b00d524ddb187a9e42%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9733f6923fa024242736b00d524ddb187a9e42%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
 Carolyn Murphy. Photograph: The Guardian 
One day about 40 years ago, Brian Smith was listening to Pink Floyd’s Dark 
Side of the Moon when he felt his world changing. The lyrics to Time (“No one 
told you when you run/ you missed the starting gun”) seemed to “reach into my 
soul”, Smith told me recently. Born and raised in Australia, with an accounting 
degree he did not intend to use, he was seeking some direction. So, in the late 
1970s, at the age of 28, he set out for California to make his mark. “I was 
looking for a hot product from California to bring to Australia,” he said. One 
day in his home in Venice, he saw sheepskin boots from Australia advertised in 
a friend’s surf magazine. They were popular with surfers in Australia but 
practically unheard of anywhere else. He got goose bumps. Instead of finding a 
Californian import to bring to Australia, he had found an Australian product to 
bring to California.

This is a story Smith has repeated many times; indeed, it can be found in his 
book, The Birth of a Brand: Launching Your Entrepreneurial Passion and Soul, 
whose cover depicts a pair of classic Ugg boots on a beach, facing the water, 
as if they are looking longingly across the Pacific towards home. (“I hope you 
enjoy the ride!” Smith wrote in my copy, which he signed “Mr Ugg!!”)

The origin of Australian surfers’ enthusiasm for sheepskin boots is still 
shrouded in mystery: one common story dates from the 1960s, and involves a 
bunch of surfers in western Australia, south of Perth, who lived on one of the 
sheep farms that dot the coastline. “One of them cut some sheepskin and started 
wearing them as warm-ups with some linoleum stuck to the bottom,” Smith says. 
“But no one really knows.”

But by the time Smith was a teenager surfing in Broulee Beach on the south 
coast of New South Wales, sheepskin boots were common enough that one could buy 
them for $12 in petrol stations. At that point, the round-toed brown boots were 
seen as purely functional. They didn’t look good, but they had a purpose. “They 
were super-practical. When you put them on after surfing, within 10 minutes 
your feet would be dry and warm,” says Smith. They were unisex and were meant 
to be worn with bare feet. Male surfers wore them, then their girlfriends. They 
were perfect for lounging. “The most common thing I’ve heard about how they 
feel is three words: oh my God,” Smith says, laughing. Who cares that 
Australia, like Southern California, has an exceedingly temperate climate? Once 
people put them on, they didn’t want to take them off. Never mind if their feet 
perspired. In Australia, Smith claims, half the population wore sheepskin boots.

From California, Smith phoned the company whose advertisement he had seen in 
Surfer magazine – Country Leather, in Western Australia – and managed to secure 
an exclusive deal to sell their products in the US. (It helped that he was a 
fellow Australian, he says.) His first order was for six pairs.

He needed a name. Country Leather was too reminiscent of ski lodge fireplaces. 
Ugg was a generic term for sheepskin boot, an endearing nod to their unlovely 
style. There was an UGH brand of sheepskin boots in Australia, but no such 
thing in the US, so Smith registered the UGG trademark in his adopted country. 
(Decades later, after Uggs blew up in America, the company waged a long and 
ultimately unsuccessful battle for the trademark in Australia.)

The first boots were light brown undyed sheepskin pull-ons, with eight-inch 
seams straight up the sides. The hide and the simple, curved boot shape were 
like a kid’s drawing of caveman shoes. They looked as though they were meant to 
be worn exclusively indoors, with a thin, almost perfunctory sole glued to the 
bottom of the sheepskin uppers.

In the very early days, Smith had some quality-control issues: the glue on the 
soles was smeared on a few pairs, and the skins were uneven – some were stiff, 
some had shorter fur, others had longer and more curly fur. In his book he 
calls those early Uggs “odd and dispirited-looking”. But within a few years he 
was able to get a product that was more consistent, with thick sheepskin and a 
sturdy brown rubber sole. The Ugg boot launched in California in the 1980s is 
virtually identical in design to the boot sold today.

Ugg still depends, to this day, on sheep. The company is the largest buyer of 
quality sheepskin– the skin of sheep tanned with the fur left on its hide – in 
the world. The pattern for a classic boot has to be hand-cut to ensure the 
sheepskin is not damaged in the process. Each pair is made up of about 40 
pieces of sheepskin that are sewn and then assembled with a water-based 
adhesive. Deckers, the company that now owns Ugg, gets its sheepskins from 
animals raised “for food”,as it judiciously says on the Ugg website 
<https://www.uggaustralia.co.uk/animal-welfare-faq.html>, sourced from 
Australia, the US, the UK, Ireland and Spain.

In 2012, a drought in Australia, which resulted in unusually thin furs and a 
short supply of sheepskin, led to a dramatic increase in costs for Ugg. It was 
also a warm year globally, which was bad for boot sales: Ugg sales decreased by 
11.6%, to $332.8m. To hedge against future shocks in the sheepskin supply, Ugg 
created a new fabric called UGGpure, which is used in about one-third of the 
Ugg collection, mostly for insoles. “It’s manufactured out of woven wool,” said 
Dave Powers, the president of Deckers. “It’s the same wool, but we can 
manufacture it to look and feel exactly like sheepskin.”

Smith initially tried selling them to shoe stores. “We just got laughed out of 
every appointment,” he says. “‘Sheepskin in California? You’re crazy.’” And so 
surfers became the target audience, surf shops the first retailers, 
professional surfers some of the first Ugg models. In Santa Cruz, a beach town 
in northern California, where I grew up, Ugg boots were ubiquitous by the 
mid-80s. Surfers like my father and his friends owned them, but mums and 
schoolgirls like me wore them too. The boots suited ultra-casual coastal 
California, where people sometimes wear flip-flop sandals and oversized hoodies 
to work.

Ugg still depends on sheep. The company is the largest buyer of quality 
sheepskin in the world

The Ugg brand was also an obvious fit for the après-ski crowd, and soon took 
off with the then-new tribe of snowboarders as well. On the west coast, surfers 
and ski bums have enough style cachet that everyone else took notice. “The kids 
in high school said, ‘All the cool kids have them, I want a pair,’” Smith told 
me. “So what do the mums do? They start walking the malls, asking, ‘Have you 
heard of them?’ The malls got inundated with mums trying to find Ugg boots for 
their kids. That’s how we cracked in. And then they were buying some for their 
daughters and younger moms were buying them for themselves.” In the frigid 
midwest, the brand marketed sheepskin boots for kids to wear after taking off 
their ice hockey skates.

In fact, versatility has been one of Ugg’s secret weapons. The product is all 
things to all people. (Or is at least sold as such.) You can wear Uggs in hot 
weather and in cold weather, indoors or outdoors. In some countries, wearing 
them is a sign of conspicuous consumption, and in other countries it is a sign 
that you’re really down to earth.

By the mid-80s, Uggs were still a niche business and largely seen as a 
Californian quirk. But 1985-1986 was the brand’s coming of age, when American 
sales went from $650,000 (12,000 pairs) to $1.4m, which Smith attributed to the 
brand finally graduating from boutiques to mall stores. The company grew 
steadily – $1.6m to $2m to $2.2m by 1990 – over the next several years. But the 
first hint of a bigger breakthrough came in 1994, when the national newspaper 
USA Today published a large photograph of Pamela Anderson, on the set of 
Baywatch, in her regulation red swimsuit and a pair of tall Ugg boots, holding 
a script in one hand and lifeguard float in the other.

Anderson, who is a devoted animal rights activist, renounced her loyalty to 
Uggs in 2007 after learning the details of their manufacture. “Biggest mistake 
of my life!!!” she told me in an email. “I had the same misconception a lot of 
people had, that shearling were shaved and not hurt. But that is a naive 
vision.” (Last year, Anderson launched her own line of Pammies, an animal-free 
boot that looks strikingly like an UGG but is made from recycled electronics.)

Still, her photograph, which prefigured the brand’s paparrazzi-powered takeoff 
the following decade, marked a major turning point. “It was a serendipitous 
thing that turned us into a national brand,” said Smith. In October that year, 
the New York Times published a short article on the boots, calling them “the 
footwear of the moment on the American west coast,” and adding, for possibly 
confused east coast residents, “They are always worn sockless.” For any other 
brand, that should have been the start of the timer counting down to their next 
phase as the footwear of yesterday – and yet that was just the beginning of 
Uggs’ cultural domination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1abb5ea7347ed3de77517293a1dd85968e0cc5f%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1abb5ea7347ed3de77517293a1dd85968e0cc5f%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
 Rihanna. Photograph: The Guardian 
In 1995, Smith sold his company, then known as Ugg Australia, to Deckers 
Outdoor Corporation – which also owns the ugly-chic Teva sandals – for a 
rumoured $15m. Deckers is based in Goleta, California, a suburb of the moneyed 
beach city of Santa Barbara. (In 2016, “Australia” was finally dropped from the 
name of the brand.) A few hundred employees are spread out over several 
indistinct modern, low-slung, beige buildings. It looks a bit like a strip 
mall, though you could say that about a lot of architecture in California.

When I visited in January, there were a few wetsuits hanging from trees in the 
car park – their owners having presumably come straight to work after a morning 
of surfing. “We are people,” theDeckers home page declares 
<http://www.deckers.com/>. “We are surfers, musicians, skateboarders, paddlers, 
dreamers, explorers, activists, raconteurs, sophisticates, extroverts, 
introverts, urbanites, suburbanites, natives, foreigners, hikers, go-getters, 
poets, lovers, fighters, men, women and children at heart.” The cafeteria has 
pineapple cucumber water and kale salads.

I was escorted into a conference room with shelves displaying more than 100 
pairs of the latest Uggs: black slippers, Timberland-style boots lined with 
sheepskin in two shades of brown; nearby racks held two sets of 
soon-to-be-launched cashmere loungewear. Leah Larson, the vice president and 
creative director for Ugg, pointed out a few pairs of baby booties. “I’m so 
popular when it comes to baby showers,” she said.

The celebrity endorsement that truly transformed the Ugg came from Oprah 
Winfrey, who featured the classic boot on her wildly popular Christmas shopping 
show in 2000. (Deckers gave 350 pairs to members of her studio audience.) For 
the next seven years, Ugg boots in various forms – crocheted, sequinned – would 
figure on Oprah’s coveted list.

Ugg and Jimmy Choo collaborate; Fashion Statement reels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/14/ugg-jimmy-choo-collaborate>
But in Larson’s telling, Ugg really took off in 2003, when they launched the 
classic boot in pink and baby blue – the perfect complement for a similarly 
coloured velour tracksuit. All of a sudden it was as if women had permission to 
go outside in pyjamas and slippers and still look fashionable. Sales for 2003 
were projected to be $25m – instead they were nearly $40m.

“That was really the moment,” Larson said. “We started getting calls from 
celebrities saying ‘I want a pink and a blue!’ and then Sarah Jessica Parker 
asked for us to make her a pair in a special colour” – ruby red – “and she wore 
them on Sex and the City, like, just wearing this long sweater. She was in a 
fight with Big.” And seemingly overnight, they were everywhere. The product 
placement worked – in fact, sending free products to famous people was the only 
kind of marketing the company says it could really afford. Kate Hudson wore her 
own Ugg boots on set while shooting the 2004 film Raising Helen. The producers 
liked the look, and she ended up wearing a cuffed pair with shorts on the 
movie’s poster. In 2004 Sienna Miller wore them at Glastonbury.

Around this time, magazines – fashion, celebrity, tabloid – all seemed to 
adopt the “at home with” feature, with photographs of glamorous people wearing 
Uggs, smiling with their families, pantomiming cooking inside immaculate, 
palatial kitchens or between takes on the set of a movie. It all fitted in with 
that moment’s newfound zeal for the casual and authentic. “The hottest 
tastemakers at the time were wearing it,” Larson says. “And they were wearing 
it to go to yoga, and they were wearing it to take the trash out, and they were 
wearing it to walk their dog – but they were wearing it.”

The task for Deckers was to figure out how to keep the Ugg from fading from 
view. In 2009, the company briefed market researchers to talk to consumers 
about their emotional attachment to the brand. “We were trying to take a 
temperature read of when people are talking about Ugg, when are they the most 
excited, or most engaged,” says Anders Bergstrom, director of insights strategy 
development at Deckers. But mostly they realised the Ugg connection was really 
about emotion. Customers were often talking about what he calls “low-stakes 
occasions”, which is “their personal time, their sort of quiet and solitude 
time. People loved Ugg because it was what was there waiting for them.”

It is with this “emotion” in mind that Ugg wants the world to start seeing it 
as something more than a company that makes boots; it wants to be a lifestyle 
brand, a purveyor ofluxurious comfort and warmth in the form of blankets, 
pillows and robes. “People just can’t get enough of that tactile sensation. 
It’s more than just being a comfortable shoe, it’s something that makes them 
feel secure,” says Jennifer Fleming, one of Deckers’ senior insights analysts.

The hottest tastemakers were wearing Uggs: to walk the dog, and take out the 
trash, but they were wearing them

Larson walked over to a wall of classic boots in various lengths and colours. 
“The design is really an ode to the beauty of the material. There’s not an 
extra stitch, an extra detail, an extra anything on it. And it really was 
created that way, to make sure that the sheepskin really got to be the star of 
the show. People talk about the shape of the boot, but it’s like, put that boot 
on, and because of the way that it’s crafted, every single part of your foot, 
ankle, gets to experience that luxury.”

Deckers has also waged a seemingly endless war against knock-offs, both with 
companies copying the silhouette of the boots and ones infringing on the 
trademarked name. In 2012, Ugg boots were at the centre of one of the largest 
counterfeit-goods cases ever prosecuted in America, an elaborate scheme run by 
two overlapping Chinese crime rings to sell $325m worth of products throughout 
the US. “We spend a lot of time and resources going after those people,” says 
Dave Powers, who has a surprisingly laconic demeanour for the president of such 
a large company. “We’ve taken down 60,000 websites in the last few years.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a5bdb01f389b9102b621febdd31c0ceaeba10e7%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ugg%3A%20the%20look%20that%20refused%20to%20die%20%7C%20Marisa%20Meltzer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fugg-the-look-that-refused-to-die%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a5bdb01f389b9102b621febdd31c0ceaeba10e7%2F0_0_3333_5333%2F3333.jpg>
 Kendall Jenner. Photograph: The Guardian 
By the early years of this decade, the overexposed sheepskin boots had become 
an easy subject of humour for a new generation whose online style gurus would 
not be caught dead wearing Uggs in their carefully Instagrammed pictures. On 
the internet, Ugg boots, leggings, iPhone and a Starbucks cup (probably 
containing a pumpkin spice latte) became the much-mocked uniform of the “basic 
bitch”, a woman who is usually white and usually in her 20s or early 30s and 
despised for her bland passions: brunch, romantic comedies, fast fashion. Memes 
on this theme abound: in one, a model moans in some kind of ecstasy with the 
caption: “When a white girl slides into that new Ugg.”

And yet sales of Uggs continue to grow and grow. Micael Dahlén, a professor at 
the Stockholm School of Economics who studies consumer behaviour, told me that 
he thought Deckers had succeeded in positioning Ugg as “the perfect compromise 
between aspiration and accessibility”. They are not exactly cheap – Ugg 
slippers, which are among the least expensive models, sell for £74 – but they 
are a good fit for a new idea of democratised style, in which everyone should 
have access to good design and quality, whether in the form of an expertly cut 
legging or a designer collaboration at H&M.

“I’m impressed because I thought they might not have lasted as long as they 
have,” Dahlen says. “But they are good at retail – they’ve kept the brand on a 
tight leash. Compare them to something like Victoria’s Secret, which is too 
accessible and therefore hard to manage the image of the brand.” At the same 
time, Dahlen said, Ugg didn’t flame out as a fad like the Croc, which had “no 
aspirational level to it”.

Alexis Petridis: Ugg boots for men? No thanks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/09/alexis-petredis-ugg-boots-men>
Back at Deckers, the view is that something about the Ugg transcends the usual 
rules of fashion. “Ugg has the power to overcome – this is going to sound wonky 
– category bias. So we have a segment of female shoppers and owners of Ugg who 
hate shopping, they don’t like fashion,” says Bergstrom, pausing to laugh. “It 
is the last on the list of concerns for them. They are more interested in other 
things. But Ugg is their favourite brand. So they don’t like brands, but they 
love Ugg.”

Perhaps the answer is that Ugg fans are so enamoured with their comfort and 
ease, they have ceased to care about the edicts of fashion. Or perhaps the Ugg 
has helped make those edicts much less harsh: maybe once women could go out 
wearing shoes that looked like oversized slippers, there was no going back.

The fashion world’s relationship with Ugg is slightly more complicated than 
its belated adoption of the two-strap Birkenstock Arizona sandal. Birkenstock 
has been able to overcome its drab image by embracing it – the company 
understands that younger customers are embracing the sandals precisely because 
they are simple. Ugg may be making a move in the same direction: the brand 
seems to be flirting with high fashion – hiring a top fashion photographer, 
Cass Bird, to shoot the model Daria Werbowy for a video for the spring 2016 
collection.

In turn, the fashion world is admitting more openly to its fondness for Uggs: 
in fact, to say you’ve always liked them and worn them all along is to suggest 
that you are immune to fashion’s fickle nature. Last year,British Vogue 
announced 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/trends/2014-15-autumn-winter/the-ugg-boot-revival>
 “The Return of the Ugg Boot”, declaring them “our guiltiest fashion pleasure … 
the sheepskin Ugg is no longer the preserve of a hungover milk run, or the 
yummy mummy.” (A white tux shirt, bare legs, and short black Uggs would be a 
“strong transitional look”, the magazine suggested.) André Leon Talley, the 
legendary editor-at-large of American Vogue, has been pictured (with Anna 
Wintour) in his own monogrammed Uggs; he owns 14 pairs. Perhaps after all this 
time, Uggs have become a permanent fixture in the footwear landscape – “a 
forever thing,” said Simon Doonan, the creative ambassador of Barneys New York. 
“Stuff doesn’t come and go in fashion like it used to,” Doonan told me. “It’s 
very twee, very last century to say they’re my guilty pleasure.”

“Put it this way: I’ve got Céline fashiony shoes, crazy-high heels, and Uggs. 
That’s the three in my wardrobe,” Rebecca Farrar-Hockley, the Kurt Geiger 
creative director, said. “The day when it’s a bit chilly and you just need to 
run to the tube, it’s the Uggs you want. It’s sort of like coming home.”

You could say that Uggs, like skinny jeans, have defied fashion’s normal laws 
of gravity or the caprice of the trend cycle. The team at Deckers would say 
they have succeeded by listening to their customers’ feelings – about that soft 
sheepskin and the warm emotions it prompts – instead of worrying about style.

In fact, in response to customer feedback, which included worries about 
slipping on wet pavements, Ugg is relaunching the classic boot in autumn 2016. 
The weatherproofing will be improved, and the sole will have a better grip. But 
the boots will look exactly the same.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 