
The British government has been accused of undermining its own commitment to 
transparency on aid spending after it emerged that it plans a dramatic increase 
in the funding it channels through the controversial private sector arm of the 
UK’s aid programme.

A draft bill from the Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 proposes to increase the limit on official support given to the CDC, formerly 
the Commonwealth Development Corporation, from £1.5bn to £6bn – with further 
scope for the cap to be doubled.

UK government led public to believe aid to India had ended, watchdog says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/16/uk-government-led-public-to-believe-aid-india-ended-watchdog-says-department-international-development-dfid>
At a time when the government has pledged to curb the use of tax havens and 
account for how aid is spent, the development prompted an outcry from 
opposition MPs and tax justice campaigners, who highlighted the CDC’s record of
channelling investments through secretive offshore locations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/04/uk-aid-investments-target-tax-havens>
.

Critics also took aim at the CDC’s record of pouring funding into gated 
communities, shopping centres and luxury property in poor countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/17/department-for-international-development-cdc-group-735m-uk-aid-private-sector>
, claiming the bill signalled a highly “ideological” shift in direction for 
DfID, now headed by Priti Patel, who has been dogged by her past calls for the 
department to be scrapped.

Another area of criticism has centred on the remuneration of the CDC’s top 
earners. Its chief executive,Diana Noble, earned more than £300,000 in 2015 
<http://www.cdcgroup.com/Documents/Annual%20Reviews/CDC%20Annual%20Accounts%202015.pdf>
.

Nick Dearden, the director of campaign group Global Justice Now, said: “From a 
luxury housing and shopping complex in Kenya, to gated communities in El 
Salvador, the CDC has an appalling record of funding developments in the global 
south that make a mockery of any notion of aid money going to help vulnerable 
communities that lack access to basic resources.


“This is evidence that DfID is increasingly committed to a highly 
financialised, highly unequal, highly ideological form of ‘development’ which 
helps big business and not ordinary people.”

The CDC’s accounts for 2015 showed it continued to hold significant 
investments in tax havens including the Cayman Islands, Mauritius and the 
Channel Islands. The investments often take the form of shares in partnerships 
in which the identity of other partners is not immediately clear.


Earlier this year, Prime Minister Theresa May ordered a crackdown on 
individuals’ and companies’ use of offshore tax havens – many sited in British 
overseas territories – as part of her statedaim of “reforming capitalism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal>
 after the BHS scandal.

“The CDC has a history of funding companies via tax havens and through private 
equity funds, where it can never be sure where the money will end up,” said Tim 
Jones, policy officer at the Jubilee Debt Campaign. “Public funds should be 
assisting impoverished countries getting back the tax money they need to reduce 
poverty and inequality. Expanding the CDC risks more public money being used to 
facilitate tax avoidance.”

Will Trump honour pledge to 'stop sending aid to countries that hate us'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/13/will-trump-presidency-honour-pledge-stop-sending-foreign-aid-to-countries-that-hate-us-usaid>
Stephen Doughty, a Labour member of the Commons international development 
committee, said: “It is extraordinary that the government is seeking to 
massively increase its funding via an organisation that has previously been 
subject to allegations about the use of tax havens, and which continues to 
provide excessive pay packets for some of its directors, in excess of the 
salary of the prime minister.

“Priti Patel claims she wants more transparency and efficiency in our aid 
spending – yet appears content to shove massive chunks of taxpayers’ cash to 
unaccountable investors and other government departments that have fewer 
safeguards and checks than her very own department.”

A DfID spokesperson said: “This bill is an essential step that will ensure CDC 
can continue to make pioneering investments and, as the secretary of state has 
said, this will help to create more jobs and boost economic growth in Africa 
and south Asia so that people can lift themselves out of poverty and leave aid 
dependency behind.

“The level of financial support that can be provided to CDC was set 17 years 
ago and has now been reached. The limits set in the bill do not commit us to 
increases in financial support. We will only invest in CDC when it is needed to 
meet demand, achieve value for money, and continue delivering life-changing 
results and clear development impact.”

Shortly after taking office, Patel pledged to reform DfID, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
 claiming that too much of Britain’s aid money was being wasted, stolen or 
spent on inappropriate projects.

A DfID spokesman also strongly pushed back against criticism by Labour of the 
move, accusing Doughty of engaging in “baseless scaremongering” about the 
potential future of the funding.

“CDC has been supported by Labour development secretaries and Conservative 
ones as it is a great British success story,” he added. “The capital limit 
increase is routine and does not reflect a change in policy about how UK aid 
delivers on its fantastic track record of fighting poverty.”
 