
Cakes and muffins on sale at popular UK coffee chains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/17/cafe-chains-selling-drinks-25-teaspoons-sugar-starbucks-costa-coffee>
 are loaded with sugar, according to an analysis by a health campaign group.

A 172g lemon drizzle product from Pret a Manger contains 18 teaspoons of sugar 
a slice, found the report by Action onSugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sugar>. That is three times a child’s 
daily recommended maximum sugar intake and more sugar than six Krispy Kreme 
glazed sugar doughnuts, the group said in its survey of nearly 70 lemon, carrot 
and blueberry muffins and cakes on sale in coffee shops and supermarkets.

The next worst offender was Starbucks’ Christmas carrot cake with 15 teaspoons 
of sugar a serving – more sugar than five Krispy Kremes – followed byPret a 
Manger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/19/pret-a-manger-sales-rise-as-vegetarian-range-pleases-foodies>
’s double berry muffins with 10. A teaspoon of sugar is equal to about 4g.


The sugar conspiracy | Ian Leslie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/07/the-sugar-conspiracy-robert-lustig-john-yudkin>
Between similar products at different coffee chains, there was sometimes a big 
difference in sugar and calorie content, the survey noted. A Caffé Nero lemon 
poppyseed muffin, with eight teaspoons a serving, contains three less than the 
same choice atStarbucks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks>.


Action on Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/17/cafe-chains-selling-drinks-25-teaspoons-sugar-starbucks-costa-coffee>
 collected data for supermarket and coffee shop products where nutritional 
information was available per 100g or per portion. Across each of the three 
cake varieties supermarkets offered healthier options compared with those sold 
in cafes – demonstrating that manufacturers can make cakes with less calories 
and sugar, partly through smaller portion sizes.

Many consumers are buying cakes and muffins to enjoy with a hot beverage 
unaware of the sugar and calories they are consuming in one sitting, claimed 
the nutritionist Jenny Rosborough, the campaign manager at Action on Sugar.

“Everyone should be able to enjoy cake, but there is no need for just one 
slice to exceed an adult’s maximum daily recommendation of sugar by almost 
three times,” she said. “Cakes, biscuits and puddings should be an occasional 
food but people are consuming these products regularly without realising the 
amount of energy required to burn off this many calories.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fuk-coffee-chains-criticised-sugar-laden-fruity-products%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dbad31232be8e2377c65df5d1695ae466032908%2F0_13_4422_2653%2F4422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20coffee%20chains%20criticised%20over%20sugar-laden%20products&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fuk-coffee-chains-criticised-sugar-laden-fruity-products%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20coffee%20chains%20criticised%20over%20sugar-laden%20products&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fuk-coffee-chains-criticised-sugar-laden-fruity-products%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dbad31232be8e2377c65df5d1695ae466032908%2F0_13_4422_2653%2F4422.jpg>
 Starbucks says it is ‘committed to working towards Public Health England’s 
sugar reduction targets by 2020’. Photograph: Alamy 
According to NHS guidelines, for a child aged seven to 10 the maximum daily 
allowance of sugar is 24g – equivalent to six teaspoons. Action on Sugar is 
urging food manufacturers and cafes to take part in Public Health England’s 
voluntary sugar reduction programme to helptackle obesity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/19/obesity-undernutrition-malnutrition-development>
 andtype 2 diabetes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/15/growing-numbers-of-children-have-type-2-diabetes-figures-show>
.

A Pret a Manger spokesperson said its large-style lemon drizzle portion was on 
trial in a handful of its regional shops: “The trial ends next week and the 
cake slices will no longer be available. We will revert back to only selling 
smaller, individual cake portions, instead of these larger slices. The calorie 
information for our cakes continues to be displayed in shops, and the full 
nutritional information is available on our website,” the spokesperson said.

Sara Bruce-Goodwin, vice-president of research and development, quality and 
regulatory atStarbucks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/starbucks-ceo-resigns-howard-schultz>
, said: “We are committed to working towards Public Health England’s sugar 
reduction targets by 2020, as part of our overall health and wellness 
commitments.

“We also offer our customers a wide choice in our bakery range. Our skinny 
blueberry muffin has 30% less calories compared to our classic blueberry muffin 
and is returning to stores in January 2017. We are working on a reduced-calorie 
and sugar carrot cake recipe, with plans to launch around spring next year.”

Alison Tedstone, the chief nutritionist at Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England, said she was aware some 
cakes and muffins contained more sugar and were sold in larger portions than 
others. “That’s why we want those making and selling cakes to look at where 
they can reduce sugar and address portion sizes,” said Tedstone.

“If every part of the food and drink industry worked to reduce sugar, we’d 
stand a better chance of helping families make healthier choices and consume 
less.”
 