
The weeks leading up to Christmas are traditionally lucrative for high street 
and online stores but they also reveal which retailers are faring better than 
others. This year most of the biggest retail names had a good festive season - 
with fashion chainNext <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> the biggest 
loser.

Next

The fashion and homewares chain was the first to report how it performed over 
the festive period but itstrading update was so dismal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
 it dragged down shares across the retail sector.

Full price sales in Next’s stores dropped by a far-worse-than-expected 3.5% in 
the weeks leading up to Christmas even though the retailer has opened new 
stores. The annual winter sale – which starts at 5am each Boxing Day – was also 
disappointing, with sales down 7%. Directory sales, almost all online, rose by 
only 5%.

The retailer warned of lower-than-expected profits this year and a tough 2017 
as a result of rising inflation and shoppers switching away from buying 
clothing. But rivals did much better and analysts have started questioning 
whether the fashion ranges are to blame.

Marks & Spencer

M&S had its its best Christmas in six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/m-and-s-christmas-clothing-sales-rise-marks-spencer>
, ending the prolonged fall in clothing sales. Like-for-like clothing sales 
rose 2.3% in the 13 weeks to 31 December – a big improvement on the 6% fall a 
year earlier.

It was Steve Rowe’s first Christmas as chief executive of the retailer, and he 
said “better ranges, better availability and better prices” helped reverse the 
fortunes of its clothing business. The store’s Christmas TV advertising, 
featuring Santa’s wife making an emergency present delivery, was also credited 
with helping sales: “Mrs Claus was fabulous”, said Rowe. The store sold more 
than 5,000 copies of the red M&S dress worn in the ad by Mrs Claus, played by 
actress Janet McTeer.

Like-for-like sales within its ever-popular food division increased by 0.6%. 
The results were boosted by an extra five days in the trading period compared 
with last year. Excluding those days, clothing and food sales were still 
higher, by 0.8% and 0.3% respectively.

John Lewis

John Lewis warned staff they would get a lower bonus this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/john-lewis-cut-staff-bonus-market-waitrose-christmas>
, because even though sales were ahead the group’s operating profit will be 
lower as a result of pressure on prices and higher costs. Like-for-like sales 
at its department stores rose by 2.7% in the six weeks to 31 December, while 
Waitrose’s like-for-like sales were up by 2.8%.

Morrisons

The supermarket enjoyed its best Christmas in seven years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/morrisons-enjoys-some-remarkable-christmas-cheer>
, after it revamped its premium ranges, opened more tills and cut fewer prices.

David Potts, the Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> 
chief executive, said the UK’s fourth largest supermarket had found its “mojo” 
as the retailer reported a 2.9% increase in like-for-like sales excluding fuel 
in the nine weeks to 1 January. Fresh fruit and vegetables, beers, wine and 
spirits, and Morrisons’ new upmarket The Best range did well, while sales of 
the Nutmeg clothing range rose 30%.
 Sainsbury’s posted its first sales growth since March last year over 
Christmas. Photograph: Dinendra Haria/Rex/Shutterstock 
Sainsbury’s

Britain’s second biggest supermarket chain surprised the City with a record 
Christmas and itsfirst sales growth since March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/sainsburys-record-sales-christmas-week-morrisons-argos-sales>
.

The growth was modest - just 0.1% on a like-for-like basis excluding fuel in 
the 15 weeks to 7 January - but it was better than the 0.8% drop City analysts 
were expecting. Like-for-like sales at Argos – bought by Sainsbury’s last year 
– rose by 4%, more than double the City forecast.

Sainsbury’s boss Mike Coupe said the retailer’s Christmas performance 
reinforced the logic of its £1.4bn takeover of Argos. Grocery sales were 
boosted in supermarkets containing Argos outlets.

Tesco

Britain’s biggest supermarket said sales of food, clothing and toys all rose 
over Christmas.Sales at stores open for more than a year grew by 0.7% in the 
six weeks to 7 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/tesco-sales-festive-season>, 
slightly better than the City expected. Tesco chief Dave Lewis said the 
improvement was driven by better customer service and product ranges. 
Highlights included party food, with sales up 24%, premium wine, up 20%, and 
Free From specialist allergy-free foods, up 18%.

However, shares fell because of the retailer’s disappointing international 
performance.

Aldi

Total UK sales for December at the German discount chain were up 15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/uk-retail-sales-christmas-economy#img-1>
 on a year earlier, helped by strong demand for festive vegetables, prosecco 
and premium products such as “specially selected” mince pies. The company said 
it was stealing a march on upmarket retailers Waitrose and M&S.

Lidl

The rival German discounter’s sales rose 10% in December year on year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/lidls-bumper-christmas-after-shoppers-shell-out-on-lobster>
, as it opened new stores and lured shoppers with its mix of bargain prices and 
luxury foods. Lidl sold 200,000 lobsters over the Christmas period thanks to a 
savvy social media campaign, and cut the price of mini stollen, Serrano ham and 
silver-topped Christmas puddings.

Majestic Wine

Bumper sales of gin and sparkling wine helped Majestic to its “biggest ever” 
Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/majestic-wine-sales-up-75-over-firms-biggest-ever-christmas-period>
. Gin sales jumped 55% compared with the previous year, with upmarket products 
such as Warner Edwards rhubarb gin and Sipsmith sloe gin performing 
particularly well. Sparkling wine sales rose 12%, with sales of prosecco 
increasing three times faster than champagne.

Sales at established Majestic Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/majestic-wine> stores (those open for 
more than a year), rose 7.5% in the 10 weeks to 2 January, comfortably beating 
expectations. Strong growth within its Naked Wines and Lay & Wheeler businesses 
helped to drive overall group sales up 12.4%.

Fortnum & Mason

The luxury department store group posted 16% like-for-like sales growth for 
the five weeks to 1 January, as shoppers stocked up on tea, hampers, caviar, 
smoked salmon and white truffles. Growth was underpinned by online sales, up by 
22% on 2015, with Fortnum’s products dispatched to 121 countries in the run-up 
to Christmas.

The bakery department contributed a 23% increase while some tea ranges more 
than doubled in sales and sales of hampers, one of Fortnum’s staples in the 
Christmas period, climbed 19%. Footfall at the flagship store in Piccadilly, 
central London, rose 10% as the weaker pound brought more international 
visitors to the capital.
 Debenhams’ like-for-like Christmas sales grew by 5%. Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Getty 
Debenhams

Debenhams has reported better than expected Christmas trading as customers 
clamoured for beauty products and gifts. Like-for-like sales grew by 5% in the 
seven weeks to 7 January and were up 1.7% at constant exchange rates. Analysts 
had expected a 1% drop. The retailer has cut back on promotions to boost profit 
margins.

Primark

The discount chain’s owner Associated British Foods, said trading across its 
business was “good” in the last 16 weeks. It did not release like-for-like 
figures for Primark, but total sales were up 11% year on year in constant 
currency terms, or a chunky 22% in actual currency terms (thanks to the sharp 
fall in sterling since the Brexit vote).

JD Sports


The trainer and sports fashion retailer expects to beat City forecasts for 
full-year profits, sending its shares to an all-time high. Headline profit 
before tax and one-off items is set to exceed expectations of £200m by up to 
15% thanks to bumper sales – up 10% on a like-for-like basis in the 49 weeks to 
7 January. JD has overtaken Sports Direct as the UK’s biggest sportswear 
retailer by market value, but both companiesface mounting pressure over poor 
working conditions at their warehouses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/jd-sports-warehouse-channel-4-kingsway-rochdale>
.
 Mothercare returned to growth in the third quarter. Photograph: Paul Faith/PA 
Mothercare

The baby goods retailer <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mothercare> 
returned to growth in the third quarter after a surge in online sales. Total 
sales for the 13 weeks to 7 January rose by 0.6%, boosted by a 5.5% rise in 
online sales. The company said online sales now account for about 40% of all UK 
sales. Sales at stores open for more than a year increased by 1%.

Mark Newton-Jones, chief executive, said the company had focused on improving 
its product range and selling goods at full price. It also better managed its 
stock levels, so that it entered the end-of-season sale with less stock than 
the previous year.

B&M

Discounter B&M celebrate a bumper Christmas trading period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/retailer-b-and-m-christmas-trading-period-strongest-quarter-since-2013>
 as cautious shoppers looked to save money. Sales rose 7.2% at the group’s UK 
established stores in the 13 weeks to Christmas Eve, with 1.1% of that lift 
coming from an extra day of trading. Sales of gifts, decorations and 
confectionery performed particularly well according to the company, chaired by 
former Tesco chief executive Terry Leahy.

AO World


Online electricals retailer AO World achieved decent sales growth over 
Christmas, but struck a cautious note about the months ahead, citing “the 
uncertain UK economic outlook, currency impacts on supplier pricing and the 
possible effect on consumer demand”.

Total revenues in the three months to 31 December were up 12.3% year on year. 
Analysts at consultancy Verdict Retail said while growth has slowed 
considerably since last year, AO is still gaining significant market share in a 
sector which has been in decline for most of 2016, and remains undeterred from 
its expansion plans.
 Oxfam posted a 10% year-on-year rise in sales for November and December. 
Photograph: Tim Ockenden/PA 
Oxfam

Sales at the charity surged to a five-year high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/12/ethical-gift--oxfam-highest-sales-five-years>
 as shoppers snapped up secondhand clothes and ethical gifts such as Fairtrade 
chocolate and coffee. The charity posted a 10% year-on-year rise in sales for 
November and December to £17.2m. “Virtual” gifts, such as providing safe water 
for a small community, were popular, with a 9% rise in sales.

SuperGroup


The retailer behind the Superdry clothing brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/supergroup> enjoyed a very strong 
Christmas, with revenue jumping 21% in the 10 weeks to 7 January. The company, 
which featuresclothing co-designed by the actor Idris Elba, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/26/superdry-signs-up-idris-elba> 
said it benefited from its store extension programme and a weaker pound, 
because an increasing proportion of its revenues come from outside the UK. 
Like-for-like sales, in stores open for more than a year increased by 14.9%.

Asos

The online fashion retailer aimed at twentysomethings had a bumper Christmas, 
with UK sales up 18% and international sales up 52% (helped by the weakness of 
the pound) in the four months to the end of December.Asos is now expecting 
sales for the full year to rise by between 25% and 30% 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-asos-results-idUKKBN14W0QX>, boosted by the 
strong festive trading period.

Nick Beighton, the Asos chief executive, said the firm would further upgrade 
its systems and processes to meet the growing demand for its clothing.

Hotel Chocolat

Customers visited the luxury chocolatier’s website and shops in greater 
numbers than the previous year over the Christmas period. They not only bought 
more items, but more higher-priced items, lifting sales by 16.2% in the 13 
weeks to 25 December.Angus Thirlwell, co-founder and chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/02/hotel-chocolat-boss-easter-angus-thirlwell-interview>
, said being a UK manufacturer gave the company flexibility to maintain good 
stock availability right up to the end of the season.
 