
The new minister in charge of Britain’s overseas aid budget faced criticism on 
her first appearance before a Commons committee when she was unable to come up 
with a figure for the amount of aid that was being “wasted and stolen” –after 
publicly highlighting it as a significant problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
.

Priti Patel, secretary of state for international development, told MPs on 
Wednesday that she had already acted in her first seven weeks of office to axe 
or reviewDepartment for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 funding for a number of projects that had been brought to her attention.

Among them, she cited reports that a cult in Malawi had received funding 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36953455>, and spoke of British 
activists being funded to travel to conferences abroad, an apparent reference 
to aweekend report 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/black-lives-leader-is-funded-by-taxpayers-z2zjdbwxb>
 that DfID money had enabled members of the UK Black Lives Matter movement to 
travel to a global forum in Brazil.

Priti Patel plans foreign aid overhaul based on 'core Tory values'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
Patel told the international development committee that her goal was to reform 
the global aid system “so that it delivers not just for the world’s poorest but 
British taxpayers as well”.

“It’s about making sure that we are spending taxpayers’ money in the right 
way, and that taxpayers have a better understanding and greater insight in 
terms of what their money is doing in the development space,” added Patel, who 
said in a piecepublished in the Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
 that both she and taxpayers were “infuriated” by aid money being “stolen or 
wasted on inappropriate projects”.

However, Patel faced particular criticism from Stephen Doughty, a Labour 
member of the committee, who repeatedly challenged her to put a percentage 
figure on the amount of money that she believed was being wasted.

“In terms of percentage they are still a significant share of UK taxpayers’ 
money,” she replied. “I don’t think we should focus on sum totals and binary 
figures. This comes back to confidence from UK taxpayers that their money is 
being spent on need.”

Doughty told her: “It could also be argued that building trust and confidence 
includes not using very grand statements where you are not able to back up the 
statistics.”

Speaking afterwards, he said: “She should get back to her very serious job 
focusing on how we help people facing poverty and conflict in places like 
Yemen, Syria and South Sudan – and spend less time posturing to burnish her 
rightwing credentials.”

Members of the committee welcomed Patel’s commitment that the UK would 
continue to spend 0.7% of gross national income on aid, but there were 
questions aboutthe appointment of Robert Oxley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/09/priti-patel-new-special-adviser-robert-oxley-critic-uk-foreign-aid-spending-target>
, a vocal critic of the spending target and a former figure in the TaxPayers’ 
Alliance lobby group, as her special adviser.

Patel responded by saying: “My special adviser’s views that were stated many 
years previously are not reflective of the day-to-day work that I am 
undertaking.”
 