
The British government has pledged £100m to support programmes to get more of 
the world’s poorest girls into school.

Justine Greening, the international development secretary, made the 
announcement on Thursday at the Girls’ Education Forum in London. The gathering 
of governments, civil society representatives and education champions was 
convened to agree a concrete action plan to meet global commitments on ensuring 
all childrenreceive a quality primary and secondary education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 by 2030.

“Education doesn’t just shape individuals, it shapes countries – but right now 
too many young girls are deprived of an education simply because of their 
gender. Today’s event is about putting a spotlight on that, and focusing on 
what education can do to unlock prospects for girls around the world,” said 
Greening.

The money will be channeled towards maximising the number of marginalised 
girls around the world able to attend school or join learning programmes.

According to global estimates, 63 million girls of primary and lower secondary 
school age were out of school <http://www.unicef.org/education/bege_70640.html> 
in 2013, while an estimatedtwo-thirds of women are illiterate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/oct/20/two-thirds-of-worlds-illiterate-adults-are-women-report-finds>
.

A report published last year by Unesco, the UN educational, scientific and 
cultural organisation, found that less than half of countrieshad achieved 
gender parity 
<http://en.unesco.org/news/less-half-countries-have-achieved-gender-parity-education>
 in primary and secondary education, despite commitments to ensure all children
went to primary school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-education-explainer>
 by 2015. In sub-Saharan Africa no country had achieved gender parity in 
primary and secondary education, said the report.

While it is every girl’s right to have an education 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CRC.aspx>, the additional 
benefits 
<http://www.globalpartnership.org/education/the-benefits-of-education#education-box-sources>
 of school attendance are significant. Educated girls areless likely to marry 
young <http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/themes/education/> and more likely to 
postpone having children. They also stand a greater chance of living a healthy 
life, since they learn how to prevent infections such as HIV. Unesco estimates 
that each additional year of schooling increases average annual gross domestic 
product (GDP) by 0.37%.

But girls face huge barriers in getting into school. Many families still 
prioritise the education of sons over daughters, which means that, when 
finances are tight, girls often remain at home. Girls are also likely to be 
kept out of school during menstruation, partly due to a lack of washrooms and 
toilets, but also as a result of stigma.

Julia Gillard, the former Australian prime minister who is now chairwoman of 
theGlobal Partnership for Education <http://www.globalpartnership.org/>, is 
expected to attend Thursday’s Girls’ Education Forum. The founder of the Nike 
Foundation, Maria Eitel, is also scheduled to appear, as are ministers from 
Afghanistan, South Sudan, and Norway. The forum will be hosted by the 
Department for International Development,Global Citizen 
<https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/> and Chime for Change 
<http://www.chimeforchange.org/>, a global campaign to raise funds and 
awareness for girls and women.

They will be joined by 150 young people from the UK who are working as 
overseas volunteers, and six volunteers from Ghana, Nepal, Malawi and Tanzania.

The forum will be followed by a music event at the Shard, featuring Tom Odell 
and Laura Mvula.

“Today the UK has taken an important step to ensure that all girls are able to 
go to school and learn,” said Amy Agnew, Europe director at Global Citizen. 
“Tens of thousands of global citizens have taken action to support this 
financial commitment, but there is still so much more to be done. Globally, 
funding for education has been woefully neglected and still, millions of girls 
remain out of school. Global Citizen supports Britain’s long-standing 
commitment to the poorest people in the world and we call on all world leaders 
to step up and prioritise investment in the future of girls.”

Last September, world leaders promised to ensure all children received “free, 
equitable and quality primary and secondary education” leading to decent 
qualifications by 2030. The commitments were made under goal four of the 
sustainable development goals. Leaders also pledged to achieve full and 
productive employment and decent work for all in that timeframe.
 