
The British government is failing to live up to promises to tackle corruption, 
according to the chair of the international development committee, Stephen 
Twigg.

On Monday the government rejected recommendations made by the international 
development committee (IDC) in the wake of amajor anti-corruption summit 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/anti-corruption-summit-london-2016>
 hosted in London last year by the former prime minister David Cameron. These 
included the introduction of country-by-country reporting of multinationals’ 
profits and payments.

Related: UK’s failure to rein in tax havens hinders global corruption battle, 
say MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/19/uk-failure-to-rein-in-tax-havens-hinders-global-corruption-battle-say-mps>

The government also disagreed with other recommendations made by the IDC in 
its October 2016 report,Tackling corruption overseas 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmintdev/111/111.pdf>
, such as reconsidering the role of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD) as the principle international forum for discussions and 
decisions on tax.

In its response to the report, the government rejected the assertion that it 
was failing to persuade UK overseas territories that they should create public 
registers to end tax secrecy. It insisted that almost all relevant overseas 
territories and crown dependencies have given their support to an initiative 
launched by the UK for the development of a new global standard on automatic 
exchange of beneficial ownership information between countries.

Twigg said that the UK Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 was working hard to respond to the challenges corruption presents in some of 
the most disadvantaged communities in the world, in places such as South Sudan, 
Yemen and Afghanistan.


“Unfortunately, the wider government seems to be falling short of the promises 
it made at the anti-corruption summit last May,” he said.

“Progress on the overseas territories has stalled, with the government showing 
it has no intention to lobby further for public registers of beneficial 
ownership.


Related: Conflicts of interest mar scheme to help poor countries curb tax 
loss, claim NGOs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/13/conflicts-of-interest-poor-countries-curb-loss-tax-inspectors-without-borders-eurodad>

“It is also disappointing that the government will not be making public the 
information it holds on how much profit UK-headquartered multinationals are 
making overseas and what payments they are making to national governments. 
Without this, citizens of developing countries will continue to be left in the 
dark about the extent to which corporations are able to make vast profits 
without paying the appropriate levels of tax.”

The committee warned last year that a lack of transparency in Britain’s 
overseas territories – nominally still under the UK’s auspices, but in practice 
self-ruled and sometimes operating as controversial tax havens – will continue 
to damage Britain’s reputation as a leader on anti-corruption.

Attempts by DfID to reduce corruption in developing countries were also in 
danger of being undermined by a lack of policy coherence and the pursuit of 
different policies by other sections of government, the MPs found.

At the summit last year, Cameron called corruption “the cancer at the heart of 
so many of the problems we need to tackle in our world”.


Britain was among six countries – along with Afghanistan, Kenya, France, the 
Netherlands and Nigeria – to agreeto publish registers of who owns companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/may/12/david-cameron-london-anti-corruption-summit-live>
 in their territories.
 