
A new study into British gaming habits has confirmed what many industry 
watchers have been observing for years: the stereotype of the teenage boy 
playing alone in his bedroom is well and truly dead.


Based on interviews with 4,000 UK residents, the research asserts that women 
now account for 52% of the gaming audience, up from 49% three years ago. The 
study, which was commissioned by the Internet Advertising Bureau, also revealed 
there are now more people over 44 years old playing games (27% of the audience) 
than children or teenagers (22%). The gamer audience reportedly stands at 33.5 
million Britons – 69% of the population.
 Distribution of gamers among age groups – 99% of 8-17-year-olds have played 
games in the last six month. Source: IAB UK Photograph: IAB 
The surge in gaming among new areas of the population is closely related to 
the rise of the smartphone, which has made games available to a much wider 
audience than dedicated consoles or PCs.Mobile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mobile> puzzlers like Candy Crush Saga 
and Angry Birds are free, intuitive and accessible, requiring neither the 
learning time, nor the expense, of traditional “core” games experiences. The 
report claims that 56% of female interviewees over 44 have played mobile puzzle 
games, which emerged as the most popular gaming genre over all, ahead of 
traditional action adventures and shooters.

Furthermore, 54% of survey respondents cited their phone as their favourite 
gaming platform – 25% of whom admitted to playing games on it every day.
Smartphones <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/smartphones> were followed 
by computers (51%), consoles (45%) and tablets (44%).

 “The internet and mobile devices have changed the gaming landscape forever,” 
said Steve Chester, Director of Data and Industry Programmes at the Internet 
Advertising Bureau. “They’ve brought down the barriers to entry, making gaming 
far more accessible and opened it up to a whole new audience. In the past you 
needed to go out and buy an expensive console and the discs on top to get a 
decent experience, now you can just download a free app.”
 Top video game genres among players in Britain Source: IAB UK Photograph: IAB 
UK 
However the stereotype that female gamers are interested almost exclusively in 
casual smartphone titles is tested by the data. 47% of female gamers polled had 
played a disc-based game in the last six months, and 68% had played an online 
game. 56% of female gamers have played on a console.

 In terms of gaming time, 8-15-year-olds play for longest, racking up 20 hours 
of gaming a week. However, the average Briton spends six hours per week playing 
games, which, according to the report, is “just over 11% of their 52 hours of 
media consumption a week – the same share accounted for by social media and 
slightly less than listening to music (14%)“. The hours between six and eight 
in the evening are the most popular for gaming.

Although most people are playing on smartphones, gamers are apparently still 
playing for longer on traditional platforms. According to the study, the 
average gamer uses three different devices, and looking at share of gaming 
time, consoles account for 30%, followed by computers (24%), smartphones (21%) 
and tablets (18%). The most time consuming types of game are online-focused 
titles like World of Warcraft and Call of Duty – these take up 47% of gaming 
time, compared to smartphone apps (23%) and disc-based games (22%).

Despite a general move in the industry toward digitally distributed games – 
usually via smartphone,PC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> or 
console app stores – disc-based games are still selling. 29% of adults brought 
a new game disc in the last six months and 21% had bought a second-hand game.

The survey, entitled “Gaming Revolution” and carried out by independent 
research agency Populus, also looked into in-game advertising. Always a tricky 
proposition in console games, where onscreen ads are often seen as invasive, 
the new era of free-to-play games has changed attitudes. 61% of respondents 
said they are happy to see ads in games if it makes them free; they accepted 
1.7 ads every 30 minutes in a free game – twice as high as in paid games.

While “hardcore” gaming is clearly still rooted in its traditional user base 
(playing games is considered the most entertaining media amongst males aged 
16-24), what the study shows is a widening audience who are exploring games 
through new platforms, thanks to the proliferation of new platforms. The 
suggestion that a quarter of all gamers are now over 45-years-old may well have 
interesting ramifications for game design going forward.


 But according to the IAB, one of the most interesting discoveries through the 
4,000 surveys and 20 in-depth interviews that contributed to the findings, was 
the immersive nature of the medium. Researchers found that, when UK gamers are 
playing, they give their full attention.


“We were really surprised by how captivated consumers are by the gaming 
environment; once they are playing, they are completely ‘in the zone,’” said 
Chester. “We hear a lot about how everyone is always multi-tasking but the 
study shows that games are a unique and engaging environment which requires 
people’s complete and utter focus.”

 * Is Angry Birds Stella sexist? ‘We want to challenge stereotypes,’ says Rovio
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/04/angry-birds-stella-game-boys-girls-sexist>
 * Google survey finds games trump all other uses for tablets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/apr/08/tablets-mainly-for-games-survey> 