
The average price of a UK home edged up by 0.2% in April, according to the 
UK’s biggest building society, despite expectations that a busy start to the 
year would be followed by a sharp drop in demand.

Nationwide <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide> said the average 
price paid for a property during the month had risen to a new high of £202,436, 
after breaking through the £200,000 barrier in March.

The monthly rise was the lowest since November and brought the year-on-year 
rate of increase down to 4.9%, from 5.7% in March. The figures are based on 
mortgages approved and valued by the society during the month, adjusted to 
reflect the price of a “typical” home.

Lenders and estate agents all reported an increase in interest from buyers in 
the early part of 2016, as those looking for buy-to-let properties and other 
second homes tried to beat a change to stamp duty on 1 April. Since that date
all property purchases other than a main home have attracted a three percentage 
point surcharge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/31/stamp-duty-second-homes-what-will-i-pay>
.

Figures from HMRC showed that 165,000 transactions were registered during March
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/21/rush-to-beat-stamp-duty-changes-causes-surge-in-housing-market-activity>
 – more than double the figure for the same month of 2015. Many commentators 
are predicting a drop in demand following the rush,and price falls in some 
parts of the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/house-prices-sales-fall-stamp-duty-brexit-election-rics>
.

Nationwide’s chief economist, Robert Gardner, said: “This slowdown returns the 
annual pace of house price growth to the fairly narrow range between 3% and 5% 
that had been prevailing since the summer of 2015.

 “It may be that the surge in house purchase activity resulting from the 
increase in stamp duty on second homes from 1 April provided a temporary boost 
to prices in March.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/foxtons-braced-revenue-slump-rise-in-buy-to-let-stamp-duty>

But while Gardner said house purchase activity was likely to fall in the 
coming months, particularly as buy-to-let lenders face another set of new tax 
rules in April 2017, other factors could drive prices up.

“It is possible that the recent pattern of strong employment growth, rising 
real earnings, low borrowing costs and constrained supply will tilt the 
demand/supply balance in favour of sellers and exert upward pressure on price 
growth once again in the quarters ahead,” he said.

Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the 
month-on-month increase was “a strong result, given that the hike in stamp duty 
for buy-to-let and second home purchases kicked in at the start of the month”.

He added: “All of the other measures of house prices have been significantly 
stronger over the last six months than Nationwide’s index, which is based on 
its mortgage offers and so may suffer from sampling issues.

“We expect the Nationwide index to pick up at a faster rate over the coming 
months as falling mortgage rates, loosening credit constraints and rising wage 
growth bolster demand, while supply remains constrained.”

Separate figures from the Land Registry showed a 0.5% dip in prices in England 
and Wales in March, putting the average price at £189,901. The data, which is 
based on sales registered during the month and does not include new-build 
properties, showed an annual increase of 6.7%.

Prices were down month-on-month in all regions except London and the 
south-east of England, the Land Registry said, with the biggest fall in 
Yorkshire & the Humber, which recorded a 2.6% drop.

In London, prices were up by 13.9% over 12 months, to an average £534,785 – 
five and a half times the average price of a home in the north-east, which fell 
by 0.7% over the year to £97,581.

Jonathan Hopper, managing director of buying agents Garrington Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> Finders, said March’s dip in 
prices was “likely to presage a return to more normal rates of price growth 
rather than a serious slowdown in the market”.

He said: “Even though its annual level of price growth remains close to 14%, 
London’s extraordinary run of price rises has slowed dramatically as 
international buyers hold off on purchases until the Brexit uncertainty is past.

“Elsewhere, levels of buyer confidence remain solid, but with the surge in 
purchases by buy-to-let buyers now over, sellers now need to think more 
carefully about pricing competitively,” said Hopper.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said over the next 
few months the market would be affected by the EU referendum.


“We expect housing market activity to regain limited momentum in the second 
half of 2016, on the assumption that a vote to stay in the EU reduces 
uncertainty and supports a pickup in economic activity,” he said.

“A vote to leave the EU would be liable to see a marked hit to UK economic 
activity over the rest of this year and in 2017 amid heightened uncertainties, 
which would likely weigh down heavily on the housing market.”
 