
Britain is not doing enough to help northern Nigeria, where millions of people 
have had theirlives ruined by the Islamic militant group Boko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/16/women-freed-boko-haram-rejected-for-bringing-bad-blood-back-home-nigeria>
.

The gap between Nigeria’s poor and conflict-stricken north and more prosperous 
south could widen,a report by the international development committee said 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmintdev/110/110.pdf>
 (pdf).

Nigeria went through its first democratic transfer of power last year amid 
conflict with Boko Haram and acollapsing economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/21/nigeria-dire-finances-show-it-cannot-grease-economy-fickle-oil-alone>
, and the parliamentary watchdog’s review of Britain’s Department for 
International Development (DfID) programme in Nigeria said it had directly 
contributed to acredible, fair and peaceful election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/29/nigeria-elections-free-fair-democracy-kofi-annan>
.

The next Boko Haram? Nigerian attacks raise fears of new 'terror' threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/the-next-boko-haram-nigerian-attacks-raise-fears-of-new-terror-threat>
However, it said more attention should be paid to fighting corruption in the 
security sector, improving education and changing the approach to unemployment, 
to address issues in north-east that led to the rise of the group that has 
killed tens of thousands of people and displaced millions.

Poverty reduction should be central to everything DfID does, said Stephen 
Twigg, chairman of the committee, adding that with DfID carrying out several 
major internal reviews this year, and in the wake of the seismic changes in the 
British government, it was an “opportune moment” for the report’s publication.

“We are urging DfID to ensure that its aid and development work in Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> going forward needs to have at its 
heart poverty reduction, and one of those aspects is the regional inequality 
within the country and how that can be dealt with,” he said. “I accept that 
security and conflict have become more significant factors … [but] within that, 
resources should be prioritised towards poverty.”

Nigeria has received a fraction of the humanitarian support that DfID has 
given to other crises, the report said. Syria, for example, received $635m in 
2015 compared with Nigeria’s $6m. The UK has however announced an extra $42m in 
humanitarian aid to Nigeria over the next three years –money meant particularly 
for refugees <http://www.unhcr.org/uk/nigeria.html>.

But more long-term development is needed to stop young men joining groups like 
Boko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/jul/25/boko-haram-niger-nigeria-podcast>
 in the first place, including improving employment chances.

The private sector, which is much stronger in southern Nigeria, has been 
relied on too heavily for this, according to Kate Meagher, from the London 
School of Economics.

“In the context of historically low levels of western education, the 
encouragement of private sector-led strategies of employment generation have 
exacerbated regional inequalities between northern and southern Nigeria,” she 
told the report’s authors. “Private sector processes of economic inclusion are 
selective, and that means that northern youth are being left ever farther 
behind.”

In particular, the report said, DfID doesn’t understand the informal 
employment sector, where most Nigerians work, adding that the committee had 
been told this was one of the big weaknesses in DfID’s programming.

On education, the report said neither the Nigerian government nor DfID seem to 
recognise the severity of the shortage of teachers and textbooks, noting again 
that education is worse in the north.

 DfID is warning that Nigeria is “unlikely to achieve” the sustainable 
development goal on education 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/sdgoverview/post-2015-development-agenda/goal-4.html>
 by 2030, even though the goals were only set last year.

DfID is also failing to fight corruption in the security sector, according to 
the report. It said the army had to deal with many soldiers deserting because 
they were disillusioned with the state. “There were even reports that whole 
units are selling weapons, intelligence, and even their services to Boko 
Haram,” the report said, quotingTransparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/transparency-and-development> 
International.



Counting the cost of the Boko Haram crisis - podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2015/jul/25/boko-haram-niger-nigeria-podcast>
The report suggests DfID could tackle military corruption, drawing on its 
success supporting the petroleum industries bill, which was designed to stem 
graft in the oil and gas sector and which is awaiting approval by the Nigerian 
parliament.

The report made no mention of President Muhammadu Buhari’s plea to Britain to 
help Nigeria claw back the billions allegedly stolen and hidden in London banks 
under Buhari’s predecessor, Goodluck Jonathan.

According to Ibrahim Mahu, Nigeria’s anti-corruption chief, $37bn in assets 
stolen from Nigeria in 2014 and 2015 was routed through London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/nigeria-not-seeking-cameron-apology-wants-assets-back>
.

Nigerian public services, which the UK spends time and money helping to build, 
are crippled by this, said Ojobo Ode Atuluku, ActionAid country director.

“We desperately need action to stop tax havens fuelling the twin scourges of 
tax dodging and corruption, which leave public services like schools and 
hospitals starved of funding,” Atuluku said.

“Nigeria has signed up to new rules to publicly reveal who owns [non-trading] 
shell companies. The UK government should demand the same level of transparency 
from British overseas tax havens so that Nigerian campaigners can track down 
the money being siphoned out of the country.”

Twigg said the report would have addressed Britain’s responsibility to take 
action, but that it had been written before Buhari made his comments.

“It’s absolutely crucial that addressing corruption [is] a universal 
commitment,” he said. “All governments including our own – the starting point 
for any of these issues has to be that we address the problems in our own 
country as well as working with other countries to address the problems in 
theirs.”





 