
Concerns that British aid funding will be diverted away from supporting the 
world’s poorest people towards facilitating trade have been raised by NGOs.

In an article on Wednesday for the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3788162/My-fury-wasted-foreign-aid-International-development-secretary-Priti-Patel-pledges-major-overhaul-12billion-budget.html>
, the new international development secretary Priti Patel announced that she 
would “challenge and change the global aid system” and that her approach “will 
be built on some core Conservative principles: that the way to end poverty is 
wealth creation, not aid dependency; that wealth is ultimately created by 
people, not by the state; that poor countries need more investment and trade, 
not less”.

But NGOs have pointed out in response that the priority for aid in the UK has 
always been the alleviation of poverty and the support of the poorest groups in 
society, and that the UK’s aid funding was already carefully targeted towards 
that end.

Priti Patel plans foreign aid overhaul based on 'core Tory values'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/priti-patel-plans-foreign-aid-overhaul-based-on-core-tory-values>
Patel’s article was “challenging reading” said Aaron Oxley, executive director 
of campaign group Results UK. “Virtually all UK aid money is already spent 
incredibly well on high-impact activities that are focused on eliminating 
poverty and have a proven track record of delivering results,” he said.

“The first priority of UK aid must be to end poverty and leave no one behind, 
not to oil the wheels of British business,” said Loretta Minghella, chief 
executive of ChristianAid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid>. 
“Increased trade supported by the aid budget ought to benefit the poorest most, 
not those who already prosper.”

Minghella added that the Conservative government must start by cleaning up the 
UK’s own backyard when it comes to corruption. “Tax dodging and embezzlement 
drain poorer countries of much-needed revenues for essential services like 
health and education and this is facilitated by global networks of corruption 
which even touch the UK’s own shores,” she said. “Among the worst offenders are 
the UK’s overseas territories like the British Virgin Islands, which featured 
so heavily in the Panama Papers.” Patel’s commitment to transparency needs to 
be taken to the foreign office, said Minghella, which hasn’t been awardedtop 
ratings <http://ati.publishwhatyoufund.org/donor/ukdfid/> yet.

When economies boom, people are left behind, said Tanya Barron, chief 
executive of Plan International, and “all too often, this is girls and young 
women”. She added: “In recent years DfID [the UK’s Department for International 
Development] has been a global leader in ensuring that girls and young women 
are protected from violence and exploitation so that they can fulfil their 
potential. This sort of work too is critical to achieve our aim of a just, 
stable and prosperous world.”

Oxley added that proof of Patel’s commitment to development will become 
apparent later this week as a conference to announce thereplenishment of the 
Global Fund to Fight Aids, TB and Malaria 
<http://international.gc.ca/world-monde/campaign-campagne/gfatm-fmstp/replenishment-conference-reconstitution.aspx?lang=eng>
 is happening in Montreal. “The UK has historically been a big donor to the 
Global Fund precisely because it gets results and is constantly working to 
improve its impact,” he said. “We look forward to seeing a strong pledge from 
the UK that will directly contribute to saving millions of lives and help end 
these epidemics for good.”France has pledged $1.08bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/05/tb-kills-three-people-every-minute-the-world-must-wake-up-to-this-pandemic>
 (£0.82bn), but the UK is yet to donate.

“UK aid is respected throughout the world as being among the most effective 
and most scrutinised,” said Ben Jackson, chief executive of Bond, which 
represents NGOs in the UK. “We would welcome the opportunity to discuss with 
the secretary of state the ways in which aid can be delivered in the most 
effective way possible, to help the poorest people.”

Alex Scrivener, policy officer at Global Justice Now, hopes that Patel 
reconsiders her views. “Aid is not perfect,” said Scrivener. “But that is no 
excuse forPriti Patel <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/priti-patel> to 
divert money meant to help the poor into supporting multinationals in the name 
of free trade and the UK national interest. Nor should she be using it to 
pander to the tabloids’ anti-immigrant agenda.”

ActionAid’s director of policy, Alison Holder, said that the best way to 
achieve development is “through supporting long-term change through education, 
fair reform of global tax and trade rules, resilience building, and by 
supporting people to take control of their own lives that can help communities 
to build their own futures, free from aid”.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.

 * This article was amended on 14 September 2016 to remove a quote from 
WaterAid which was taken out of context.  