
While many people were still sleeping off the extra calories – and alcohol – 
consumed on Christmas Day, millions of the nation’s hardcore shoppers had set 
their alarms, ready to be up and out to bag the biggest bargains on Boxing Day.


Jace Tyrrell, chief executive of the New West End Company, representing stores 
on Bond, Oxford and Regent streets, said average footfall was up 8% 
year-on-year at 11am, with turnover for the day expected to reach £55m. Chinese 
shoppers were giving the West End a boost, with luxury handbags among the most 
popular items.

At the Westfield shopping centre in Stratford, east London, the most dedicated 
started queueing at 2am. By the time the doors opened at 5am hundreds of 
shoppers were ready to flood through the doors.

“It was chaos,” said one security guard. “They were pushing, complaining, 
arguing about little things like schoolkids. And for what? You’re going to get 
to Next, don’t worry.”

Syed Ali, 27, went straight to the shops with his wife and children after 
working a 24-hour shift in security. “It was a bit cold but what really annoyed 
me was people trying to push in the queue – people were jumping in, shouting at 
you. There is no need for that,” he said.

“To be honest we are just buying everything for the kids,” he said, piles of 
clothes around his feet. “That’s why I worked for the last 24 hours to make 
money to spend on them – if there is anything left, maybe then we’ll get 
something for ourselves.”

Next was, as always, one of the biggest draws for the early shoppers. 
Britain’s biggest clothing retailer is one of the few big chains not to slash 
prices before Christmas – although its sale did begin online at 3pm on 24 
December.

Ling Lin, 29, did not let the fact that she was seven months pregnant prevent 
her getting among the crowds, and had spent about £1,300 by 8.30am. Her only 
concession to her condition seemed to be that she was willing to take a rest 
after filling seven large bags fit to burst. “But I think I have saved at least 
£1,000 in the Next sale,” she said. “I love it, I love shopping and I always do 
the sales – and I don’t know when I will be able to shop again for a while.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fuk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F675cbba0f54277435d4ba5f52dd91bdd3ede35d7%2F0_0_4608_3028%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20shoppers%20head%20out%20in%20their%20millions%20to%20brave%20Boxing%20Day%20sales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fuk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20shoppers%20head%20out%20in%20their%20millions%20to%20brave%20Boxing%20Day%20sales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fuk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F675cbba0f54277435d4ba5f52dd91bdd3ede35d7%2F0_0_4608_3028%2F4608.jpg>
 Customers queue to enter the Selfridges department store in central London on 
Boxing Day. Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty 
While millions headed to the shops on Boxing Day, before Brexit-related price 
rises are expected to trickle down to the high street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/boxing-day-shoppers-expected-splash-out-before-brexit-price-rises-kick-in>
, retail experts warned that pre-Christmas discounting, online sales and the 
introduction of Black Friday could depress footfall.

Retailers have already struggled in 2016, according to retail analyst Richard 
Hyman. “It has been extraordinarily tough without any impact from Brexit at 
all. For the last two and a half years, we’ve had price deflation in virtually 
every sector,” he said. “In 2016, on average more than 60% of UK retailers have 
been on sale. I’ve never seen a market like this. Sales used to be used to 
clear stock. That’s a thing of the past. Now there is a permanent sale.”

The overall number of people who visit the shops in December has declined in 
six of the past seven consecutive years, according to retail analysts 
Springboard.

The chief executive of the British Retail Consortium, Helen Dickinson, said 
the fourth year of falling shop prices suggested shoppers would mean permanent 
competition between retailers.

“The outlook for 2017 is tough,” she said. “We have a triple whammy of cost 
pressures – inflation coming through, an unreformed business rate system, 
another year of uplift in the national living wage and apprenticeship levies – 
and all of these at the same time as a market that’s not growing very quickly.

“But we know they’re a resilient and enterprising bunch and there will be a 
lot of businesses that rise to the environment really well.”

Consumer and retail expert Kate Hardcastle said there had been a permanent 
shift in shopping habits. “This is the time of year where, after a good sales 
period, [retailers] normally slash the prices to encourage extra footfall and 
get rid of stock they don’t want, but that is no longer the case,” she told BBC 
Radio 4’s Today programme.

“We’ve had the introduction of Black Friday … when you start discounting that 
early you set a pattern that the consumer desires. Add on to that the changes 
in how we shop now and the trends emerging from online shopping: the fact we 
can use devices like smartphones to access everything we want. There has very 
much been a changing face to the way we shop.”

However, no one seemed to have told the shoppers in Stratford. Westfield said 
more than 100,000 people came through the doors of its two giant shopping 
centres in London by 1pm on Boxing Day, with £500,000 spent every hour over the 
Christmas period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fuk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64780b26fe90d0453376e85653957930d37e1353%2F0_0_4600_2891%2F4600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20shoppers%20head%20out%20in%20their%20millions%20to%20brave%20Boxing%20Day%20sales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fuk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20shoppers%20head%20out%20in%20their%20millions%20to%20brave%20Boxing%20Day%20sales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fuk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64780b26fe90d0453376e85653957930d37e1353%2F0_0_4600_2891%2F4600.jpg>
 A shopper carries bags past a Christmas window display on New Bond Street. 
Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
Myf Ryan, chief marketing officer for Westfield UK and Europe, said: “For many 
shoppers, the annual Boxing Day sales continue to be an important date in the 
diary. Many people will have received spending money or gift cards for 
Christmas, and use Boxing Day as an opportunity to treat themselves, as well as 
spending time with family and friends.”


Boxing Day was still the most popular post-Christmas shopping day among UK 
consumers, according to Dom Joseph, chief executive of advertising technology 
company Captify. A record £984m is expected to be spent online on Boxing Day, 
up from the £805m spent on Christmas Day.

Angela Jordan, 51, had decided to cover all the bases, and do her shopping 
online and in store. “I’ve already bought everything I wanted online – so what 
am I doing here?” she asked. “It’s a bit sad, but I sneaked away yesterday and 
did most of it then.”

Ozay Kirik, who was waiting for designer clothing store Choice to open, said 
he wanted to be able to try things on. “It’s different, there’s more of an 
atmosphere,” he said. “Maybe I can do my shopping at home in bed, but I can’t 
feel it, I can’t try it on. It’s less hassle to come here than get it sent and 
then send it back because it doesn’t fit.”

As the queues started to grow and lines into the most popular shops started 
operating a holding policy one family had taken time out to eat the breakfast 
they had brought with them.

Alpana Jain and her 13-year-old son, Kshitij, had come from Delhi to visit 
family and try out the Boxing Day sales for the first time. “It’s very 
different,” she said. “In Delhi sales are a lot more relaxed and last longer.”

Her son-in-law, Rajat Gupta, laughed and added: “To be honest I just don’t 
think people are crazy enough in Delhi to start queuing at five in the morning.”
 