
UK Sport is considering implementing a full-time investigations unit after a 
string of controversial governance issues including the recent look into the 
culture atBritish Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling>.

Announcing a governance code for all sports governing bodies that will require 
at least 30% of board members to be women if they want to continue to receive 
public money fromSport England <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sport-england>
 and UK Sport, the latter said it was also examining whether to introduce a 
full-time investigations unit.

British Cycling upholds complaint against Shane Sutton by Jess Varnish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
“What UK Sport will be doing is looking in the next year at whether we have 
the right structures in place in British sport in terms of an investigatory 
function,” said theUK Sport <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uk-sport> chief 
operating officer, Simon Morton. “We have been involved in quite a few 
independent reviews in the last 12 months and it’s making us think about 
whether we have the right functions in British sport to handle those.”

Morton added: “It’s very early days but we understand there is an increasing 
need for British sport to have an investigatory function around independent 
reviews. Rather than having to reinvent the wheel every time an independent 
review comes around, having clarity on the process would be beneficial.”

Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson is chairing a review on the wide-ranging issue of 
the duty of care sports have for athletes, while the British Rowing chair, 
Annamarie Phelps, is leading a specific inquiry into the culture of British 
Cycling amid allegations of bullying and sexism.

Last week an internal British Cycling review found the former head coach Shane 
Sutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/british-cycling-upholds-complaint-shane-sutton-jessica-varnish>
 had been guilty of using inappropriate and discriminatory language. The Phelps 
review is expected to be published next month.

It was also confirmed the government may withhold support for any bid by the 
Football Association to host the World Cup or European Championship if it fails 
to adhere to the code, which will come into force on 1 April next year.

Repeated efforts to force the FA to reform have failed since Lord Burns 
recommended changes to the board and council 11 years ago. The sports minister, 
Tracey Crouch, has already said the FA faces losing £30m in government funding 
over four years if it fails to comply.

As well as making all reasonable efforts to meet the 30% target on gender 
diversity, the FA and other governing bodies must also ensure the main board 
has primacy on decision-making. That would effectively mean the FA councillors 
voting to relinquish their own power. The most recent attempt at reform, by the 
former chairman Greg Dyke, was unceremoniously rejected by the council but his 
successor, Greg Clarke, and the chief executive, Martin Glenn, have said they 
are committed to making changes.

The Sport England director of sport, Phil Smith, said the FA and other 
governing bodies would not be expected to comply on 1 April next year but would 
have to keep to a timetable to be agreed over the coming months.

Morton said few governing bodies complied with the code. “The mandate from 
government was that they wanted something tough and was the gold standard for 
sport,” he said.
 