
UK Sport has appealed directly to Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to make up a £30m shortfall 
in funding for Olympic and Paralympic athletes following a decline in national 
lottery sales. The body responsible for managing elite Olympic sport decided to 
go to the prime minister after its overtures to the treasury were rejected.

In the four-year buildup to the Rio Games, UK Sport received £350m to support 
British athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/brutal-but-effective-why-team-gb-is-winning-so-many-olympic-medals>
 and a similar amount was expected to be announced on Friday to help Team GB 
prepare for the 2020 Tokyo Olympics, especially after the exchequer announced 
an increase in direct funding from £135m to £148m last year.

Jessica Ennis-Hill in line for 2011 gold as Chernova is stripped of world title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/jessica-ennis-hill-2011-gold-medal-chernova>
However, the steeper than expected fall in national lottery sales, which 
contribute to two-thirds of funding, has led to “challenges” that will need 
addressing in the next seven days to avert widespread cuts, according to theUK 
Sport <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/uk-sport> chair, Rod Carr.

“We are not panicking here. What we are seeing here is a trend in the lottery 
and that has been acknowledged by Camelot,” Carr said. “But the issue for UK 
Sport is we have to make some difficult decisions.

“ We understand the situation. We are not stupid. We know what’s going on,” he 
continued, acknowledging that the government has to watch its pocket in these 
straightened times. “On the other hand it’s a relatively small amount of money, 
£6m or £8m a year.”

Carr conceded that could lead to many sports having less funding than ideal 
but insisted an efficiency drive in Olympic and Paralympic sports would negate 
the worst effects. “What everyone will see is that many of the sports may have 
less funding but that’s maybe because of the efficiencies that have been made.”

“But if we don’t get a solution before next Wednesday from Government the 
reality is that yes we are going to have to make some hard decisions.”

British Athletics reported “incredibly strong” demand for the 100,000 
remaining tickets for next year’s world championships in London. However, a 
number of customers were left frustrated when the official website crashed, 
some saying they waited over an hour only for the page to reset and put them 
back to the end of the queue.

Buy tickets for the IAAF World Championships London 2017 from: 
tickets.london2017athletics.com

'Brutal but effective': why Team GB has won so many Olympic medals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/brutal-but-effective-why-team-gb-is-winning-so-many-olympic-medals> 