
The chief executive of GB Badminton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/badminton> has described UK Sport’s decision 
to axe its funding for the next Olympic cycle as “catastrophic”, with four 
other sports also set to lose all their exchequer and Lottery funding before 
the Tokyo Olympics.

Archery, badminton, fencing, weightlifting and wheelchair rugby saw their 
funding wiped out, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/badminton-archery-fencing-weightlifiting-wheelchair-rugby-olympic-funding-cut-uk-sport>
 while British Cycling’s bumpy year off the track worsened as it suffered a 
£4.3m cut. UK Sport warned “further conditions” could be applied to that money 
if the independent review into cycling’s culture, which is expected next month, 
was critical.

As wheelchair rugby flourishes why is it the only Paralympic sport not funded?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/wheelchair-rugby-paralympic-sport-tokyo-2020>
Adrian Christy, the head of GB Badminton, said the sport would appeal against 
the cut givenMarcus Ellis and Chris Langridge won bronze at Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/chris-langridge-marcus-ellis-badminton-bronze-team-gb>
 to secure Britain’s first men’s doubles medal and a crop of talented 
youngsters are coming through.

“We are staggered by this decision,” he said. “It is incomprehensible. Despite 
the most successfulOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> since 2004 for GB badminton, 
the decision presents a catastrophic impact on the sport and it will mean the 
cessation of all the funding that supports the performance and operations of 
our current squad of players.”

Writing in the Guardian, David Pond, the chief executive of Great Britain 
Wheelchair Rugby, admitted his surprise and described the implications for his 
sport as “stark”.

Earlier the UK Sport chair, Rod Carr, stressed British Cycling’s steep decline 
in funding from £30.2m to £25.9m to prepare for Tokyo 2020 was owing to its 
underperforming BMX and mountain bike programme as well as the need for it to 
use a sponsorship deal with HSBC to fund elite sport.

He also warned if an independent review upheld bullying and sexism 
allegations, or a parliamentary body raised serious questions about the sport’s 
lack of transparency, it could “fundamentally undermine” its success.

“Governance is a really important issue, whether it be Fifa or IAAF, and if 
there were issues inBritish Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling>, it fundamentally 
undermines everything,” Carr said. “If people don’t believe what they’re seeing 
on the track, if things are getting done in a way that we as the public think 
is untoward, then it’s really bad news so we take that very seriously.”

Carr also admitted he was concerned about the lack of transparency over what 
was in the package a member of British Cycling’s staff delivered to Team Sky 
for Bradley Wiggins on the day he won the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011. “Of 
course it worries me but you learn not worry about things until you have the 
facts,” he said. “It’s tough this, and I’m hoping there aren’t any issues, but 
if there are then we’ll confront it because it’s really important.”

But Chelsea Warr, the director of performance at UK Sport, predicted the 
funding decisions would help British athletes win even more medals at the 2020 
Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics. “I’ve spoken to lots of people in our system 
who say we are operating on four out of six cylinders at the moment, so there 
are definitely improvement to be made,” she said, before setting a target of 
51-85 Olympic medals and 115-162 Paralympic medals, a figure she said did not 
include professional sports such as tennis, or new Olympic sports such as 
surfing.
 