
Efforts to curb global corruption risk being seriously hindered by the UK’s 
failure to persuade its overseas territories to improve their transparency, a 
high-level report by British MPs warns today.

Accusing the UK government of missing an opportunity to build on a major 
anti-corruption summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/may/12/david-cameron-london-anti-corruption-summit-live>
 that took place in London in May, it calls on Britain to persuade the 
territories to create public registers of beneficial ownership.

A lack of transparency in the entities – nominally still under the UK’s 
auspices, but in practice self-ruled and sometimes operating as controversial 
tax havens – will continue to damage Britain’s reputation as a leader on 
anti-corruption, according to theHouse of Commons International Development 
Committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/>
.

Conflicts of interest mar scheme to help poor countries curb tax loss, claim 
NGOs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/13/conflicts-of-interest-poor-countries-curb-loss-tax-inspectors-without-borders-eurodad>
Attempts by Britain’s Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 to reduce corruption in developing countries are in danger of being undermined 
by a lack of policy coherence and the pursuit of different policies by other 
sections of government, the MPs warn.

While commending the UK for showing leadership in the past six years, it adds 
that the scale of the challenges when it comes to tackling corruption have been 
underlined by revelations such as those contained in thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>, an unprecedented leak 
of millions of documents showing the myriad ways in which the rich can exploit 
secretive offshore tax regimes.

“It is essential that momentum is not lost in the wake of the decision to 
leave the European Union, when laws, regulations and trading arrangements are 
reviewed,” says the report, which adds that the UK government must consider the 
ramifications of Brexit on EU provisions designed to curb corruption.

As much as $240bn (£195bn) in tax revenue is lost each year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/oecd-hopes-reforms-will-end-era-of-aggressive-tax-avoidance>
 due to tax avoidance, according to OECD estimates, with developing countries 
hit the hardest.

The report asks the British government to reconsider whether the best forum 
for its pursuit of discussions and decisions on international tax matters 
should actually be the OECD, whose membership is mainly composed of developed 
countries and which it accused of “not adequately reflecting the needs of the 
poorest countries”.

The MPs say it is clear from the evidence they received that companies and 
individuals in the UK as well as in Britain’s crown dependencies and overseas 
territories “play a major role in facilitating global corruption”.

By way of example, they quote the evidence of Professor Paul Heywood, an 
anti-corruption expert at the University of Nottingham, who told the committee 
the role of banks and the City of London “in allowing corrupt money to flow 
should not be underestimated”.

It also notes that approximately half of the companies – more than 113,000 in 
total – that featured in the files released as part of the Panama Papers 
revelations were registered inthe British Virgin Islands, a UK overseas 
territory. <https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-virgin-islands>

In other findings, it says the registration of large numbers of major oil, gas 
and mining companies in the UK mean that the British government could play an 
important role in rooting out the corruption that impacted on resource-rich 
developing states such as Nigeria.

Ecuador's foreign minister steps up campaign for UN tax body
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/21/ecuador-foreign-minister-guillaume-long-steps-up-campaign-for-un-tax-body>
Looking back at David Cameron’s administration, it commends him as a “clear 
advocate” for anti-corruption measures and challenges Theresa May to show the 
same level of commitment.


The report comes after a cross-party group of British MPs claimed a victory 
last week for corporate tax transparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/multinationals-to-publicly-declare-country-by-country-profits-and-tax-caroline-flint>
 following the government’s acceptance of a legal amendment to legislation that 
could force multinationals to publicly declare where they do business and the 
tax they pay.

The amendment to the finance bill allows, but does not commit, the government 
to publication of country-by-country reports produced by multinationals.

The committee’s chair, Labour MP Stephen Twigg, says it has previously called 
on the UK government to get its own house in order, and this remains the case.

“Ministers must address the role of some UK companies and individuals in 
facilitating global corruption, including the vast amounts of money laundered 
through the UK,” he adds.

“Huge amounts of money are lost every year through illegal tax evasion, money 
laundering and bribery. The people most at risk from this scourge are the 
world’s poorest, who lose out on education, healthcare and infrastructure – not 
to mention the impact of petty corruption on their daily lives.”

A spokesperson for DfID said: “The UK is a global leader in the fight against 
corruption, and this report rightly recognises the government’s summit in May 
as a significant moment in international efforts to tackle corruption.

“Helping the world’s poorest stand on their own two feet by tackling poverty 
overseas while stopping organised crime, money laundering and tax evasion is 
firmly in the UK’s interests. The UK is fully committed to delivering on the 
promises made at the anti-corruption summit.”
 