
The private sector arm of the UK’s aid programme is failing to demonstrate 
adequately how its investments improve the lives of the world’s poorest,
according to the state spending watchdog 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/department-for-international-development-investing-through-cdc/>
, even as the government plans to ramp up the funds it channels through the 
body.

Given proposals by the Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/department-for-international-development-dfid>
 to quadruple the limit on support it gives to the CDC Group from £1.5bn to 
£6bn, the National Audit Office (NAO) calls for “a clearer picture” of the 
body’s overseas development impact in order to demonstrate value for money.


UK accused of lack of transparency over rise in aid funding to private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
Despite £5m of funding 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/Department-for-International-Development-through-CDC.pdf>
 being put aside last year for assessments of the wider impact of the CDC’s 
investments, the watchdog said that no contracts for that research had been 
awarded.

The report finds that DfID has improved its oversight of the CDC, which it 
also commends for making improvements such as better cost control and corporate 
governance. But it concluded that development targets met by the body –which 
says <http://www.cdcgroup.com/Corporate-information/Annual-Review-2015/> that 
its investments helped to create more than one million direct and indirect jobs 
last year – measured their prospective rather than their actual impact.

“The Department for International Development has improved its oversight of 
CDC and has directed it to address many of the weaknesses previously identified 
by parliament,” said Amyas Morse, head of the NAO.

“It remains a significant challenge, however, for CDC to demonstrate its 
ultimate objective of creating and making a lasting difference to people’s 
lives in some of the world’s poorest places.”


The report comes on the eve of the second parliamentary reading of a bill to 
increase the cap on DfID funding for the CDC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
 to as much as £12bn.

Officials at the CDC believe that criticism from the NAO does not reflect the 
work that it has done to measure, evaluate and demonstrate development impact.

“The NAO recognises in the report that development impact is hard to measure 
and we agree,” said a spokesperson.

“Investments are long term. Impacts take time to feed through, but CDC is 
unique globally in its commitment to track and report on total job impacts 
consistently and annually. CDC has developeda robust methodology 
<http://www.cdcgroup.com/The-difference-we-make/Performance/> to measure direct 
and indirect jobs supported and created, and has reported the results on a like 
for like basis in its last two annual reviews for 2014 and 2015.”

However, critics of the CDC and DfID’s policy said that the potentially huge 
increase in the private sector arm’s funding was not justified.

Stephen Doughty, a Labour MP and member of the international development 
committee, said: “Despite improvements since its past controversies, there is 
no case made for a 10-fold increase in taxpayers’ money being pumped into this 
institution – diverting our aid into private equity funds, some of which
allegedly flows through tax havens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/04/uk-aid-investments-target-tax-havens>
.”

Aisha Dodwell, a campaigner for the pressure group Global Justice Now, said 
that while the CDC might be good at returning on investments, it was falling 
well short of meeting basic development goals like supporting people to move 
out of poverty or providing access to basic public services such as education 
and healthcare.

The CDC has also been the focus of controversy in the past over its 
executives’ high pay packets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/jan/19/commonwealth-development-corporation-private-sector>
. The NAO report finds that its employees’ average annual salary has reduced by 
27% from £123,000 to £90,000 over the past five years.

That situation may be about to change, however. Both the CDC and DfID admit 
that recruitment and retention of staff remains a risk for the group, whose 
staffing levels have been increasing as it expands operations.

As a result, the department and the CDC expect to have drafted a revised 
remuneration framework and submitted it to ministers for approval by March, 
according to the NAO.

A DfID spokeswoman said that the NAO had recognised that the CDC’s strategy is 
fully aligned with the department’s priorities for the world’s poorest 
countries. “CDC has delivered proven development impact … generating over 
US$7bn in local taxes over the last three years,” she said.

“The NAO itself identifies that CDC has ‘made important, positive changes’, 
exceeded its performance targets and highlights DfID’s strong oversight and 
role in directing CDC to address historic issues.”

She added that the bill was an “essential step” towards ensuring that the CDC 
can continue to make its investments and ensure value for money for UK 
taxpayers.
 