
UK Anti-Doping has expanded its inquiry into British cycling to encompass 
multiple allegations of wrongdoing after reportsTeam Sky and Sir Bradley 
Wiggins are being investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-ukad-investigate-wrongdoing-allegations>
 over the contents of a medical package.

Former Team Sky rider: Wiggins’ TUE during 2012 Tour ‘looks suspicious’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
Despite Team Sky’s insistence they were “confident there had been no 
wrongdoing”, they failed to address apparent inconsistencies surrounding the 
explanation given by the team principal, Sir Dave Brailsford, over the delivery 
of a medical package to Wiggins’s doctor, Dr Richard Freeman, before the 2011 
Tour de France.

Ukad had already confirmed it was looking into a single allegation but said on 
Friday it had widened the scope of the inquiry. “We have confirmed we are 
investigating allegations of wrongdoing in cycling. To protect the integrity of 
the investigation we will not comment further on this matter. Athletes, 
coaches, support staff and even spectators can help shape what we do by telling 
us, in confidence, if they have concerns or information that doping is taking 
place.”

It is believed other allegations have been made directly to Ukad, aside from 
those passed to it byTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky> via 
British Cycling that had been made by the Daily Mail. Any use of a banned 
substance requires an active TUE.

Neither Team Sky nor British Cycling would comment on what was in the medical 
package urgently transported to France by a BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> official but the latter indicated 
it did not contain triamcinolone.

Brailsford initially told the Mail that Simon Cope, the British Cycling coach 
who reportedly delivered the package after flying to Geneva airport, had 
travelled to La Toussuire to see Emma Pooley but Pooley confirmed she was not 
there at the time but instead 687 miles away in Spain.

The Mail also alleged that Wiggins was seen entering the team bus with Dr 
Richard Freeman, the Team Sky doctor. Brailsford said Wiggins could not have 
done because the bus had left by the time he had completed his podium, media 
and anti-doping duties.

However, a fan video on YouTube appears to show Wiggins being interviewed 
outside the bus after the race on the day in question.

“Team Sky was contacted by the Daily Mail regarding an allegation of 
wrongdoing. We take any issues such as this very seriously and immediately 
conducted an internal review to establish the facts,” said the team, who have 
won four of the past five Tours de France with British riders. “We are 
confident there has been no wrongdoing. We informed British Cycling of the 
allegation and asked it to contact Ukad, who we will continue to liaise with.”

Team Sky and Wiggins have been under intense pressure after his TUEs became 
public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/bradley-wiggins-world-anti-doping-agency-hackers-russian-leak>
, with questions centring on whether the first British Tour de France winner 
had behaved unethically by injecting the powerful corticosteroid in 2011, 2012 
and 2013 before his most important target of each of those seasons.

Wiggins argued he had been prescribed the injections by a specialist to combat 
his pollen allergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/bradley-wiggins-andrew-marr-unfair-advantage>
 and had been through the proper procedure, with each exemption having been 
signed off by an independent doctor and the UCI.

The former Team Sky rider Jonathan Tiernan-Locke, who was sacked in 2014 after 
being banned for two years over irregularities in his blood passport, said this 
week that theuse of TUEs by Wiggins “looks odd” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/07/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-former-rider-looks-suspicious>
.

“You assume if you had a need for such a thing it would be consistent 
throughout his career, that you’d use it year in, year out, so from that point 
of view it looks suspicious,” he told the BBC.

The United States Anti-Doping Agency chief executive, Travis Tygart, 
haslabelled the Fancy Bears “con artists” after the hackers accused US sports 
officials of covering up doping.

The Russian group on Thursday released email exchanges it claimed revealed 
“Usada covers up many athletes using prohibited substances”.

Bradley Wiggins and Sky operated in grey areas which blur moral credibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-team-sky-tues> 
“This is just another desperate attempt to distract from the real issue of 
[Russian] state-sponsored doping,” Tygart told BBC Sport.

“They are con artists,” he added. “We are confident that people will see this 
for what it is: a malicious and illegal invasion of athlete privacy followed by 
a baseless smear campaign.”

Amid febrile debate sparked by the revelations surrounding state-sponsored 
doping in Russia and the Fancy Bears retaliatory hack, the International 
Olympic Committee will this weekend host a summit on the future of anti-doping.
 