
The UN has been accused of failing to act quickly enough to save hundreds of 
thousands of lives in northern Nigeria where a food crisis already killing 
hundreds of people a day is poised to become the most devastating in decades.


Nigerian authorities, who maintain tight control over humanitarian and media 
access to the region, have also been accused of deliberate negligence and 
attempting to conceal the scale of the crisis.

The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has 
categorised 4.4 million people in the Lake Chad region as “severely food 
insecure” – meaning they are in need of urgent food aid.

Toby Lanzer, UN assistant secretary general and OCHA’s regional humanitarian 
coordinator for the Sahel, said: “This is about as bad as it gets. There’s only 
one step worse and I’ve not come across that situation in 20 years of doing 
this work and that’s a famine.”

“We have to step in and quickly or we are going to have hundreds of thousands 
at risk of dying in the north-east of Nigeria.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fun-accused-of-failing-as-nigerian-food-crisis-threatens-hundreds-of-thousands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8cfecdaf7e3b59404976893e35709f99dcd9c74%2F0_235_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20accused%20of%20failing%20as%20north-east%20Nigeria%20at%20risk%20of%20famine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fun-accused-of-failing-as-nigerian-food-crisis-threatens-hundreds-of-thousands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20accused%20of%20failing%20as%20north-east%20Nigeria%20at%20risk%20of%20famine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fun-accused-of-failing-as-nigerian-food-crisis-threatens-hundreds-of-thousands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8cfecdaf7e3b59404976893e35709f99dcd9c74%2F0_235_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 The Muna settlement on the outskirts of Maiduguri. The UN has warned that 
without fast action hundreds of thousands of people will be at risk of dying in 
north-eastern Nigeria. Photograph: Stefan Heunis/AFP/Getty Images 
Boko Haram’s seven-year insurgency has left Borno’s farmland – which 
previously fed Nigeria – devastated and abandoned. This will be the region’s 
third year without a harvest.

The hunger crisis is claiming lives even in Maiduguri, the capital of Borno 
state and the hub of humanitarian and security forces in the region. The city 
has doubled in size in two years and now hosts 2.4 million displaced people. 
Food prices are soaring in the markets, where it now costs $100 (£75) to buy a 
large bag of rice.
Nigeria food crisis 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/nigeria/giv-12515eG56qF8yayjm/>
Lanzer said UN agencies have not had the resources necessary to tackle the 
crisis and has called on international donors to prevent a greater catastrophe. 
Of the $279m (£210m) required, only $75m has so far been secured.


Isabelle Mouniaman, head of Médecins Sans Frontières operations in Nigeria, 
said MSF has been raising the alarm in northern Nigeria for two years and UN 
organisations have failed to respond.


“We’ve been calling to the UN, to the headquarters of Unicef, WFP [World Food 
Programme], OCHA and their response has been ‘Yes, we’re doing this and that’… 
But you cannot just be satisfied to say you built X number of latrines, 
delivered X bags of food when people are dying. It’s not enough,” Mouniaman 
said.


“The Red Cross is doing their job, MSF is doing their job, but the vast 
majority of humanitarian organisations are failing in their responsibility 
towards the crisis in Borno.”


This is about as bad as it gets. There’s only one step worse ... and that’s a 
famine
Toby Lanzer, UN assistant secretary general 
International aid agencies have focused on Maiduguri’s overstretched camps, 
but more than 80% of displaced people in the city, around 1.9 million people, 
are living among the community, the vast majority without access to food aid or 
medical support.

The most desperate crisis is unfolding outside Maiduguri, where aid agencies 
fear hundreds of thousands of people are trapped, cut off by Boko Haram and the 
military operation against them. As the Nigerian army clears more of these 
areas, the true scale of the crisis is only just becoming clear; those who have 
escaped tell of watching children die from hunger and being prevented from 
calling for help.


Mouniaman said: “We’re talking about areas in which 39% of children have 
severe acute malnutrition. This is a really, really dramatic situation. In my 
whole MSF career – since 1999 – I’ve never seen anything like it.”


In June, a humanitarian convoy reached Bama 
<http://www.msf.org/en/article/20160622-nigeria-least-24000-displaced-people-dire-health-situation-bama>
, Borno state’s second largest city. It was recaptured by the Nigerian army in 
March 2015, but the 37-mile journey (60km) from Maiduguri is still considered 
too dangerous to make without military escort because of Boko Haram attacks and 
landmines.

They found Bama destroyed and a camp of about 30,000 people, mostly women and 
children. Many were starving. MSF found the graves of 1,233 who had died in the 
camp, 480 of whom were children. More than 3,000 severely malnourished people 
were evacuated by the state governor to Maiduguri for emergency treatment. 
Several died en route.


The Guardian was refused entry to Bama by the Nigerian military on security 
grounds. But Maj Gen Leo Irabor, who leads the military operation against Boko 
Haram in the region, said hunger in the Bama camp was “relative”.


“Very largely I think their needs are being met,” Irabor said. 


Several people evacuated to Maiduguri agreed to speak to the Guardian on 
condition of anonymity. One man, a civil servant, said he had seen people die 
every day in the camp as a result of hunger and poor sanitation.


Food rations were delivered once a day by civilian militia and distributed by 
local community heads. This was often raw rice, which there was no means to 
cook. Complaints about hunger and deaths were ignored.


“How many times we cried out or we complained … But when we were in Banki, the 
army confiscated all our mobile phones. If the army saw you making a telephone 
call, wow would they give you a beating,” he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fun-accused-of-failing-as-nigerian-food-crisis-threatens-hundreds-of-thousands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9e4868e6f47443865e686482c71215327945c3d%2F0_29_1902_1142%2F1902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20accused%20of%20failing%20as%20north-east%20Nigeria%20at%20risk%20of%20famine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fun-accused-of-failing-as-nigerian-food-crisis-threatens-hundreds-of-thousands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20accused%20of%20failing%20as%20north-east%20Nigeria%20at%20risk%20of%20famine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fun-accused-of-failing-as-nigerian-food-crisis-threatens-hundreds-of-thousands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9e4868e6f47443865e686482c71215327945c3d%2F0_29_1902_1142%2F1902.jpg>
 People flee after Boko Haram attacks on Mairi village, on the outskirts of 
Maiduguri in Borno. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Humanitarian agencies are still struggling to get an idea of the scale of need 
in tens of towns they have not been able to reach. In Mondugo last week, MSF 
estimated 100,000 displaced people were in need of assistance; this week, their 
revised estimate was 200,000. There is even less information about large 
communities in Dikwa, Konduga, Gwoza and Kale/Balge, where the situation is 
thought to be even worse than in Bama.


Grema Terab, chairman of the State Emergency Management Agency (Sema) in Borno 
– the body leading the state’s humanitarian response – until early March 2015, 
believes the crisis is the result of “total neglect and carelessness on the 
part of the government”. He said the government was aware of the extent of the 
hunger, but failed to deliver a plan to tackle it and attempted to prevent 
media coverage of the issue for fear of embarrassment.

“The government chose to conceal the issue of IDPs [internally displaced 
people] because they were afraid of indictment. There has been a lot of 
long-term neglect and a refusal to act upon the plight of the IDPs and this is 
why starvation is occurring in most of the camps,” he said.


“The IDPs are kept under lock and key because they don’t want them to 
communicate with the outside world.”


The current Sema chairman, Satomi Saleh, told the Guardian these allegations 
were “blackened lies and political connivances”. He said Sema, alongside the 
National Emergency Management Agency, has reached 150,000 people in the camps 
in Maiduguri with food assistance, but admitted the crisis has now exceeded 
Nigeria’s ability to respond alone.


A nutritional emergency has been declared in Borno state, where the governor, 
Kashim Shettima, is now working closely with UN agencies. The WFP was invited 
into Nigeria by the government in March to assist the relief effort. They are 
rapidly scaling up their operation and now hope to reach more than 700,000 with 
food aid by December.


“I don’t think anyone was quick enough to understand how serious the situation 
was. We can criticise each other, but the main point is … what are we going to 
do to make sure this situation doesn’t deteriorate,” Lanzer told the Guardian.


“We can make every plan on earth ... [but] if we do not get resources from the 
donor community very little of that will actually happen.”

 