
The United Nations’ failure to respond to allegations that French peacekeepers 
sexually abused children inCentral African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic> amounted to “gross 
institutional failure” and allowed assaults to continue, according to an 
independent panel’s damning report released on Thursday.

The study 
<http://www.un.org/News/dh/infocus/centafricrepub/Independent-Review-Report.pdf>
, commissioned by the UN, found that children as young as nine were encouraged 
to take part in oral sex in exchange for food or money in the middle of a war 
zone. The alleged perpetrators were mainly French soldiers from a unit known as 
the Sangaris force which was operating under authorisation of the security 
council but not under UN command.


UN aid worker suspended for leaking report on child abuse by French troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/un-aid-worker-suspended-leaking-report-child-abuse-french-troops-car>
The inquiry report, entitled Taking Action on Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by 
Peacekeepers, exonerated Anders Kompass, the director of field operations for 
the UN’s office of the high commissioner for human rights – thewhistleblower 
who first disclosed the abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/un-aid-worker-suspended-leaking-report-child-abuse-french-troops-car>
. He had been suspended for disclosing an internal report on abuse to French 
prosecutors.

Initial complaints in early 2014, the report said, were “passed from desk to 
desk, inbox to inbox, across multiple UN offices, with no one willing to take 
responsibility”.

Even when the French government became aware of the allegations and sought the 
cooperation of UN staff, its requests were met with resistance and “became 
bogged down in formalities”.

 UN staff, it is said, became overly concerned with whether the allegations 
had been improperly leaked to French authorities and focused on protocols 
rather than action. Among those said to have looked the other way were the UN 
children’s agency, Unicef, as well as human rights officials.


The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, expressed “profound regret that these 
children were betrayed by the very people sent to protect them”. He said he 
accepted the panel’s broad findings.

The panel, led by the Canadian judge, Marie Deschamps, found that UN staffers 
failed or hesitated to pass the children’s allegations to more senior 
officials, sometimes because of political concerns withFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

“Not only were there unconscionable delays in providing the children with 
basic medical care, psychological support, shelter, food, or protection, but no 
steps were taken to locate the additional child victims ... to determine if 
they also required protection and care,” the report states. There was a failure 
to vet peacekeepers sufficiently to screen out those with a history of past 
abuse.

Four French soldiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/french-soldiers-interrogated-in-child-sex-abuse-inquiry-central-african-republic>
 are being questioned in an investigation into alleged child sexual abuse inCAR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic>. A total of 14 
people are said to be under investigation.

Referring to Kompass, the report recognised his seniority, extensive 
experience with field missions and the fact that human rights officials “had 
not followed up on the allegations despite the need for urgent action”.

Kompass, it adds, had received “assurances that the information would be kept 
confidential and, more importantly, that France would take action to bring the 
perpetrators to justice ... No adverse finding is made against the director on 
this issue.”

In May, an appeal tribunal had ordered the UN to immediately lift the 
suspension of Kompass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/un-suspension-of-sexual-abuse-report-whistleblower-is-unlawful-tribunal-rules>
.

So far, more than a year and a half after UN officials first heard the 
children’s allegations of sexual abuse, no one has been arrested, the panel 
points out.

The report tackles one of the most persistent and embarrassing problems for 
the UN and its member countries. Tens of thousands of peacekeepers serve in 
some of the world’s most volatile areas.

The abuse in CAR’s capital, Bangui, emerged in the middle of a chaotic war. 
The country had been torn apart by violence between Christians and Muslims. 
Thousands of frightened people had sought shelter in squalid camps at the 
airport.


The accusations were not made public until the Guardian’s revelations in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/un-aid-worker-suspended-leaking-report-child-abuse-french-troops-car>
. The French government has not explained why the investigation was kept quiet, 
although the French president, François Hollande, has promised tough punishment 
for any soldier found guilty.

French soldiers interrogated in child sex abuse inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/french-soldiers-interrogated-in-child-sex-abuse-inquiry-central-african-republic>
The alleged abuse took place as French peacekeeping troops were supposed to be 
protecting civilians at a centre for displaced people near the airport in 
Bangui, between December 2013 – when the French military operation began – and 
June 2014.

Similar accusations of abuse have emerged against soldiers from Chad and 
Equatorial Guinea serving in CAR.

In its conclusion the panel said: “The persistence of serious crimes against 
vulnerable local populations perpetrated by some of the very individuals 
charged with protecting them puts at risk the sustainability of peacekeeping 
missions in the longer term.


“The UN must take immediate action when it receives reports of sexual violence 
by peacekeepers to stop the violations and hold the perpetrators accountable 
... Above all, UN staff and agencies must end the bureaucratic cycle in which 
responsibility is fragmented and accountability is passed from one agency to 
another.”

It added: “When peacekeepers exploit the vulnerability of the people they have 
been sent to protect, it is a fundamental betrayal of trust.”
 