
The United Nations has admitted for the first time that its peacekeepers were 
directly responsible for bringing cholera toHaiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti>, bringing to an end a six-year delay 
in which the world body consistently ducked responsibility for importing the 
disease that has potentially killed up to 30,000 people.

In a 16-page report released on Thursday setting out what is being billed as a 
new approach to fighting cholera in Haiti, the UN secretary-general, Ban 
Ki-moon, citesexpert opinion 
<http://www.ijdh.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/The-Cholera-Outbreak-in-Haiti_Where-and-How-it-Begin.pdf>
 about the cause of the deadly outbreak. It found that “the preponderance of 
the evidence does lead to the conclusion that personnel associated with the 
[UN’s peacekeeping] facility were the most likely source”.

UN's own expert calls its actions over Haiti cholera outbreak 'a disgrace'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/25/united-nations-expert-special-rapporteur-calls-actions-over-haiti-cholera-outbreak-2010-a-disgrace>
The comment marks the first time that the UN chief has admitted that the 
devastating disease was brought to the country by the organization’s own 
peacekeepers when they were transferred from Nepal to assist with emergency 
rescue work in the wake of the 2010 Haitian earthquake.

Ban presented his report to a special meeting of the UN general assembly in 
New York on Thursday. He spoke directly to the Haitian people in three 
languages – Creole, French and English. In English, he said: “We apologize to 
the Haitian people. We simply did not do enough with regard to the cholera 
outbreak and spread in Haiti. We are profoundly sorry for our role.”

He added that the UN’s handling of the epidemic “leaves a blemish on the 
reputation of UN peacekeeping and the organization worldwide. For the sake of 
the Haitian people, but also for the sake of the United Nations itself, we have 
a moral responsibility to act and a collective responsibility to deliver.”

Despite the presentation of the speech as a historic “apology”, it remained 
carefully worded in order to meet the tight limitations imposed by the UN’s 
legal position. Since cholera erupted in Haiti in September 2010, the UN has 
insisted that it is legally immune from any claims for compensation from those 
who were sickened or from the families of those who died.

The official death toll now stands at 9,200 people, but studies 
<http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/22/3/14-1970_article> have suggested that if 
under-reporting is taken into account the real figure may be more than three 
times that number.

As Ban and his senior team prepare to bow out from their positions at the end 
of the year, they have stepped up efforts to clean up what has become a fetid 
sore on the reputation of the UN around the world. For the past six years ithad 
doggedly refused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/21/un-haiti-cholera-victims-rejects-compensation>
 to address the issue of how its own peacekeepers brought the deadly cholera 
bacterium with them when they were supposed to be coming to the help of the 
stricken people of Haiti.

A first tacit admission of guilt came in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/un-public-admission-haiti-cholera-outbreak>
. But that in turn was denouncedby the UN’s own human rights special rapporteur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/25/united-nations-expert-special-rapporteur-calls-actions-over-haiti-cholera-outbreak-2010-a-disgrace>
 as a “disgrace” because in his opinion it amounted to an “explicit and 
unqualified denial of anything other than a moral responsibility”.

The special rapporteur, Philip Alston, on Thursday welcomed Ban’s final 
admittance of the UN’s culpability. “The secretary-general has finally acted, 
albeit in his last month in office, after years of stonewalling,” he said in a 
statement to the Guardian.

But Alston went on to slam Ban’s speech to the general assembly as a 
“half-apology”. “The determination not to accept legal responsibility 
entrenches a scandalous legal maneuver designed to sidestep the UN’s legal 
obligations,” he said. “It renders a meaningful apology impossible, as is made 
clear by the half-apology of the secretary-general today: he apologizes that 
the UN has not done more to eradicate cholera, but not for causing the disease 
in the first place,” Alston said.

The key countries impacted by the cholera epidemic, which has spread around 
the Caribbean, showed a similar mix of emotions in response to Ban’s “apology”. 
Haiti’s representative to the UN, Jean Cazeau, said: “The UN has shown it can 
admit making mistakes.”

He added pointedly that Ban’s volte face marked “a radical change of attitude 
away from the morally unjustifiable approach from the UN until now”.

Courtenay Rattray, UN representative for Jamaica which suffered a knock-on 
cholera epidemic that spread from Haiti, said that Ban’s address acknowledged 
“the gross injustice that has been visited on the people of Haiti and the moral 
responsibility harbored by the UN”.

As part of the UN’s new commitment to trying to redress some of the damage 
that its posture of denial has caused in one of the world’s poorest nations, 
the world body is trying to drum up $400m of resources over three years to 
invest in combatting the epidemic and its impact. The money, if raised, would 
be split within a dual track approach – introducing new sanitation and health 
treatment measures to reduce incidence of the disease, and a community-based 
fund to help victims.

However, a lack of finance may inhibit the delivery of the package. The 
announcement conceded that efforts to tackle the outbreak have been undermined 
by insufficient funding.

Brian Concannon, executive director of the Institute for Justice and Democracy 
in Haiti, a partnership of Haitian and US human rights advocates, said the 
initial wording of the announcement marked “a refreshing change from six years 
of ignoring victims’ voices and the UN’s clear legal obligations to them”.

But he noted that the use of the phrase “moral responsibility” was the same 
language that the UN secretary general used during histrip to Haiti in July 2014
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/16/haiti-cholera-epidemic-united-nations-ban-ki-moon>
, and appeared to be calculated to address the concerns of UN lawyers more than 
those of the people of Haiti.

“Haitians are looking for a less qualified apology – for both introducing 
cholera and for the six years of denial of responsibility, which was an insult 
to Haitian dignity,” said Concannon.
 