
The UN security council has unanimously adopted a resolution welcoming efforts 
byRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and Turkey to end the 
nearly six year conflict inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and 
jump-start peace negotiations.

The resolution approved on Saturday afternoon also calls for the “rapid, safe 
and unhindered” delivery of humanitarian aid throughoutSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. It anticipates a meeting of the 
Syrian government and opposition representative in Kazakhstan’s capital, 
Astana, in late January.


The resolution’s final text dropped an endorsement of the Syria ceasefire 
agreement reached on Thursday, as western members of the council sought changes 
to the circulated draft resolution to clarify the UN’s role and the meaning of 
the agreement brokered by Moscow and Ankara.

Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and Russia say the talks in 
Astana aim to supplement the UN’s peace efforts, rather than replace them. They 
want to involve regional players such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Jordan.

Until a ceasefire covers all rebel groups, war will rage on in Syria | Ranj 
Alaaldin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/syria-ceasefire-civil-war-terrorists-assad-putin-peace-deal>
Washington is conspicuously absent from the new process, but Moscow has said 
it hopes to bring Donald Trump’s administration on board once he takes office 
in January.

Syrian rebel groups said they would consider a ceasefire deal brokered by 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and Turkey “null and void” if 
government forces and their allies continued to violate it.

Russia, which supports the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, had urged the UN to give 
its blessing to the fragile ceasefire, the third truce this year seeking to end 
nearly six years of war in Syria.

Why Russia-brokered Syrian ceasefire has chance of succeeding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/russia-calling-shots-middle-east-syria>
Clashes and airstrikes have persisted in some areas since the ceasefire began 
on Friday, but the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group, 
said on Saturday that the truce was largely holding.

“Continued violations by the regime and bombardment and attempts to attack 
areas under the control of the revolutionary factions will make the agreement 
null and void,” a statement signed by a number of rebel groups said. It said 
government forces and their allies had been trying to press advances, 
particularly in an area north-west of Damascus.

The rebels said it appeared the government and opposition had signed two 
different versions of the ceasefire deal, one of which was missing “a number of 
key and essential points that are non-negotiable”, but did not say what those 
were.

There has been confusion over which groups in the opposition are included in 
the ceasefire. Islamic State, which has made enemies on all sides in the 
conflict, is not included.
 