
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> peacekeepers 
stayed in their bases rather than protect civilians during an outbreak of 
fighting in South Sudan in July, a rights group has said.

Chinese UN peacekeepers in the capital Juba “abandoned their posts entirely” 
at one civilian protection site where tens of thousands had sought safety from 
successive bouts of fighting,a report by the US-based Centre for Civilians in 
Conflict (Civic) said. 
<http://civiliansinconflict.org/resources/pub/under-fire-the-july-2016-violence-in-juba-and-un-response>

'We just want to live' – South Sudanese refugees bear scars of brutal civil war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/south-sudanese-refugees-scars-civil-war-uganda>
Although Ethiopian troops appear to have withdrawn from their perimeter 
positions at another base, civilians said the peacekeepers helped evacuate 
civilian casualties and, on at least a few occasions, returned fire when 
fighters targeted the camp. Outside the fortified bases, however, peacekeeper 
presence was “non-existent”.

The failures came amid clashes in Juba between troops from the government’s 
Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA), loyal to the presidentSalva Kiir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/27/south-sudan-president-salva-kiir-signs-peace-deal-despite-serious-reservations>
, and opposition forces of his rivalRiek Machar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/south-sudan-rebel-leader-reik-machar-returns-juba>
. The street battles, in which scores were killed, were the culmination of 
months of tension between the two factions, and resulted in the flight of 
Machar from South Sudan.

During four days of fighting between the rival forces, artillery rounds and 
gunfire hit two UN bases, killing two Chinese peacekeepers.

The Chinese troops subsequently abandoned their posts, leaving weapons and 
ammunition behind, the report said.

More than 300 people died in the fighting, with the majority of the military 
casualties sustained by the rebels. A number of government soldiers from the 
SPLA were also killed.

However, civilians suffered worst, with tens of thousands displaced by the 
violence and widespread human rights abuses by both sides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fun-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F405c8a1b386b9bb88cabc21f57205587e95c391b%2F0_103_4213_2528%2F4213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20peacekeepers%20refused%20to%20help%20as%20aid%20workers%20were%20raped%20in%20South%20Sudan%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fun-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20peacekeepers%20refused%20to%20help%20as%20aid%20workers%20were%20raped%20in%20South%20Sudan%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fun-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F405c8a1b386b9bb88cabc21f57205587e95c391b%2F0_103_4213_2528%2F4213.jpg>
 South Sudan’s president, Salva Kiir, with members of the UN security council 
in Juba last month. Photograph: Justin Lynch/AP 
Civilians died inside and outside the UN bases and hundreds – possibly 
thousands – of women were raped, including many within view of UN bases. Aid 
workers were also targeted.

On the last day of the fighting, about 80 to 100 government soldiers attacked 
a compound in Juba where they raped and gang-raped at least five international 
aid workers and physically or sexually assaulted at least a dozen others, the 
report said.

Enough is enough. It's time to protect aid workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/23/enough-is-enough-its-time-to-protect-aid-workers>
They also killed a South Sudanese journalist, apparently because of his 
ethnicity, it was reported.

One UN base was only several hundred metres from the compound, but despite 
dozens of appeals for help from the besieged aid workers and personal visits 
from at least one who escaped from the compound, internal UN documents show no 
help was sent,the Associated Press reported in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/17/un-under-pressure-over-failure-to-act-during-south-sudan-rampage>
.

The new report, based on about 100 interviews conducted in south Sudan, 
explains that though the UN gave orders for a peacekeepers to intervene, none 
“ever tried to leave their bases” with the Chinese and Ethiopian battalions 
refusing to go.

The UN has more than 12,500 troops from 61 countries deployed in South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, which gained independence from 
Sudan in 2011 after decades of civil war. Under the UN’s terms of engagement, 
the force, which is equipped with armoured vehicles and heavy weapons, has the 
authority to take action to protect civilians and staff from imminent violence.

About 2,500 troops are stationed in two bases in Juba, backed by about 930 
support staff and 350 police officers.

“The UN peacekeeping mission faced a challenging environment during the July 
violence in Juba, but it underperformed in protecting civilians inside and 
outside its bases,” said Federico Borello, the executive director of Civic. “To 
ensure that such problems are not repeated, it is critical that the UN be 
transparent about what went wrong and hold accountable any individuals or units 
that failed to live up to the protection mandate.”

Civic also called for a UN arms embargo on South Sudan, which was plunged into 
conflict in December 2013, when the president, Kiir, accused Machar, his former 
deputy, of plotting a coup.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fun-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15189d075215405f37690b10f4a16dcc715f861%2F0_232_6900_4142%2F6900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20peacekeepers%20refused%20to%20help%20as%20aid%20workers%20were%20raped%20in%20South%20Sudan%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fun-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20peacekeepers%20refused%20to%20help%20as%20aid%20workers%20were%20raped%20in%20South%20Sudan%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fun-peacekeepers-refused-to-help-south-sudan-rebels-raped-aid-workers-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15189d075215405f37690b10f4a16dcc715f861%2F0_232_6900_4142%2F6900.jpg>
 A UN armoured personnel vehicle in a refugee camp in Juba, South Sudan. 
Photograph: Jason Patinkin/AP 
A patchily implemented peace deal in August 2015 led to Machar’s return to the 
capital this year, but the agreement broke down.

The UN’s failings in July were not new, Civic said. The group previously 
investigated an incident in February, when peacekeepers fromEthiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia>, India and Rwanda stood by as 
government soldiers attacked another Protection of Civilians site in the 
northern town of Malakal, killing at least 30 civilians.

Months later, the UN admitted to peacekeeper “inaction, abandonment of post 
and refusal to engage” during the Malakal attack, but failed to hold any 
commanders or troops to account.

Civic said the UN mission in South Sudan received inadequate support from UN 
headquarters and had been “repeatedly blocked, harassed, and, at times, even 
attacked by the parties to the conflict”.

“The UN’s failings began before guns were fired in July; the security council 
has not taken meaningful action to challenge the government of South Sudan as 
it repeatedly obstructed the movements and functioning of Unmiss.

“The mission, for its part, yielded to a situation in which, in effect, it 
needed [local authorities’] authorisation to perform many of its most basic 
protection tasks,” the report said.

UN peacekeeping officials said the report raised a number of important issues, 
noting that an independent investigation into the Juba violence ordered by the 
outgoing UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon was due to present its findings 
shortly.

The UN sites offering civilians refuge were “unsustainable and cannot provide 
a reliable option for the physical security” of tens of thousands of South 
Sudanese, the institution’s peacekeeping department said. “The investment we 
urgently need to make and prioritise in South Sudan is putting the peace 
process back on track,” it said.

Machar, the former vice president, is in exile in Khartoum, from where he has 
called for armed resistance against Kiir’s government, raising the prospect of 
a return to all-out civil war.














 