
Encountering someone who doesn’t take themselves too seriously is always 
refreshing. And in the semi-tropics of Brisbane, the city’s lighthearted and 
laid-back take on all things is as refreshing as a cool breeze blowing in off 
the river.

Brisbane’s burgeoning dining and entertainment scene may be evidence it is 
growing up but the river city is doing so in its own way, cultivating a taste 
for the quirky and left-of-field, delivering memorable experiences with jest, 
not self-importance.


A prime example? In inner-city entertainment district Fortitude Valley, an old 
church is using a shared passion to bring people together. And while you may 
think this is exactly what you’d expect to find in a church, there isn’t a 
Bible in sight behind stained-glass windows. Instead, what you’ll find is 18 
holes of putt-putt golf at Holey Moley Golf Club, one of Brisbane’s newest bars.


Bursting with cheeky puns, the Club lives by the mantra of ‘no ifs, just 
putts’ and puts popular culture through the mini-golf blender. For example, 
punters can slice like Jon Snow at the Game of Thrones-themed Nine-Iron Throne 
hole, or revel in 8-bit glory at the Nintendo-themed It’s On Like Donkey Kong 
hole.


And when visitors finish trying to get a tiny dimpled ball to follow their 
wishes, they can retire to the Caddyshack bar, offering an impressive range of 
themed cocktails—think Tee Quila Mocking Birdies and Long Island Iced Tees—and 
a few more reminders that Brisbane doesn’t take itself too seriously.


Golf is not the only leisure pursuit that attitude extends to either. In 
Brisbane, even the traditionally tranquil practice of yoga has been reinvited. 
At Yo! Yoga studio in nearby New Farm, they are committed to loosening up yoga 
just as much as the practice loosens limbs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6cb93c1792fa57fd19b8a782990cb2a15ea8366%2F0_27_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Up%20north%20and%20up%20for%20a%20joke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Up%20north%20and%20up%20for%20a%20joke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6cb93c1792fa57fd19b8a782990cb2a15ea8366%2F0_27_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Photograph: Tuscany Gray 
Run by self-proclaimed hip hop yogis, every class at Yo! Yoga is run to a 
soundtrack of dirty beats. Where other yoga studios would prompt students to 
focus on the soothing sounds of a bird’s call in an unidentified rainforest, at 
Yo! their flow is timed to the lyrical stylings of the likes of Notorious 
B.I.G, Jay Z, Rihanna and Beyonce, without a chime in sight.


But there are few better places to absorb Brisbane’s irreverent attitude than 
its internationally acclaimed Gallery of Modern Art. Known affectionately as 
GOMA, the gallery makes it obvious it has no time for stuffy art-world 
pretension before one even enters the building, courtesy of an entrance sign 
channelling all the glitz of a Surfers Paradise motel in the 1960s.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75e183d2069d98c387392dbce663b6b21ff0396c%2F0_75_625_375%2F625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Up%20north%20and%20up%20for%20a%20joke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Up%20north%20and%20up%20for%20a%20joke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75e183d2069d98c387392dbce663b6b21ff0396c%2F0_75_625_375%2F625.jpg>
 Check out Brisbane’s art scene at GOMA Photograph: Getty Images 
For the next few months, the gallery is celebrating its 10th birthday, and the 
headline exhibition for the GOMA Turns 10 Summer Festival shows exactly how 
comfortable Brisbane is with celebrating its irreverent streak. Entitled Sugar 
Spin, the exhibition has pulled together more than 250 contemporary artworks 
that demonstrate how art can engage the senses of any and everyone, regardless 
of their age or taste in art.

Pieces include Carsten Höller’s Left/Right Slide, an enormous spiral slide, 
whisking visitors from the top floor to the ground, and Olafur Eliasson’s The 
cubic structural evolution project, in which the public is invited to get stuck 
into an interactive installation of thousands of white Lego pieces, building 
and destroying at will.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72c868fc098afae483816299dd030939b53a7c9d%2F0_124_5095_3057%2F5095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Up%20north%20and%20up%20for%20a%20joke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Up%20north%20and%20up%20for%20a%20joke&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbankwest-discover-a-world-of-real-experiences%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fup-north-and-up-for-a-joke%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72c868fc098afae483816299dd030939b53a7c9d%2F0_124_5095_3057%2F5095.jpg>
 The GOMA is located along the South Bank of Brisbane. Photograph: Allan 
Baxter/Getty Images 
Dedicated to breaking down barriers between art and its observers, other 
immersive exhibitions include a room tuned to pull music from the movements of 
live finches, and an incredible multi-hued landscape of synthetic hair that 
plays with engulfing the viewer.

The festival also includes the likes of an adults-only after-dark art and 
craft workshop, as well as live performances from celebrated Brisbane bands 
such as Regurgitator and The Grates. Best of all? It’s all free, and a fine 
reminder that a good time in Brisbane doesn’t need to come with a large ego or 
a large price tag.

The Bankwest More World MasterCard 
<http://www.bankwest.com.au/personal/credit-cards/compare-credit-cards/more-mastercard-rewards-credit-cards>
 - helping you open a world of real experiences with the people that matter 
most.
 