
SOUTH AFRICA
 Photograph: @garethpon <http://instagram.com/garethpon> 
@garethpon  <http://instagram.com/garethpon>is an urban photographer from 
Johannesburg. His favourite spot to photograph in the city is Maboneng Precint. 
For him, photography is not so much about shooting pretty pictures, but about 
“being as honourable as possible to capture in a single image the story that a 
moment wants to tell”.


 * Other Johannesburg Instagrammers he follows are @levonlock 
<http://instagram.com/levonlock>, @unclescrooch 
<http://instagram.com/unclescrooch>, @roywrench <http://instagram.com/roywrench>
,@timvanrooyen <http://instagram.com/timvanrooyen>, @alexioso 
<http://instagram.com/alexioso> and @ghostwitness 
<http://instagram.com/ghostwitness>.

UNITED STATES
 Photograph: @lec101 <http://instagram.com/lec101> 
The hills, the bay, the fog and the architecture make San Francisco a wonder 
for photographers.@lec101 <http://instagram.com/lec101> tries to look for 
ethereal, magical moments that feel like refreshing escapes from city life, and 
says she is “forever mesmerized by the wild fog that is unique to San 
Francisco”. Her favourite parts of the city are the little forests and the 
Outer Sunset district: “As a child I grew up surrounded by trees and open 
spaces, so I tend to seek out those environments within the city.”


 * Some of her favourite views of the city are seen through the eyes of 
@karlthefog <http://instagram.com/karlthefog>, @travisjensen 
<http://instagram.com/travisjensen>, @michiesharine 
<http://instagram.com/michiesharine>, @junebugkim 
<http://instagram.com/junebugkim>, @thatandrewkim 
<http://instagram.com/thatandrewkim>, @chrisconnolly 
<http://instagram.com/chrisconnolly>, @pketron <http://instagram.com/pketron>, 
@ddent <http://instagram.com/ddent>.  Photograph: @cafeaulei 
<http://instagram.com/cafeaulei> 
Here’s an unusual shot of an obvious San Francisco landmark, the Golden Gate 
bridge, as seen through the lens of @cafeaulei <http://instagram.com/cafeaulei>
. Her favourite place in the city is Treasure Island, above the Bay Bridge, 
with the bridge lights and traffic below and the entire San Francisco skyline 
to the right. “The bridge is so special to me because I was almost born in it”, 
she says, as her mother went into labour while crossing it over. She also loves 
Hawk Hill, above the Golden Gate: “on a gorgeous foggy day you can see the 
entire city engulfed in fuffy white clouds!”


 *  Other San Francisco Instagrammers she follows are @pketron 
<http://instagram.com/pketron>, @moneal <http://instagram.com/moneal>, @artchang
 <http://instagram.com/artchang> and @throughthetinylens 
<http://instagram.com/throughthetinylens>.  Photograph: @robinthesky 
<http://instagram.com/robinthesky#> 
@robinthesky <http://instagram.com/robinthesky> is a photographer and designer 
from the tri-state area that surrounds the New York metropolitan area, so he 
has a mix of different locations to work from: he lives on the New Jersey 
shoreline, and New York isn’t far from him. Therefore, he can “capture 
everything from the beach to the pine barren woods that fill New Jersey to the 
majestic skyscrapers of New York”. But his favorite spot to photograph is 
“definitely at the beach, and a few spots around my town’s local inlet”, he 
says. His aim is to “capture anything that I can turn into something that will 
make you think, or anything that will stimulate your senses: I capture light 
and the magical moments that this earth has to share with us”.

 * The list of other tri-state Instagrammers he would recommend “could go on 
forever”, he admits, but he did give it a try:@black_soap 
<http://instagram.com/black_soap>, @rachesq <http://instagram.com/rachesq>, 
@vananooch <http://instagram.com/vananooch>, @lastsuspect 
<http://instagram.com/lastsuspect>, @josetutiven 
<http://instagram.com/josetutiven>, @fliickman <http://instagram.com/fliickman>,
@jnsilva <http://instagram.com/jnsilva>, @k_mustafa 
<http://instagram.com/k_mustafa> and @monaris_ <http://instagram.com/monaris_>. 

You recommended us: @nyonair <http://instagram.com/nyonair#>

MEXICO
 Photograph: @lavicvic  <http://instagram.com/lavicvic> 
@lavicvic <http://instagram.com/lavicvic> is an architect who captures moments 
from the daily life of Mexico City. She loves this giant metropolis because 
“it’s the kind of city that becomes what you want whenever you want. You can 
find all kinds of magical moments in it.” She likes her photos to be very clean 
and to play with colour compositions, textures and elements.


 *  Her favourite Instagrammers in Mexico are @elinsaciavle 
<http://instagram.com/elinsaciavle>, @mikyalanis 
<http://instagram.com/mikyalanis>, @mylastnameistoolong 
<http://instagram.com/mylastnameistoolong>, @elgatonegro_  
<http://instagram.com/elgatonegro_>and @pppaam <http://instagram.com/pppaam>.  
Photograph:@elgatonegro_ <http://instagram.com/elgatonegro_#> 
@elgatonegro_ <http://instagram.com/elgatonegro_> is a Mexican lawyer who has 
taken to Instagram to “capture a lighter and simple life”. On this photo, 
teenagers gather around the fountains of the Monument to the Revolution in 
Mexico City. His favourite spot in the city is Espacio Escultórico UNAM, part 
of an architectural ensemble in the country’s biggest university.

 * He recommends following @mente_de_rufus 
<http://instagram.com/mente_de_rufus>, @elinsaciavle 
<http://instagram.com/elinsaciavle>, @lanzgg <http://instagram.com/lanzgg>, 
@el_triplede <http://instagram.com/el_triplede> and @lavicvic 
<http://instagram.com/lavicvic>. 
CANADA
 Photograph: @othellonine <http://instagram.com/othellonine> 
You would never guess at first glance that most of the photos from @othellonine
 <http://instagram.com/othellonine>’s feed are actually from a city. He 
benefits from the green spaces in Vancouver, where he recently captured the fog 
in Central Park. His favourite spot in the city is Stanley Park: “the seawall, 
the views, the tall trees, the beaches...”


 * Other Vancouver Instagrammers that he follows are @bittadesign 
<http://instagram.com/bittadesign>, @dudelum <http://instagram.com/dudelum>, 
@secretcities <http://instagram.com/secretcities> and @maurice 
<http://instagram.com/maurice>, among others.  Photograph: @maurice 
<http://instagram.com/maurice> 
Here’s a very different Vancouver photo, taken from Stanley Park by @maurice 
<http://instagram.com/maurice>. His favourite place to photograph from is also 
this beautiful park: “It is mere minutes from the downtown core, but offers a 
variety of features including quiet forest trails, public beaches, gardens and 
city views by day and night. In many ways, it’s a photographer’s dream.”


 * Two of his favourite Instagrammers are @secretcities 
<http://instagram.com/secretcities> and the aforementioned @othellonine 
<http://instagram.com/othellonine>.  Photograph: @akaalec 
<http://instagram.com/akaalec> 
@akaalec <http://instagram.com/akaalec> is an Instagrammer from Vancouver 
whose inspiration for black and white photography started when he saw Robert 
Doisneau’sThe Kiss 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Doisneau#Le_baiser_de_l.27h.C3.B4tel_de_ville_.28The_Kiss.29>
. “I fell in love with the movement of people doing everyday things”, he 
recalls. For architectural shots, he tries to “find an angle that makes the 
building pop”. His favourite spot in the city is Gastown, one of the oldest 
parts of the city and a tourist hub, right on the waterfront. “It allows me to 
capture both architecture and people”


 * Other snappers that he recommends from the city are @iamsengs 
<http://instagram.com/iamsengs> and @missyjena <http://instagram.com/missyjena>.
You recommended us: @flolum <http://instagram.com/flolum#>, @racheycakes 
 <http://instagram.com/racheycakes#>

BRAZIL
 Photograph: @paulodelvalle <http://instagram.com/paulodelvalle> 
@paulodelvalle  <http://instagram.com/paulodelvalle>is a designer who tries to 
“capture all the beauty of Rio de Janeiro, showing beautiful spots and also the 
‘carioca’ lifestyle”. His favourite place in Rio is the Mirante Dona Marta, 
from where you can see breathtaking views: “On the left, you can see the 
Sugarloaf (pictured), and on the right the Christ the Redeemer.”


 * Two other Rio Instagrammers whose work he admires are @pripper 
<http://instagram.com/pripper> and @minduim <http://instagram.com/minduim>.  
Photograph:@ruduit <http://instagram.com/ruduit#> 



@ruduit <http://instagram.com/ruduit> lives in Porto Alegre and likes to 
photograph colours, art and nature. “I like the naturalness and simplicity of 
things”, he says. His feed has been all about travel lately, but you’ll also 
find snaps of this Brazilian city. A favourite place of his in the city is the 
central district, which is full of “old buildings and details”. He also enjoys 
moving around and photographing poorer villages, which he likes for their 
colours and for “the way they improvise structures”.

 * He recommends following @michelikaroly <http://instagram.com/michelikaroly> 
and@gil_vg <http://instagram.com/gil_vg> in his same town. 
You recommended us: @kashkheirkhah <http://instagram.com/kashkheirkhah#>, 
@jdelboux <http://instagram.com/jdelboux#>

NETHERLANDS
 Photograph: @p_d_y <http://instagram.com/pdy/> 
Amsterdam is full of beautiful urban scenes, and @p_d_y 
<http://instagram.com/pdy/> is a filmmaker capturing its daily life. His 
favourite spot in the city is the Jordaan district, because “it’s full of the 
things that make it an amazing city for a photographer: canals, bridges, small 
streets and historical architecture. It’s what the locals like to call the 
‘real’ Amsterdam.”


 * Other Amsterdam Instagrammers he follows include @sethcarnill 
<http://instagram.com/sethcarnill>, @regalphis <http://instagram.com/regalphis>,
@panyrek <http://instagram.com/panyrek>, @maevdkrogt 
<http://instagram.com/maevdkrogt> and @mariafranciska 
<http://instagram.com/mariafranciska>.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F5%2F1391616796287%2F255d0a63-c1da-4c9f-aab6-8106c08be9b2-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20Instagram%20photographers%20you%20should%20follow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20Instagram%20photographers%20you%20should%20follow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F5%2F1391616796287%2F255d0a63-c1da-4c9f-aab6-8106c08be9b2-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Photograph:@macenzo  <http://instagram.com/macenzo> 
@macenzo <http://instagram.com/macenzo> describes himself with a simple 
sentence: “in love with the lines of the city”, and a look at his feed quickly 
confirms this. His favourite place in Amsterdam is high up in Cafe Blue: “They 
have the most amazing middle center skyline view of Amsterdam. I love to sit 
there enjoying a coffee and gaze over the city.”

 * Other Amsterdam Instagrammers that he recommends are @sfennema 
<http://instagram.com/sfennema> and @ruu_da <http://instagram.com/ruu_da>.  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F5%2F1391615551700%2Fb694450f-036e-4008-bb46-99606a21b81a-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20Instagram%20photographers%20you%20should%20follow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20Instagram%20photographers%20you%20should%20follow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F5%2F1391615551700%2Fb694450f-036e-4008-bb46-99606a21b81a-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Photograph:@regalphis <http://instagram.com/regalphis> 
@regalphis <http://instagram.com/regalphis> tries to capture “the intangible 
beauty and uniqueness of Amsterdam and its vicinity”. His favourite spot in the 
city is the SkyLounge, one of the highest public places in the city. “The 
rooftop terrace is awesome and has some of the best views around,” he says.

 * His favourite Instagrammers from Amsterdam are @mariafranciska 
<http://instagram.com/mariafranciska>, @sanneb10 <http://instagram.com/sanneb10>
 and@sethcarnill <http://instagram.com/sethcarnill>.  Photograph: @sfennema 
<http://instagram.com/sfennema#> 
@sfennema <http://instagram.com/sfennema> thinks of Instagram as “a channel 
for sharing the way I see my surroundings and as a way to meet people who think 
alike.” He doesn’t have a favourite spot, but he says what he likes is “to 
stroll around and find new places along the beautiful Canal Ring. There’s 
always something new to see!”


 * Other Amsterdam Instagrammers he follows are @onahazymorning 
<http://instagram.com/onahazymorning>, @panyrek <http://instagram.com/panyrek>, 
@p_d_y <http://instagram.com/p_d_y>, @regalphis <http://instagram.com/regalphis>
 and@mariafranciska <http://instagram.com/mariafranciska>. 
You recommended us: @croyable <http://instagram.com/croyable>


UNITED KINGDOM
 Photograph: @chaiwalla <http://instagram.com/chaiwalla> 
@chaiwalla <http://instagram.com/chaiwalla> is a London-based Instagrammer, 
although lately his feed has also featured other European cities like Lisbon or 
Dublin. He likes to document his surroundings, whether nature or urban 
architecture, and enjoys including people in the shots -”to keep the photo 
unique”- and capturing unusual spots such as the Horniman Museum and Gardens 
(pictured), in the English capital. His favourite spot in London is the 
Monument, because “the 360º views are spectacular and, on a good day, you can 
see for miles”. Also, since it’s not enclosed, he explains, “there is no window 
reflection or glare to get in the way of the photograph”.


 * Other London Instagrammers that he follows are @tschang 
<http://instagram.com/tschang>, @dearleila <http://instagram.com/dearleila>, 
@missunderground <http://instagram.com/missunderground>, @mattpike 
<http://instagram.com/mattpike>, @hellopoe <http://instagram.com/hellopoe>, 
@zobolondon <http://instagram.com/zobolondon>, @ecolephoto 
<http://instagram.com/ecolephoto>, @mrwhisper <http://instagram.com/mrwhisper>, 
@danrubin <http://instagram.com/danrubin> and @mattscutt 
<http://instagram.com/mattscutt#>. 
You recommended us: @davidgriffen <http://instagram.com/davidgriffen>, 
@darrenseamark <http://instagram.com/darrenseamark>, @ash 
<http://instagram.com/ash>, @nialloleary <http://instagram.com/nialloleary>, 
@mikekus, @ <http://instagram.com/mikekus#>theboygeniuz 
<http://instagram.com/theboygeniuz#>, @charlala <http://instagram.com/charlala#>
,@rich__ <http://instagram.com/rich__#>, @knockoclock 
<http://instagram.com/knockoclock#>, @imaginationdetonation 
<http://instagram.com/imaginationdetonation#>, @adamsheath 
<http://instagram.com/adamsheath#>, @sparrowflu 
<http://instagram.com/sparrowflu#>, @the_hat_ <http://instagram.com/the_hat_>, 
@hanootka <http://instagram.com/hanootka#> and @theycallme_GT 
<http://instagram.com/theycallme_GT>.

SPAIN

 Photograph: @barrut <http://instagram.com/barrut> 
In this photo, @barrut <http://instagram.com/barrut> captured Plaça de Sant 
Felip Neri, a charming little square in Barcelona’s Gothic Quarter. He explains 
that he usually doesn’t look to capture anything in particular with the 
pictures; instead, “they capture me for different reasons”. He’s not hooked to 
his phone taking photos of every corner - he prefers to wait for a scene to 
catch his attention. He likes taking photos around the city’s coastline, and 
especially in the Fòrum area, his favourite spot.


 * Other Instagrammers from Barcelona that he particularly recommends are 
@sanfigjo <http://instagram.com/sanfigjo> and @joelopez 
<http://instagram.com/joelopez>.  Photograph: @lidpop 
<http://instagram.com/lidpop> 
Cities are full of hidden gems, and the hustle and bustle of daily life can 
make it difficult to pay attention to them.@lidpop <http://instagram.com/lidpop>
 is a graphic designer who loves “Instagram’s power to capture details and 
moments”. He posts shots of unusual details from Barcelona and other Catalan 
cities, such as Girona. His favourite Barcelona locations are its streets - he 
loves to wander around and let the city surprise him visually. He also enjoys 
sharing “little personal obsessions” with other Instagrammers such as
#calendaribalconitis <http://statigr.am/tag/calendaribalconitis> (balconies), 
#persianisme <http://statigr.am/tag/persianisme>(shutters) or #labarcelonalletja
 <http://statigr.am/tag/labarcelonalletja> (ugly Barcelona). 


 * Some Barcelona Instagrammers he follows are @martabcn100 
<http://instagram.com/martabcn100>, @martimanya 
<http://instagram.com/martimanya>, @lalauri <http://instagram.com/lalauri>, 
@philmusical <http://instagram.com/philmusical>, @arasanz 
<http://instagram.com/arasanz>, @inistis <http://instagram.com/inistis>, 
@gina_compte <http://instagram.com/gina_compte>, @oriolvm 
<http://instagram.com/oriolvm> and @gdel_arco <http://instagram.com/gdel_arco>. 
 Photograph:@nicanorgarcia <http://instagram.com/nicanorgarcia#> 
@nicanorgarcia <http://instagram.com/nicanorgarcia> is an architect and 
photographer from Barcelona. He uses his photos to “nose around and learn from 
what I look at, which can be architecture, the city or its people.” The title 
of this snap is Windows orchestra. He loves lots of places in the city and he 
would photograph most of them, because in all of them “an infinity of pictures 
are awaiting to be taken”. But if he had to choose an area he would pick Ciutat 
Vella, the old quarter, “for its variety, intensity and warmth”.


 * Other Instagrammers from Barcelona that he would really recommend are 
@lullabycafe <http://instagram.com/lullabycafe> and @hectormilla 
<http://instagram.com/hectormilla>. 

You recommended us: @holayessica <http://instagram.com/holayessica>

PORTUGAL

 Photograph: @ritacordeiro <http://instagram.com/ritacordeiro#> 
@ritacordeiro <http://instagram.com/ritacordeiro> is a graphic designer and 
crochet maker. She likes “remembering things, places and people in her daily 
life and taking pictures is the perfect way of perpetuating that”. She lives in 
a small portuguese city called Leiria, 130km north from Lisbon. Her favourite 
spot in Leiria is the Castle, located at the top of a hill. “Its view can be 
pretty magical”, she says. You can see it in her feed, as well as a lot of 
Lisbon shots like this one. In the Portuguese capital, she used to live in the 
centre so some of her favourite spots are Avenida da Liberdade, Baixa and 
Chiado. She also loves the riverside area, “where you can jog, ride a bike or 
simply walk.”


 * Other Portuguese Instagrammers that she recommends are: in Leiria, 
@carlaoliveirasousa <http://instagram.com/carlaoliveirasousa>, @atgraces 
<http://instagram.com/atgraces> and @sandrinevieira 
<http://instagram.com/sandrinevieira>. And in Lisbon, @ruicartaxorod 
<http://instagram.com/ruicartaxorod> and @mileu <http://instagram.com/mileu>. 

DENMARK
 Photograph: @sondergaard <http://instagram.com/sondergaard> 
@sondergaard <http://instagram.com/sondergaard>’s feed is an eclectic account 
of Copenhagen’s life and vibe, with street photos, architecture shots and the 
odd sunset. “I love my city and I love catching the different moods, especially 
with the changing seasons”, he says. His favourite spot is Kastellet, 
especially this time of year. “It’s the almost 400-year-old citadel which 
Copenhageners now mainly use for walking and running trips.” A lot of his 
photos tagged with#sondergaard_nakedtrees 
<http://statigr.am/tag/sondergaard_nakedtrees> were shot there. 


 * He recommends following @mathias_milton 
<http://instagram.com/mathias_milton>, @bobbyanwar 
<http://instagram.com/bobbyanwar>, @visitcopenhagen 
<http://instagram.com/visitcopenhagen>, @gittestark 
<http://instagram.com/gittestark> and @littlemycph 
<http://instagram.com/littlemycph>.  Photograph: @justhanni 
<http://instagram.com/justhanni> 
@justhanni  <http://instagram.com/justhanni>is another urban photographer 
based in Copenhagen. He tries to look for strong inviting subjects that catch 
the viewer’s attention: “often these are roads, railway tracks, silhouettes, 
patterns or symmetry”. He also enjoys taking shots of puddles and reflections 
every now and then. He shoots a lot in Ørestad, a developing new urban 
district. “Some of the most interesting architecture, waterways and 
infrastructure are found here,” he says. “It’s a very modern part of 
Copenhagen, but at the same time close to nature and open spaces allowing for 
some good light.”


 * Some of his favourite fellow Copenhagen Instagrammers are @bobbyanwar 
<http://instagram.com/bobbyanwar>, @cirkeline <http://instagram.com/cirkeline>, 
@sondergaard <http://instagram.com/sondergaard>, @nikolajthaning 
<http://instagram.com/nikolajthaning>, @s1000 <http://instagram.com/s1000>, 
@geographable <http://instagram.com/geographable>, @gittestark 
<http://instagram.com/gittestark>, @jesperbulow 
<http://instagram.com/jesperbulow>, @jlvm33 <http://instagram.com/jlvm33>, 
@82seba <http://instagram.com/82seba> and @kennethnguyen 
<http://instagram.com/kennethnguyen>. 
FRANCE

 Photograph: @juanjerez <http://instagram.com/juanjerez#> 
Paris is the protagonist in @juanjerez <http://instagram.com/juanjerez>’s 
black and white pictures. His favourite place in the city is the distance he 
walks every day between his house and boulevard Voltaire. The French capital is 
“an astonishing theatre”, according to this architect and photographer. 
“Streets, squares and monuments compose its relentless scenography where the 
most beautiful drama takes place. I try to capture this drama”, he says.


 * He particularly likes the work of @vutheara <http://instagram.com/vutheara> 
and@misscoolpics <http://instagram.com/misscoolpics>.  Photograph: @wheninparis 
<http://instagram.com/wheninparis#> 
@wheninparis <http://instagram.com/wheninparis> is an American living in 
Paris, with the motto ‘when in Paris, do as the Parisians do’. She captures 
daily life against the classic backdrop of the belle ville, with its beautiful 
architecture and monuments, as well as its more typical street scenes. 
Constantly looking to create stories in her photography, her shots often 
include people and “moments”, and she uses her outsider’s perspective to show 
off Paris in its best light. “It’s hard to take a bad photo of this gorgeous 
city”, she says. For views of the city, Shannon’s favorite spot is the top of 
the Arc de Triomphe, even if you have to climb its 284 steps to get to the top! 
But for the most charming photo opportunities per square kilometre, she says 
the spot to be Montmartre (pictured): “there is always a painter in his flat 
cap, the Sacré Cœur at the end of an alley, or a charming café just around the 
corner.”


 * Other Paris Instagrammers she follows include: @jeffonline 
<http://instagram.com/jeffonline>, @nathparis <http://instagram.com/nathparis>, 
@vutheara <http://instagram.com/vutheara>, @misscoolpics 
<http://instagram.com/misscoolpics> and @leoleoparis 
<http://instagram.com/leoleoparis>.  Photograph: @lily__rose 
<http://instagram.com/lily__rose#> 

@lily__rose <http://instagram.com/lily__rose> defines herself as a wanderer 
and a dreamer (and an animal lover) who enjoys exploring, wherever she is, and 
then sharing every moment of it. She spends most of her time in Paris, which 
features frequently on her feed. She loves Paris rooftops and the Jardin des 
Tuileries, because it’s a place which mixes nature and amazing French 
architecture.


 *  Other Instagrammers from the city that she would recommend are @wheninparis
 <http://instagram.com/wheninparis>, @antone_lep 
<http://instagram.com/antone_lep> and @_jibraeel_ 
<http://instagram.com/_jibraeel_>.  Photograph: @jeffonline 
<http://instagram.com/jeffonline#> 
@jeffonline <http://instagram.com/jeffonline> loves cityscapes, historic 
places, streets, playing with lines or reflections and photographing 
perspectives – all of which abound in #Paris, his city. His favourite spots are 
a handful of Paris landmarks: the area around the Eiffel Tower, Montmartre with 
the Sacré Coeur, the Louvre (pictured) or the Pont des arts.


 * He would recommend other Instagrammers in Paris such as @nathill 
<http://instagram.com/nathill>, @seb_gordon <http://instagram.com/seb_gordon>, 
@vutheara <http://instagram.com/vutheara> and @loxilaux 
<http://instagram.com/loxilaux>. 

You recommended us: @barbarablay <http://instagram.com/nathparis>, @nathparis 
<http://instagram.com/nathparis>, @seb_gordon <http://instagram.com/seb_gordon>,
@leoleoparis <http://instagram.com/kerhouarn>, @oliviathebaut 
<http://instagram.com/kerhouarn> and @kerhouarn <http://instagram.com/kerhouarn>
.

CZECH REPUBLIC
 Photograph: @prazakj <http://instagram.com/prazakj> 
@prazakj <http://instagram.com/prazakj> posts pictures of Prague and its 
surroundings and enjoys taking shots of architecture, like this one of the Main 
Point Karlin building. One of his favourite spots is Lake ‪Hostivař‬, which he 
discovered recently and, he says, fascinates him.


 * Some of his favourite Instagrammers in the Chech Republic are @tomasdvorak 
<http://instagram.com/tomasdvorak>, @j1rk4 <http://instagram.com/j1rk4>, @jackob
 <http://instagram.com/jackob>, @matescho <http://instagram.com/matescho>, 
@sirondrej <http://instagram.com/sirondrej>, @majkl_k 
<http://instagram.com/majkl_k>, @domini_que <http://instagram.com/domini_que>, 
@hynecheck <http://instagram.com/hynecheck> and @i_stau 
<http://instagram.com/i_stau#>. 
RUSSIA

 Photograph: @palchenkov <http://instagram.com/palchenkov> 
@palchenkov <http://instagram.com/palchenkov> is a Moscow-based Instagrammer 
who likes to capture “buildings and architecture, people and situations, light 
and shadows, geometry and minimalistic compositions” in the Russian capital and 
during his travels. His favourite place in Moscow is Gorky Park, the most 
famous recreation park in the city: “there, i can find everything that i want 
about street photography”, he says.


 *  He recommends @russian_moscow <http://instagram.com/russian_moscow> and 
@back2thailand <http://instagram.com/back2thailand>, both capturing Moscow and 
other cities around the world.  Photograph: @back2thailand 
<http://instagram.com/back2thailand#> 
Andrey, also known as @back2thailand <http://instagram.com/back2thailand>, is 
a photographer from #Moscow. His favourite spot in the city is a field on the 
edge of Moscow, where he watches the sun go down every day: ¨I can see the sun 
set against urban skyscrapers and a huge industrial plant. This, I can watch 
endlessly; I feel the breath of the metropolis”.


 * Other Instagrammers that he recommends from the Russian capital are @phatmn 
<http://instagram.com/phatmn> and @sun698 <http://instagram.com/sun698>. 
You recommended us: @kirbase <http://instagram.com/kirbase#>, @cat_morphine 
<http://instagram.com/cat_morphine#>, @bones_of_man 
<http://instagram.com/bones_of_man#> and @swinopass 
<http://instagram.com/swinopass#>.

GERMANY

 Photograph: @davidgnad <http://instagram.com/davidgnad#> 
@davidgnad <http://instagram.com/davidgnad> is a motion designer “who found a 
new passion, mobile photography”, and uses it to capture Berlin’s diversity. 
One of his favourite spots is called Schwedter Steg (pictured), located on the 
former border between east and west Berlin. It looks just like another nice 
place for Instagrammers to take a great bridge shot, but it’s actually “like an 
open book”, he says. “The scars are still visible. People walk past, runners 
cross the bridge, trains from all directions loaded with commuters pass by… 
There are trees down the bridge but also areas of plain grass, because the soil 
was poisoned to avoid trees growing in order to see refugees more easily. Just 
so many things to spot”, he explains.


 * Other Berlin Instagrammers he recommends are @berlinstagram 
<http://instagram.com/berlinstagram>, @uwa2000 <http://instagram.com/uwa2000>, 
@dosavocados <http://instagram.com/dosavocados>, @livinberlin 
<http://instagram.com/livinberlin> and @justiciere 
<http://instagram.com/justiciere>. 

CHINA
 Photograph: @siumomomo <http://instagram.com/siumomomo#> 
Even though Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated cities in the world,
@siumomomo <http://instagram.com/siumomomo>’s feed is full of urban oases, 
peaceful spots and human interactions. This one was taken in a rooftop in Mong 
Kok (the busiest area in Hong Kong). Her favourite place in the city is Yau Ma 
Tei, a small district “with mixed culture and social classes: from the poor to 
the middle classes to the highly educated, they all live next door to each 
other”, she says. This area also has “many local, very Hong Kong-style food 
stalls and street art”.


 * She recommends following @maubolung <http://instagram.com/maubolung>, the 
frontman of a Hong Kong band, and also@pan_tang <http://instagram.com/pan_tang>,
@deonwong <http://instagram.com/deonwong>, @momomomoc 
<http://instagram.com/momomomoc>. 
You recommended us: @slcinhk <http://instagram.com/slcinhk>, @alex_ogle 
<http://instagram.com/alex_ogle>, @edwardkb <http://instagram.com/edwardkb#>, 
@raskalov <http://instagram.com/raskalov#> and @jantong 
<http://instagram.com/jantong#>. 


INDIA
 <http://instagram.com/alex_ogle>
 Photograph: @mumbaipaused <http://instagram.com/mumbaipaused#> 
@mumbaipaused <http://instagram.com/mumbaipaused> is a feed full of human 
stories and captivating images from the Indian metropolis. “Mumbai is a melting 
pot of different cultures and it’s always on the move. I try to make sense of 
it through still images”, says Gopal, the person behind the project. It’s tough 
for him to pinpoint a favourite place, as his top spot keeps changing. “Right 
now it’s the playgrounds in the city. Mumbai has too few of them, so children 
and adults convert streets, alleys and other places into playgrounds”, he 
explains.


 * Other Instagrammers he likes from the city are @riteshuttamchandani 
<http://instagram.com/riteshuttamchandani>, @kometjuice 
<http://instagram.com/kometjuice> and @hashimbadani 
<http://instagram.com/hashimbadani>. 

You recommended us: @tanweeer <http://instagram.com/tanweeer#>

AUSTRALIA
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F5%2F1391617923143%2Ffb0f3ba7-4996-4177-af19-7ae72dc16123-1020x1019.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Urban%20Instagram%20photographers%20you%20should%20follow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Urban%20Instagram%20photographers%20you%20should%20follow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F06%2Furban-instagram-photographers-you-should-follow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F5%2F1391617923143%2Ffb0f3ba7-4996-4177-af19-7ae72dc16123-1020x1019.jpeg>
 Photograph:@cleocoppinger  <http://instagram.com/cleocoppinger> 
@cleocoppinger <http://instagram.com/cleocoppinger> tries to capture Melbourne 
as she sees it through her eyes: “A beautiful city filled with dreamers, coffee 
shops, incredible food, and all my favourite people. Many of those around me 
are constantly saying ‘Melbourne is so boring’, but I’ve always thought it was 
something very special, so I try to show that through my photos.” Her feed is a 
mix of daily life snaps, recipes and views of the city. Her favourite spot is 
Captains of Industry, a mix of barbershop, shoe maker and cafe: “It looks over 
the constantly buzzing Elizabeth street, making it perfect for people watching.”

 * Her favourite Melbourne Instagrammers are @streetsmith 
<http://instagram.com/streetsmith>, @agiasidi <http://instagram.com/agiasidi> 
and@stephanie_somebody <http://instagram.com/stephanie_somebody>.  Photograph: 
@stephanie_somebody <http://instagram.com/stephanie_somebody#> 
@stephanie_somebody <http://instagram.com/stephanie_somebody> lives in 
Melbourne and tries to capture “images that make the viewer stop for a moment 
to take it in”. Her favourite spot in the city is hard to choose. She tells us 
that “for coffee it’s Market Lane, for shopping it’s Mr Kitly, and Hellenic 
Republic to get lunch boxes for food”.


 * Other Instagrammers from Melbourne she thinks are doing amazing things are 
@popandscott <http://instagram.com/popandscott>, @thebrainerystore 
<http://instagram.com/thebrainerystore>, @afloralfrenzy 
<http://instagram.com/afloralfrenzy>, @taratakesphotos 
<http://instagram.com/taratakesphotos> and @beciorpin 
<http://instagram.com/beciorpin>.  Photograph: @mark_pc 
<http://instagram.com/mark_pc#> 
@mark_pc <http://instagram.com/mark_pc> lives in Sydney and primarily posts 
“minimalist digital art in little square boxes”. He tries to “capture 
uncluttered scenes with a solitary person or a couple of people connecting with 
their surroundings”, he says. The steps at Maroubra beach are his favourite 
place: “Sydney is lined with beaches from the north to the south, and from the 
city you’re only 15 minutes away from many of them”. This is a photo of the 
entrance to the ‘Museum of Contemporary Art Australia’, which is “a beautiful 
building and a must-visit for anyone coming to Sydney.”


 * His favourite Sydney Instagrammers are @twistdee 
<http://instagram.com/twistdee>, @_m0e <http://instagram.com/_m0e>, 
@william_patino <http://instagram.com/william_patino>, @bobby_j 
<http://instagram.com/bobby_j> and @dawa_lhamo <http://instagram.com/dawa_lhamo>
. 
You recommended us: @John_OCal <http://instagram.com/John_OCal#> and 
@twoguineapigs <http://instagram.com/twoguineapigs#>.

This is, of course, a small imperfect sample. We have included your 
recommendations from the comment thread, but do keep telling us what other 
urban Instagrammers from particular cities you recommend through our
@GuardianCities <http://instagram.com/guardiancities#> Instagram account.

 