
Hundreds of millions of dollars in US aid that helps prevent child and 
maternal deaths and reduces unintended pregnancies worldwide could be at risk 
under aDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
administration, campaigners and thinktanks have warned.


Citing “worrisome” indicators, such as Trump’s U-turn against abortion, his 
pledge to appoint pro-life justices to the Supreme Court and his choice ofMike 
Pence, an anti-abortion activist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/15/mike-pence-policies-womens-rights-birth-control-abortion>
, as vice-presidential running mate, they fear a reversal in aid commitments 
that have seen gains in reproductive health and gender equality.

Suzanne Ehlers, president and CEO of PAI, a global advocacy group for 
reproductive health, said: “What we know from Trump as a candidate is that 
international development is not high on his agenda.”

Contraception and family planning around the world – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/mar/08/contraception-and-family-planning-around-the-world-interactive>
As the president-elect looks inwards, Ehlers said she is most fearful of the 
loss of the US’s position as the world’s most generous bilateral donor 
supporting reproductive health rights – withcurrent funding at $600m 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/article/2016/05/just-numbers-impact-us-international-family-planning-assistance>
 (£474m).

“We have a long history of funding, even before President Reagan,” said 
Ehlers. “Reagan wanted to bring it down to zero. In Trump, we have the kind of 
president who wouldn’t be afraid of that kind of budget request and Republicans 
in Congress who would support him in that. Every year Congress has to approve 
these levels, and that funding can be cut drastically.

“This is not just about opposition to birth control, but about young girls 
being forced into marriage, about maternal deaths and about child health.”

The $600m includes money to fight against child marriage and gender-based 
violence. It is unlikely that it would be lost immediately, but over a period 
of months.

Trump’s views on US foreign aid have been relatively vague; for instance, he 
said in June 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/media/donald-j-trump-presidential-announcement> 
that the US should “stop sending aid to countries that hate us and use that 
money to rebuild our tunnels, roads, bridges and schools”. It is unclear 
whether, with support in Congress to maintain it, he would make cuts in the 
foreign aid budget overall. However, where the money would go and what it would 
fund could shift, to support US trade or the anti-abortion lobby.

If, as campaigners fear, Trump’s vice-president is given leeway on this issue, 
he could “go for broke”, putting in place stringent anti-reproductive health 
measures domestically and abroad.

Rise in use of contraception offers hope for containing global population
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/08/rise-use-contraception-global-population-growth-family-planning>
 Pence, who describes himself as an evangelical Catholic, made his name as one 
of the most anti-abortion members of Congress, and, as Indiana governor,signed 
every anti-abortion bill on his desk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/mike-pence-republicans-defund-planned-parenthood-abortion>
, in addition to ananti-LGBT bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/mike-pence-led-anti-lgbt-backlash-trump>
 his critics said would allow widescale discrimination. He has arguedagainst 
condoms and for abstinence 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-elections/mike-pence-condoms-very-poor-protection-stds-policies-2002-a7149106.html>
 as the only way to stay safe from premature pregnancy and STDs.

 Serra Sippel, President of the Centre for Health and Gender Equality 
(Change), which aims to ensure US international policies promote reproductive 
and sexual health globally, is deeply worried a potential policy shift under 
the Trump-Pence administration that could have implications far beyond 
reproductive heath.

“We know that, while Mr Trump has not so much of a track record on this, his 
vice-president,Mike Pence <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, is 
on record as being against abortion, of supporting abstinence and of putting 
ideology over evidence and science and that’s very scary,” said Sippel.

“We can expect to see US aid [funds] supporting religious groups that promote 
abstinence and that have an anti-LGBT agenda. That’s frightening, in the 
context of places like Uganda, whichpassed an anti-LGBT law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/20/uganda-anti-gay-law-life-imprisonment>
. It’s very dangerous for the US to support groups that fuel the fire of 
anti-LGBT rights – there are lives at risk in those countries.

“We saw this happen during the Bush administration. Because of Mr Pence’s 
record, we are all worried.”

Sippel also expects what is known as the “global gag rule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/23/barack-obama-foreign-abortion-aid>
”, a US health policy that has a chilling effect on reproductive rights, to be 
re-invoked and to see a withdrawal of US funding – some $32m – from the United 
Nations Population Fund,as it did under Bush 
<http://pai.org/30-years-of-the-global-gag-rule/> and other anti-family 
planning administrations.

The policy denies foreign organisations US family planning funding if they 
provide abortion information, referrals or services, or if they engage in any 
abortion rights advocacy with their own funds. Projects on the ground are faced 
with a stark choice – to refuse US funding or to take the funding and to end 
abortion advice. First introduced by the Reagan administration, it was repealed 
by President Clinton, reinstated by George Bush and repealed again by President 
Obama.

“We expect the global gag rule to come back under a Trump president,” said 
Sippel. “That could happen as early as January. Our colleagues are fearful and 
worried about what this means for women and girls.”

In 2015 the US gave 27m women ​access to contraceptives and prevented 2m 
unsafe abortions and 6m unintended pregnancies

The loss of US funding to the UNFPA, if it happens, Sippel said, would also 
represent a loss of US leadership.


“Having the US government support the UNFPA is a message to the rest of the 
world that reproductive rights for women and girls matter,” she said.

Analysis by the Guttmacher Institute (GI) found that last year’s US aid budget 
for family planning 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/article/2016/05/just-numbers-impact-us-international-family-planning-assistance>
 gave 27 million women and couples access to contraceptives, prevented more 
than 2 million unsafe abortions, 6 million unintended pregnancies and helped 
prevent 11,000 maternal deaths worldwide.

Sneha Barot, a senior policy manager at the GI, said when Congress or the 
administration has been dominated by social conservatives, they have slashed 
funds for reproductive health and family planning.

“There is a real fear of this funding being cut,” she said. “Women are the 
ones who are hurt by these sorts of policies.”

But, among some quarters, there is hope that Trump, who has in the past 
expressed a pro-choice stance on abortion 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/04/03/donald-trumps-ever-shifting-positions-on-abortion/>
, may have a change of heart once he is in the White House.

Katja Iversen, president of Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> Deliver, a global advocacy 
group for women and girl’s rights, said: “We hope when Donald Trump goes into 
the White House he will see things differently than he has in the last while. 
He will be pressured from within to scale back progress on women’s rights in 
the US and worldwide but … he has had strong support for family planning and 
abortion before.”
 