
The US and UK have been holding talks to explore ways to airdrop food and 
medical supplies to eastern Aleppo and other besieged populations inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.


The talks have been going on for months in Washington and have considered a 
broad range of possibilities, from parachute drops to creating an air bridge 
with drone flights, and even flying in edible drones that can be taken apart 
and eaten.

However, the discussions have been mired in disagreements between government 
agencies, the reluctance of the military to get involved and concern among 
officials that flying in aid without permission from the Damascus regime and 
its allies could hamper conventional humanitarian deliveries.

However, as the talks have stalled, the plight of the people of eastern Aleppo 
has steadily become more desperate. No road convoy has got through to the 
enclave for five months,hospitals have all been destroyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/aleppo-hospitals-knocked-out-airstrikes>
 and rebel-held areas are underconstant bombardment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/aleppo-syria-siege-is-war-of-extermination-says-injured-doctor>
.

A meeting in the UK embassy last week was intended to inject some momentum to 
the discussions and get some decisions made. It was introduced by the 
ambassador, Kim Darroch, and brought US and British officials together, in 
addition to humanitarian drone specialists from the private sector.

But by the time the meeting took place almost half of eastern Aleppo had been 
overrun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/nov/30/battle-eastern-aleppo-maps-rebel-territory-shrinking>
, and there were fears that by the time any drone-borne aid finally took to the 
air, there would be no one there left to save.

“There was talk in private that all this was too late,” said one of the 
participants.

Syrian government forces have taken control of more than half of Aleppo’s 
rebel districts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/syrian-forces-seize-control-of-more-than-half-of-aleppo>
 after fierce bombardments and ground advances forced tens of thousands to flee 
last week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fus-uk-explore-possibility-aid-airdrops-syria-drones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961fe992e6379f81bd9b0e950e96db4c36177dd6%2F59_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20and%20UK%20explore%20possibility%20of%20aid%20airdrops%20in%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fus-uk-explore-possibility-aid-airdrops-syria-drones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20and%20UK%20explore%20possibility%20of%20aid%20airdrops%20in%20Syria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fus-uk-explore-possibility-aid-airdrops-syria-drones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961fe992e6379f81bd9b0e950e96db4c36177dd6%2F59_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 A still image taken from a drone flying over Aleppo in September. Photograph: 
Reuters Tv/Reuters 
However, there are other trapped and starving populations all around Syria. 
The UN estimates 1 million Syrians are living under siege, more than half of 
them children.


As the world has watched the people of Aleppo die in their thousands, with no 
sign of UN humanitarian convoys reaching those in need even during brief 
“humanitarian pauses” in the onslaught, various ideas have been put forward in 
western capitals on whether it was possible to shame Damascus and Moscow into 
letting aid convoys through.

One suggestion was to man the convoys with diplomats from western and Arab 
countries in the 25-nation International Syria Support Group (ISSG).

Guardian briefing: the key questions around aid in Syria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/syria-aid-relief-effort-key-questions-guardian-briefing>
However, there is little optimism such a gesture would protect a relief 
convoy. “There are discussions about a convoy ‘adopted’ by ISSG members. But it 
would need GoS [Government of Syria] and Russian approval to pass all 
checkpoints and thus have the same fate as the UN convoys unless GoS and Russia 
was part of the effort,” Jan Egeland, humanitarian adviser to the UN special 
envoy on Syria, said in an email.

Meanwhile, traditional airdrops from military transport planes would have to 
be carried out at such high altitudes to avoid anti-aircraft missiles that they 
would be worse than useless.

“Unfortunately airdrops cannot be done on a heavily populated urban area. We 
could hurt as many as we helped,” Egeland said.

“The contents of the drops would liquify on the way down, and they would most 
likely miss their target, destroy buildings or kill the people they are 
supposed to save,” said an official involved in the Washington talks.

The US and UK military have pointed out that any relief flights made without 
Syrian government or Russian permission risk causing an international incident 
that could spiral out of control.

 “We have been asked for our opinion on it and we have provided our views,” 
Gen Joseph Votel, the head of US central command, told the Guardian. “It would 
be extraordinarily difficult and it’s not the ideal way to move the kind of 
quantities you need.”

 In the UK, more than 200 MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/hundreds-of-mps-back-campaign-for-syria-aid-airdrops-aleppo>
 supported a call for British airdrops, but the government warned it would be 
hugely complicated and could put UK forces in harm’s way.

 Two engineering graduates from Aleppo University, Abdulrahman and Amr Shayah, 
have called for the use of guided parachute drops which have cameras and 
navigation equipment on the aid pallets, allowing an aircraft to fly at 
35,000ft (10,670 metres) and drop its payload up to 100km (62 miles) from the 
intended target.

 “There has been a shameful indifference towards imposing a no-fly zone that 
could still save thousands of lives. Let’s not make safe airdrops of aid 
another missed opportunity,” they said ina public appeal 
<http://www.thealeppoproject.com/parachutes-aid-not-bombs-jpads-safe-urgently-needed-besieged-aleppo/?utm_campaign=shareaholic&utm_medium=facebook&utm_source=socialnetwork>
 on Friday.

 Advocates of humanitarian drones argue that even small payloads of medical 
supplies can have a dramatic impact in helping besieged civilians survive a 
siege, and that significant quantities of food can be flown in by drones in an 
air bridge, with a hundred or more flights operating day and night.

 The commercially made drones discussed at the UK embassy meeting could carry 
payloads of 2kg to 50kg. For use in a conflict zone like Syria they could be 
programmed to randomise their flight path, altering altitude and direction in 
unpredictable ways so they would be harder to shoot down. The guidance 
circuitry could also self-destruct in the event of a crash, so it could not be 
used as a weapon if it fell into the wrong hands.

 The use of unmanned aircraft for delivering humanitarian aid is still in its 
infancy, however. A year ago, theUnited Nations Population Fund 
<http://www.unfpa.org/> (UNFPA) and the Ghanaian health service conducted a 
pilot initiative,using drones to deliver contraceptives to women 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2016/02/02/drones-successfully-deliver-contraceptives-to-women-in-rural-ghana/>
 in remote rural areas. Earlier this year, a California-based drone company 
called Zipline began delivering blood supplies to remote transfusion clinics in 
Rwanda.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fups-to-help-deliver-blood-by-drone-in-rwanda-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UPS%20to%20help%20deliver%20blood%20by%20drone%20in%20Rwanda%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fups-to-help-deliver-blood-by-drone-in-rwanda-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UPS%20to%20help%20deliver%20blood%20by%20drone%20in%20Rwanda%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fups-to-help-deliver-blood-by-drone-in-rwanda-video&media=>
UPS to help deliver blood by drone in Rwanda – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/09/ups-to-help-deliver-blood-by-drone-in-rwanda-video>
 A British inventor, Nick Gifford, said he was called to meet the 
international development secretary, Priti Patel, on Thursday to discuss his 
design for anedible drone 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/the-worlds-first-edible-drone-2016-9> that 
could be packed with food, spars that could be made of solid foodstuffs and a 
light airframe that could be used as a shelter.

 “She gave her full support to our solution and is keen to help but we still 
have to go through the various government machinations to see which 
organisation will look at official government involvement,” said Gifford, who 
was part of a small UK drone company, Ascenta, bought by Facebook in 2014 for 
nearly $20m.

 The UK’s Department for International Development did not respond to a 
request for comment. An official involved in the Washington talks, however, 
said edible drones was one of the options discussed.

 This is not the first attempt to organise unmanned aid drops into Syria. In 
2014, a US-led team of volunteers attempted to build a fleet of low-budget 
drones that could be locally assembled and used to get aid to besieged 
communities in Syria. The initiative, the Syria Airlift Project, folded in 
December 2015, after technical problems <http://uplift.aero/?p=324> and a lack 
of funding.

 Now there is strong interest from some parts of the US and UK governments in 
a large-scale drone airlift, but there are still significant obstacles. Most of 
the drone flights would have to take off from Turkey and would need Ankara’s 
permission. The technology is also only just being field tested, and it is 
unclear whether flying in aid against the will of the Syrian government and 
Russia would lead them to block conventional land deliveries that might 
otherwise have got through.

“It’s an open question how this would affect access for traditional delivery 
methods. It could go one way or another. These are such complex situations,” 
said one of the participants in Wednesday’s embassy meeting. “But non-action is 
no longer an option.”
 