
The United States yesterday opened a second front in its trade war with the 
European Union, announcing a preliminary list of EU products that could be 
slapped with punitive duties unless Europe lifts its ban on imports of 
hormone-treated US beef.

 Yesterday's list, announced by the US Trade Representative, Charlene 
Barshefsky, would apply to $900 million (Â£550 million) of European products, 
mostly agricultural goods, including beef, pork and poultry.

 The Clinton administration last month imposed 100 per cent tariffs on $520 
million-worth of luxury European goods in the ongoing dispute over the European 
banana import rules. Scottish cashmere producers are already suffering from the 
duties which more or less hut the targeted products out of the American market.

 "This is the most effective way to leverage the EU to comply with its 
obligations," said Peter Scher, US special trade representative for 
agriculture. The Americans have twice won rulings from the World Trade 
Organisation, which polices global trade, that the EU ban on imports of meat 
treated with growth-enhancing hormones is illegal.

 EU officials were anxious to strike a conciliatory note yesterday, insisting 
that they were already in negotiation with American officials over how to solve 
the beef dispute before the May 13 deadline imposed by the WTO for Europe to 
lift its ban.

 Officials in Brussels accept the WTO ruling, but want extra time to conduct 
more scientific studies before complying. The EU has begun exploratory talks 
with American trade representatives over compensating US firms for loss of 
export earnings while the scientific studies are concluded.

 "We don't think a further dispute is in anyone's interest," said a European 
Commission official yesterday. "We will talk our way through this one."

 As an alternative to compensation, the commission has proposed allowing US 
beef imports into Europe as long as they are clearly labelled as 
hormone-treated, an option the Americans have previously rejected.

 Mr Scher insisted during a press conference yesterday that hormone-treated 
beef posed no risks, a conclusion, he said, that had been established by 
American and European scientists. The WTO ruling, he argued, did not require 
such beef to carry any special labelling as there were no health risks.

 "The issue is not to force European consumers to buy US beef," he said. "We 
are simply asking for a chance for our producers to sell a product that is 
healthy."

 American and European companies now have two months to lobby the US trade 
representative's office before the final list of goods targeted for punitive 
tariffs is annnounced in June.

 Brussels believes a compromise will be found before the deadline, unlike the 
stalemate in the banana dispute, in which the US imposed sanctions unilaterally 
without waiting for a WTO ruling on whether the EU was still in breach of trade 
rules.

 "We are taking steps early to come into compliance," the official said. "As 
long as the US respects the rules and plays by them, it will be fine."
 