
The Smithsonian’s National Museum of Natural History has asked the public to 
help save the ruby slippers that whisked Dorothy back to Kansas at the end of 
the film The Wizard of Oz.

The museum has launched a Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> campaign to raise $300,000 
(£250,000) for the project. The slippers, worn by Judy Garland in the film 
have, for more than 30 years, been one of the beloved items at the museum. They 
were crafted almost 80 years ago by the MGM Studios prop department.

They were not built to last; the frayed shoes now are not ruby-coloured but a 
dull auburn. As well as restoring the shoes’ colour, the funds will go towards 
a technologically advanced display case to help with their preservation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fmuseum-kickstarter-restore-dorothys-ruby-slippers-wizard-of-oz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be9f62c1116e7bed203d366e15e7b491a181270%2F864_0_2040_2550%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20museum%20launches%20Kickstarter%20to%20save%20Wizard%20of%20Oz%20red%20shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fmuseum-kickstarter-restore-dorothys-ruby-slippers-wizard-of-oz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20museum%20launches%20Kickstarter%20to%20save%20Wizard%20of%20Oz%20red%20shoes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fmuseum-kickstarter-restore-dorothys-ruby-slippers-wizard-of-oz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9be9f62c1116e7bed203d366e15e7b491a181270%2F864_0_2040_2550%2F2040.jpg>
 Judy Garland in her ruby slippers as Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz (1939) with 
Ray Bolger and Jack Haley (right). Photograph: Allstar/Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer 
The Smithsonian museums are federally funded, but the institution frequently 
solicits private and corporate contributions for big projects not covered by 
the budget. This is the Smithsonian’s second Kickstarter campaign. In 2015 the 
National Air and Space Museum raised $700,000 through the crowd-funding site to 
preserve Neil Armstrong’s moon-walk spacesuit.

Judy Garland's sweat-stained Wizard of Oz dress sells for more than $1.5m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/24/judy-garlands-sweat-stained-wizard-of-oz-dress-sells-for-more-than-15m>
Melinda Machado, a museum spokeswoman, said preserving the shoes would be 
quite complicated. They were made from a dozen materials. Their gelatin-based 
sequins were a relic from the infancy of plastic; they also had glass beads, 
and red felt on the soles used to muffle their sound as Garland danced.

“We’re going to have to do a lot of scientific research to come up with a 
treatment plan that is compatible with all of the different materials,” Machado 
said.

The shoes have been nearly always on display since being donated to the museum 
in 1979.
 