
Venice film festival 2015: full lineup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/29/venice-film-festival-2015-full-lineup>
The late-summer scrap for high-prestige premieres and awards-friendly titles 
between the Toronto, Telluride and Venice film festivals has become a highlight 
of the film industry calendar. A few years ago it looked as if Toronto, with 
its proximity to lucrative North American markets and shortish skip by private 
jet from Burbank airport, was comprehensively outpunching its more venerable 
Italian rival, while italso declared battle on the Colorado weekender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/04/tiff-blows-over-as-toronto-film-festival-modifies-telluride-ban>
. However, in recent editions, Venice has asserted itself, giving a platform to 
Birdman last year, and Gravity the year before that, to re-establish itself as 
a powerful presence on the film festival circuit.

The festival’s artistic director Alberto Barbera had already announced two big 
world premieres:the mountaineering drama Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/everest-open-venice-film-festival-movie>
, starring Jake Gyllenhaal, about the real-life disaster in 1996 when eight 
climbers died, andBlack Mass, the biopic of notorious gangster Whitey Bulger 
<http://www.labiennale.org/en/cinema/news/24-07m.html?back=true> featuring 
Johnny Depp. Neither will be competing for the Golden Lion; but another 
headlining world premiere The Danish Girl, directed by Les Miserables’ Tom 
Hooper and featuring Eddie Redmayne as gender reassignment surgery pioneer 
Einar Wegener in his first post-Theory of Everything role, will.
 Giddy heights … Jake Gyllenhaal in Everest. 
Venice has secured other major first looks of films that will subsequently be 
shown at Toronto, part of the complicated dance of scheduling between the two 
events, as well as Telluride, which is sandwiched between the two. Beasts of No 
Nation, the Africa-set child-soldier drama with Idris Elba, whichgarnered 
industry attention after Netflix purchased its screening rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/03/netflix-idris-elba-beasts-of-no-nation-film>
, will have its world premiere in Venice, as will Spotlight, a drama about 
child abuse in the Catholic church featuring Mark Ruffalo, Rachel McAdams and 
Michael Keaton. Also making the trip to Toronto after Venice world premieres 
will be the Atom Egoyan-directed Remember, a revenge thriller centred on a 
former concentration camp guard living in the US under an assumed name, 
starring Christopher Plummer, and Anomalisa, the stop-motion animated film with
which director Charlie Kaufman set a crowdfunding record on Kickstarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/19/charlie-kaufman-anomalisa-crowdfunding-record>
.

The Venice selection is also influenced by its central competition strand – 
which Toronto lacks, although they are innovating this year with a new, juried 
sidebar – and so can focus its efforts on including classy arthouse films which 
won’t be crowded out by the more commercial titles. Highlights of the 
competition include A Bigger Splash, from Italian director Luca Guadagnino, who 
reunites with his I Am Love star Tilda Swinton for a study of jealousy and 
sexual tension set on a small island; The Clan, from Argentina’s Pablo Trapero, 
about a real-life Buenos Aires family specialising in kidnap and murder; and 
Equals, from Like Crazy director Drake Doremus, a future-set sci-fi drama 
featuringKristen Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> and 
Nicholas Hoult.

Venice has also found room for notable directorial names like Israel’s Amos 
Gitai, whose Rabin, the Last Day chronicles the 1995 assassination of Israeli 
prime minister Yitzhak Rabin, and Russia’s Alexander Sokurov, with Francofonia: 
The Louvre Under German Occupation which looks to be a companion piece to his 
epic Hermitage film Russian Ark. Celebrated performance artist Laurie Anderson,
of O Superman renown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hhm0NHhCBg>, will also 
be competing, with Heart of a Dog, an essay film about her terrier, Lolabelle.
 Family values ... The Clan, directed by Pablo Trapero 
Toronto film festival 2015 to premiere Oscar hopefuls Freeheld and Stonewall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/toronto-film-festival-premieres-tiff-stonewall-freeheld>
Festival programmers have also pulled in a number of intriguing films for 
Venice’s out-of-competition sections. Its documentary strand features new work 
from Frederick Wiseman, who returns with In Jackson Heights, focussing on 
immigrant communities in the diverse New York neighbourhood and West of Memphis 
director Amy Berg’s film about blues rocker Janis Joplin; while environmental 
photographer Yann-Arthus Bertrand is screening his essay film Human, a 
follow-up to his 2009 film Home.

And buried in the special screenings Fiction section is arguably the most 
intriguing film of all: a little item called The Audition, directed by someone 
called Martin Scorsese. Is it another one of his celebrated music 
documentaries, featuring never before seen footage of the Beatles trying to 
impress Brian Epstein, or the Rolling Stones angling for their first record 
deal? Apparently not: it appears to be the 16-minute short featuring Robert de 
Niro, Brad Pitt and Leonardo DiCaprio,funded as a promotional film at enormous 
expense by a casino in Macau 
<http://pagesix.com/2014/09/03/how-pitt-dicaprio-and-de-niro-made-13m-each-in-2-days/>
.


The Venice film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival> 
runs from 2-12 September 2015.
 