
On Sunday 5 July, at the same time Greeks were going to the polls to vote in 
their referendum, we were driving along the Peloponnesian coast on the way to 
Kalamata airport. My family had just spent the most glorious fortnight in 
Stoupa, our first visit toGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> for 
some 10 years.

We had caught a few glimpses of the BBC World News. Apparently we were 
holidaying in a country racked in crisis, its people desperate and enraged.

Greece: top 10 budget beach hotels in the Peloponnese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/27/greece-peloponnese-budget-beach-hotels>
Really? What was it that none of us – nor any of the other contented tourists 
– could see? Were we all so wrapped up in our selfish enjoyment that we 
couldn’t see the chaos around us?

The previous evening, for our farewell meal, we had sat in our favourite of 
the several excellent tavernas we’d tried, at a table overlooking the beach. 
The sea was that kind of ever-shifting, shimmering blue that only Greek seas 
seem to possess, the sun was slowly descending in a red blaze in front of us, 
and to the side the towering Taygetos mountains embraced us. It was 
heart-stoppingly beautiful … in a way that must have stopped the hearts of many 
thousands of other people over many thousands of years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fpeloponnese-greece-travel-stoupa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436438289222%2Fc3d47728-bc70-4483-b860-e956ba162f23-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=View%20from%20the%20Peloponnese%3A%20Crisis%3F%20What%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fpeloponnese-greece-travel-stoupa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=View%20from%20the%20Peloponnese%3A%20Crisis%3F%20What%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F11%2Fpeloponnese-greece-travel-stoupa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436438289222%2Fc3d47728-bc70-4483-b860-e956ba162f23-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Voidokilia Beach, Petrohori near Yialova, Messinia, Peloponnese. Photograph: 
Ian Dagnall/Alamy 
Return to the Peloponnese: my Greek odyssey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/04/peloponnese-greece-holidays> 
That night, we had been served by younger family members of the taverna, the 
reason being that the older ones were taking part in the annual charity 10km 
race they had themselves initiated in 2010. The finishing line was on the 
beach, amidst fireworks, music, applause and noisy celebration. This year, 
hundreds of people of all ages from the local villages had taken part. Many 
jumped into the sea to cool off, joining all the delighted kids still larking 
in the shallow waters. If ever there was a sign of a community at peace and at 
play, this was surely it.

Food was local, home-grown and plentiful, from gardens or family fields. Each 
taverna made its own olive oil.

Above all – for the tourist at least – there is the assurance that the Greeks 
are Masters of Hospitality. Nothing is too much trouble, very little causes 
offence, all requests are tolerated, all imbecilities are forgiven, nobody is 
hassled, everybody is given space, kindness seems obligatory, and the tourist 
is always treated with courtesy and respect (even when undeserved). It must be 
just about the easiest place to enjoy a holiday anywhere.
 