
Tomatoes grow like weeds on the paths. That’s how fertile the land is at Fajã 
dos Padres, a small cove on the south coast of Madeira – known on the island as 
the place where the famous Malmsey vines survived phylloxera. Until recently, 
the only way to get to the cove was from the sea or to take a rickety-looking 
glass elevator. Now there’s a cable car running visitors to the heart of the 
vineyard for €10. As an escape from the cranes and cruise ships of Funchal, 
it’s worth it. The descent feels like a ride down into a secret garden of Eden.

Named after the Jesuit priests who founded the vineyard in 1595, Fajã dos 
Padres has been in the Jardim Fernandes family for three generations. They were 
the ones to discover the sole-surviving malvasia vine, and now produce 
single-vineyard Malmsey on site. It’s not just vines: bananas, figs, avocados, 
mangos, courgettes, squash, sweet potato and passionfruit and a whole manner of 
other fruit and vegetables grow in profusion and supply the small restaurant by 
the jetty and the pebbled beach. There you can eat traditional Madeiran dishes 
likepeixe espada com banana – battered black scabbardfish served with fresh 
vegetables and a fried banana – a surprisingly enjoyable combination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmadeira-faja-dos-padres-cove-cable-car-cottages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e71372bb55b201e5b57a0630bea9483fd1bb2ac%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vine%20and%20dandy%3A%20Madeira%E2%80%99s%20Faj%C3%A3%20dos%20Padres%20is%20a%20glimpse%20of%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmadeira-faja-dos-padres-cove-cable-car-cottages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vine%20and%20dandy%3A%20Madeira%E2%80%99s%20Faj%C3%A3%20dos%20Padres%20is%20a%20glimpse%20of%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmadeira-faja-dos-padres-cove-cable-car-cottages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e71372bb55b201e5b57a0630bea9483fd1bb2ac%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Highs and lows … a glass elevator was previously the only way to get to the 
cove. Photograph: Alamy 
Most spend a day on the pebbled beach, swimming in the surf and enjoying the 
peace, but people can stretch the stay in paradise a little bit longer by 
staying over in one of nine carefully restored workers’ cottages for two, with 
vine-shaded patios and windows offering sunset views.

• Bungalow from €75, fajadospadres.com 
<http://www.fajadospadres.com/faja/index.php/en/>
 