
It’s been heralded as the future of film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/26/cinemas-hot-25-2015> and 
journalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/22/vr-journalism-virtual-reality-new-york-times-google-cardboard>
. It has been avidly welcomed by theadvertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/dec/03/virtual-reality-in-advertising-2016>
,art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/oct/08/oculus-rift-jon-rafman-art-virtual-reality>
,fundraising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/dec/21/virtual-reality-future-face-to-face-fundraising>
 andgaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/07/virtual-reality-future-oculus-rift-vr>
 worlds – and has just as enthusiastically been written off as a passing fad, 
which makesyou feel sick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2015/nov/18/why-staring-at-screens-is-making-us-feel-sick>
 and isn’treally film-making 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/03/pixar-virtual-reality-storytelling-ed-catmull>
.

At Sundance 2016 virtual reality, in all its guises, has been embedded – or 
should that be seamlessly immersed – into this year’s programming. 
Opportunities to experiment with the technology abound: whether that’s watching 
Funny or Die’s newVR comedy Interrogation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/22/rob-huebel-transparent-comedy-central-virtual-interrogation-sundance>
; walking on the surface ofStar Wars’ planet Jakku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/20/star-wars-the-force-awakens-new-trailer-six-things-we-learned>
; or watching an immersive short about a family trying to copeas bombs drop 
overhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2009/mar/20/nato-serbia-anniversary>
. Shari Frilot, chief curator of Sundance’s New Frontiers section, which has a 
special focus on VR in 2016, says the technology is advancing quickly and there 
are major changes happening often which make it hard to keep up.

Three really real questions about the future of virtual reality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/07/virtual-reality-future-oculus-rift-vr>
“I try to lock it [the final lineup] around September. But every year that’s 
more and more difficult especially because with VR, it leaps every three 
months,” says Frilot.

“Even though there’s a lot of hype and a lot of excitement it’s still pretty 
new in terms of how storytellers are being able to engage it in different 
ways,” she says. “The medium itself is so compelling.”

This year the New Frontiers has the installation work of Heather Cassils (her 
self-immolation work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/nov/09/heather-cassils-inextinguishable-fire-spill-festival-national-theatre>
), and a two-screen piecefocusing on LA by Kahlil Joseph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/15/history-art-hip-hop-art-basel-miami-beach-kanye-jay-z-basquiat>
 (with music by Kendrick Lamar). People mill around surveying the work but in 
the corner there’s a group of people ogling goggles and trying not to fall over 
tables that don’t really exists. “The bleeding edge of this stuff is found in 
the media labs,” says Frilot and that’s where people are having so much trouble 
with virtual furniture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-immersive-film-making-wowing-sundance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff681592d191f065f8f4225ab7679bf560a69bc0d%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Virtual%20Reality%3A%20the%20immersive%20film-making%20wowing%20Sundance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-immersive-film-making-wowing-sundance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Virtual%20Reality%3A%20the%20immersive%20film-making%20wowing%20Sundance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-immersive-film-making-wowing-sundance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff681592d191f065f8f4225ab7679bf560a69bc0d%2F0_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 The Guardian takes a stroll on the surface of Star Wars’ planet Jakku. 
Photograph: The Guardian 
This year the bleeding edge is represented by the Leviathan Project 
<http://worldbuilding.institute/events/leviathan>, an installation that mixes 
AR (augmented reality) and VR which was put together byAlex McDowell 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/5015247/alex-mcdowell-punk-rock-digital-designer>; Real 
Virtuality <http://www.engadget.com/2015/07/14/real-virtuality-multiplayer-vr/>
, a fully immersive video game-like experience; andILMxLAB 
<http://www.ilmxlab.com/>, the company that worked on the latest Star Wars 
movie.

“There’s C3PO talking to you and BB-8 rolling around,” says Rob Bredow of 
ILMxLAB, as I stand in the middle of what appears to be Jakku. With some rather 
clunky AR glasses on, it does appear as if C3PO wants to chat, while BB-8 is 
rolling around by my feet making funny noises.

For Star Wars fans, the lab’s presentation at Sundance will probably be a 
dream come true; for film-makers it’s a practical opportunity to visualise and 
alter virtual worlds that eventually make up their film. “We actually got 
Gareth Edwards,who is directing the next piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/23/star-wars-spinoff-godzilla-director-gareth-edwards>
, in to a version of this Holo-Cinema to pre-visualise some of the sets for his 
upcoming film Rogue One,” he says.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5YSPb6zjwrk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5YSPb6zjwrk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5YSPb6zjwrk&media=>
 ILMxLAB 
Questions over whether VR will become a viable mainstream commercial product 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/07/virtual-reality-future-oculus-rift-vr>
 in the next 12 months still need to be answered, but as a film-making tool it 
seems fully fledged. Frilot has heard misgivings about the fact VR is an 
individual experience, but for her it’s far from isolating.

“I know there’s a lot of anxiety about VR being an individual experience, and 
number one: that’s not a bad thing. Part of the VR experience, the power of it, 
is that it’s fully immersive around your individual body,” she says.

If anybody tells you that they know, they’re probably selling you something
Rob Bredow 
“I don’t think that it’s isolating. I’ve been watching VR at the festival 
since 2012, and I’ve seen people getting excited about watching their friends 
go through it, talking about it, wanting to share it. It’s an intensely social 
experience.”

One of the films that is social is Giant. Made by Serbian director Milica Zec 
<http://milicazec.com/>, it’s a bracing VR short inspired by real events that 
happen to her during the bombing of Belgrade. You watch it in groups of three, 
and for Zec VR is a tool to imbue her film-making with more potency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-immersive-film-making-wowing-sundance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb08610fa6b28a2f2441651a0af68b69f08b8600d%2F0_4_1200_721%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Virtual%20Reality%3A%20the%20immersive%20film-making%20wowing%20Sundance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-immersive-film-making-wowing-sundance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Virtual%20Reality%3A%20the%20immersive%20film-making%20wowing%20Sundance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-immersive-film-making-wowing-sundance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb08610fa6b28a2f2441651a0af68b69f08b8600d%2F0_4_1200_721%2F1200.jpg>
 Virtual Insanity: Real Virtuality at New Frontier. Photograph: Ryan 
Kobane/Sundance Institute 
“VR is called an empathy machine so we were hoping that people can feel 
something,” says Milica. “While writing the script then you have to think in a 
different space. In a 360 space.” That different way of working meant using new 
cameras and buying VR props from an online store. The result is a work that 
puts you a few feet in front of a family who are trying to get through a 
bombing raid; the interactive elements (which include the floor physically 
shaking) left audiences stunned.

It’s not all so serious though. Reggie Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/dec/12/reggie-watts-comedian-jash-nyc>
 presented Waves, which was a mind-melting tour of outer space where the 
comedian and singer appears as a floating head that shoots lasers out of his 
mouth. There was also Click Effect, an immersive dive into the depths to see 
how dolphins and whales communicate. These films were among 30 that were shown 
via headsets using mobile phones as the screen. It’s this cheap, shareable tech 
that seems to be the future for VR films, but Bredow is quick to remind me that 
no one is sure what’s next.

“If anybody tells you that they know, they’re probably selling you something,” 
he says.
 