
When four American Vogue editors decided to embed a series of 
stream-of-consciousness rants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/29/vogue-editors-declare-war-fashion-bloggers>
 against a group of people they lumped together as “bloggers” within aMilan 
fashion week roundup 
<http://www.vogue.com/13483417/milan-fashion-week-spring-2017-vogue-editors-chat/>
, they could not have predicted the firestorm they’d unleash.

Blogger itself is a term so outmoded that I’m surprised a publication that 
likes to think of itself as being firmly on the cutting edge is still using it. 
Brands have been referring to bloggers as digital influencers for some years 
now, and, as it would seem to Vogue’s bizarre disgust, plenty of those 
influencers don’t actually have blogs. Or, if they do bother, they are a small 
offshoot of their main platform, Instagram.

Vogue editors accused of hypocrisy after declaring war on fashion bloggers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/29/vogue-editors-declare-war-fashion-bloggers>
I started blogging in 2006, while I was still a fashion editor. At the time 
I’d seen one other blog,Belle de Jour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/14/brooke-magnanti-belle-de-jour-the-turning-tide-diary-london-call-girl>
 – the anonymous diary of a sex worker and, while I wasn’t going to be 
following in her career footsteps, I was inspired by the idea that there was a 
place online where I could collect my thoughts anonymously.

There was no road map for monetising blogs back then beyond parlaying your 
writing into a book deal, or perhaps a newspaper column, if you were lucky. So, 
although I now have a business built aroundmy digital platform 
<http://www.libertylondongirl.com/>, I still find it hard to comprehend that 
blogging, once seen as the preserve of the enthusiastic amateur, has reached a 
level where fashion bloggers are being pitched against editors from American 
Vogue in a war of words, laced with vitriol and a dash of mean-spiritedness.

The main thrust of the Vogue editors’ collective complaint was the spectacle 
that takes place outside fashion shows, where both dressed-up attendees and 
overdressed attention-seekers have their photographs taken by a mob of 
shouting, desperate photographers. I don’t think any regular attendee at the 
collections, whether in New York, Milan, Paris or London, regards having to 
push their way through the street-style bunfight outside the shows with any 
joy. No one wants to be roughly pushed aside, toes squashed, ribs elbowed, as 
the huge photographer pack rushes, lemming-like, to capture another 
street-style image.

How is being paid to wear clothes different from advertisers pressuring 
magazines to shoot their clothes on models?

Equally the rise of street-style photography and the seemingly insatiable 
appetite from, yes, magazines like Vogue for those images, has led to the rise 
of a kind of style that has been developed solely for the camera. Forget the 
traditional all-black editor outfit: these looks can be retina-burning. The 
more over-the-top the look, the more the photographers like it, and the less it 
has to do with fashion.

If the editors had just commented on this, I think there would have been some 
understanding nods – but no, they had to wrap it in some nasty commentary, with 
Sarah Mower blaming it all on the “professional blogger bit”, along with a few 
patronising eye-rolls from Alessandra Codinha, the vogue.com fashion news 
editor, who said: “It’s all pretty embarrassing – even more so when you 
consider what else is going on in the world.”

Someone needs to get off their high horse: last time I checked reporting 
fashion news wasn’t exactly on a par with covering Syria.

Secrets of a professional Instagrammer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/02/instagram-professional-instagrammer-blogger-filter>
Blaming “bloggers” for the mess at shows is naive at best, stupid at worst. 
Some of the famous street-style stars are, in fact print editors. Caroline Issa 
(Tank), Giovanna Englebert (Vogue Nippon),Anna Della Russo 
<https://www.instagram.com/anna_dello_russo/> (Vogue Nippon) Christine Centenera
 <https://www.instagram.com/centenera/> (Vogue Australia) are now some of the 
most photographed women in the world. They understand, as do the digital 
influencers, that they are ambassadors for not just their publications but 
themselves, and that there is serious money to be made from developing a 
recognisable personal brand.

Secondly, the print publications are colluding in this circus: they use 
street-style as both content in the magazines and as clickbait on line. They 
cite them as“inspiration” 
<http://en.vogue.fr/fashion/fashion-inspiration/diaporama/the-new-street-style-stars/36318>
, and, desperate to grab on to the millennial audience, they put the girls who 
are famous for their outfits on magazine covers. Chiara Ferragni, of The Blonde 
Salad, has been on the cover of six Condé Nast titles to date, including Vogue 
España, and Kendall Jenner, whose entire power base arguably comes fromher 66.5 
million Instagram followers <https://www.instagram.com/kendalljenner/> was the 
September cover star of US Vogue.

Editors may not like how the shows have evolved, but it’s time to face the 
inevitable: the purpose of a fashion show has now changed, from a trade 
conference where a closed circle of insiders disseminated their opinions to the 
masses to a public forum where brands, editors and “bloggers” fight for 
attention in an overcrowded space by any means possible.

The Vogue editors’ comments also addressed the matter of borrowed clothing and 
paid appearances with Nicole Phelps, director of Vogue Runway, proclaiming: 
“It’s not just sad for the women who preen for the cameras in borrowed clothes, 
it’s distressing, as well, to watch so many brands participate.”

I find this mystifying and, to be honest, just plain ridiculous. Not only is 
the hypocrisy mindboggling, as the borrowing and gifting of product – clothes, 
bags, shoes, makeup – is endemic across the entire fashion industry from the 
most senior editor to the assistant in the fashion closet, but brands – and 
everyone else – knows, or should know, that these days the quickest way to 
raise awareness of a product and sell, sell, sell, is to get it on the back of 
the influencers who then wear those clothes to the shows – which then, of 
course, appear in Vogue et al in the endless stream of street-style photographs.

The Guardian view of Vogue v the bloggers: business is winning | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/the-guardian-view-of-vogue-v-the-bloggers-business-is-winning>
Vogue also seems to take exception to the idea that influencers are paid to 
wear clothes at the shows, with Codinha chiming in: “I have to think that soon 
people will wise up to how particularly gross the whole practice of paid 
appearances and borrowed outfits looks.” I’m at a loss to understand how being 
paid for your job is gross, or how being paid to wear clothes is any different 
from advertisers pressuring magazines to shoot their clothes on models, or 
brand ambassadors – actresses, models, athletes, being paid to do press with 
magazines as part of their contracts.

Vogue creative digital director Sally Singer’s exhortation to bloggers to 
“find another business” was perhaps the most extraordinary comment: while not 
all bloggers can command the fees of Chiara Ferragni, who is estimated to earn 
over $10m a year, it is not uncommon these days for digital influencers to turn 
over six figures.

With the going rate for a single Instagram post for an account with 50,000+ 
followers hovering at about the £500 mark, there are plenty of fashion 
Instagrammers making north of £50,000 a year just from posting two sponsored 
images a week. Who’s having the last laugh now?
 