
Robert Gesink won the Vuelta’s gruelling 14th stage in the French Pyrenees on 
Saturday, while Nairo Quintana maintained his overall lead overChris Froome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-froome>.

The Dutch rider surged ahead of two rivals to win the 196km (122-mile) route 
for Lotto NL-Jumbo, finishing at the Col d’Aubisque category-one summit after 
nearly six hours.

Mark Cavendish eyes world road race as stars gather for Tour of Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/mark-cavendish-bradley-wiggins-tour-of-britain>
It was Gesink’s first win at a grand tour. “I wasn’t sure I could do it, but I 
kept on fighting,” he said.

Quintana attacked Froome six times on the last of four mountain ascents, but 
the Tour de France winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/chris-froome-wins-third-tour-de-france>
 responded each time to stay within a minute of the Colombian climber entering 
the race’s final week.

The route, which started in Urdax, Spain, before crossing into France, was 
described by race organizers as one of the most demanding in the 71 editions of 
the Vuelta. It lived up to its billing, with three category-one climbs setting 
up the ascent to the Aubisque, a classic on the Tour with its breathtaking 
views.

The route offered the chance for team directors to use tactics to shake up the 
overall standings. Orica-BikeExchange proved the most astute, succeeding in 
moving Esteban Chaves and Simon Yates into third and fourth place overall.

While Chaves pulled away late and moved to within two minutes of the lead, an 
attack by Yates on the third ascent helped him knock almost two minutes off the 
gap to Quintana and move into contention.

Quintana’s Movistar team-mate Alejandro Valverde was the major victim of the 
mountain marathon, fading fast at the start of the last climb. The former 
Vuelta winner lost nine minutes in the overall standings and plummeted from 
third place to 19th.

The race continues on the Spanish side of the Pyrenees on Sunday, with a 
118.5km (74-mile) route from Sabiñánigo to a category-one finish at Sallent de 
Gállego.
 