
The World Anti-Doping Agency <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> has 
indicated thehacker group Fancy Bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/19/mo-farah-named-fancy-bears-leak> 
may have doctored or fabricated some of the medical documents of athletes that 
it has released.

Wada <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> released an update on Wednesday 
into its own cyber security investigation, reporting that a Rio 2016 section of 
its anti-doping administration and management system (ADAMS) was accessed after 
a “spear phishing” attack.

Such an attack involves tricking the recipient into giving away details such 
as usernames and passwords, and Wada said several of its and the International 
Olympic Committee’s email accounts were targeted, giving hackers means to 
obtain the confidential records of Rio competitors.

A host of major names from world sport have seen personal information dumped 
into the public domain, includingAlistair Brownlee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee>, Mo Farah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah>, Laura Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-trott> and Sir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins>, by hackers who are believed 
to be Russian.

Some of the information released may not be genuine, however, according to 
Wada.

The agency said in a statement: “Wada has determined that not all data 
released by Fancy Bears [in its PDF documents]accurately reflects ADAMS data. 
However, we are continuing to examine the extent of this as a priority and we 
would encourage any affected parties to contact Wada should they become aware 
of any inaccuracies in the data that has been released.”

Wada, in its update, said “multiple” visits by the hackers between 25 August 
and 12 September led to the leaking of private medical details that showed when 
therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs) were granted. TUEs allow athletes to take 
medicine that otherwise would be banned by Wada, and stringent conditions apply 
to their use.

Wada said it had taken steps to tighten security within ADAMS, including 
deactivating all Rio 2016 accounts and bringing in outside forensic experts to 
determine the degree of intrusion and quash any future threat.

The agency also said some ADAMS users have received rogue messages, which 
misleadingly appear to come from Wada’s deputy director general, Rob Koehler, 
asking the recipient to speak to him regarding the cyber attacks.

Wada is based in Montreal, Canada, and oversees and co-ordinates sport’s 
anti-doping efforts.

Wednesday’s statement urged athletes with concerns about hacking to get in 
touch, and added: “Wada thanks athletes and ADOs [anti-doping organisations] 
for their understanding and support.

“Wada is taking this situation, concerning athlete privacy, very seriously and 
will continue to provide relevant updates as circumstances evolve.”
 