
Waitrose has taken a leaf out of sister brand John Lewis’s Christmas TV ad 
playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/10/john-lewis-christmas-advert-buster-the-bouncing-dog-a-sledgehammer-to-2016>
with a heart-tugging festive campaign that tells the story of an arduous epic 
journey home of a young robin.

The ad, like John Lewis’s trampoline bouncing Buster the boxer, uses hi-tech 
special effects to create the robin’s transcontinentalChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> migration in what Waitrose 
says is the “most creatively sophisticated” ad it has ever made.


The TV ad tells the tale of the real-life migration of a young Scandinavian 
robin across mountains and seas to reach his home in a UK garden to be reunited 
with his mate to enjoy a festive treat, aWaitrose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> mince pie left each year by a 
young girl.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxtKYdG9r0Pk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxtKYdG9r0Pk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxtKYdG9r0Pk&media=>
 Waitrose Xmas ad 
The 90-second commercial – made by adam&eveDDB, the agency best known for 
making a string of famous commercials forJohn Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> – has a hint of the touching 
epic trip concept used for John Lewis’s 2012 festive tear-jerker The Journey.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0N8axp9nHNU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0N8axp9nHNU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0N8axp9nHNU&media=>
 John Lewis Christmas ad 
“Coming home is a central theme at Christmas when welcoming, hosting and 
providing a special meal for loved ones is at the heart of celebrations,” said 
Rupert Thomas, marketing director at Waitrose, which is part of the John Lewis 
Partnership. “It’s a story of love, courage and the importance of enjoyment 
with family and friends.”


The ad marks a new creative direction for Waitrose bearing little resemblance 
to its2015 Christmas campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/04/waitrose-pips-sister-brand-john-lewis-with-christmas-tv-ad>
, which featured a cameo from brand ambassador Heston Blumenthal and was set to 
Cab Calloway’s 1948 jazz classic Everybody Eats When They Come To My House.


Waitrose’s ad, which will air for the first time on ITV during the X Factor 
results show on Sunday night, features an adaptation of “Cambridge, 1963” by 
Icelandic composer Jóhann Jóhannsson from his score of film The Theory of 
Everything.

Waitrose said every element story of the star character of the Robin, a CGI 
creation by special effects house The Mill, has been fact-checked to make sure 
it is as “close to reality and factually correct as possible”.


The supermarket, which spent £13m on advertising in the final quarter run-up 
to Christmas last year, is hoping the robin might become something of a festive 
hit.


The supermarket says there will be “various robin-related products” made 
available in stores, including kitchenware, clothing, toys and wrapping paper.


Christmas TV ads - the search for a cracker, the fear of a turkey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/05/christmas-tv-ads-john-lewis> 
There will also be a game, developed by the supermarket’s media agency MG OMD, 
which will give social media followers an “interactive experience”, of the 
robin’s journey home.


Waitrose is making sure all the multimedia bases are covered by also launching 
a book telling the story of the robin’s journey in the advert is due to hit 
book shops from 14 November.


“We’re really proud of the plucky little fella and his plight to get home for 
Christmas,” said Richard Brim, executive creative director at adam&eveDDB. 
“It’s a warming story that speaks to the spirit of togetherness in the festive 
season and the joy of just coming home. It feels like a great way to wrap up a 
great year for Waitrose.”


Raiding the kitty: Sainsbury's resurrects Mog the cat for Christmas advert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/12/raiding-the-kitty-sainsburys-resurrects-mog-the-cat-for-christmas-advert>
Last year, Sainsbury’s released a book by Judith Kerr on the adventures of Mog 
the calamitous cat, the star of its Christmas TV campaign, whichtopped 
bestseller lists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/18/mogs-christmas-resurrection-shoots-to-no-1>
 and raised more than £1.5m for Save the Children.


John Lewis sold more than £2.5m of Monty merchandise, the star of its 2014 
Christmas campaign, including 48,000 soft toys, some of which went for as much 
as £500 on eBay as stores sold out.


Sainsbury’s, one of the last major supermarkets still to launch its Christmas 
campaign, will debut this year’s follow-up to the hugely popular Mog the cat ad 
on Monday.
 