
Henry David Thoreau’s revered account of the period he spent living a 
self-consciously simple life in a cabin at Walden Pond is set to be adapted for 
the 21st century, to make the classic text more appealing to modern readers.

First published in 1854, Walden sees the American writer lay out the two 
years, two months, and two days he spent in the woods near Concord, 
Massachusetts in a cabin lent him by his friend and fellow “transcendentalist 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/transcendentalism/>” Ralph Waldo Emerson. “I 
went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the 
essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and 
not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived,” he wrote. “I wanted to 
live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and 
Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life.”

The poet Robert Frost found that “in one book … [Thoreau] surpasses everything 
we have had in America”. But according to John Updike, “Walden has become such 
a totem of the back-to-nature, preservationist, anti-business, 
civil-disobedience mindset … that the book risks being as revered and unread as 
the Bible”.

Now the designer and writer Matt Steel is setting out to address Walden’s 
declining readership, with a new edition of the public domain text that adapts 
Thoreau’s 19th-century language for modern readers. Steellaunched a Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/2001070129/the-new-walden> to raise funds 
for his project on Tuesday, aiming to raise $104,000 (£72,000) to print 2,000 
cloth hardback, illustrated copies of his adapted version. The finished book is 
due out in spring 2017 if the campaign is successful.

I want to shorten the distance between 1854 and today so that the lyrical 
beauty of this excellent text can shine

“While widely quoted, Walden is rarely read anymore, and our society’s 
familiarity with the story is fading,” Steel said. “My theory is that there’s 
nothing wrong with the story. It’s the 19th-century language that’s 
problematic. By creating an updated version of Walden, I want to create more 
opportunities for other people’s lives to be enriched by this book.”

When Steel himself first read the book, in 2014, it had “a profound impact” on 
him, he said. “Having gone through a period of career burnout, followed by 
radical lifestyle change, I could see that Thoreau’s ideas around simplicity, 
consumerism, and busy-ness had an uncanny relevance to the challenges we face 
today. I shared my enthusiasm for the book with anyone willing to listen. But I 
kept having to couch my recommendations: ‘This is an incredible book, but the 
19th-century language is hard to digest at times. But stick with it, and you’ll 
be glad you did!’ This situation bothered me. I didn’t want to keep telling 
people they should read Walden – ‘but …’. I realised that what this story needs 
is to be updated for modern readers.”

His new version neither abridges nor “dumb[s] down” Thoreau’s original text, 
he says. “A lot of the pleasure in reading Walden is Thoreau’s language. Walden 
has always been a dense, layered text. I think that’s part of what makes it a 
feast for the mind,” said Steel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwalden-for-the-21st-century-kickstarter-update-henry-david-thoreau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5d02f97a2a49f450ce37e7cc4586c4f9d82fc47%2F109_0_3597_2160%2F3597.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walden%20for%20the%2021st%20century%20%E2%80%93%20Kickstarter%20plan%20to%20update%20Thoreau&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwalden-for-the-21st-century-kickstarter-update-henry-david-thoreau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walden%20for%20the%2021st%20century%20%E2%80%93%20Kickstarter%20plan%20to%20update%20Thoreau&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fwalden-for-the-21st-century-kickstarter-update-henry-david-thoreau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5d02f97a2a49f450ce37e7cc4586c4f9d82fc47%2F109_0_3597_2160%2F3597.jpg>
 A pond for the 21st century ... a comparison of the language of the original 
and the new versions of Walden. Photograph: Vann Alexandra 
“To that end, I am not revising Walden to the point of removing any of 
Thoreau’s ideas or adding my own. I have no wish to impose my style or opinions 
on such a celebrated author. But I believe the degree to which the English 
language has changed over the past two centuries has made it harder for readers 
to get into this particular text. And because Walden was such a complex, 
layered work to begin with, and because of its ongoing relevance, it seemed 
particularly ripe for an update ... I want to shorten the distance between 1854 
and today as much as possible, so that the lyrical beauty, wisdom, and power of 
this excellent text can shine.”

Examples of the changes he has made include translations of Latin and Greek 
references, updated archaisms (“I would fain” becomes “I wish”), changes to 
outdated place names, and splitting Thoreau’s lengthy sentences up. He has also 
switched “men” for “people” throughout, when Thoreau is referring to humanity 
as a whole. The new version is sprinkled with pull quotes highlighting 
Thoreau’s “powerful one-liners”, such as “could a greater miracle take place 
than for us to look through each other’s eyes for an instant?” And at the end, 
a selection of the author’s “most arresting passages” are presented as prose 
poems.

Steel has worked with the editor and poet Billy Merrell 
<http://talkinginthedark.com/> on the text, and says that so far, much of the 
feedback from the literary community has been “delight and enthusiasm”. “A 
couple have been very sceptical. I’m sure that there will be strong reactions 
as more people discover this project,” said Steel. “I invite sceptics to read 
the original and my version side by side and then judge for themselves … I want 
people to know that I don’t intend to replace the original version of Walden. 
My version may serve as a replacement for some people, or a first-and-only 
version for others. But I see the two versions living side by side. If this 
project helps preserve Thoreau’s beautiful words and introduces him to new 
audiences, then I’ve done my job.”

Should the Kickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> 
prove successful, Steel envisages adapting other classics. “The loss of 
accessibility in books has been going on for millennia, as has the practice of 
updating them in order to prevent their disappearance. But I think we tend to 
wait too long. With this project, I hope to show the benefits of shortening 
revision cycles. I believe this will allow the world’s best stories to remain 
evergreen,” he said.
 