
There’s a great deal of crying for “change” of the aid system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/10/outdated-and-resistant-to-change-how-can-we-fix-the-humanitarian-system>
 right now: the system is unfair; the system is outdated and dysfunctional. In 
recent memory issues likemental health of aid workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/nov/23/guardian-research-suggests-mental-health-crisis-among-aid-workers>
, accountability, efficiency, local versus international, among many others, 
have rallied calls around this generalised notion that things need to change.

This is all well and good, and in the majority of cases I agree. The aid 
system needs to change. We can all see it.

But despite all of that, I have yet to meet someone who can articulate in any 
kind of coherent, concrete terms what changes really need to happen. One of the 
confounding aspects of this whole conversation is that the shouts for change 
tend to focus on generalities, platitudes and misdiagnosis, or a conflation of 
symptoms and illnesses. While these egregious ills of the aid system all seem 
obvious enough as we scroll through Twitter, the problem is that after agreeing 
in principle, we’re often left with no clear sense of what comes next.

I won’t try to tell you what has to change. But I will tell you how. You want 
to change the aid industry? You need to follow five steps:

Will a 'grand bargain' solve the humanitarian funding crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/18/will-a-grand-bargain-solve-the-humanitarian-funding-crisis>
1 | Diagnose problems correctly

The tendency right now is to shout – usually on social media – about whatever 
issue pisses us off today. I love ranting about celebrity advocacy but if I’m 
honest, that stupid, ineffective celebrity advocacy is a symptom of a larger 
illness. It is easy to see that there are problems, but actually understanding 
those problems is tougher, so do the brainwork first.

2 | Be specific

Get away from the generalities and move towards the concrete. Most of the 
platitudes are no-brainers. I doubt you will find many humanitarian workers who 
disagree with the importance of inclusion, for example, or the importance of 
local. Which organisations, specifically, need to change which policies, 
specifically? Ask yourself: “How do I move the needle on my favourite issue?” 
Many are passionate and outspoken about the need for change. Few have the 
insight needed to think through what, exactly, needs to change.

3 | Commit to process and follow through

The secret to changing the humanitarian system (or any other industrial 
complex) lies in being able to move within the system’s own processes. There 
are no quick or simple solutions. Understand where, when and by whom the 
decisions that matter are made, and understand how to influence those 
decisions. You need to articulate what the improved state looks like, then 
outline the steps to get there, and then see the process through.

A note, because this step is important: Process and follow-through are 
bureaucracy. They’re politics. They’re not fun, and they’re supremely unsexy. 
You’re not going to get many likes on Facebook for pictures of process. But 
make no mistake: this is where aid industry change actually happens. I 
encounter ideas for positive aid industry change on a weekly basis, more or 
less. But the vast majority of these good and sometimes even brilliant ideas 
will never exist beyond the pub, the coffee room, or the Skype chat window. 
Why? Because they very often lack the capacity to follow through.

4 | Articulate the day-to-day

The big statements are easy. No one disagrees that aid should be more 
accountable, or that local NGOs and aid workers should have a more central role 
in shaping interventions meant for their own communities. But what do these 
mean for you and me next Tuesday? Whatever aid system change you feel needs to 
happen urgently, you must be able to articulate what that looks like for the 
rank-and-file, whether they’re slogging it out in the bowels of HQ or out on 
the front line. Many seem to know what the head of the UN agency or the CEO of 
the household charity should do differently. But few seem able to say how 
business as usual should change for the project accountant or nutrition 
technical specialist or most of the otherhumanitarians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/humanitarianshumanitarians>
 around the world, who do the ordinary work of the industry day-in and day-out.

'Outdated and resistant to change': how can we fix the humanitarian system?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/10/outdated-and-resistant-to-change-how-can-we-fix-the-humanitarian-system>
5 | Understand your pet issue in the context of time

Be humble. Conventional development wisdom in the 1980s was to never give 
people actual money because they would use it badly. In the 1990s we discovered 
micro-credit and made peace with cash loans, but only if we changed enough 
interest and service fees to build sustainable micro-financial institutions 
(MFIs). And we trained recipients relentlessly to make sure they’d know how to 
use money properly (I personally wrote the words “numeracy training” intoUSAid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/usaid> proposals more times that I can 
remember during the micro-credit era). Now, there is a growing body of evidence 
to suggest that the best way to help people is to just give them cold, hard 
cash with few or no follow-up expectations.

Whether you perceive it or not, the ecosystem of aid and development entities 
is in a constant state of evolution – changing theory, changing practice, 
changing understanding about what it means to “help”. Today’s brilliant 
innovation will be tomorrow’s old hat. And the practice that you so 
passionately evangelise this week could well be proven harmful the next.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 