
Fashion retailers are rolling out the discounts early for the second autumn in 
a row after warmer than average weather hit sales of coats and knitwear.

Marks & Spencer is offering 20% off coats and jackets and up to 60% off 
selected other items, despite its efforts to cut back on discounting.Debenhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> is offering up to half price 
on women’s knitwear; Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Bhs and Oasis are all offering up 
to 30% discounts while New Look and French Connection are advertising 25% off 
many knitwear items.

The discounts have kicked in a fortnight before Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, when many fashion chains 
are expected to join in with the traditional US discount day.

It comes after a poor week for fashion retailers which have already suffered 
from unseasonably chilly weather over the summer.

Clothing chains suffered a 6.6% fall in sales in the week to 8 November 
compared with the same week last year, according to figures from BDO’s survey 
of mid-sized chains. That was on top of a weak trading period a year before 
when sales fell 3.6%.

BDO said all fashion retailers had suffered as the number of people visiting 
high streets and shopping centres fell.

The mild temperatures also contributed to a 0.6% fall in fashion sales at John 
Lewis in the week to 7 November, particularly in cold-weather gear, coats and 
jackets. The figure was partly affected by strong sales in the previous week 
when John Lewis was price-matching against a promotional event atHouse of Fraser
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/house-fraser>.

“There is a sense that retailers have managed their stocks more efficiently 
this year but with like-for-like numbers struggling, they will no doubt be 
considering their promotional activity asBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> looms and the savvy 
consumer holds out for stronger promotions,” said Sophie Michael, national head 
of retail at BDO. She said she expected promotions to be more selective than 
“blanket”.

On Tuesday, Anders Kristiansen, the boss of New Look, said he didn’t think 
this year’s warmer weather was affecting sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/10/new-look-to-open-20-menswear-stores-as-expansion-gathers-pace>
. “Although it is warm now, in September we had an early cold spell and that 
helped change people’s mindset to buying outerwear and knitwear.”

He said that did not happen last year, when retailers were forced to discount 
heavily to clear stock after an unseasonably warm autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/26/winter-fashion-warm-weather-high-street-discounts>
.

However, a number of other fashion executives told the Guardian that trading 
was disappointing, particularly in comparison with last year’s weak figures 
with stocks of cold weather gear building up.

“The levels of discounting so far this season have been lower than in the 
previous three years, but we expect activity on the high street to step up in 
the next 10 days to two weeks unless the weather changes and there is a cold 
snap,” said one retailer.

The chance of that cold snap emerging is not promising, despite storm Abigail 
bringing heavy rains and high winds over the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/13/heavy-rain-warning-for-northern-britain-in-wake-of-storm-abigail>
.

The Met Office is predicting day to day variations in the temperature, with 
milder, wetter spells interspersed with colder, showery spells, in the next two 
weeks. Its forecast predicts: “Overall [temperatures] should average out at 
near or slightly above normal for the time of year.”

In October the UK mean temperature was 10C, 0.5C above the long-term average 
but the temperature hit a high point of 22.7C in Braemar, Aberdeenshire. It was 
also the driest month since October 2007 with locations in the west and north 
with less than a third of average rainfall in a few locations. Overall the UK 
overall received only 57% of average rainfall.

Tony Shiret, an analyst at Haitong Research, said that poor sales in October 
and early November made it difficult for clothing chains to clear their coats 
and jumpers.

“They are going to be sitting around with excess inventory in the run-up to 
Christmas and if you give people a taste of discount they are just going to 
wait for the big sales kick.

“I’m working on the assumption that the whole season is going to be spoilt by 
markdowns and overhanging stock against an incredibly weak season last year.

“What is more difficult to judge is how much the current trade also reflects 
the continuing switch from shops to online. That is much more of an issue 
structurally.”
 