
Manchester United’s Wayne Rooney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> has withdrawn from the 
England squad with a knee injury, the Football Association has announced.

Joe Hart says he had to rein in England passion after Euro 2016 errors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/joe-hart-england-passion-euro-2016-errors>
Rooney and Ryan Bertrand both missed training on Monday morning with “minor 
issues” and the interim managerGareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> had said both would be 
assessed to see if they will be available for selection against Spain on 
Tuesday, but the England captain has not been deemed fit enough to remain with 
the squad.

Southgate had earlier confirmed Jordan Henderson – who has stood in as captain 
before – would wear the captain’s armband.

In naming Henderson as captain for the match, Southgate also voiced his belief 
that it was importantEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 
have more players who can step up to lead the side.

He said: “Jordan Henderson will be captain. But I believe we’ve got several 
leaders, one sitting next to me [Joe Hart] who has shown a great maturity since 
I’ve been in the roles, and I don’t think we can have just one captain. At 
times too much of that responsibility has laid with Wayne and we need to share 
that. There are leaders already and other potential leaders who I think can 
step forward. And once you have a team full of those players then we’ll have a 
lot of success.”

Aside from Rooney and the Southampton left-back Bertrand, Southgate will also 
be without the Tottenham striker Harry Kane due to an ankle problem, but 
otherwise reported no further fitness concerns.

Gareth Southgate presses home his long-term vision for England side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/gareth-southgate-long-term-vision-england-spain>
The clash against Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> at 
Wembley will be Southgate’s fourth and final match of his temporary reign, with 
his previous three matches bringing wins over Scotland and Malta and a draw 
with Slovenia.

Southgate was again asked about his future beyond Tuesday’s friendly but the 
former Middlesbrough manager was giving little away.

He said: “I think it’s right for everybody to reflect. If you are appointing a 
manager at any football club, in my opinion you should take your time, you 
should see what fits with the philosophy of what you want to do, you should 
speak to all of the people you want to speak to.”

Pushed on whether he wants the job permanently, Southgate said: “I don’t think 
now is the time for those discussions. I’ve said everything is about the team. 
I’m not a coach for whom what happens to me is the most important thing.

“First and foremost in these four matches I was asked to pick up, the team are 
in a healthy qualifying position and that’s been done. Now we’d like to build 
on that in the game tomorrow and to show some style, some understanding of what 
we need to do without the ball.

“Our pressing has to be spot on, because if you don’t get that right against 
Spain then they can carve you apart. So our work with and without the ball has 
to be immaculate and so that’s a great challenge for us as a group of coaches 
and all of the players.”
 