
Do you know where and how you want to be buried?

Will you choose an elaborate Victorian-style headstone, or do you prefer a 
“green” burial 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/entry/australia-gps-graves_n_7190576> with 
only a GPS tracking signal indicating your location? Or you may elect to buy a
Bios Urn <https://urnabios.com/>, a 100% biodegradable capsule you plant in the 
ground with cremated ashes and a seed of your choice which will one day grow 
into a tree.

Issues of mortality and access to burial space are not typically dinner party 
conversations or at the top of government agendas. And until recently its 
priority as a challenge in planning has been virtually non-existent.

Sydney’s 2014 strategic plan, A Plan for Growing Sydney 
<http://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/Plans-for-Your-Area/Sydney/A-Plan-for-Growing-Sydney>
, recognises the need for studies of cemetery capacity and demand to identify 
future land requirements. Such studies are likely to reveal spatial variances 
across larger cities owing to differences in age and religious and cultural 
communities.

The last major changes to the cemetery landscape in Australian cities occurred 
in the late 1800s 
<http://dictionaryofsydney.org/entry/death_and_dying_in_nineteenth_century_sydney>
. At this time thecrowded and unsanitary conditions 
<http://www.cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au/learn/sydneys-history/people-and-places/old-sydney-burial-ground>
 of churchyard burial grounds required the dedication of considerable burial 
land on what was once the urban fringe.

The Vatican may protest, but traditional funerals are dead and buried | Sophia 
Deboick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/28/vatican-catholic-ban-scattering-ashes-death-funerals>
Many of these cemeteries continue to serve society’s burial needs. For the 
past century there has been no pressing need to plan cities for the dead. It 
therefore comes as no surprise that consideration of a cemetery as essential 
public infrastructure has fallen through the cracks.

We have reached a point where this must change. The lifespans of existing 
cemeteries in major Australian cities are severely limited. In Sydney, 
according to the New South Wales Department of Planning and Environment, the 
metropolitan region’s 310,000 to 330,000 available plots will probablybe 
exhausted by 2050 
<http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/659594/cemeteries-and-crematoria-nsw-activity-report-2041-15.pdf>
.

Annual numbers of deaths are predicted to double between 2011 and 2051. 
Despite ashift towards cremations 
<http://www.afr.com/business/cremation-favoured-in-tough-economy-20130903-je3o4>
 over the last century (Sydney’scremation rate is 66% 
<http://www.dpi.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/630623/cemeteries-and-crematoria-nsw-strategic-plan.pdf>
), our cities’ diverse religious and cultural communities will always require 
space for burial.

This raises two important considerations. Where will we bury? And how will we 
bury?

Where will we bury?

At 286 hectares, Sydney’s Rookwood cemetery is the largest in the southern 
hemisphere <http://www.rookwoodcemetery.com.au/about-us>. The allocation of 
such sizeable land only 15km from the CBD is unimaginable today. Equally as 
inconceivable is the location ofWaverley cemetery 
<http://www.waverleycemetery.com/>, which clings to the ocean cliffs of 
Sydney’s eastern suburbs.

Significant barriers to cemetery development in urban areas include high land 
values, limited available land, restrictive zoning and a more pressing need to 
house the living. The landlocked nature of many cemeteries suggests no choice 
except for the dedication of additional land on the urban fringe.

Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> has changed 
considerably since Rookwood cemetery was established in 1868. While planners 
are continually rethinking how we design for housing, transport and employment 
to meet changing needs, we are yet to contemplate a new life for the cemetery 
landscape.

How will we bury?

The need to plan for the shortage of burial space presents a timely 
opportunity to reconsider how we bury.Legislative changes 
<https://www.google.com.au/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=10&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjqv9DUgYTRAhVBH5QKHWzyAFAQFghOMAk&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theaustralian.com.au%2Fnews%2Flatest-news%2Fgrave-recycling-laws-pass-nsw-parliament%2Fstory-fn3dxiwe-1226764671053&usg=AFQjCNElG50KhnoZPN5S_uWKOPjjcRs5OA>
 in NSW introduced provisions for the reuse of an older grave once the tenure 
period expires. Renewable tenure creates the opportunity to provide ongoing 
cemetery capacity.

Renewable tenure is uncommon in Australia. Most burial plots are still sold in 
perpetuity, meaning a grave remains untouched forever.

Have you ever considered that your grave could later become someone else’s? 
Would you buy a grave for your parents for a limited number of years, or would 
you choose a grave that you could visit for the rest of your life and your 
children’s lives?

These are difficult questions to ponder. Also, disturbing a personal and 
sacred space for the dead typically does not sit well with the public. A grave 
is often thought of as a “final resting place”.

An important question is whether the bereaved seek comfort in memorialising 
the deceased in perpetuity, or is a physical space for mourning required only 
for an initial period. Considering that grave visitations often cease after 40 
or 50 years, is it reasonable to assume that the significance of a grave varies 
over time?

When the opinions of younger adults (aged 20 to 30) on grave reuse were 
surveyed by one of the authors, 72% of respondents indicated they were unaware 
of this practice. But respondents recognised links to several urban issues, 
including sustainable land consumption and growth pressures in cities.

Respondents also expressed interest in other burial trends, such as natural 
burial 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/grave-new-world--natural-burials-coming-to-the-act-20150715-gicxib.html>
 parks, where physical memorials are limited and the natural environment 
remains largely unaltered. Despite a discussion on burial practices, 68% said 
they wanted to be cremated. If cremation rates do rise this could mean less 
urban land is needed for burials.

A conversation about burial preferences and new burial trends will improve 
understanding and provide direction on the future demand for burial land and 
the future form of the cemetery landscape.

• Kate Ryan is a researcher at the University of New South Wales and Christine 
Steinmetz is a senior lecturer in built environment there.This article was 
originally published onthe Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/how-to-pick-an-ethically-raised-ham-this-christmas-69640>
, part of theGuardian Comment Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/guardian-comment-network>
 