
There’s always one game at E3 that proves, counter to the general theme of the 
show, bigger isn’t always better. This year, a tiny studio named Compulsion 
found itself thrust into the limelight after its project We Happy Few caused a 
considerable splash at Microsoft’s press conference. But as a black comedy set 
in a dystopian Britain being destroyed by a vast group hallucination, it may 
now take on more profound and pressing connotations following last night’s 
result. For some, this strange combination of 1984, A Clockwork Orange and 
Bioshock feels very much the game of the moment.

The opening of the E3 demo, which momentarily silenced the usual energetic 
whooping, evoked the spirit of another wonderful introductory sequence, from
Terry Gilliam’s seminal 1985 film Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/21/brazil-gilliam-fantasy>. 
Wage-slave Arthur Hastings is sat at his desk in an extravagantly British 
office in 1964, surrounded by Heath Robinson vacuum-tube machinery and period 
furniture, balefully performing his job of erasing uncomfortable stories from 
back-issues of a newspaper. Suddenly he spots a story with personal relevance, 
but as he’s processing it a colleague sporting a Mary Quant dress and a white 
mask with a rictus grin, enters. Unlike his colleagues, it emerges, Arthur 
hasn’t been taking his mandatory Joy pills. This is a Britain in which drugged 
out bliss isn’t a counter-culture activity, it’s a legal requirement.

Things come to a head when Arthur obeys his workmates’ exhortations to 
participate in the dubious excitement of bashing a piñata. At which point, the 
last vestiges of the narcotic wear off, revealing to Arthur that he and his 
colleagues have actually just bludgeoned a giant rat, showering his compatriots 
in blood and gore, which they blithely gobble as if it were sweets. So this is 
a Britain in which the populace are literally fed terrible lies by 
unaccountable wardens of social stability. Hmmm. Anyway, identified as a 
“Downer”, Arthur is henceforth condemned to life as an outcast in the fictional 
city of Wellington Wells, We Happy Few’s central setting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwe-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4502197502430dd0d17d23f0b3cc6b6274c8dfc%2F25_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20Happy%20Few%20%E2%80%93%20the%20indie%20game%20about%20Britain%20that%20couldn't%20be%20more%20relevant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwe-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20Happy%20Few%20%E2%80%93%20the%20indie%20game%20about%20Britain%20that%20couldn%27t%20be%20more%20relevant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwe-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4502197502430dd0d17d23f0b3cc6b6274c8dfc%2F25_0_1799_1080%2F1799.jpg>
 It’s Joy-poppers v Downers in We Happy few. Photograph: Compulsion Games 
Perhaps the surprisingly thing about this Orwellian dystopia is that Compulsion
Games <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> is not based in Britain, 
but in an old gramophone factory in Montreal. Art director Whitney Clayton 
reveals that the team is fascinated by British culture, and happily reels off a 
list of influences. “They include The Prisoner, Clockwork Orange, Brave New 
World, Doctor Who and Brazil,” she says. “And Blow-Up for the aesthetics.” She 
adds that the game has a whole area which is effectively a tribute to Dad’s 
Army. “And there’s a lot of Monty Python-style humour, too”.

So what led Compulsion to turn this interest into a game? “The studio head 
wanted to do a dystopia, set in an alternate history, he wanted a society where 
everybody was forced to be happy, and he had the idea for the happy-masks,” 
says Clayton. “So from there, that concept reminded me of the movie Hot Fuzz, 
and I was thinking that it seems to be a common theme in British shows – 
there’s an episode of The Avengers, for example, called Murderville, which is 
set in a cute town, but there are dark secrets underneath. It’s a really common 
theme, and I love it. People are obsessed with manners, like in the show 
Keeping Up Appearances – but then they bury everything beneath that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwe-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93faf3153eb05891ad6e647141350bfc9e3bd490%2F228_0_5194_3120%2F5194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20Happy%20Few%20%E2%80%93%20the%20indie%20game%20about%20Britain%20that%20couldn't%20be%20more%20relevant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwe-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20Happy%20Few%20%E2%80%93%20the%20indie%20game%20about%20Britain%20that%20couldn%27t%20be%20more%20relevant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fwe-happy-few-indie-game-uk-britain-dystopia-e3%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93faf3153eb05891ad6e647141350bfc9e3bd490%2F228_0_5194_3120%2F5194.jpg>
 Perhaps the surprisingly thing about this Orwellian dystopia is that 
Compulsion Games is not based in Britain, but in an old gramophone factory in 
Montreal. Photograph: Compulsion Games 
Hands-on time with We Happy Few reveals a survival game which is definitely 
more black comedy than horror. After Hastings is outed as a Downer, he is at 
least left with a melee weapon – useful for escaping security guards – and 
winds up in an underground bunker stocked with materials that can be crafted 
into useful items. After a bit of puzzling (one of the first items available to 
craft is a lock-pick), he finds himself wandering a run-down village named 
Hamlyn, mainly populated by fellow Downers.

Attempting to escape that ghetto, you enter an area populated by Joy-poppers 
and as the story of this world emerges, another game mechanic emerges. 
Non-Downers will routinely attack you, unless you temporarily disguise yourself 
as one of them by swallowing a Joy pill – at which point, the landscape 
radically transforms, too, from desolate shanty to apparent idyll, complete 
with hallucinogenic rainbows.

We learn quickly that We Happy Few is pretty unforgiving if you don’t have the 
right supplies: and if you die, you must start again. Also, you don’t just play 
as Arthur Hastings – there are a number of characters, each with their own 
storyline. And the game world looks to be large and diverse, as it exists on a 
number of islands off the shore of Britain.

The game has another interesting surprise: it makes liberal use of procedural 
generation – the technology exploited in titles like No Man’s Sky and Minecraft 
to automatically create huge, unique landscapes. Thus, every time you die or 
move to a new area in We Happy Few, your surroundings will regenerate 
themselves.

The decision to explore this technique was, according to compulsion COO Sam 
Abbott, related to its first game, Contrast, one of the first two PlayStation 
Plus titles, which launched along with the PlayStation 4 in 2013. A clever, 
atmospheric noir-style game centred on shadow-play puzzles, it was made by a 
team of just seven people.

“The core team wanted to work on something a bit more ambitious: we felt the 
things that we did on Contrast really well were story and atmosphere, but it 
was really hard for a small team to build a giant linear game,” says Abbott. 
“You need so many more people and so much more resources. So procedural 
generation is great, because people can make a smaller number of 
super-high-quality pieces rather than 100 million not-such-good-quality pieces. 
Our technical director has created quite an incredible procedural system. It’s 
very flexible, so we could even change the length of the game from five hours 
to 20.”

We Happy Few, then, appears to be have benefited from a clever joined-up 
approach to theme, content and technology. Like No Man’s Sky, it may prove a 
blueprint for how tiny studios can punch above their weight in a quickly 
evolving industry. What really comes through when you play, though, is that 
Compulsion has clearly had great fun making it – the result is a thoroughly 
original, visually unmistakable and genuinely amusing work, that exudes the 
sort of sophistication and (perhaps unintended) political potency that we do 
not always associate with E3 hits.

We Happy Few is released in early access form on PC, Mac and Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> (timed console exclusive) on 
26 July

 