
In New York this week, in a moment sadly lacking the fanfare of their signing, 
comes the first test of thesustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 (SDGs): the inaugural meeting of their monitoring process.
 <>

The High Level Political Forum <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/hlpf> 
takes place under the banner “ensuring that no one is left behind”. It’s highly 
encouraging that UN member states have agreed that focusing on the poorest is 
the most immediate priority, and countries will report on how they are 
responding to this new agenda.

UK government pledges £100m to help world's poorest girls make the grade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/07/uk-government-pledges-100m-poorest-girls-universal-primary-secondary-education-2030>
New research <http://www.developmentprogress.org/leave-no-one-behind> 
quantifies how urgent this is. Using current progress on key indicators, it 
shows just how much harder it will be to reach some of the most relevant goals 
and targets if action is delayed.

We conclude that if no action is taken in the first 1,000 days of the SDGs – 
in other words, in the first three years up to September 2018 – then 
governments risk leaving people behind and failing to achieve certain goals 
altogether.

In Africa, today, our analysis shows that countries will need to reduce 
preventable child deaths <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs178/en/> 
at a rate of more than 7% a year between now and 2030 to meet the SDG target. 
But if they wait until 2018 before taking action, that rate increases to more 
than 9%. Currently child mortality rates in the region are declining by only 
around 4% a year.

If they delay until 2027 – which really would be a worst-case scenario – they 
will have to reduce child mortality more than four times (32%) faster than they 
would if they start to take action today: clearly an impossible task.


We see a similar story for education. Our calculations show that African 
countries need to reduce the number of children attending school for less than 
four years at a rate of 10% each year between now and 2030 to eliminate 
education poverty. If action is delayed until 2018, the rate increases to 13% 
per year.


Finally, if sub-Saharan Africa is to eliminate ultra-poverty – people living 
on less than $1 a day 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwjh9uXRnuTNAhVFLMAKHRYcAecQFggoMAI&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.odi.org%2Fevents%2Fpresentations%2F257.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFdsRPWlbMf1_NdOHfAgVjTjJHcXQ&sig2=6JuEKLQ_-Cd0SDmHNkC2yg&bvm=bv.126130881,d.ZGg&cad=rja>
, an estimate of the minimum survival level – it needs to reduce levels by 10% 
a year if action starts today, rising to 13% if this is left until 2018.


In fact, countries can do a lot in three years to help poor and marginalised 
people out of poverty and exclusion. For instance, from 2010 to 2012,Senegal’s 
rural electrification project 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&ved=0ahUKEwi49JPznOTNAhXGCcAKHcZ2Ae4QFgg9MAU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.club-er.org%2Fimages%2FslideHomePage%2FJaune%2520Financmt_GB_BD.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGw1wrofhUFHQNgvpk_2QrAS-hZqw&sig2=uHwVO6fL-cPmgXt6xptSyQ&bvm=bv.126130881,d.ZGg&cad=rja>
 (pdf) increased access to electricity in 191 target villages more than 
five-fold, from 17,000 to 90,000.

Working together, we have a real chance to make global education a reality | 
Erna Solberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/04/make-global-education-reality-world-leaders-erna-solberg-international-commission-on-financing-global-education-opportunity>
There are examples of extraordinary progress from low income countries too. In 
2007, Nepal’s interim constitution provided a legal basis to the rights of 
minorities and introduced quotas for members of lower castes and women. As a 
result, in the Constituent Assembly formed just one year later,one third of 
seats were held by women 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=6&ved=0ahUKEwiY4YHNqeTNAhVMDcAKHdBOAIUQFgg-MAU&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fwcm%2Fwebdav%2Fsite%2Fundpa%2Fshared%2Fundpa%2Fpdf%2Fdpa_ps_2008_summer_fall.pdf&usg=AFQjCNF0lf5CQtsAFYAI6nZ--hAU8xdykQ&sig2=19c6QLtj3iBeDWcII5r81g&bvm=bv.126130881,d.ZGg&cad=rja>
, including traditionally marginalisedTerai Dalit women 
<http://www.nepaldemocracy.org/ethnicity/dalit_women.htm>.


Meanwhile in Eritrea, a fragile state, there has been extraordinary success in 
getting previously excluded children into education. A programme launched by 
the government, in conjunction with Unicef, in 2007, has allowed the children 
of nomadic herders – a group traditionally excluded from formal teaching 
because of seasonal migration patterns – to attend primary school.

The programme has had remarkable success in a short space of time. Within two 
years,more than 5,000 children between the ages of nine and 14 were enrolled 
<http://www.unicef.org/infobycountry/eritrea_56989.html> in 57 Complementary 
Elementary Education (CEE) learning centres across the country. Building on 
this success, there are now some 100 CEE centres in the country, and about 
30,000 children have benefited from the programme.


So the message is clear: early action is both necessary and possible. What we 
need is another follow-up moment in 2018 – a high-level summit to review 
progress, to ensure that “leave no one behind” does not itself get left behind.

 