
People are gathered around a bed in the emergency ward of Al-Sabeen children’s 
hospital in Sana’a, the Yemeni capital. Five-month-old Atan is being examined 
while lying next to another struggling baby. He’s tiny, and his breathing is 
fast and shallow. His father is staring glassy-eyed while his mother holds an 
oxygen tube near the boy’s face. She’s wearing a niqab so all I can see are her 
eyes. There are no tears, but a terrible look of fear. Across the bed, a doctor 
frantically checks the baby over and demands urgently: “When was the last time 
he ate?” There is no answer.

Atan is severely malnourished. He’s been starving – as has his mother. She’s 
been eating so little she’s unable to breastfeed any more. She tried giving him 
goat’s milk, but it gave him diarrhoea.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-RLaLw1HLgc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-RLaLw1HLgc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-RLaLw1HLgc&media=>
Channel 4’s Unreported World Yemen: Britain’s Unseen War 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-RLaLw1HLgc> 
His father, Abdul Aziz, says Atan has been like this for about a month, but 
the family couldn’t afford to bring him the 50km to Sana’a. It’s taken that 
long to scrape together and borrow the money for the trip. There is no work 
where they live, prices in the shops have rocketed, and Aziz is trapped farming 
a small plot of land that belongs to somebody else. By the time he’s paid the 
landowner there’s virtually nothing left to feed his family. What do you eat? I 
ask. “Flour. Only flour,” he says, unable to remember the last time they ate 
vegetables or meat.

Those who are malnourished are set to be, by far, the biggest casualties of 
Yemen’s war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/yemen-famine-feared-as-starving-children-fight-for-lives-in-hospital>
. More than 6,000 peoplehave been killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/saudi-inquiry-war-claims-yemen-inadequate-say-rights-groups>
 in the bombing and fighting as aSaudi-led coalition tries to defeat the Houthi 
rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/how-saudi-arabias-airstrikes-have-hit-civilian-life-in-yemen>
 and supporters of the former president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, who took over much 
of the country last year and drove out the new president, Abd-Rabbu Mansour 
Hadi.

Hundreds of thousands of children in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, like Atan, are suffering from severe 
malnutrition, and possibly millions are in the early stages. Statistics in 
countries like this are unreliable, but the doctors say there is a procession 
of children coming through the emergency unit every day.

Patients with other conditions are made worse by malnutrition. As we stand 
looking at Atan, another family rushes into the ward carrying a child of around 
six. Within seconds doctors are doing chest compressions and blowing oxygen 
into his mouth but it is clearly too late. Within seconds the cries of the 
child’s mother fill the emergency ward. The boy had malaria but the doctor says 
he was so severely malnourished that he had no strength to fight the fever. 
About 40% of the cases coming in, he says, are made much worse by malnutrition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fwe-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23bb480bb75c3284a8e9dd6c4c453a06e7ed8016%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20saw%20how%20Yemen%E2%80%99s%20children%20are%20slowly%20starving%20to%20death%20%7C%20Krishnan%20Guru-Murthy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fwe-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20saw%20how%20Yemen%E2%80%99s%20children%20are%20slowly%20starving%20to%20death%20%7C%20Krishnan%20Guru-Murthy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fwe-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23bb480bb75c3284a8e9dd6c4c453a06e7ed8016%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Severely malnourished five-month-old Atan, in his hospital bed in Sana’a. 
Photograph: Krishnan Guru-Murthy/ITN 
To the south of rebel-held territory, lies the Red Sea port city of Hodeidah, 
where the vast majority of imports are brought in. Yemen is almost entirely 
reliant on imported food, but the port was one of the first areas to be bombed 
by the Saudi-led coalition. The giant cranes used to unload ships were 
destroyed by guided bombs. It means the only ships that can dock now are those 
that have their own small cranes on board. It makes the whole process painfully 
slow.

Food warehouses, storage silos and maintenance depots at the docks have also 
been hit. And beyond the port, bridges across the country have been bombed, 
making road transport slow and hazardous. The infrastructure Yemen needs to 
distribute food has been effectively crippled.

Saudi Arabia insists it does not target civilian infrastructure and said at 
the time it was not aiming at the civilian port but a Houthi military position. 
However, whether or not they are targeting civilian facilities, they are 
hitting them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fwe-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3677421145828026c6d7a67c55117e478d3c1496%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=We%20saw%20how%20Yemen%E2%80%99s%20children%20are%20slowly%20starving%20to%20death%20%7C%20Krishnan%20Guru-Murthy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fwe-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=We%20saw%20how%20Yemen%E2%80%99s%20children%20are%20slowly%20starving%20to%20death%20%7C%20Krishnan%20Guru-Murthy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fwe-saw-how-yemen-children-slowly-starving-to-death-krishnan-guru-murthy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3677421145828026c6d7a67c55117e478d3c1496%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 The port cranes in Hodeidah have been bombed by the Saudi-led coalition 
forces, crippling the infrastructure Yemen needs to distribute food. 
Photograph: Krishnan Guru-Murthy/ITN 
The port manager shows me bomb fragments gathered after the airstrikes. There 
are no serial numbers to check, but people here believe they are the same kind 
of weaponsdocumented by Human Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/07/11/saudi-coalition-airstrikes-target-civilian-factories-yemen>
 that have been used against nearby factories in Hodeidah –Paveway guided bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/20/britain-cashing-in-middle-east-weapons-sales-saudi-arabia-yemen>
 made in Britain and the US. Britain has sold £3bn worth of weapons to Saudi 
Arabia since the start of the war last year, and the Saudi airforce flies 
Eurofighter Typhoon jets. It is no surprise that the men working here regard 
Britain as a part of the coalition that is attacking them. At the numerous 
Houthi checkpoints across Yemen they regard us, a British filmcrew, with some 
suspicion.

The villages around Hodeidah are also suffering a malnutrition crisis. A 
mobile team of doctors and nurses provide what help they can, but they have few 
supplies. Parents told to take their children to hospital often can’t afford to 
do so.

We meet Bassam, who weighs less than when he was born several months ago. His 
father was a motorbike taxi driver but nobody can pay him, so he’s barely 
making any money. He can’t afford to travel to the city so we take the family 
in our car and drop them at the hospital. The UN-funded malnutrition ward in 
Hodeidah is crammed full of similar cases.

On our return to Sana’a we go back to the children’s hospital to catch up with 
the cases we had filmed before. Atan was admitted to intensive care but died 
two days ago, and his parents buried him in a city graveyard they now won’t be 
able to afford to visit.

 