
Gareth Southgate <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> said 
he has proved he can “handle big occasions” after his four‑match stewardship of 
the senior England side ended with an encouraging if ultimately frustrating 
draw against Spain.

His team conceded two late goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
, Isco’s equaliser coming five minutes into stoppage time, to temper some of 
the optimism whipped up by the most impressive display of Southgate’s short 
tenure. The process to appoint a permanent successor to Sam Allardyce will 
begin in earnest on Wednesday, with a five-man selection panel – comprising the 
FA’s chairman, Greg Clarke, the chief executive, Martin Glenn, plus Howard 
Wilkinson, Dan Ashworth and Graeme Le Saux – expected to recommend the 
46-year-old takes over on a four-year contract with a break clause applicable 
after the 2018 World Cup.

Jamie Vardy leads the way but England held by second-string Spain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
Southgate, acutely aware he will return to the under-21s if he is not taken 
on, would not be drawn onwhether he wants the job  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/gareth-southgate-quick-decision-england-manager-job>
but has made it clear privately he would like to continue what he has started. 
“I’ve not learned anything about myself but I’ve learned a lot about the role 
and relished the challenge,” he said. “I’ve proved I can manage big matches, 
that I can tactically – with the help of my staff – prepare a team to play 
against a top side and give them a tough test. I’ve proved I can handle big 
occasions.

“I feel every situation I’ve been through, and many have been complex and 
potential powder kegs, we’ve coped with very well. And I’m pleased with how 
we’ve coped with it all really. More than that, we’ve built some important 
stability for the group of players and the team. It’s been a brilliant 
experience for me. I’ve thoroughly enjoyed working with the players and can see 
the potential of the group. I took over at a moment of instability for 
everybody, and we’ve brought stability back and built a platform for the team.

“In terms of the remit, we’ve fulfilled that. It’s an exciting group of 
players. They’ve got a lot of potential but there’s a long way to go before we 
can be considered a top team. I’m proud to have led the country for a couple of 
really important games and experienced what that feels like. We’ve got a 
European Under-21 Championship next summer and the draw is being made next 
month, so I need to know where I’m going to park my car for the next few weeks.”

Southgate saw positives in his team’s display, with England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> the better side for long 
periods. “I definitely took encouragement,” he said. “The players, over the 
period of the four matches, couldn’t have given any more. I’m really pleased 
with them, especially the way we were tonight. We had long discussions before 
the game about our approach, wanting to be a front-foot team pressing high. If 
we were going to be defeated it was going to be being positive and brave 
without the ball. At times we did that well.

Julen Lopetegui’s Spain leave it late but depart with reputations intact | Sid 
Lowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/julen-lopetegui-spain-new-manager-england-wembley-draw-friendly>
“That comes with a price as the game goes on. At times we kept the ball well 
and were certainly a threat in transition and counterattack but maybe in the 
second half we weren’t able to keep it quite enough. You pay the price. We were 
fatiguing in the last 20 minutes, and they are a top side. It feels like a 
defeat for the players but I couldn’t be prouder of their efforts. It was a 
healthy, positive performance. Maybe not winning will be better for us in the 
long run, knowing what we have to do at this level.

“Without doubt, the longer you work with any team, with any group, you have 
the chance to embed more ideas, review each game and learn from it. The players 
are bullish about how they want to play. They have the potential to go and do 
that longer term. They now know the benchmark. We made changes [on the 
pitch]ourselves as well, and maybe lost a bit of cohesion towards the end. But 
what a brilliant experience for all of them. It should start to build belief in 
them as a group.”
 