
Winter is coming, or so Britain’s downtrodden fashion chiefs hope after a 
summer to forget.

Last week’s profit warning from womenswear retailer Bonmarché, which wiped 25% 
off the value of the company’s shares, underlined how damaging the wrong sort 
of weather can be for chains. The Indian summer had put a dampener on sales of 
new season winter coats and jumpers, said chief executive Helen Connolly of the 
value retailer, which only two months ago had bemoaned a lack of sunshine.

And Bonmarché has not been alone this year in complaining about wintry summers 
and summery winters, with some of the high street’s biggest names – from Next 
to H&M, River Island and even fast-fashion juggernautPrimark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> – struggling to trade through 
topsy-turvy seasons.

The malaise is making analysts worried about the fortunes of market leader 
Marks & Spencer, which in July reported its worst quarter of clothing sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/marks-spencer-suffers-big-fall-in-clothing-sales>
 in eight years, and is not due to update the City until November.

In the wake of last week’s weaker-than-expected figures from H&M, Bernstein 
analyst Jamie Merriman warns that the slow start to the new season could force 
retailers to offer discounts. “We expect that H&M and the industry more broadly 
have more stock than planned for at this point in the year, which could again 
lead to higher than expected markdown,” she says.

This is bad news for an industry that is struggling as Britons buy fewer new 
clothes, choosing to spend spare cash on going out. All Bar One ownerMitchells 
& Butlers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/22/heat-helps-mitchells-butlers-rise-drink-sales-oneills>
, for example, toasted the recent hot spell as it drove more punters into its 
pubs.

“The weather is a perennial excuse for poor performance, but I do think that 
... it has become a more valid reason for [it],” says Conlumino analyst Neil 
Saunders. A crowded and competitive marketplace and reliance on discounting to 
shift stock are also behind the sector’s woes, he says, adding: “Given the 
weather is not going to behave any time soon, retailers need to look at how 
they can shift their models to be more reactive to sudden changes.”

One of the retailers still managing to thrive is the Inditex-owned Zara chain, 
which last week bucked the trend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/zara-tops-up-inditex-profits> 
by reporting strong figures. The Spanish group, which manufactures and designs 
its own clothing, is uniquely placed to react to catwalk trends and erratic 
seasons, getting clothes from factory to store within days.

Saunders says retailers should be trying to move away from traditional 
seasonal stock changes by putting more focus on “layering” – which allows for 
warm- and cold-weather lines to be stocked together. Buying some products on 
shorter production runs would allow chains to react to weather changes, he 
suggests.

M&S tested this in May, selling pieces of its autumn collection in store at 
the same time as it showed them to fashion press.

But other forces are also bearing down, with Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> boss Lord Wolfson pointing to the 
influence of falling real wage growth on high-street sentiment. At its recent 
trading update, the Tory peer described a volatile sales picture with wildly 
different figures emerging from stores around the country, as autumn arrived in 
Aberdeen, but Londoners were still trooping to work in flip-flops. The 
divergence made it hard to gauge whether winter ranges were a hit or a miss, he 
said. “Consumers are not buying stock unless they absolutely need and want it … 
that’s a symptom of underlying weakness in consumer demand.”

The Met Office’s long-range forecast for October suggests the unsettled 
weather will continue but it promises “increasing chance of chilly nights and 
frosts”. Fashion chiefs will have their fingers crossed.
 