
10 of the best ways to enjoy Paris … on a budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/06/10-best-ways-enjoy-paris-on-a-budget>
We moved to Paris three years ago with our then four-year-old twin boys. Ready 
to embrace the child-friendly side of the city, we struggled at first but then 
stumbled across Les Berges,a mile-long creative playground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/06/10-best-ways-enjoy-paris-on-a-budget>
 and cultural space on the Left Bank of the Seine, affectionately dubbed Berge 
Street.

Kids were having a wild time, skateboarding, leaping onto climbing frames, 
playing hopscotch, tagging the giant slate drawing wall. Our boys were stoked. 
They sped off to hide in the tipis then challenged me to a game of swingball.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fparis-le-berge-street-seine-family-playground%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436366195738%2Fd81f45cc-55ef-4111-b633-8c17951a8beb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Welcome%20to%20Berge%20Street%2C%20Paris%E2%80%99s%20brilliant%20child-friendly%20space%20on%20the%20Seine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fparis-le-berge-street-seine-family-playground%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Welcome%20to%20Berge%20Street%2C%20Paris%E2%80%99s%20brilliant%20child-friendly%20space%20on%20the%20Seine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Fparis-le-berge-street-seine-family-playground%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436366195738%2Fd81f45cc-55ef-4111-b633-8c17951a8beb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Renovated ship crates, known as Zzz pods 
Top 10 museum cafes and restaurants in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/07/top-10-museum-cafes-restaurants-paris-france>
We discovered a row of glass “Zzz” pods 
<http://lesberges.paris.fr/en/envies/zzz/> – renovated ship crates in their own 
gardens that are free to hire for 1½ hours to snooze or relax in – and also a 
five-lane running track. We grabbed pizza at Rosa Bonheur 
<http://www.rosabonheur.fr/> (great value and delicious), then sipped hot 
chocolate by a makeshift cafe strewn with board games and danced under the 
disco ball at Place de la Concorde, where music played through massive 
speakers. Later we chilled atFLOW <http://www.flow-paris.com/>, a cool alfresco 
bar that didn’t mind the little people!

As a family we have lost hours here; discovering something new on every visit 
– DJs at night was the latest. It’s free, loads of fun, forever changing and 
beautiful. Open all year round but in full swing over summer, it’s a fabulous 
place to unleash the child within and exhaust the kids.

• From Port de Solférino to Port du Gros-Caillou, lesberges.paris.fr 
<http://lesberges.paris.fr/en/>

Claudette Parry is founder of the blog mamalovesparis.com 
<http://mamalovesparis.com/>
 