
The Lagos novel has become a genre in itself, with an outstanding list of 
practitioners:Chinua Achebe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/chinuaachebe>, 
Cyprian Ekwensi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/24/culture.obituaries>, Wole 
Soyinka,Sefi Atta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/22/a-bit-difference-sefi-atta-review>
, Ben Okri,Teju Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/books/teju-cole> ... It is 
almost a rite of passage for Nigerian authors, for Lagos is Nigeria in 
microcosm, and there is no understanding the country without understanding the 
city. With her new book,Chibundu Onuzo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chibundu-onuzo> (right) appears to be 
seeking to redefine the genre. Her debut novel,The Spider King’s Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/30/first-novels-roundup-review>, 
also set in Lagos, but its territorial ambition was modest compared withWelcome 
to Lagos. The classic African novel has always idealised the village, mostly 
casting it as the repository of order and tradition, while the city is 
portrayed as its antithesis – chaotic and corrupt, if not downright evil. It is 
a contest of worldviews: the modern versus the traditional, the foreign versus 
the indigenous, the old against the new.

Related: Chigozie Obioma: who should I write for – Nigerians, Africans, or 
everyone? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/14/how-african-writers-can-bring-local-language-to-life-for-all>

Onuzo’s title is an in-joke referencing the fact that, unlike most cities, 
Lagos has no “Welcome” sign. If there were a sign for the visitor approaching 
Lagos, it should probably be one of the epigraphs – made-up quotations from an 
imaginary local newspaper – that she places at the start of each chapter, 
perhaps the one that reads: “Lagos is no different from anywhere, except there 
are more people, and more noise, and more.” Despite the cacophony, and that 
ominous “more”, it has been estimated that about 2,000 souls daily move from 
countryside to city to realise their dreams – just like the five main 
characters who arrive there in search of a new start. Chike Ameobi is a 
military officer, travelling with Yemi, his subaltern, both deserters unable to 
stomach their commander’s killing of civilians in the Niger delta. On the way, 
they meet Fineboy, a fighter with one of the myriad rebel groups, pursuing his 
dream of becoming a radio DJ in Lagos. They also encounter 16-year-old Isoken, 
whom they save from being raped by Fineboy and his rebel cohorts, and whose 
father is thought to have been killed by rebels. And last there is the 
beautiful Oma, runaway wife of a rich but abusive husband.

Onuzo goes against conventional Lagos wisdom: greed is countered with charity, 
selfishness is juxtaposed with altruism

It’s a promising Dickensian opening, and in true Dickensian style, things 
quickly get complicated. The five decide to stick together. They all lack what 
it takes – money or connections – to make it in Lagos. What they do have, 
though, is hope. They move into an abandoned building which, it transpires, has 
not actually been vacated. The owner, minister of education Chief Sandayo, 
stumbles through the door one night on the run from the economic crimes police, 
carrying a bag containing $10m in cash. The five squatters decide to seize the 
loot, and to hold the minister prisoner. And now the central question becomes 
what to do with the money.

With Nollywood-like storylines and clever turns in plot, the book paints an 
entertaining and funny picture of Lagos life and Nigerian politics. Matters 
take a moralistic turn when the group decides to use the money to build schools 
and improve the life of the deprived masses, victims of politicians such as 
Chief Sandayo. Each morning they go out on a shopping spree, buying computers 
and books and playground equipment, and at night they return to their 
subterranean shelter to home-cooked meals from Oma, and a Bible reading by 
Chike.

Related: Top 10 megacities in fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/18/top-10-megacities-in-fiction> 

We sense Onuzo’s attempt to go against the conventional wisdom of Lagos. Greed 
is countered with charity, selfishness is juxtaposed with altruism. She seems 
to be imposing a traditional African moral vision on the city, and maybe even 
expressing a wishful vision of her country, of different “tribes” living 
harmoniously under one roof, each striving for the betterment of the whole. 
Onuzo’s portrayal of human character is often too optimistic, her view of 
politics and society too charitable; but her ability to bring her characters to 
life, including the city of Lagos, perhaps the best-painted character of all, 
is impressive.

• Helon Habila’s Oil on Water is published by Penguin. Welcome to Lagos is 
published by Faber. To order a copy for £12.99 (RRP £9.99) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/welcome-to-lagos.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 