
What with hosting 16 royal weddings as well as every coronation since 1066, 
Westminster Abbey has seen its fair share of extraordinary outfits. The Queen’s 
1953 Norman Hartnell coronation gown took a team of nine seamstresses eight 
months to make. The Duchess of Cambridge’s Alexander McQueen dress was such a 
closely guarded secret that embroiderers working on it were told the dress was 
for a costume drama.

 But until the first look from Gucci’s 2017 cruise collection appeared on the 
flagged cloisters, a thousand years of pageantry at the abbey had not included 
a fashion show, technically speaking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fwestminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F000e1102847ad4f5583e503890ce505121a0e5ec%2F0_0_3698_2220%2F3698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westminster%20Abbey%20proves%20divine%20inspiration%20for%20Gucci&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fwestminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westminster%20Abbey%20proves%20divine%20inspiration%20for%20Gucci&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fwestminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F000e1102847ad4f5583e503890ce505121a0e5ec%2F0_0_3698_2220%2F3698.jpg>
 Gucci models fill the cloisters at Westminster Abbey. Photograph: John 
Phillips/Getty Images for GUCCI 
And it is probably safe to say that until this moment it had not seen the 
likes of a rainbow-striped sweater with lace inserts, embroidered with a cat 
sporting a spiked halo of the type seen in early Christian art, teamed with a 
kilt in the mustard yellow checkmade famous by Alicia Silverstone in the film 
Clueless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/30/clueless-best-fashion-film-twenty-years-cher-horowitz>
, finished off with lace tights and spike-heel boots with seven silver buckles 
each.


If Gucci’s creative director, Alessandro Michele, was intimidated by putting 
his clothes on display a few feet from the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior, under 
the same roof as the burial place of 17 British monarchs, eight prime 
ministers, Geoffrey Chaucer and Charles Dickens, it did not show. The 
presentation was glorious, charming, surreal, and not so much eccentric as 
completely unhinged. A striped fur coat was worn with a jewelled turban and 
bleach-splattered jeans; a dressing gown with winkle pickers; a gold straw 
boater with a cricket jumper and pearl-heeled sandals.

After the show, Michele waxed lyrical about the richly layered inspirations he 
had found in British culture. “This culture is an unbelievable treasure,” he 
said backstage, wearing ribbed sport socks with schoolgirl-style Mary Jane 
sandals.

“I could work for all my life with this inspiration. What I love about the 
English aesthetic is the contrast, how the contemporary merges with the past. 
How you can be a punk, but with a cup of tea.”

Michele’s Gucci has a healthy irreverence for aesthetic boundaries. 
Aristocratic references are mixed with street, while gender is deemed 
altogether irrelevant. At Westminster Abbey – where politics and religion, art 
and society have long been intertwined – union jack sweaters rubbed shoulders 
with tartan ballgowns, and the Queen’s silk headscarves shared catwalk airtime 
with distinctlyMargot Leadbetter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/08/charlotte-mcdougall-on-penelope-keith-margo-good-life-comedy-hero>
 flicked-out hair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fwestminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ea6e9ac469836d1662a355c9a34794dff5a39f%2F132_23_2868_1720%2F2868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westminster%20Abbey%20proves%20divine%20inspiration%20for%20Gucci&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fwestminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westminster%20Abbey%20proves%20divine%20inspiration%20for%20Gucci&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fwestminster-abbey-divine-inspiration-gucci-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ea6e9ac469836d1662a355c9a34794dff5a39f%2F132_23_2868_1720%2F2868.jpg>
 Alessandro Michele, Gucci’s creative director, is applauded at the end of his 
show. Photograph: John Phillips/Getty Images for Gucci 
There was a mini controversy in the runup to the show when author the Rev 
Peter Owen-Jones criticised the abbey’s staging of the event, likening it to 
“selling our soul for a pair of trousers”.

He said of the decision to hire out the abbey to Kering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/03/westminster-abbey-gets-a-gucci-makeover-stylewatch>
, the luxury group that owns Gucci: “I can think of no other reason the church 
is doing this other than money, and that confuses what the church should stand 
for.”

The cloisters have, however, been available for private hire for over a 
decade, and have hosted many parties including for private equity companies. 
Owen-Jones, a campaigner against what he sees as the materialistic sympathies 
of his church, did not explain why it was a catwalk show to which he 
specifically objected.

An abbey spokesperson said the response to the show had been “overwhelmingly 
positive”, and described it as “a new and exciting collaboration for us”.
 