
Brexit and Donald Trump’s election as the next president of the United States 
present clear risks to the system of international humanitarian response. The 
rise of populism seems bent on politicising aid even more than it is now, 
puttingDunantist ideals <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunantist> of impartial 
aid to their greatest test. If humanitarians fail to react early and in 
earnest, they will jeopardise not only their jobs, but also people in conflict 
zones who could be left without life-saving assistance.

The success of populist parties and their preoccupation with domestic growth 
through protectionist measures is at odds with international solidarity. The 
governments of the UK and the US have not yet announced changes to their roles 
as humanitarian donors – positive or negative – but their populist mandate 
presents three likely scenarios that threaten the humanitarian system as we 
know it. Each would have a significant impact on their own, but could also play 
out in parallel.

Impartial aid

The first scenario concerns spending. The US and UK governments jointly provide
more than 40% 
<https://fts.unocha.org/reports/daily/ocha_R18_Y2015___1611100230.pdf> (pdf) of 
global humanitarian contributions. Any decrease in their contributions would 
widen thealready gaping funding shortfall 
<https://ftsbeta.unocha.org/appeals/overview/2016>. 

Does Trump's election mark the end of compassion in aid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/11/trump-us-election-victory-end-compassion-aid>
Critically, less spending by the US and the UK would increase the relative 
share of contributions from countries that do not uphold the same ideals of 
impartial aid, and that tend to see humanitarian aid as a function of foreign 
policy and trade. Of all non-OECD humanitarian donors, only theOrganisation of 
Islamic Cooperation <http://www.oic-oci.org/states/?lan=en> ascribes to the 
principles ofGood Humanitarian Donorship 
<http://www.ghdinitiative.org/ghd/gns/about-us/our-members.html>.

The management of aid operations by western countries in Afghanistan and Iraq 
has been far from perfect, but the expected behaviour of some non-OECD 
governments leaves little room for optimism either. Take Yemen, for example. 
Saudi Arabia is head of the military intervention and is thesecond largest 
humanitarian donor to the country 
<https://fts.unocha.org/reports/daily/ocha_R24c_C237_Y2015_asof___1611150231.pdf>
 (pdf), after the United Arab Emirates. In February 2016, Saudi Arabia sent a 
letter to the UN and aid organisations asking thatthey leave the areas they are 
bombing alone 
<https://news.vice.com/article/exclusive-saudi-arabia-warns-the-un-and-aid-workers-in-yemen>
. Although the UN was able to push back on this occasion, the conduct of Saudi 
Arabia should be a precautionary tale about the future of impartial aid.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
Violating humanitarian law

Second, even if the US and UK do not decrease aid contributions, there is 
still a risk that they would allow humanitarian action to fall prey to 
politics. Although the UN has been accused ofbeing influenced by collaborating 
with Syrian president Bashar al-Assad 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/01/27/syria-madaya-starvation-united-nations-humanitarian-response-plan-assad-edited/>
 there is a difference between working toward high standards and failing, and 
relativising humanitarian ideals of impartial aid altogether.

The established norms that populist governments are undermining at home could 
be extended abroad, driven by a ruthless business mentality to cut better 
deals. Trump suggested, for example, that the US should deliberately violate 
international humanitarian law and “go after 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/donald-trump-terrorists_us_56e0d7cde4b065e2e3d4d82d>
” the families of suspected terrorists.

A machiavellian turn in US and UK foreign policy could make humanitarian aid a 
bargaining chip in foreign policy; one that is highly valued by oppressive 
governments that care too much about who should not receive life-saving 
assistance and protection in war.

The troubling prospect of an alliance between the US, Russia and Syria in the 
fight against Isis would send waves of horror to people oppressed by their 
rulers and in dire need of aid. International humanitarian norms have already 
weathered a number of breaches – such asthe attack on a Médecins San Frontières 
hospital in Kunduz 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/12/21/afghanistan-us-should-conduct-criminal-inquiry-msf-attack>
 – but the prospect of a new tide of foreign policy opportunism would set a 
precedent for other countries to follow suit, leading to more civilian 
suffering worldwide.

UK NGOs raise concerns about Priti Patel's new approach to foreign aid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/14/uk-ngos-raise-concerns-about-priti-patels-new-approach-to-foreign-aid>
Reform reversal

A third scenario imagines the end of reform in the UN-led humanitarian system. 
For the first time, in agrand bargain made at the World Humanitarian Summit 
<http://www.publicfinanceinternational.org/news/2016/05/grand-bargain-aid-reform-sealed-world-humanitarian-summit>
 in May 2016, participants agreed to a comprehensive set of reforms to address 
problems in aid organisations and donor governments. The two sides have agreed 
tocut bureaucracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/25/less-paperwork-bureaucracy-more-aid-in-humanitarian-work>
, usemore cash 
<http://www.dw.com/en/old-habits-die-hard-at-world-humanitarian-summit/a-19280229>
 and localise aid.

Although there is still much to criticise about this progress, populist 
governments’ lack of trust in international organisations will probably reverse 
the much-fought-for partnership between international civil servants and their 
paymasters – who will likely resort to sticks rather than carrots in the 
future. A broken partnership could increase organisational inertia and 
resistance to even incremental reforms.

Sadly, aid organisations are in no position to influence donor policies at the 
level necessary to prevent any of these three scenarios unfolding. They are not 
in the position to speak out against changed donor policies either; this duty 
will fall primarily on external observers and the media.

[Aid organisations] should explicitly take advantage of a growing 
counter-populist movement

But aid organisations do have a few resources to brace for changed donor 
policies and cushion their impact. First, they should forge close alliances 
with people working in the US and UK aid administrations who are opposed to 
their political leadership’s new direction. Working together, they can enhance 
resilience and resistance to changing donor policies.

Second, aid organisations should encourage non-OECD government donors to join 
the Good Humanitarian Donorship initiative, help devise a mechanism to measure 
the conduct of its members, and support them in meeting those standards.

Third, aid organisations should accelerate efforts to increase the share of 
private sources in their income, which would ward off their dependence on 
government donors. They should explicitly take advantage of a growing 
counter-populist movement; reaching out to individuals, foundations, 
corporations, political parties and other groups that believe in international 
solidarity.

What is the future of foreign aid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/27/what-is-the-future-of-foreign-aid>
Fourth, aid organisations should take their donors’ demands seriously. As 
Priti Patel, the UK’s new international development secretary,has warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/25/priti-patel-warns-aid-organisations-must-provide-value-for-money-or-face-cuts-development-secretary-post-brexit>
, aid organisations funded by tax money need to illustrate their impact on the 
lives of those they serve. This implies change at levels not previously seen. 
Aid organisations could start by learning fromthe burgeoning party of 
initiatives <http://h2hworks.org/> that have identified gaps in core 
humanitarian functions, and have developed approaches to fill them. Established 
organisations should seek ways to work with or internalise these new 
approaches, encouraging an atmosphere of healthy competition.

If aid organisations underestimate the threat posed by recent events in the US 
and the UK, they do more than jeopardise their own future – they will risk 
undermining the Dunantist humanitarian mission of the UN, the International 
Committee of the Red Cross and other organisations that are heavily dependent 
on western government financing.

András Derzsi-Horváth is research associate at the Global Public Policy 
Institute <http://www.gppi.net/home/>. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.

 