
On the eve of the first season finale of HBO’s Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/02/chi-raq-ricky-gervais-last-guardian-westworld>
, I find myself looking ahead, past the episode right in front of me to as-yet 
unexplored territory. That reaction seems to be the norm with this show. Better 
to speculate on what’s next than to luxuriate in the now. Television shows 
often toy with their audience by giving them only part of the ultimate picture, 
or swerving into unexpected storytelling territory mid-stream, but Westworld is 
unique in how committed it is to keeping its fans in the dark. How long can the 
writers hope to maintain this shell game approach to plot and character?

Unlike similar puzzle box shows such as Lost or Twin Peaks that have a central 
mystery (what is the island/who killed Laura Palmer?) Westworld has a variety 
of micro-mysteries to answer. Most of them have been solved already, and most 
of them were deduced bythe hive mind of internet fandom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/03/westworld-fan-theories-are-the-future-of-tv>
. People pegged Bernard for a host weeks ago. They also correctly guessed that 
he was a copy of Arnold. Each week, more evidence appears for the pet theory of 
some Westworld fans: that we are watching two separate timelines divided by 30 
years. Westworld is barreling towards resolution, at least for the issues we 
are aware of. We’ve been told that there arefive seasons planned out 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/09/08/westworld-plan>, but the claustrophobia 
of a show set in a theme park that exists outside of time makes it hard to 
envision that plan.

The Good, the Meh and the Ugly: are Westworld's villains firing blanks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/31/westworld-hbo-villains-ai-robots>
That shouldn’t matter, and yet the maddening part of Westworld fandom is the 
desire to be given morsels of truth in between all the questions. Episode 
eight, titled Trace Decay, revealed very little on the heels of the 
Bernard-is-a-host scene. Because the narrative (Westworld’s favorite word, by 
the way) crawled along in Trace Decay, it waseasier to ding it critically 
<http://www.avclub.com/tvclub/lack-answers-leads-uneven-westworld-246228> 
whereas other prestige dramas get a bit more leeway for digressions or 
slow-moving stories. Mad Men could get away with an episode where Don takes his 
family to Disneyland. Breaking Bad could drop The Fly episode in the mix; while 
the Sopranos allowed Chris and Pauli tohunt a Chechen solider in the woods 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f7vBbEG0zH0> and never mention it again. 
Westworld is set up in such a way that without the peeling back of another 
layer of obfuscation, the entire experience is seen as a bit of a letdown. 
Whereas Westworld’s forebears made their intentions known as early as the first 
20 minutes of the pilot, we still really don’t have a clue where this show is 
headed or what its ultimate intentions are even after nine episodes.

That’s partly down to the fact the show still doesn’t have a standout 
protagonist. Even in the insular world of the park, there can be characters the 
audience can identify with. Creators Jonathan Nolan and Lisa Joy, though, have 
crafted a series in which absolutely no one can truly be that figure. They seem 
to revel in subverting that old fashioned notion of how to tell a story. Sleepy 
Teddy riding into Sweetwater on the train – the noble outsider with a rigid 
sense of morality – ends up being a robot programmed to serve that very 
purpose. Same with po-faced Bernard. Park guestWilliam may or may not be the 
sadistic Man in Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/31/westworld-hbo-villains-ai-robots>
, but regardless of the validity of that theory, he absolutely blew a gasket in 
episode nine and might be trending toward a more sinister mindset. Even saintly 
Dolores is revealed to have murdered Arnold, her creator and would-be liberator.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwestworld-finale-review-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe80850033be60473ab1e8bf860eb37c366ad485%2F58_19_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20finale%3A%20even%20with%20the%20spot-on%20fan%20theories%20we're%20still%20left%20guessing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwestworld-finale-review-hbo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20finale%3A%20even%20with%20the%20spot-on%20fan%20theories%20we%27re%20still%20left%20guessing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fwestworld-finale-review-hbo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe80850033be60473ab1e8bf860eb37c366ad485%2F58_19_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
 ‘Do you have any family discounts for Disneyland?’ … Jon Hamm as Don Draper 
Photograph: Michael Yarish/AP 
Westworld is truly unique in its insistence on eschewing the easy 
good-versus-evil tale. For all its hype about killing your idols, Game of 
Thrones is ultimately about the noble Starks and Daenerys Targaryen joining 
forces to take revenge and save the Seven Kingdoms from the White Walkers. It’s 
a fantasy story, above all else. What is Westworld other than a story about 
stories? For this show to thrive in the years to come and to take Game of 
Thrones’ place as HBO’s signature drama, it will need to answer that question. 
It stands to reason that soon we’ll see the world outside the park. We’ll learn 
where the hellWestworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> 
actually is. Is it even on planet Earth?

The question is, when we do see the full breadth of the chessboard, will 
viewers still care?

While Thrones immediately laid out a vast universe for the characters to 
traverse (thanks in no small part to George RR Martin’s obsessively detailed 
source novels) and for audiences to lose themselves in, Westworld hooked people 
by holding back. The question is, when we do see the full breadth of the 
chessboard, will viewers still care? Lost chose to pile on mystery after 
mystery, then wiping it all away with one curious decision in the finale. 
Westworld might still choose to steer itself in that direction, but if I were 
forced to speculate on where this is all going (and like I said, that’s sort of 
the point of Westworld) then I would not be shocked to find that each season of 
the show is structure in a drastically different fashion.

There’s no reason that each year of this show has to be identical to the last, 
or that it all has to take place in the park. Whatever the Delos board subplot 
ends up being, it’s likely to fundamentally alter what we think we know about 
this program. The robot rebellion that is the core of the plot of the movie 
Westworld is based on is probably either besides the point, a colossal red 
herring, or something that will wrap up relatively soon. Of course, I’m just 
guessing. We’re all just taking shots in the dark, but that’s the joy of 
Westworld as it is right now. If Nolan and Joy can somehow keep this level of 
viewer engagement going and deepen the mystery without frustrating the faithful 
– USA’s Mr Robot is dangerously close to doing just that – then it’ll be quite 
an achievement.
 