
The money involved in SoftBank’s takeover of tech giant ARM Holdings is 
extraordinary. As part of the£24bn deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/tech-giant-arm-holdings-sold-to-japanese-firm-for-24bn>
, ARM’s 4,000 workers could share more than £300m. Simon Segars, the chief 
executive, and Mike Muller, the chief technology officer, are likely to get 
about £55m between them.

But it is the size of the fees and expenses from the deal that really stand 
out – £349.6m. SoftBank will pay out between £247.2m and £284.6m, whileARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/armholdings> will pay £65m. SoftBank’s 
lenders will earn up to £110.4m, while the financial advisers on both sides 
will collect £96.4m, the lawyers £14.5m, and the PRs £6m. The companies in line 
for a windfall include Goldman Sachs, Barclays and City spinners Brunswick and 
Finsbury.

These eye-watering fees remind me of the question that has been brought to the 
fore by the BHS scandal – what incentive do any of the advisers working on the 
deal have for it to fall over?

Investment banks and PR advisers rely on transactions such as SoftBank-Arm to 
make their money. AsMichael Sherwood, a vice-chairman of Goldman Sachs, told 
MPs investigating the collapse of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/bhs-committee-goldman-sachs-michael-sherwood-apologises-not-disclosing-talks>
, Goldman was willing to advise Sir Philip Green for free so that it was in the 
“goalmouth” when he eventually did a “significant transaction”.

I am not suggesting that SoftBank’s purchase of ARM is as dubious as Green’s 
sale of BHS to serial bankrupt Dominic Chappell. SoftBank has a track record as 
a responsible business owner and has offered to give a legal undertaking that 
it will double ARM’s workforce in Cambridge over the next five years.

But, with such an enormous pot of gold available for making takeovers like 
this happen, there is a notable lack of opposing forces. This is why the 
government should respond to the BHS scandal by introducing new rules that 
firmly establish the responsibilities of company directors to their employees, 
including pay, working conditions and pensions.

Such a move could have wide-ranging implications in the future, such as 
ensuring that companies have a legal obligation to consider the impact of a 
takeover on employees. It could even provide the loophole that allows the 
government to step in and block the sale of strategic companies to foreign 
buyers.


Next shoppers prefer cash 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fwhat-incentive-do-softbanks-advisers-have-to-question-arm-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0214d0c965b73e7e14690106751c539a9b852b2b%2F118_572_2282_1369%2F2282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20incentive%20do%20SoftBank's%20advisers%20have%20to%20question%20ARM%20deal%3F%20%7C%20Graham%20Ruddick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fwhat-incentive-do-softbanks-advisers-have-to-question-arm-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20incentive%20do%20SoftBank%27s%20advisers%20have%20to%20question%20ARM%20deal%3F%20%7C%20Graham%20Ruddick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fwhat-incentive-do-softbanks-advisers-have-to-question-arm-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0214d0c965b73e7e14690106751c539a9b852b2b%2F118_572_2282_1369%2F2282.jpg>
 Sales at Lord Wolfson’s Next rose slightly in the last quarter, but fewer 
customers are buying on credit. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Lord Wolfson, the chief executive of Next, has become renowned for his gloomy 
assessments of the British economy and the weather. In the clothing retailer’s
latest trading update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
, Wolfson dedicated an entire segment to the “impact of the EU referendum”.

However, the macro-economic uncertainty should not mask the structural 
challenge facingNext <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next>.

The company’s success in recent years has been underpinned by its online and 
catalogue credit service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/02/next-banks-170m-interest-charges-shoppers>
. This service allows shoppers to buy clothing from Next that they may not 
otherwise be able to afford, but also ensures a windfall for the company due to 
the 22.9% interest it charges on offering customers credit. In the year to the 
end of January, Next had 2.6 million credit customers and recorded net income 
on the interest charges of £188m.

However, the number of customers using credit with Next is now falling. The 
company has pencilled in a decline of 5% in credit customers this year and 
warned it will “take a number of years for our credit customer base to 
stabilise”. Consumers are increasingly keen to pay upfront when shopping online 
and are reluctant to take on more debt.

This decline means Next is losing competitive advantage over other high street 
chains. Shares in the company are down 27% in 2016 and are trading at levels 
not seen for three years.

Wolfson is a shrewd operator, and Next’s sale rose slightly in the past three 
months after a fall in the previous quarter. But the company, which was a stock 
market darling not so long ago, now looks as vulnerable to the fluctuations of 
fashion as Marks & Spencer, its great rival.

Berkeley bosses are their own best customers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fwhat-incentive-do-softbanks-advisers-have-to-question-arm-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7f2e806d479b073ea9c67e6f49fba807618dfc1%2F96_432_5520_3312%2F5520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20incentive%20do%20SoftBank's%20advisers%20have%20to%20question%20ARM%20deal%3F%20%7C%20Graham%20Ruddick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fwhat-incentive-do-softbanks-advisers-have-to-question-arm-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20incentive%20do%20SoftBank%27s%20advisers%20have%20to%20question%20ARM%20deal%3F%20%7C%20Graham%20Ruddick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fwhat-incentive-do-softbanks-advisers-have-to-question-arm-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7f2e806d479b073ea9c67e6f49fba807618dfc1%2F96_432_5520_3312%2F5520.jpg>
 A Berkeley Group site in Islington, London. Its ‘eligible employees’ are 
buying into other new developments from the builder. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter/the Guardian 
If you judge the health of a company by whether its bosses buy the products or 
use the services, thenBerkeley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/berkeleygroupholdings> Group Holding is 
in good shape.

The London-focused housebuilder published its annual report on Wednesday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/berkeley-group-boss-tony-pidgley-gets-215m-pay-packet>
and the section on related party transactions is a fascinating read.

It reveals that Tony Pidgley, the founder and chairman, and Rob Perrins, the 
group chief executive, paid £378,593 and £155,167 respectively for Berkeley to 
carry out work at their own homes.

Berkeley assures us that these transaction took place through a scheme whereby 
“eligible employees” can enter into an arrangement with the company “at 
commercial rates, in accordance with the relevant policies of the group”.

Berkeley’s directors are also buying new homes from the company. Karl 
Whiteman, head of its East Thames division, has agreed to pay £650,000 for an 
apartment at its Royal Arsenal Riverside development.

This transaction is so large that Berkeley shareholders will have to approve 
it at the annual meeting in September. But Whiteman is not the only director to 
have bought a home from Berkeley in the past three years. Perrins paid £2.1m 
for a new apartment on the Strand, while non-executive Diana Brightmore-Armour 
paid £3m for an apartment in the same development and executive director Greg 
Fry bought flats in two other projects.

If Brexit does stop foreign investors buying luxury property in London, at 
least Berkeley knows it can rely on its board.
 