
I would like to be the kind of woman who exudes elegance and cool authority in 
long, loose layers, rather than the kind who feels scruffy and short. And while 
leg length is an issue, the fundamental problem is one of mindset. My knee-jerk 
reaction when I feel the need to smarten up is to wear clothes that are more 
fitted. A tailored, waisted jacket feels smarter than an oversized, cocooning 
one. A close-cut black dress seems more “cocktail” than a loose one.

And I need to get a grip, because this mindset is unforgivably basic. Basic in 
the pejorative sense of eye-rollingly lame. My tight-equals-smart mindset is 
idiotic, but it is everywhere. It is why women buy the smallest dress on which 
they can do up the zip, rather than the size that is most flattering, which is 
usually the next size up. It is why theRoland Mouret Galaxy dress 
<https://www.rolandmouret.com/signature/galaxy/red> – tight, formal – was an 
instant hit, and lives on to this day, in that any full tube carriage at rush 
hour will boast at least one sleeveless, wool-mix, back-zipped shift dress. It 
is as if Lycra infantilised us into being able to tell if clothes fit only when 
they are sausage-skin tight.

Long, loose layers are the opposite of basic. When your top ends halfway down 
your legs, the art of clothing yourself looks loftily abstract, rather than 
literal-minded. You look as if when you got dressed you were thinking about 
your sketches or your roses, rather than looking in the mirror. There is 
something elegant about that, in a season whose dominant sartorial image 
increasingly seems to be an ab-baring changing-room selfie.

What I wore this week: the dress-down hoodie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/13/hoodie-dressing-down-womens-fashion>
But an elegant concept is one thing; elegant execution is another. I haven’t 
mastered it, but I have worked out a few ground rules. If you are normal 
height, wear heels if you want to look like you have any legs at all. Don’t be 
tempted to extend the artist-studio vibe into “interesting” prints and 
statement jewellery or you will tip the look from “offbeat” to “kooky”. Those 
are the basics of making loose, long layers look smart. And basics are better 
than being basic, right?

• Jess wears tunic, £280, by Trademark, from matchesfashion.com 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/womens/designers/trademark>. Trousers, £39.99, 
zara.com <http://www.zara.com>. Shoes 
<http://www.lkbennett.com/Collections/Shoes/Miki-Monochrome-High-Heel-Sandals/p/SSMIKINAPPAOrangeCantaloupe>
, £275, lkbennett.com.Lamp 
<http://www.habitat.co.uk/lansbury-dark-stained-wooden-tripod-floor-lamp-base-339259>
, £95, habitat.co.uk.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management
 