
Perhaps 2016 will be remembered as the year the UK social care services reached
crisis point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/social-care-crisis-funding-cuts-government-council-tax>
.

The headlines were bleak: significant funding gaps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/20/a-council-tax-rise-alone-will-not-solve-the-social-care-funding-crisis>
 in community services for older people, which could increase to £2.6bn by 2020;
delays in discharging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/16/social-care-crisis-nhs-trusts>
 medically fit patients from hospital; regular breaches of safe hospital bed
occupancy levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/27/nhs-hospital-bed-occupancy-rates-hit-record-figures-risking-care>
; amisalignment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/30/government-inaction-on-social-care-funding-needs-a-radical-response>
 between government and the health and care sectors.

This should be the year that social care and healthcare finally start working 
together effectively

The 6% council tax rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 announced in December is a start, but it diverts funds from housing and will 
leave some taxpayersout of pocket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/poor-not-pick-up-tab-social-care>
. What’s more, it will do little to ease the pressure of an ageing population, 
struggling without informal or formal care at home and faced withunderpaid and 
overworked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/17/day-in-the-life-of-a-care-worker-zero-hours-contracts>
 care staff battling an overstretched system.

Something has to change – and, fortunately, there are several ways we can 
begin to work towards a solution in 2017.

This should be the year that social care and healthcare finally start working 
together effectively. Byintegrating the two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/dec/14/bridging-the-divide-how-can-the-nhs-get-collaboration-right>
 – something that has never happened since the NHS was founded in 1948 – care 
can become the seamless experience our elderly population deserves. There will 
of course need to be a culture shift for those working in the system, but the 
result would mean that medical treatment need no longer be detached from 
routine care in nursing homes and, importantly, we will be able to squeeze out 
more pennies from every taxpayer pound. There are already promising signs – 
local authorities should look to Greater Manchester which, in April 2016, 
became the first locality in England to merge its health and social care 
sectors and takecontrol of its own budgets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/the-guardian-view-on-manchesters-health-devolution-taking-the-national-out-of-the-nhs>
.

How can health and social care work together effectively?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/dec/15/how-can-health-and-social-care-work-together-effectively>
The key to achieving this joined-up system is technology. Digital innovation 
has the potential to transform a sector that is currently disjointed and 
overcrowded, in which more than 8,000 different companies provide dramatically 
different standards of care.

Technology companies such as Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> DeepMind, Cera and Babylon made 
progress in 2016, making care more transparent, reliable and responsive. They 
offer new ideas, such as medical advice from your smartphone, on-demand visits 
from care workers and advances in medical research using artificial 
intelligence. Soon, GPs will be able to tap in to digital medical records, 
updated by care workers, which should work to further simplify the relationship 
between these complex services.


Yet without changing the way in which we pay for social care, such 
improvements will be short-lived. Funding must be comprehensive, sustainable 
and designed for the long term. Currently, almost 50% of social care in the UK 
isself-funded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/do-it-yourself-social-care-works-very-rich-nursing-old-age>
, a cost that is too often treated as a late-in-life surprise rather than 
something that can be planned for throughout our working lives. Short-term cash 
injections are not the answer.

A number of different proposals have been broached that must be considered in 
the coming months. Some recommend merging the pots for benefit entitlements, 
pensions and care; others suggest amending the triple-lock on pensions to free 
up funds. Alternatives include insurance schemes for social care, or a move 
towards encouraging young adults to start saving for their own future care 
needs.

Social care is running on empty - but technology can make a difference | Paul 
Burstow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/sep/13/social-care-running-on-empty-technology-paul-burstow>
Whichever path we choose, there is no doubt that the current social care 
system needs to be reinvented. The first steps must be taken this year. With 
advances in technology and service integration starting to show promise, we 
already have the tools we need at our fingertips.

 *  Mahiben Maruthappu is a London-based doctor and co-founder of technology 
initiativeCera <https://www.joincera.com/>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 