
For the purposes of this column I will travel to the very edges of my comfort 
zone, but as far as hemlines go, this is not very intrepid. A mini skirt, to 
me, is any skirt that ends more than about three inches above my knee. (This is 
not because I am a prude; my legs end about five inches above my knee.) I will 
sometimes wear a floor-length skirt, but not all that often, because while they 
are undeniably excellent for standing around looking elegant in, if you attempt 
to accomplish anything at normal speed you end up walking along while lifting 
your skirts up in the manner of an impoverished minor Austen character who is 
about to give herself a fever from walking through wet grass. Which is not 
elegant.

But a change in proportions is the most eyecatching way to reset the needle on 
your look. Which is why I am quite excited by the idea of a Super Sleeve, 
despite the obvious cuff-in-coffee drawbacks. Changing the hemline on your 
sleeve is almost as impactful as altering your skirt length – think of how 
significant the connotations of rolling your sleeves up are, after all.

This season’s Super Sleeve is any sleeve which is knuckle-grazing, 
bell-shaped, or extravagantly shaped. The trend has evolved from two 
long-running trends, for oversized shirts and for statement knitwear. Cuffs 
worn open and loose, and slightly too long in a borrowed-it-from-the-boys kind 
of way, are a key part of the chic shirt-wearer’s look. Meanwhile, a 
high-necked poloneck looks even more statement-making if you elongate the line 
with an extra long sleeve. This season, those details – the big open cuff, and 
the cosy long-slim sleeve – have been co-opted by blouses, tunics and dresses

What I wore this week: a pinafore dress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/02/what-wore-week-pinafore-dress-jess-cartner-morley>
As to the cuffs-in-coffee matter. Hands buried under fabric are traditionally 
for wizards, or ladies in opera gloves. The impracticality is, as always in 
fashion, part of the point. And not being able to hold a coffee without fear of 
a spell is one thing; not being able to cross a road without getting run over 
is another. As far as sleeves go, I am really quite intrepid.

• Jess wears top, £35, by Topshop Boutique, from topshop.com 
<http://www.topshop.com>. Skirt 
<https://www.jcrew.com/uk/womens_category/skirts/alinemidi/PRDOVR~F4332/F4332.jsp>
, £98, jcrew.com.Shoes 
<http://www.dunelondon.com/aiyana-pointed-toe-high-heel-court-shoe-0085503940110204/>
, £75, dunelondon.com.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and 
makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes Management.
 