
The white poplin shirt I’m wearing has fabric patches with popcorn, 
a lipsticked mouth, a drink, an ice-cream cone and the exclamation, TOP!

Let’s start with what this look is not about. It’s not about classic elegance 
or investment dressing. It’s not about timeless style, or the lifelong project 
of curating one’s own signature look. It is about a fashion hit, a quickfire 
pick-me-up. Now, this is tricky moral ground, and rightly so, because being 
conscious of buying clothes that will get multiple wears is an important part 
of consuming ethically. But if a white shirt with a difference can give fresh 
legs to a wardrobe when your sensible trousers and skirts are boring you to 
tears, then that makes sense as a responsible shopping strategy. Sometimes, 
when you feel like you’re sick of everything you own and have nothing to wear, 
all you need is one new piece that will turn old standbys into a new outfit.

I’m not going to overcompliate it: a garment with patches is a fun piece. The 
trend comes from some high-end catwalks, too – notably Gucci and Marc Jacobs – 
and, after having been alighted on with glee by streetstyle photographers and 
bloggers (they look awesome in a detail shot) is all over the high street.

What I wore this week: the boho blouse | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/17/jess-cartner-morley-boho-blouse>
Patches seem like a classic summer silly season trend, but they represent 
something telling about the mood of fashion as they are both unisex and 
countercultural. Unisex in the 2016 sense, which is not the old-school, 
grey-marl mode, but the ebullient, colourful unisex thatAlessandro Michele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/18/milan-fashion-week-back-to-basics-for-guccis-alessandro-michele>
 is celebrating at Gucci. And countercultural in the outsider chic way that 
runs through catwalk fashion now, from Vetements with their vaguely threatening 
metalhead font hoodies in Paris, to Christopher Kane’s obsession with outsider 
art. Bright fabric patches, like dungarees, speak of nostalgia for the innocent 
utility of what you wore when you were 10. They are associated with fandom, 
with political movements, individualism, freedom of expression.

I’m not sure if the message of this shirt goes any deeper than: this is summer 
2016. As we established, this isn’t a highfalutin trend. Enough said?

• Jess wears shirt 
<http://www.zara.com/uk/en/woman/tops/shirts/oversized-poplin-shirt-c401033p3773870.html>
, £25.99, zara.com.Skirt 
<http://www.cosstores.com/gb/Women/Skirts/Skirt_with_tie_belt/7086-48080516.1#c-24480>
, £79, cosstores.com.Shoes 
<http://www.dunelondon.com/bellisimo-monochrome-striped-court-shoe-0084503940083489/>
, £85, dunelondon.com.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 