
People think my job is so glamorous, but it isn’t. I work with a mix of models 
and celebrities, creating fashion shoots for magazines.Models 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/models> are much easier: they are 
professional and never ask for freebies. Celebrities, on the other hand... One 
1960s rock star asked if she could have a pair of sunglasses and, before 
I could say no, just took them. They cost £300. Sometimes the labels who loan 
the clothes don’t mind. And I didn’t mind so much, because I liked her. She was 
quite charming in her rudeness.

Some people make it clear they don’t want me to talk to them, or even look at 
them. One supermodel arrived three hours late, then spent another couple of 
hours looking at Twitter while everyone waited for her. Then she was a 
nightmare. She was a world-class bully, and said she had never met a stylist as 
rude as me. But I fought back, and she was lovely after that – though she made 
me sign a non-disclosure agreement, not to talk about the shoot. That’s what 
difficult celebs do.

Another celeb turned up without a bra and asked if I had one. When I said no, 
she started shaking me and said, “How. Can. You. Be. A. Stylist. And. Not. 
Have. A. Bra?” I was speechless. I always bring a bra now.

What I’m really thinking: the goalkeeper’s mum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/what-im-really-thinking-goalkeepers-mum>
I have to try to kill them with kindness. When it doesn’t work, I go to the 
toilet, have a little cry and then I’m fine. With celebrities, I often think, 
“I don’t want to do this any more.” But working with models, making beautiful 
pictures, I think, “This is the best job in the world.” It all depends on the 
pictures: if they look great, I feel proud, and I don’t care how badly anyone 
behaved.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com <>
 Illustration: Lo Cole for the Guardian  