
There has been a fair bit of seismic change to take in this year, one way or 
another, so you’d be forgiven for having missed one important shift: at some 
point in 2016, we passed peak jumpsuit. For the first half of this decade, 
the all-in-one was a visual shorthand for the busy modern woman who engages 
with fashion to look up-to-date as much as pretty. From theChiltern Firehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/27/chiltern-firehouse-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
 waiting staff in their sleekly tailored jumpsuits to the dungarees andStan 
Smiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/22/2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer>
 accessorised with aBugaboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/sep/23/bugaboo-buggy-fashion-price>, 
the all-in-one has been everywhere.

And for several Decembers on the trot, the jumpsuit came into its own. In the 
season of office parties and friends’ nights out, a jumpsuit is in many ways 
the perfect look: upbeat without being gaudy, practical without being killjoy. 
At this time of year, you want to tread a line somewhere between Scrooge and 
the person wearing the novelty Santa hat; that is, to exude festive spirit in 
an infectious way, rather than being the Compulsory Fun Police blastingMariah 
Carey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariahcarey> on repeat.

If the jumpsuit you already have remains your go-to, then you are all set. One 
of the happy side-effects of the slow death of fashion’s strict trend cycle has 
been that when a look works, it sticks around for a while. But if you are in 
the market for a new party look, the jumpsuit is no longer the freshest item 
on the shelf.

What I wore this week: jeans and a going-out top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/dec/02/what-wore-week-jeans-top-jess-cartner-morley>
This season’s update is the cold-shoulder party dress. The shoulder has been 
fashion’s erogenous zone of 2016 but, more importantly, previews of next year’s 
collections make it clear that it will rule 2017 as well. The joy of a 
cold-shoulder dress is that it works well as over-the-table dressing if you are 
out for dinner in a setting where, say, a feathered skirt would be pointless. 
Also, it looks more daring than it feels: shoulders don’t jiggle, so the focus 
remains on your face rather than your body. And if you have been used to 
wearing a jumpsuit, it feels like a dramatic change. What could be more 2016 
than that?

• Jess wears dress, £49, topshop.com <http://topshop.com>. Shoes, £199, 
kurtgeiger.com <http://kurtgeiger.com>. Chair, £395, grahamandgreen.co.uk 
<http://grahamandgreen.co.uk>
 