
It’s understandable that the world didn’t much care about Gamergate. The 2014 
hashtag campaign, ostensibly founded to protest about perceived ethical 
failures in games journalism, clearlythrived on hate 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/gamergate-about-media-ethics-or-harassing-women-harassment-data-show-279736?rm=eu>
 – even though many of those who aligned themselves with the movement either 
denied there was a problem with harassment, orwrote it off as an unfortunate 
side effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/16/gamergate-abuse-feminist-new-york-times-anita-sarkeesian>
. Sure, women, minorities and progressive voices within the industry were 
suddenly living in fear. Sure, those who spoke out in their defence were 
quickly silenced through exhausting bursts of online abuse. But that wasn’t why 
people supported it, right? They were disenfranchised, felt ignored, and wanted 
to see a systematic change.

Is this all sounding rather familiar now? Does it remind you of something? If 
you’re just discovering the world of angry, anonymous online dudes masquerading 
as victims – hi, come in. Some of us have been here for a while.

The similarities between Gamergate and the far-right online movement, the 
“alt-right”, are huge, startling and in no way a coincidence. After all, the 
culture war that began in gamesnow has a senior representative in The White 
House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
. As a founder member and former executive chair of Brietbart News, Steve 
Bannon had a hand in creating media monster Milo Yiannopoulos, who built his 
fame and Twitter following bysupporting and cheerleading Gamergate 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/10/28/gamergates_fickle_hero_the_dark_opportunism_of_breitbarts_milo_yiannopoulos/>
. This hashtag was the canary in the coalmine, and we ignored it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bfe46827b676062fb03ee06a942e405104f3959%2F0_77_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20'alt-right'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20%27alt-right%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bfe46827b676062fb03ee06a942e405104f3959%2F0_77_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Brianna Wu was one of women targeted for abuse and death threats. Photograph: 
Boston Globe/Boston Globe via Getty Images 
Lest we forget, Gamergate was an online movement that effectively began 
because a man wanted to punish his ex girlfriend 
<http://arstechnica.com/gaming/2014/09/new-chat-logs-show-how-4chan-users-pushed-gamergate-into-the-national-spotlight/>
. Its most notable achievement was harassing a large number of progressive 
figures - mostly women – to the point where they felt unsafe or considered 
leaving the industry.Game developer Zoe Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/03/zoe-quinn-gamergate-interview>
 was the original target. Anita Sarkeesian’s videos applying basic feminist 
theory to video gameshad already made her a target 
<https://feministfrequency.com/2012/06/10/harassment-and-misogyny-via-wikipedia/>
 (because so many people have a difficulty differentiating cultural criticism 
from censorship) but this hate was powerfully amplified by Gamergate – leading 
todeath threats, rape threats, and the public leaking of personal information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/29/anita-sarkeesian-gamergate-interview-jessica-valenti>
. Other notable targets included developerBrianna Wu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/17/brianna-wu-gamergate-human-cost>
, actorFelicia Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/23/felicia-days-public-details-online-gamergate>
, and prominent tech-culture writerLeigh Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/07/in-praise-of-leigh-alexander-gamergate-video-games-sexism-bullying>
, whoseprovocative article on the tyranny of “game culture” 
<http://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/224400/Gamers_dont_have_to_be_your_audience_Gamers_are_over.php>
 offered stark warnings that still resonate powerfully: “When you decline to 
create or to curate a culture in your spaces, you’re responsible for what 
spawns in the vacuum.”

Other than harassment, very little was achieved, with tiny changes held aloft 
as great victories: media publications felt the need topublicly clarify 
<http://www.polygon.com/forums/meta/2014/8/26/6071669/on-patreon-support> 
pre-existing ethical measures, others implemented small new additions to 
account for shifts in the ethical landscape caused by modern funding tools such 
as Patreon and Kickstarter; games writers were duty bound to declare their 
support for projects they financially aided in these ways. But it quickly 
became clear that the GamerGate movement was a mess – an undefined mission to 
Make Video Games Great Again via undecided means.

Many had embraced Gamergate because they felt it wholly matched their ideals, 
and yet – quite consistently – no one in the movement was willing to be 
associated with the abuse being carried out in its name. Prominent supporters 
on Twitter, in subreddits and on forums like 8Chan, developed a range of 
pernicious rhetorical devices and defences to distance themselves from threats 
to women and minorities in the industry: the targets were lying or 
exaggerating, they were too precious; a language of dismissal and belittlement 
was formed against them. Safe spaces, snowflakes, unicorns, cry bullies. Even 
when abuse was proven, the usual response was that people on their side were 
being abused too. These techniques, forged inGamergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate>, have become the standard 
toolset of far-right voices online.

In 2014, the media’s reaction was often weak or overtly conciliatory 
<http://kotaku.com/a-brief-note-about-the-continued-discussion-about-kotak-1627041269>
 – some sites went out of their way to “see both sides”, to reassure people 
that openly choosing to be affiliated with a hate group did not make them in 
any way responsible for that hate.Olive branches were extended 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/gamergate-hate-affects-both-sides-so-how-about-we-end-it>
, but professional lives continued to be ruined while lukewarm op-eds asked for 
us to come together so we could start “healing”. The motivations may have been 
sound, but it’s the language Trump and his supporters have used post-election 
to obliterate dissenting voices.

In 2016, new wave conservative media outlets like Breitbart have gained trust 
with their audience by painting traditional news sources as snooty and aloof. 
In 2014, video game YouTube stars, seeking to appear in touch with online 
gaming communities, unscrupulously proclaimed that traditional old-media 
sources were corrupt.

Everything we’re seeing now, had its precedent two years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b0eebe319862f900d9e4b7a274ca94d042fa03b%2F0_97_2495_1497%2F2495.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20'alt-right'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20%27alt-right%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b0eebe319862f900d9e4b7a274ca94d042fa03b%2F0_97_2495_1497%2F2495.jpg>
 Steve Bannon and Donald Trump days before the 2016 US presidential election. 
Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
The stark parallels between Gamergate and the political atmosphere of 2016 may 
come as a surprise, but it shouldn’t: both saw their impact and reach amplified 
by self-interested parties who underplayed the obvious nastiness they were also 
promoting. With 2014’s Gamergate, Breitbart seized the opportunity to harness 
the pre-existing ignorance and anger among disaffected young white dudes. With 
Trump’s movement in 2016, the outlet was effectively running his campaign: 
Steve Bannon took leave of his role at the company in August 2016 when he was
hired as chief executive of Trump’s presidential campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/donald-trump-stephen-bannon-breitbart-news-kellyanne-conway>
. Despite Bannon’s distance from Breitbart in an official capacity, the 
outlet’s ideology and relentless support of Trump remained unchanged – with 
editor-in-chief Joel Pollak notably sendingan internal memo to staff 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/rosiegray/breitbart-editor-ordered-staffers-to-stop-defending-michelle?utm_term=.emZVNa5nl#.gtaO42epA>
 that ordered them not to support Breitbart reporter Michelle Fields after
allegations she was attacked by Trump’s campaign manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/29/trump-campaign-manager-corey-lewandowski-charged-assault>
 Corey Lewandowski.

Breitbart’s aspirations to directly influence politics extend a long way into 
Europe, too – Bannon is openly keen tocollaborate with the far-right Marine Le 
Pen in France 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/politics/marine-le-pen-marr-french-president-brexit-trump-marr-us-elections-a7414686.html>
, andhired UKIP’s Raheem Hassam to co-run the Breitbart London office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/feb/17/digital-media-dailytelegraph>
. These movements are gaining ground by finding political figures who will 
legitimise them in return for the support of their swollen online communities. 
The young men converted via 2014’s Gamergate, are being more widely courted 
now. By leveraging distrust and resentment towards women, minorities and 
progressives, many of Gamergate’s most prominent voices – characters like Mike 
Cernovich, Adam Baldwin, and Milo Yiannopoulos – drew power and influence from 
its chaos. These figures gave Gamergate a new sense of direction – generalising 
the rhetoric: this was now a wider war between “Social Justice Warriors” (SJWs) 
and everyday, normal, decent people. Games were simply the tip of the iceberg – 
progressive values, went the argument, were destroying everything. The same 
voices moved into other geek communities, especially comics, where Marvel and 
DC werecriticised for progressive storylines and decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/25/feminist-superheroes-she-hulk-ms-marvel-thor>
. They moved into science fiction with thecontroversy over the Hugo awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/21/hugo-awards-winners-nk-jemisin-sad-rabid-puppies>
. They moved into cinema with the revoltingkickback against the all-female 
Ghostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 reboot. Despite colonising the world with pointless tech and plastering modern 
film and TV with fan-pleasing adaptations of niche comic books, nerds still had 
a taste for revenge. They saw the culture they considered theirs being ripped 
away from them. In their zero sum mindset, they read growing artistic equality 
as a threat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd74d1c1ed86ca1d3e83b4e54ad484dc724d7ea0d%2F0_35_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20'alt-right'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20%27alt-right%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd74d1c1ed86ca1d3e83b4e54ad484dc724d7ea0d%2F0_35_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Gamergate figureheads such as Milo Yiannopoulos weren’t taken seriously. Now 
he is synonymous with Trump and the ‘alt-right’, we have no choice. Photograph: 
Drew Angerer/Getty Images 
For a long time, we didn’t take these characters seriously. Breitbart’s Milo 
Yiannopoulos in particular seemed such a desperate opportunist that we never 
predicted his rise to prominence, having explicitlystereotyped gamers in the 
past as “overweight” and “embarrassing” 
<https://storify.com/x_glitch/the-gamergate-supporting-journalist-who-hates-game>
. A disgraced journalist and entrepreneur who had toclose his tech site The 
Kernel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/mar/05/kernel-close-debts-unpaid-sentinel-media>
 due to unpaid debts, leaving staffuncertain if they would ever be paid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/mar/01/the-kernel>, he’d then spent the 
next few years spouting insincere hateful ideas to a burgeoning Twitter 
audience who responded to his anti-feminist, anti-establishment invectives. He 
was eventuallybanned from the platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
 after finally abusing a woman who was apparently just famous enough for 
Twitter to respond.

Using 4chan (and then the more sympathetic offshoot 8Chan) to plan their 
subversions and attacks made Gamergate a terribly sloppy operation, leavinga 
trail of evidence 
<http://arstechnica.com/gaming/2014/09/new-chat-logs-show-how-4chan-users-pushed-gamergate-into-the-national-spotlight/>
 that made it quite clear the whole thing was purposefully, plainly nasty. But 
the video game industry didn’t have the spine to react, and allowed the 
movement to coagulate – forming a mass of spiteful disappointment that 
Breitbart was only more than happy to coddle. Historically, that seems to be 
Breitbart’s trick - strongly represent a single issue in order to earn trust, 
and then gradually indoctrinate to suit wider purposes. With Gamergate, they 
purposefully went fishing for anti-feminists. 2016’s batch of fresh converts – 
the white extremists – came from enticing conspiracy theories about the global 
neoliberal elite secretly controlling the world.

The greatest strength of Gamergate, though, was that it actually appeared to 
represent many left-leaning ideals: stamping out corruption in the press, 
pushing for better ethical practices, battling for openness. There are 
similarities here with many who support Trump because of his promises to put an 
end to broken neo-liberalism, to “drain the swamp” of establishment corruption. 
Many left-leaning supporters of Gamergate sought to intellectualise their 
alignment with the hashtag, adopting familiar and acceptable labels of dissent 
– identifying as libertarian, egalitarian, humanist. At best they unknowingly 
facilitated abuse, defending their own freedom of expression while those who 
actually needed support were threatened and attacked. Genuine discussions over 
criticism, identity and censorship were paralysed and waylaid by Twitter voices 
obsessed with rhetorical fallacies and pedantic debating practices. While the 
core of these movements make people’s lives hell, the outer shell – knowingly 
or otherwise – protect abusers by insisting that the real problem is that you 
don’t want to talk, or won’t provide the ever-shifting evidence they politely 
require.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08aac1cbf737f95f4d938d5aa167050ea6bf93f0%2F846_1175_4107_2466%2F4107.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20'alt-right'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Gamergate%20should%20have%20taught%20us%20about%20the%20%27alt-right%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgamergate-alt-right-hate-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08aac1cbf737f95f4d938d5aa167050ea6bf93f0%2F846_1175_4107_2466%2F4107.jpg>
 As with Trump, Gamergate appeared to represent many left-leaning ideals such 
as stamping out corruption and pushing for better ethical practices. 
Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
The beauty of this anti-establishment standpoint is, when any mainstream media 
source seeks to challenge the collective beliefs of the movement, it’s merely 
used as further evidence that journalists are untrustworthy and aloof. This is 
a challenge the press must be ready to face in today’s political climate: 
confronting these movements comes with a cost – it has never been possible to 
write openly about Gamergate without attracting a wave of online abuse. In 
2017, the tactics used to discredit progressive game critics and developers 
will be used to discredit Trump and Bannon’s critics. There will be 
gaslighting, there will be attempts to make victims look as though they are 
losing their grip on reality, to the point that they gradually even start to 
believe it. The “post-truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
” reality is not simply an accident – it is a concerted assault on the rational 
psyche.


The strangest aspect of Gamergate is that it consistently didn’t make any 
sense: people chose to align with it, and yet refused responsibility. It was 
constantly demanded that we debate the issues, but explanations and facts were 
treated with scorn. Attempts to find common ground saw the specifics of the 
demands being shifted: we want you to listen to us; we want you to change your 
ways; we want you to close your publication down. This movement that ostensibly 
wanted to protect free speech from cry bully SJWs simultaneously did what it 
could to endanger sites it disagreed with,encouraging advertisers to abandon 
support for media outlets 
<http://arstechnica.com/gaming/2014/10/intel-folds-under-gamergate-pressure-pulls-ads-from-gamasutra/>
 that published stories critical of the hashtag. The petulance of that movement 
is disturbingly echoed in Trump’s own Twitter feed.

Looking back, Gamergate really only made sense in one way: as an exemplar of 
what Umberto Eco called“eternal fascism” 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1995/06/22/ur-fascism/>, a form of extremism 
he believed could flourish at any point in, in any place – a fascism that would 
extol traditional values, rally against diversity and cultural critics, believe 
in the value of action above thought and encourage a distrust of intellectuals 
or experts – a fascism built on frustration and machismo. The requirement of 
this formless fascism would – above all else – be to remain in an endless state 
of conflict, a fight against a foe who must always be portrayed as impossibly 
strong and laughably weak. This was the methodology of Gamergate, and it now 
forms the basis of the contemporary far-right movement.

'Alt-right': why the Guardian decided not to ban use of the term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mind-your-language/2016/nov/30/alt-right-why-the-guardian-decided-not-to-ban-use-of-the-term>
We have no idea where this will lead, but our continued insistence on 
shrugging off the problems of the internet as “not real” – as something we can 
just log out of – is increasingly misled. 2016 has presented us with a world in 
which our reality is being wilfully manipulated.Fake news 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/russian-propaganda-effort-helped-spread-fake-news-during-election-experts-say/2016/11/24/793903b6-8a40-4ca9-b712-716af66098fe_story.html>
,divisive algorithms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-fires-trending-topics-team-algorithm>
, misleading social media campaigns. The majority of people who voted for Trump 
will never take responsibility for his racist, totalitarian policies, but 
they’ll provide useful cover and legitimacy for those who demand the very worst 
from the President Elect. Trump himself may have disavowed the “alt-right”, but 
his rhetoric has led to themfeeling legitimised 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/features/why-the-alt-right-is-celebrating-trumps-win-w452493>
. As with Gamergate, the press risks being manipulated into a position where it 
has to tread a respectful middle ground that doesn’t really exist.

Prominent critics of the Trump administration need to learn from Gamergate. 
They need to beprepared 
<http://www.cbc.ca/radio/thecurrent/the-current-for-october-27-2016-1.3822261/alt-right-trump-supporters-attack-journalists-online-1.3822421>
for 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/441319/donald-trump-alt-right-internet-abuse-never-trump-movement>
abuse 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/us-election-donald-trump-supporters-nazi-term-lugenpresse-gettysburg-rally-republican-party-a7376176.html>
, for falsified concerns, invented grassroots campaigns designed specifically 
to break, belittle, or disgrace. Words and concepts will be twisted, repackaged 
and shared across forums, stripping them of meaning. Gamergate painted critics 
as censors, the far-right movement claims critics are the real racists.

Perhaps the true lesson of Gamergate was that the media is culturally 
unequipped to deal with the forces actively driving these online movements. The 
situation was horrifying enough two years ago, it is many times more dangerous 
now.
 