
You can tell the cardigan’s star is in the ascendant, because people have 
started shoulder-robing it. Well, at fashion week they have, anyway, which 
might not seem relevant except – mark my words – these things have a way of 
catching on. Shoulder-robing is the ultimate power move. Shoulder-robe your top 
layer, and take a look at your shadow: bam, you’re a superhero. Also, you 
instantly have the aura of someone who has a high-powered, fast-moving, Anna 
Wintour-type schedule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/06/anna-wintour-who-is-the-real>. 
Shoulder-robing suggests dynamic standing-up meetings and brief journeys, 
possibly by helicopter. After all, nobody shoulder-robes on a 30 minute tube 
journey, it’s just not practical.

On the other hand, the cardigan is traditionally the polar opposite of power 
dressing. Wearing a cardigan is like prefacing your sentences with “Sorry to 
bother you, but…” or “This is probably a silly idea.” Even a brand new cardigan 
never has that shiny, boxfresh feeling that a crisp piece of tailoring or 
shirting has. Psychologically, choosing a cardigan puts you sort of fireside. 

But what does a tailored jacket say? If you’re not careful to chic it up, it 
says meeting. And there’s a word to give you a thrill. Not. So if you can make 
a cardigan work in a fashion context – which is another way of saying make it 
look modern – it is a subversively ballsy move. Because who in their right mind 
wouldn’t take a good fireside chat over a meeting?

What I wore this week: a pie-crust blouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/08/what-wore-this-week-pie-crust-blouse-jess-cartner-morley-fashion>
The cardigan has to be right, of course. Those dinky fitted numbers that were 
little more than pashminas with sleeves are not the thing at all. At the
Christopher Kane spring/summer 2016 show 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/spring-summer-2016/ready-to-wear/christopher-kane>
, oversized cardigans were thrown over party dresses. Go for bulk and presence, 
not neatness, and a generous length: the hem should fall lower than the 
sleeves, and an unexpected colour is better than navy or black. You want an 
awesome cardigan, not a cardigan that wants to be a jacket. Your litmus test: 
could I shoulder-robe this? This will help you get into superhero character. 
And it’s that thought that counts.

• Jess wears cardigan, £39.99, mango.com <http://www.mango.com>. Dress, £42, 
topshop.com <http://www.topshop.com>. Shoes, £250, lkbennett.com 
<http://www.lkbennett.com>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management
 