
Today is International Women’s Day, when the world acknowledges the 
achievements of women and their continuing struggle against gender inequality. 
Join us as welive blog the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/live/2016/mar/08/international-womens-day-2016-iwd-live>
, exploring how people are celebrating and hearing from activists and leaders 
on what gender equality means to them. You can share your thoughts by 
commenting on the live blog or tweeting using the hashtag#equalitymeans 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/equalitymeans?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
.

We’re taking a close look at women’s reproductive rights, and the global 
increase in contraceptive use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/08/rise-use-contraception-global-population-growth-family-planning>
. In 2015, an estimated 64% of married women, or women living with a partner, 
aged between 15 and 49, were using modern or traditional forms of family 
planning. In 1970, the rate was only 36%. But despite the progress, many women 
who want to avoid or delay pregnancy do not have access to contraception. Take 
a look at ourglobal interactive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/08/rise-use-contraception-global-population-growth-family-planning>
 and see how contraception is used in your country.

Elsewhere on the site

 * A Girl in the River’s Oscar win gives Pakistan chance to end honour killings
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/04/a-girl-in-the-river-oscar-win-pakistan-end-honour-killings>
 * Germany opens its doors to Yazidi women and children enslaved by Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/02/germany-opens-doors-yazidi-women-children-northern-iraq-enslaved-isis>
 * Justice at last for Guatemalan women as officers jailed for sexual slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/01/guatemala-sexual-slavery-sepur-zarco-military-officers-jailed>
 * Women seek islands of refuge in Papua New Guinea’s sea of violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/29/papua-new-guinea-women-violence-at-home-refuge>
 * PNG risking lives with inaction on sexual violence, says MSF
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/29/papua-new-guinea-risking-lives-sexual-violence-medecins-sans-frontieres>
Opinion

Sexual violence is a strategic tool of war, but laws already exist to end it, 
argue Zainab Hawa Bangura and Melanne Verveer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/02/sexual-violence-is-a-tool-of-war-but-we-have-the-weapons-to-end-that>
. “If we are serious about countering extremism and addressing the gross human 
rights violations being committed by groups like Isis, a comprehensive, 
coordinated approach – which engages not only governments and military forces, 
but also religious leaders, community groups and women’s organisations – is 
required,” they say.

Take part

Are you marking International Women’s Day? Share your photos, stories and 
videos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/07/how-are-you-marking-international-womens-day-share-your-stories-photos-videos>
 with us and we’ll use a selection in our coverage.

What you said

We’re asking readers what gender equality means to them. Katja Iversen, CEO of 
Women Deliver, says:

Gender equality means that everybody wins. It means investing in the health, 
rights and wellbeing of girls and women, so they can live their full potential. 
It means levelling the playing field so we together can build a better world.

Highlight from the blogosphere

Overseas Development Insitute: Women’s work – mothers, children and the global 
childcare crisis 
<http://www.odi.org/publications/10349-womens-work-mothers-children-global-childcare-crisis>

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team –@swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>,@LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and joinGuardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 