
Start with Oxfam

Oxfam is still the starting point for great fashion. We know designers use it 
to find inspiration for their collections. But duringLondon Fashion Week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week-autumn-winter-2015>, 
for one day only, stylist Emma Slade Edmondson reinterpreted what she saw on 
the fashion show live streams forCharity Fashion Live 
<http://www.charityfashionlive.com/>. She used the Oxfam shop in Dalston as her 
base and watched the live streams of the shows for that day, including Jasper 
Conran, Sibling London and Holly Fulton (right), and scoured the rails to find 
ways to recreate the looks. Photographer Rachel Manns shot the results on a 
mini catwalk in store.

“With 350 tonnes of textile going to landfill every day, it’s really good to 
get creative with the clothes that already exist,” said Slade Edmondson.

It’s a great way to reconnect with fashion on a personal level, using the 
catwalks and the designers as inspiration for your own style. Check out the
Charity Fashion Live Instagram feed <https://instagram.com/charityfashionlive/> 
to see what happened – and be inspired by the looks on these pages to do it 
yourself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631172259%2F154e1c83-a4f1-4342-89a4-7e4b0459a9aa-1183x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631172259%2F154e1c83-a4f1-4342-89a4-7e4b0459a9aa-1183x2040.jpeg>
 In the red: a model on the catwalk for Marques’ Almeida. REX Shutterstock 
Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Ruffles are rife

It’s all about the ruffle. If you’ve followed the reports from the shows, you 
will be prepared for next spring’s ruffle-fest courtesy of… oh, well, pretty 
much every designer, including Marques’ Almeida. But away from the bright 
lights of the catwalk was a young designer starting out on her career. Jodie 
Ruffle (that’s her real name) showed her MA Fashion collection from University 
of Middlesex (she graduates this year) in a makeshift showroom. Ruffle is the 
future of fashion – a super-bright student dedicated to her craft and full of 
innovative ideas. Her small collection of oversized sportswear was handcrafted 
with couture-level embellishment embroideries, hand-printed concrete – and the 
odd ruffle – that had a cool looseness and roughness to it.

“Some of the pieces took 300 hours to make,” she said. “There’s such a quick 
turnaround on the high street, and I like the idea of concentrating on having a 
few special pieces rather than just being saturated with mass-market stuff. 
Fashion keeps coming so fast, and it’s not really sustainable at all.”

Politics rule

Politicians are criminals. That is according to the irrepressible Vivienne 
Westwood, who had a band of merry activists/ravers on hand to welcome guests to 
her show. “We are going to give you some politics with your fashion today,” 
said the clown-faced greeter, pressing leaflets into the audience’s hands – a 
rant which rattled through most the world’s current woes from austerity to arms 
dealers, climate change and general poverty. This wasn’t a show on Sam Cam’s 
schedule. If wearing Westwood’s clothes signifies you are somehow on the 
fringes of the establishment, then I’m all for them. Besides, Viv really knows 
how to cut a brilliantly flattering dress.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631284545%2Fe159e7f1-78d0-41d2-af7c-009b91cfa48f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631284545%2Fe159e7f1-78d0-41d2-af7c-009b91cfa48f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nom de Mode 2016. Photograph: PR 
Layers work

While we are on the subject of climate change, it’s worth talking about 
layering. This is now the intelligent way to dress. One designer duo that has 
mastered the art of dressing across the seasons is Nom de Mode. Twin sisters 
Mandeep and Hardeep Chohan are their own best advertisement. They specialise in 
making outer layers that transform an outfit into something effortlessly 
elegant. Their bestsellers are a sleeveless gilet and a cleverly draped cape, 
which are useful, as they can be worn over other layers without making you feel 
bulky. The carefully chosen luxurious fabrics are sometimes collaged together 
to create the impression of more layers. And you don’t have to wait to buy – 
their perennial collection is, well, perennial. Check it out onnomdemode.com 
<http://nomdemode.com/>.

Handmade is forever

As Antonio Berardi’s stylist Sophia Neophitou told me backstage: “Fast fashion 
is the death of what we do.” As we all know, it is possible to buy pretty much 
anything from the high street. The only way for designer fashion to stand out – 
and justify the prices – is by creating pieces that cannot be copied and made 
en masse. So Berardi’s fabrics are heavily embellished and the dresses finished 
with couture techniques to become “forever pieces”. ForFaustine Steinmetz 
<http://www.faustinesteinmetz.com/>, it means weaving the very fabric – she 
taught herself to weave via YouTube and is busy reinterpreting the humble 
sweatshirt and jeans jacket into something altogether more luxurious. Katie 
Jones also knits her slightly bonkers collections in small quantities – all by 
hand, from dead stock yarns – in her Stratford studio. Selfridges is selling 
her line for the first time this autumn. Other handcrafters include Peter 
Pilotto, the duo which has transferred their love of complex prints into a 
passion for macramé, smocking and embroidery so it’s all about texture; Phoebe 
English, who likes to fashion her woven panels and cobweb knits into ethereal 
clothes; and Mary Benson, who embroidered personal love letters on to her 
dresses – along with a few tears.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631376080%2Ff7191ea7-e03a-4f89-b546-b139c5c0618f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631376080%2Ff7191ea7-e03a-4f89-b546-b139c5c0618f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sleeves are back: a model walks the runway at the JW Anderson show. 
Photograph: Samir Hussein/Getty Images 
Sleeves are huge

Obvious to you maybe, but for Planet Fashion sleeves are particularly 
important for SS16. They are almost comically exaggerated in the hands of 
Jonathan Anderson, who is set to revive the leg of mutton for his JW Anderson 
label. For society and executive women’s favourite designer Emilia Wickstead, 
the sleeve is puffed and deliciously billowy. And Roksanda is Queen of the 
Sleeve with her voluminous bell shapes. Even if you don’t go to these extremes, 
I guarantee your sleeves will be so long and floppy next season that your hands 
will disappear from view.

Cardigans never die

The cardigan is useful, but often regarded as frumpy. But next season frumps 
can delight in the knowledge that they can wear their cardies with pride, 
especially if, as with Christopher Kane’s bold, chunky version, they have 
darned bits and elbow patches. The older and more well-loved the better. Which 
is great news for anyone concerned about landfill; old cardies never die.

Buy a bum bag

The bum bag is another useful piece of kit that occupies that strange 
hinterland of fashion which is more often out than in. But thanks to the 
brilliance of Christopher Raeburn, whose clothes are always as much about 
function as about form, the bum bag can be worn without looking as though you 
are an American tourist in fear of being mugged for your passport. As is often 
the way with fashion, it needs to be big and confident to look sharp, which 
means there is room for everything in there from your supersized mobile phone 
to a spare pair of shoes.

Be seen in green

Parrot green (and sunset pink) are the colours for next season. The Korean 
designer J JS Lee used it (in deckchair stripes), as did British newbieMolly 
Goddard <http://mollygoddard.com/> and Peter Jensen <http://peterjensen.co.uk/>
. And if that particular shade makes you feel sick as a parrot, then there is a 
lot of pink about – the whole sunset spectrum, in fact.Bora Aksu 
<http://www.boraaksu.com/> was nostalgic for hot summer nights back home in his 
garden of lemon, orange and pomegranate trees in Izmir, and Roksanda made a 
dress in shredded, ruffled chiffon that matched the colour of the model’s hair 
which was – naturally – pink.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631480506%2F7736fdcb-4eef-48e7-9b31-cff5f48bf307-1247x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%20learned%20from%20London%20Fashion%20Week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443631480506%2F7736fdcb-4eef-48e7-9b31-cff5f48bf307-1247x2040.jpeg>
 Green lights: Peter Jensen’s show. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
Keep it personal

It’s all about you – your own personal style is the only style for you. The 
idea of trends is dead and buried. In Milan, Gucci’s new designer Alessandro 
Michele has heralded a new era of “anything goes” fashion. So in London we 
could choose from the multilayered, multicoloured collection by Japanese label 
Toga, or Preen which is a collection designed to meet the needs of every woman. 
Or take some tips from Peter Jensen’s latest muse the fashion stylistShirley 
Kurata <http://shirleykurata.com/>. You may not know her, but that doesn’t 
matter if you like her style and want to borrow a bit of it. Like a sun visor, 
perhaps? (She lives in LA.)

Or you might simply want to wear immaculately cut clothes by another woman who 
knows just how to do that. In which case take a look at1205, the collection 
designed by Savile Row trained Paula Gerbase <http://www.1205.eu/collection/> – 
one of the few designers to include trousers in their collection. And she 
finished it off with dazzling white boxfresh Nike Air Max trainers – the 
perfect combination of form, function and great personal style.

And don’t forget, there’s always Oxfam.
 