
Virtual reality was a big deal at this year’s E3 video game expo in Los 
Angeles. Oculus was there showing off the latest build of its Rift headset, 
Sony revealed a newmultiplayer shooter demo 
<http://uk.ign.com/articles/2015/06/16/e3-2015-rigs-announced-for-project-morpheus>
 for the Project Morpheus, and Microsoft announced a partnership with Valve, 
seeking to make Windows 10the software platform for the HTC Vive as well as all 
other PC-based VR devices. It also brought the “mixed reality” device Hololens 
along for the ride. There was much excitement.

But what do the mainstream games publishers really think about this new era of 
immersive technology? The spectre hanging over the whole industry right now is 
that, behind all the hype, very few VR or AR headsets have actually been sold 
to the public. The only commercially available mainstream products right now 
are Android phone extensions like the Samsung Gear VR and Zeiss VR One; Google 
ditched its Glasses project this year. The first big player to get a launch is 
likely to be the brilliant HTC Vive this winter, but it’s going to require an 
ultra high-endPC <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc>, limiting its user 
base – at least at first – to enthusiasts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw5XVq4NLnwk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw5XVq4NLnwk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw5XVq4NLnwk&media=>
And then, of course, there’s the whole problem of, well, what are people going 
to want from a VR application? At the well-attenedSouth West VR conference 
<http://southwestvr.com/> this year, many of the talks and discussions were 
based around this question. Is it going to be about epic narrative games in 
vast virtual environments or will people want short, contained experiences with 
very little movement? Or some combination of both? Or neither?


Opinion is hugely divided – and the interesting discussions are going on away 
from the glare of the E3 press briefing. Andrew Wilson, CEO of Electronic Arts 
chose to speak about VR, not at E3 at all, but at the more offbeat and artsy 
SXSW festival, where he talked about the company’s interest in VRas a new 
paradigm in entertainment 
<http://www.engadget.com/2014/03/08/electronic-arts-virtual-reality/>, but 
provided no details. Then, on the Sunday before E3, the Guardian was invited 
into a short interview slow with Nintendo America chief Reggie Fils-Aime and 
Activision Publishing CEO Eric Hirchberg – two of the most powerful men in 
mainstream gaming. We were ostensibly there to talk about the Skylanders deal 
between the two companies, but at the end of the session, we snuck in an extra 
question: what do you think about virtual reality?

The responses were a fascinating mix of evasion and corporate messaging. “Can 
I get out of this one?” asked Hirschberg, laughing. “I think there’s certainly 
a lot of energy, industry-wide, going into these things, and sometimes that 
popcorn pops and sometimes it doesn’t. At the end of the day, it’ll come down 
to the applications. We’re certainly looking at it carefully - we’re a platform 
agnostic company, we want to be wherever gamers are. We’ll see how it goes.”

Fils-Aime was similarly circumspect. “Is it fun?” he asked. “I think that this 
industry is going to continue to progress by being entertaining and creating 
experiences that are fun. I’ve tried a lot of the different experiences - some 
were fun, some less so. But at the point that it’s consistently fun, it will be 
a real innovation. That’s my perspective.”

Not much commitment there. By contrast, later that afternoon, in a 
behind-closed-doors briefing, Ubisoft revealed that it is working on a number 
of virtual reality projects, with its Red Storm studio set to release something 
in the near future. David Votypka, head of Red Storm,spoke teasingly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/16/ubisoft-ambitious-social-virtual-reality-e3-2015>
 about how the company wants to marry virtual reality gaming with social 
connectivity: “I’m talking about games that are specifically designed to have 
mechanics based around social cues, social dynamics and social interactions 
between players. These projects are just the beginning.”

Speaking to the Guardian a couple of days later, Ubisoft CEO, Yves Guillemot, 
admitted that there is uncertainty surrounding VR, but insisted that the 
company is on board with the tech.

“We don’t know yet whether it will be an enormous consumer success,” he says. 
“What I like about it is that it’s accessible, you can control it just by 
moving your head; that’s an interesting step. What’s also good is that you 
don’t have to work on $50m projects with VR, you can work on $1-2m projects and 
that gives us a chance to test different ideas. We’re at the beginning, but our 
demos have been convincing.”

Interestingly, the company is already thinking of how to apply VR tech to its 
major game brands. “It won’t be like the games we see today,” says Guillemot. 
“It will be more like the World of Far Cry or the World of Assassin’s Creed, 
where you go and complete specific challenges that are more adapted to VR. But 
yes we will try to use the worlds we have created, because we think that’s a 
very important asset.”

One of the demos Ubisoft showed at E3 was a VR version of the moment in Far 
Cry 3 when crazed antagonist Vaas explains his definition of insanity to bound 
and gagged lead character, Jason Brody. Viewed through Brody’s eyes it’s a 
weirdly intimidating experience, capturing the emotional essence of immersive 
theatre productions, and the scenario – you’re tied to a chair – provides a 
plausible limiter to the player’s movements – which is going to be a key 
element in VR because you don’t want people running into walls or furniture. So 
is this the future of VR gaming? Very intense, controlled cinematic moments 
with little interaction? Could this be a mass market proposition?

Ultimately, though, the key barriers could be more psychological than 
experiential. What few people were talking about at E3 is the uncanny physical 
experience of both wearing a VR helmet (the way it isolates you from your 
environment, but also just the way it messes up your hair) and of viewing 
others wearing it. There’s a sort of techno-fear, instigated perhaps by a dozen 
sci-fi movie visions of an oppressive, highly mechanised VR future.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIojqOMWTgv8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIojqOMWTgv8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIojqOMWTgv8&media=>
David Braben, founder of Frontier Developments, has seen how VR can augment a 
gaming experience: Elite Dangerous works amazingly well on the Oculus Rift, 
giving you an immersive view of your ship’s cockpit. But he’s concerned about 
the future shock of head mounted displays (HMDs): “The move to VR is 
interesting, but very rapid,” he says. “I’m just worried that it’s going to 
happen too quickly, because I’m not sure we’re ready to see our own kids 
wearing HMDs, completely disengaged from the world. I love VR, it’s great, but 
there could be a backlash.”

Guillemot recognises the possibility of this kind of instinctive hardware 
revulsion, but he thinks its like any new technological advance: the right kind 
of experience will make users of us all. “If we produce experiences that are 
emotional and intense there will be a market,” he says. “It doesn’t matter that 
you have to wear something on your head, if it’s good people will do it. People 
will have to go through that period of discovery, but itcan become mass market.”

For now, all we really have from the traditional games industry are some 
Project Morpheus demos put out by the likes of Capcom and Rebellion and a lot 
of interesting indie projects (and experimental support from bigger brands such 
as Elite, Dying Light and Eurotruck Simulator) on Oculus. HTC Vive andMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> Hololens are tech demos and 
promises. If there is excitement, it is yet to transform into commitment.
 