
When you talk to both business leaders and designers about human centred 
design, the same words keep popping up: people, collaboration, agility, value. 
Essentially, human centred design is the process of creating solutions, 
services or productswith people rather than for them. In a broader context, it 
is where a framework is put in place to ensure the human perspective is 
accounted for throughout the entire design process – allowing an organisation 
to truly understand their customers so they can add value and find solutions to 
real problems.

“The definition of human centred design is as simple as the art of making 
things better for people,” says Alexis Baum, consultant designer and educator. 
“It’s a design practice with the philosophy of putting people first and centre, 
and really understanding your customer on their own terms. Many of us have 
experienced the difference between an organisation that can change itself to 
accommodate the needs of the people it is serving versus trying to change you 
to suit its systems and processes.”

Baum, who has been working in the human centred design space in Australia and 
the US for more than a decade, says the reason why human centred design is 
proving so popular is because it works.

“So many companies are using human centred design to become more innovative, 
not because it’s some new age thing but because it’s fundamental to creating 
value to people,” she says. “It’s about co-working, co-making, collaboration. 
As a result, it will 100 per cent result in a more meaningful and valuable 
result for the consumer.”

And as our world becomes increasingly digitised, with technology advancing so 
quickly and exponentially, an organisation’s understanding of people and their 
specific human needs will have to advance in the same way and at the same rate 
to keep up.

Cue human centred design.

It will 100 per cent result in a more meaningful and valuable result for the 
consumer.”
Alexis Baum, consultant designer and educator 
Baum attributes this as another reason why so many organisations globally are 
embracing human centred design, and names Kickstarter, the world’s largest 
crowdfunding platform, as a good example of human centred design in practice.

“Kickstarter is an organisation that embodies putting people first and 
adjusting themselves to accommodate. Its fundamental premise is ‘We are going 
to launch new value into the world based on an iterative process’. Essentially, 
they are getting people to speak their vote via money in order to decide if 
it’s worth bringing a new product into the world,” Baum says.

“It’s entirely customer centric. If people don’t fund it, it doesn’t happen. 
And then they know they are going in the wrong direction and can reassess and 
adjust the product until it meets the customers’ needs. In a way, they are 
co-making it with their customers. By the very nature of that model, it’s a 
very human centred design. And it means that once the product is complete, it 
is bound to succeed.”

While the structure of Kickstarter naturally lends itself to human centred 
design, the benefits of incorporating this innovative methodology are being 
recognised by a wide range of sectors, from humanitarian and health to retail 
and banking.

“Taking a human-centric approach not only offers more value to the customer 
but also gives them a much richer sense of belonging,” says Roy Shiladitya, 
Head of IT at ING DIRECT Australia. “We involve the customer in the design 
process [of products and services] from beginning to end to ensure that what we 
are designing is providing value. It also gives the customer a sense of 
ownership and understanding that they are being listened to. When the product 
is out there, it is something the customers feels they have helped us build – 
and they have.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwhat-is-human-centred-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F707047d32349eee93df7289a0905efc3c6336012%2F0_40_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20human%20centred%20design%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwhat-is-human-centred-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20human%20centred%20design%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwhat-is-human-centred-design%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F707047d32349eee93df7289a0905efc3c6336012%2F0_40_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Roy Shiladitya, Head of IT at ING DIRECT Australia Photograph: ING Direct 
In fact, ING DIRECT has introduced its own innovative process called PACE, 
which uses human centred design principles. Shiladitya describes it as a 
structured innovation process that is continuously validated with the customer 
to ensure that what is created is a product or service that they really want.

He says it’s as much about mindset as a practical framework: “We’ve always 
made services and products that we think the customer wants, but more and more 
we are understanding that it’s not about what we think, but what the customer 
actually wants. That’s the shift in the thinking.

“PACE is based on design thinking and agile methodologies. So instead of 
spending lots of time building a product that we think the customer wants, we 
are taking the initiative and experimenting and involving the customer 
throughout the entire process.

“For example, customer behaviour is a key factor in terms of how we develop 
user interface. From beginning to end, we are checking back in with the 
customer to ensure that it is what they want so we can build a product or 
service that provides value and that they can use in their day-to-day life.”

Baum says that while human centred design is a relatively new practice for 
many mainstream organisations, the concept has been around for a long time.

“It goes back to when we were just villages and you had the local cobbler or 
blacksmith or butcher. You had these small businesses who were engaging with 
their customers on a daily basis. They understood and knew them, and it was not 
difficult for a butcher to adjust and meet their customers’ needs intuitively – 
slicing a piece of meat just the way they like it.

Why human centred design matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/ing-direct-being-human-in-a-digital-world/2016/nov/14/why-human-centred-design-matters>
“But in today’s world, organisation have thousands of customers, who come from 
different places and cultures, and they don’t interact with them daily. This 
brings certain challenges. So while the concept of human centred design has 
been around for a long time, globally it still feels like early days in the 
evolution of this space.

“Fundamentally what they are trying to do is overcome the industrial model of 
an organisation, which is a very commanding and controlled silo style. That’s 
no longer the case. Today it’s about transforming from that industrial model to 
a more learning organisation. In the process we’re going back to the origins of 
human centred design, but in new and clever ways that help up to reach more 
people than a village butcher ever would.”

Global design group IDEO, whose client portfolio includes Apple, Pepsi and 
Samsung, is one organisation leading the way in the human centred design space 
– creating solutions for everything from third-world health and education 
problems to designing the original mouse for Apple.

IDEO has also released The Field Guide to Human Centred Design. In it, it 
says: “When you understand the people you’re trying to reach – and then design 
from their perspective – not only will you arrive at unexpected answers, but 
you’ll come up with ideas they’ll embrace.”

As such, there is no doubt the human centred design movement will continue to 
gain traction worldwide as businesses experience the agility and creativity 
that this process brings, while ultimately creating a more engaging and 
successful end result for their customers.
 