
Upspeak, when your sentences end on a rising note, gives whatever you say a 
hesitant, half-baked air. You make a statement, but then turn it into a 
question. Unmoored by a full stop, the words drift off, leaving you undermining 
your own opinion.

A cutesy ruffle or sweet little frill is the wardrobe equivalent of upspeak. 
It puts a question mark against what your otherwise sharp-edged outfit is 
saying about you. “I’m wearing a shirt… I guess? Maybe it’s a nightie? I’m not 
sure?” That is the message, when you choose a shirt with a ruffled neckline, or 
a lacy frill alongside the buttons.

Often we send these signals without being conscious of what we are doing. For 
example: when we, like, interrupt our own sentences with the word “like” at 
random intervals, it breaks up the cadence and makes us sound, like, incohorent 
and rambling. It’s a seemingly benign, thoughtless self-sabotage, like eating 
cheese in front of the fridge before you go to bed.

So, think before you frill. If you do frill, then scale up. A ruffle the width 
of a ribbon is apologetic and domestic, like piping on a cake. A mega-frill is 
anything but. Queen Elizabeth I knew this: her ruffs were super-frilly, 
super-sized, and 100% alpha. I am not suggesting you wear a ruff, by the way, I 
am just pointing out that the ruff had nothing in common with the frilly bonnet.

What I wore this week: bright patches | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/01/what-wore-week-bright-fabric-patches-jess-cartner-morley>
Mini-frills are doing you no favours. But power dressing doesn’t need to mean 
androgyny. Mega-frills – power puffs, if you will – are the new power dressing. 
The frill on this blouse is on the scale of one of those queenly ruffs, which 
is why I am into it. In a summer in which every other shoulder is befrilled, 
a top like this raises you above the pack. A frill this size is not a full 
stop at the end of your sentence, but more like an exclamation mark. It is 
operatic, rather than warbling. And, to underline the point, you can wear these 
kind of frills with defiantly unfrilly pieces. Nothing like a pair of tracksuit 
bottoms for keeping your feet on the ground, sartorially speaking.

• Jess wears top 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/products/Anna-October-Ruffled-cotton-blend-top%09-1049598>
, £295, by Anna October, from matchesfashion.com.Trousers 
<http://www.meandem.com/contrast-piping-luxe-crepe-trouser-french-navy-soft-white>
, £129, meandem.com.Shoes, £85, dunelondon.com <http://www.dunelondon.com>. 
Chair <http://www.habitat.co.uk/momo-charcoal-fabric-armchair-282267>, £225, 
habitat.co.uk.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management
 