
I don’t want to tell you what this look is inspired by. Because you have to 
admit this dress is pretty, yet I know you are going to hate me once I tell you 
whom I’m channelling. It’s going to be like that moment when someone 
compliments you on the miso clams you made for dinner and you say you found the 
recipe in aGwyneth Paltrow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gwynethpaltrow> 
cookbook, and they look as if you’d admitted you found the clams in a skip. You 
know the look. The one when you can tell by the eyes that someone is willing 
themselves not to wrinkle their nose.

The Coco Chanel <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel> quote about 
fashion reflecting the world we live in is a cliche, yes, but a cliche because 
it is true. If you had been asleep under a rock for a decade, and you woke up 
in 2016, the element of modern life that would strike you as even weirder than 
people still wearing skinny jeans would be how obsessed we are with our phones. 
So it makes sense, really, that the new style icon making her influence felt on 
the way we dress lives in our phones. Yes, 1954 hadAudrey Hepburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/19/cult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic>
 inSabrina <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0047437/>, 1967 had Catherine Deneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/10/catherine-deneuve-france-la-tete-haute-cannes-film-festival-selfies>
 inBelle de Jour <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061395/>; 2016, meanwhile, has 
thedancing lady emoji in her ruffled red dress 
<http://ih2.redbubble.net/image.28596930.6856/flat,550x550,075,f.jpg>.

I don’t believe it is a coincidence that the flamenco-styled crimson dress is 
suddenly as ubiquitous in fashion as winky-face keyrings and smiley cushions 
are on market stalls and at souvenir shops. At theCannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, no red carpet was 
complete without scarlet ruffles. And this dress is by no less than Self 
Portrait, the thinking woman’s party dress label; you will see it around this 
summer, mark my words.

What I wore this week: the boho blouse | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/17/jess-cartner-morley-boho-blouse>
The point about the dancing lady emoji is not just that when you spend your 
day staring at your phone she is the most glamorous person in your orbit, it’s 
also about what she represents. A single dancing lady means: this is going to 
be fun. She says, I can’t wait. She stands for joie de vivre and party spirit. 
Repeated dancing ladies mean: I got stuck into the pink wine early, and am 
already a bit drunk. What’s not to love?

PS: those miso clams are good, too. I also recommend the chicken piccata 
<http://www.popsugar.com/food/Gwyneth-Paltrow-Chicken-Piccata-41181717>. Just 
saying.

• Jess wears dress 
<http://www.self-portrait-studio.com/new-arrivals/calla-flounced-dress>, £280, 
self-portrait-studio.com andshoes 
<http://www.office.co.uk/view/product/office_catalog/2,37/2473393170>, £60, 
office.co.uk.Table 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/bradshaw-dining-table/p/p22393616?prevPage=plp>
, £179, marksandspencer.com, and vase, £12,anthropologie.com 
<http://www.anthropologie.com>.

Photograph: David Newby for the Guardian. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and 
makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes Management.

 