
Everyone looks better in black and white. This is, like, portrait photography 
101, and why, if you stumble into some bad lighting, the monochrome Inkwell 
filter can save your Instagram selfie. It works for clothes, too.

It feels easier to wear colour in summer than it does in winter: a brightly 
printed dress is simpler to style when your legs are bare and you can throw on 
a blazer or denim jacket, depending on where you are going, than it is when you 
have to think about black tights or what on earth you’re going to do when your 
arms get cold. Then there’s the dubious logic of, “I can wear 
white/yellow/green only when I’ve got a tan, so now that I’ve got a tan, I’m 
wearing white/yellow/green for the next two weeks.” But just because you can 
wear colour, doesn’t mean you have to. Wearing monochrome in summer feels 
quietly subversive, when all around are in tropical brights and pastel rose 
prints.

Which to choose: black or white? Conventional wisdom tends to advise against 
wearing black when it’s hot on the grounds that black absorbs the heat of the 
sun, whereas white reflects it. But it’s more complicated than that, because 
blackabsorbs the heat radiated by your body, too 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/5903956/the-physics-that-explain-why-you-should-wear-black-this-summer>
, apparently, so will keep you cooler than white. White is summery in a 
pristine, upbeat, holiday-days-when-you-don’t-have-to-get-the-tube sense. While 
black is very chic in a French-girl-in-a-black-Eres-bikini way. White is more 
yacht-life; black is more Glastonbury.

What I wore this week: long layers | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jun/10/what-i-wore-this-week-long-layers>
You know what? I think we’ve had enough tortured, controversial decisions with 
conflicting arguments-in-favour to make this week. And why choose between black 
and white when you can wear them together for maximum impact. The black summer 
dress with white lace trim, as seen on the Céline catwalk, and onDakota Johnson 
on her recent Vogue cover 
<http://cdni.condenast.co.uk/426x639/d_f/Dakota-Johnson-Vogue-Feb16-Cover-23Dec15_b_426x639.jpg>
, is this season’s no-brainer going out look. Cooler than a tropical print, and 
way more flattering than tangerine, however tanned you are. Life is rarely 
black and white, but this dress is. For once, the decision is simple.

• Jess wears blazer, £60, topshop.com <http://www.topshop.com/>. Dress 
<http://www.newlook.com/shop/womens/dresses/black-premium-contrast-lace-trim-slip-dress-_371386609?productFind=search>
, £27.99, newlook.com.Shoes 
<http://www.kurtgeiger.com/ennis-black-synthetic-39-miss-kg-shoe.html>, £99, 
kurtgeiger.com.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 