
It’s my office Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
party next week. What should I wear?
Everyone, everywhere
Glad you asked, everyone! People tend to think this is not something they need 
put much thought into. Just that dress from French Connection two years ago and 
some lip gloss, right? That’ll do!

In fact, dressing for the office Christmas party is probably the trickiest 
fashion quandary you’ll face all year. All outfits send a message. Some say: 
“Yes, I might be a middle-aged man, but have you seen my skinny black jeans? 
These have never seen the inside of a B&Q, I can tell you, mate! I’m all about 
the clubbing!” Others say: “Hello, I like to hibernate from November to March. 
Yes, I am in my pyjamas at 1pm on a Wednesday, what’s your point?” (See 
question below.)

With an office party, you need your outfit to make so many conflicting 
statements that we can only start to grasp what is needed by laying them all 
out. Here is what you need your outfit to say: “Hi! I’m actually surprisingly 
attractive, aren’t I? And you always thought I was just a mousey office person. 
But I’m not attractive in a now-you-want-to-sleep-with-me way, because that 
would be really awkward in the office. No, it’s more of a fun and funny but 
definitely-out-of-your-league way, so that you’re now nicer to me at work and 
maybe feel a little wistful when you think of me, but you know you could never, 
ever try it on with me. I’m like your mate’s really hot partner, right? Think 
of me like that. Also, I’m a lot more interesting than you thought, aren’t I? 
This outfit shows someone with secret depths of creativity, someone who is a 
little more woke, a little more on it than you thought. It’s the kind of outfit 
worn by someone who gets invited to secret midnight gigs, which is totally how 
I spend my evenings after you see me leave the office, not just sitting on my 
sofa wishing Bake Off was on. No, never. You respect me more now, don’t you?”

For men, this means a suit that actually fits; for women, this means a dress 
that isn’t two years old and from French Connection. That’s the other thing 
about office parties: the message is tricky, but the bar is pretty low.

The hygge conspiracy | Charlotte Higgins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/hygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend>
I’ve been hearing a lot about something called “hygge”. What does this mean, 
from a fashion perspective?
Mike, by email
Look, for the record, I really did try, OK? Because I, along with everyone 
else, got the memo sent to every columnist in Britain thatthe topic this season 
was something called “hygge” and that it was absolutely essential we treat it 
as an actual thing, under pain of losing our lofty status as opinion churners 
for hire. Sure, a couple of other things were happening this year that we could 
have written about – something in the political world, I think? – but hygge was 
the big one, the issue on which we absolutely must express opinions. To the 
laptop!

Yet two months have passed since the hygge klaxon went out and still, from me, 
nothing. I know! It makes no sense. I once wrote 4,000 words for a fashion 
magazine about how a store moved its shoe rack from one end of the store to the 
other. Surely I, of all people, could conjure up some kind of 
excitement/outrage/bigger meaning about hygge? No, I could not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwhat-wear-office-christmas-party-aka-fashion-quandary-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd29f44c7b73e030fd363932f2bd15a9ce7be1e2%2F0_0_4992_3328%2F4992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20to%20wear%20at%20the%20office%20Christmas%20party%20%E2%80%93%20AKA%20the%20fashion%20quandary%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwhat-wear-office-christmas-party-aka-fashion-quandary-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20to%20wear%20at%20the%20office%20Christmas%20party%20%E2%80%93%20AKA%20the%20fashion%20quandary%20of%20the%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwhat-wear-office-christmas-party-aka-fashion-quandary-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd29f44c7b73e030fd363932f2bd15a9ce7be1e2%2F0_0_4992_3328%2F4992.jpg>
 ‘My friends are so used to seeing me in my pyjamas that, when one of them saw 
me in a dress recently, he was genuinely concerned that someone had died.’ 
Photograph: Getty Images/Monkey Business 
I get that hygge is a real thing in Denmark. I also get that clever, good 
writers are writing books about it. But, try as I genuinely do, I cannot see 
hygge as anything other than Danish for “choosing to be cosy instead of 
miserable and uncomfortable”. You know what? I think I’ve got that down pat 
already. Perhaps my fellow columnists have heretofore been living in the kind 
of photogenic but clearly horrible modern houses you see in fashion magazines’ 
homes spreads, all chrome and corners and bare, slate-grey floors on which they 
click about with their pointy-toed stilettos. The sort of homes with sofas as 
hard as boards and cupboards you can’t open because door handles are verboten. 
I, on the other hand, am au fait with the concept of getting into one’s 
pyjamas, ideally by 3pm in the winter, lighting a fire, inviting friends over 
and settling down with a giant pot of macaroni cheese. My friends are so used 
to seeing me in my pyjamas that, when one of them saw me in a dress recently, 
he was genuinely concerned that someone had died.

So, trying to be excited/outraged about hygge feels like attempting to stir an 
emotion about air, water or anything else that is just “the stuff of life” to 
me. I mean, thanks for validating my lifestyle choice of staying home, eating 
chocolate and wearing socks – I raise my hot water bottle in appreciation. But, 
seriously, does anyone live differently? This smacks of a trend that exists 
purely to sell to people things they already have. But that’s absurd – fashion 
would never do that.

So, I’m sorry. I appreciate that this will result in my invitation to the 
columnists’ Christmas party being revoked. I might even have my name removed 
from the Columnists’ Golden Charter, meaning – Oh, cruel world! – I’ll never 
appear on Have I Got News for You or Question Time. But I must live my truth. 
As Tony Blair said, albeit possibly not about hygge, I am the insurgent now.
 