
Being a wedding guest is one of the toughest gigs to dress for. But if you 
think I am about to let you off the hook with some bleeding-heart 
wear-what-you-feel-comfortable-in guff, you can think again. It is a tough gig, 
but it’s one that you need to nail. Because, assuming you’re a common-or-garden 
guest – not the bride or groom, not making a speech or looking after the rings 
– turning up looking excellent is the one job you have been given. Once you 
have your outfit on point and have found the venue and are waiting over the 
road with your gin and tonic, you are along for the ride. All you need do for 
the rest of the day is eat and drink, clap and smile on cue.

The least you can do is look good, frankly. But how to get the balance right 
between looking appropriate and being fourth-blue-lace-Self-Portrait 
<http://www.asos.com/women/a-to-z-of-brands/self-portrait/cat/?cid=19317&cr=6>
-dress-from-left in the photos? Being a rule breaker is not the answer. I don’t 
think we need to spell out why a day on which your friends are honouring their 
solemn commitment to a socially ratified contract of monogamy is the day on 
which you need to tell the world what a free spirit you are. If the bride wears 
jeans and a T-shirt, by all means do the same, but if the bride is in a white 
dress, you need to look equally smart or you will get on everyone’s nerves. And 
consider the practicalities: weddings are long and often involve extended 
standing-around periods, so shoes that don’t hurt and a coat that enhances the 
look, rather than killing it off, are non-negotiable.

What I wore this week: flat white shoes | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/20/what-i-wore-this-week-flat-white-shoes-jess-cartner-morley>
That’s the T&Cs covered; now for the fun bit. As a guest, the ceremonial 
function of your look is this: to bring the party. A summery, floor-length 
dress is to the weddings of summer 2016 what the cocktail jumpsuit was to last 
year’s: the look that brings just enough fashion to liven things up. I say 
floor-length deliberately, because the look I am talking about is halfway 
between a maxi dress and a gown. Not a maxi dress, because to me a maxi dress 
is something casual in jersey you wear in the evening on holiday for 
ankle-protection from mosquitoes, and not a gown because, asJustin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> would say, it’s 2016. Get 
one. No excuses.

• Jess wears dress 
<http://www.missselfridge.com/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ProductDisplay?searchTermScope=3&searchType=ALL&viewAllFlag=false&CE3_ENDECA_PRODUCT_ROLLUP_ENABLED=N&catalogId=33055&productOnlyCount=1&sort_field=Relevance&storeId=12554&qubitRefinements=siteId%3DMissSelfridgeUK&langId=-1&beginIndex=1&productId=23153528&pageSize=20&defaultGridLayout=3&searchTerm=MS18D33SMUL&productIdentifierproduct=product&DM_PersistentCookieCreated=true&searchTermOperator=LIKE&x=25&geoip=search&y=11>
, £69, missselfridge.com.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close At Carol Hayes 
Management.
 