
In early February, there was a minor controversy surrounding the critically 
acclaimed strategy sim, XCOM 2. It turned out that the game, which most people 
play with a mouse and keyboard, would only be supporting one type of joypad: 
Valve’s idiosyncraticSteam <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/steam> 
Controller.

Launched in November alongside the new range of Steam Machine PCs, this 
ambitious and innovative control device has provoked a range of reactions – 
though confusion seems to be the most common. Featuring two large HD haptic 
track pads, a single analogue thumbstick and an array of buttons (including two 
on the inside edges of the pad’s handles), the Steam Controller is designed to 
bring the precision controls of the mouse/keyboard combo to a handheld form 
factor. Each of the touch pads, for example, features haptic feedback, allowing 
you to sense where your thumb is on the surface, rather like moving a mouse 
around on a desktop.

The controller looked interesting to many PC gamers, but few were convinced it 
was the future. While Valve changed the whole course of thePC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pc> games industry with its Steam 
online store, where players are able to browse and download hundreds of titles, 
pundits have been less convinced with the company’s spin-off concepts. The 
Steam Machine PCs (which Valve doesn’t make, it just provides the feature set) 
are deemed over-priced, and the controller … well, folks just think it’s odd. 
It’s an outlier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fsteam-controller-valve-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F111f035521f44f7a2a2b898cf4bbeadea657d8d9%2F115_0_1217_731%2F1217.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20Steam%20Controller%20tells%20us%20about%20the%20way%20Valve%20works&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fsteam-controller-valve-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20Steam%20Controller%20tells%20us%20about%20the%20way%20Valve%20works&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fsteam-controller-valve-gaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F111f035521f44f7a2a2b898cf4bbeadea657d8d9%2F115_0_1217_731%2F1217.jpg>
 The Steam Controller is designed to bring the precision controls of the 
mouse/keyboard combo to a handheld form factor. Photograph: Valve 
So why was Valve so keen to make this thing? The Seattle-based company used to 
develop games like Portal, Half-Life and Left 4 Dead, before concentrating on 
its digital distribution business. Now it exists in strange liminal zone 
between software developer (it still makes the popular Dota 2 game), online 
store and hardware pioneer. What this controller is all about is a question 
that gets right to the heart of what Valve itself actually is.

“We had this really interesting challenge,” says Robin Walker, a veteran coder 
and designer who has been on the Steam Controller project since its inception 
three years ago. “We had to find this design that worked for the largest 
library of games that any device has ever attempted to deal with, but at the 
same time it had to be somewhat future-proof. One of the great things about the 
PC is that this is where all the innovation is happening, whether that’s 
virtual reality or new business models. We don’t know what’s going to happen 
next but we want to have a controller that can survive whatever the next steps 
are.”

This is a key element of the Valve philosophy: to be slightly ahead – or at 
least outside – of current thinking. When the company first announced its Steam 
platform in 2002 there was some initial resistance; there was nothing similar 
out there for the PC and besides, Valve was already making plenty of money with 
its games. Why change?

“At any point in our history the thing that was being the most successful from 
a business perspective at some point was the thing that made no sense if you 
looked at it from a pure accounting perspective,” says Walker. “It takes 
cultural effort to make sure we don’t fall into an easier way of thinking. It’s 
scary to say ‘I want to work on this thing and other people want to work on it 
too, but we don’t know if it’ll make more money’. It’s certainly scarier than 
thinking ‘I’m going to work on that thing because it’s making a lot of money 
and I can add another percent’. The problem is, if you take that approach, it 
kills our company within some number of years.”

Valve has always been good at figuring out what gamers are doing and then 
working out where it will lead. Back in the early days, when ex-Microsoft 
employees Gabe Newell and Mike Harrington first formed the company to work on 
the first-person shooter Half-Life, they immediately noticed that there was 
this whole modding community attached to the genre: fans were creating their 
own levels for hits like Doom and Quake, even expanding these into spin-off 
games. So Valve employed the developers of the Quake mod Team Fortress and 
released the game as a standalone title to significant success and acclaim. The 
game was then regularly tweaked and updated for the next decade, responding to 
the needs and wishes of fans. Valve understood the value of customisation, 
iteration and community way before the smartphone games industry took those 
values to its very core.

We’re very interested in trying to make hardware more like software

This concern with customisation and iteration is a core element of the Steam 
Controller design. The pad is configurable to work with titles that weren’t 
designed to support it; players can go through a process of realigning the 
controls by matching them to the game’s own set-up, or they can download a 
configuration worked out and shared by another player.

“We had to build a system that allowed you to configure a controller to handle 
all these old games whle also letting you play new games in a different way,” 
says Walker. “We wanted to make sure we supported all that at a level above the 
game, so it doesn’t matter what you’re playing, you get that power.”

Importantly, however, openness to customisation isn’t restricted to button 
configuration. Another concept that Steam Controller symbolises is the transfer 
of software philosophies – ease of iteration, consumer customisation – to 
hardware.

“We’re very interested in trying to make hardware more like software,” says 
Walker. “With a traditional controller, people think of it as a solely physical 
object: you build the hardware, you build a thumbstick and the thumbstick says 
‘I’m being pressed right’, and that information goes to the game. But there’s 
actually a huge software layer that’s doing a lot of work: how you interpret 
and filter for things like my thumb slipping off the pad; or if you want a 
character to move sideways, well, the reality is no one moves their thumb 
perfectly horizontally, so how do you adjust for that? It’s all software work.”

Like its software, Valve wanted the controller hardware to feel configurable 
too. “Our games are better today because we have created many channels, like 
Steam itself, where communities can get their hands on software and improve 
it,” says Walker. “A lot of the thinking behind Steam was: how does the 
internet make you better?


“This can be the same for hardware. We have a bunch of ideas on how to create 
those channels – so it’s things like, you can go onto our site and download all 
the CAD files for the controller; you can buy all the electronic guts from us 
so you can build your own form factor. We could have a workshop where people 
upload their own form factors so if you happen to have access to a 3D printer, 
you can just print a controller that someone else has designed.

“We’ve done a lot of work over the years on supporting various disabilities. 
When you get a large enough audience you’re going to have a lot of customers 
with specific challenges: colour blindness, for example. We’re really excited 
to see what effect those people will have when they start playing around with 
the controller. Often we find that when we ship stuff, it’s the community that 
makes it better, it’s like a juggernaut, we want to see where it goes.”

This is already happening. YouTuber Ben Heck, who specialises in hardware 
hacks, has built his own alternative controller based around the innards of 
Valve’s pad, and although rough, it’s interesting:

There’s also something else that Steam Controller helped Valve to prepare for. 
During its development, the company added HD haptic feedback to the trackpads, 
but it also built in a gyroscope for motion tracking. This has since been used 
by first-person shooter fans to handle things like jumping, peeping around 
corners and other specific movements (there’s an interesting examplehere 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0TEM8r9p_f4> with Dead Space 2), but of 
course, including this combination of physical controls into the product has 
made it a perfect testbed for another of Valve’s emerging interests: virtual 
reality. The company has teamed up with manufacturer HTC to produce the 
much-lauded Vive VR technology, which is due for release later this year.


“When we started to think about VR, we began by almost literally cutting a 
Steam Controller in half and putting one of the thumb pads in each hand,” says 
Valve’s business development manager, Eric Johnson. He puts Vive on a 
philosophical throughline that links Team Fortress, Steam and the Controller. 
“We view VR as on the spectrum of what an open platform can end up producing. 
If you bought Team Fortress 2 on a console, well, that game is gone now – but 
it is still growing on PC. That’s not because we had some masterplan, it’s just 
that, on PC, we had the ability to keep taking it in whatever direction made 
sense to our customers. Open platforms are really important to us because we 
can do Steam Machines and VR and new controller designs, then just ship them 
and see what happens.”

The future of the Steam Controller is perhaps uncertain. If we see more 
strategy games like XCOM 2 embracing it, if we see indie studios fiddling with 
its more esoteric capabilities (Walker says developers like Tommy Refenes, the 
co-creator of Super Meat Boy, played a role in testing the device), then it 
could take off.

Right now it’s a curiosity that co-exists alongside another curiosity: the 
Steam Machine. But for Valve watchers, and everyone interested in video games, 
the controller says a lot about how this company develops stuff. It hires 
polymaths who can switch easily between projects, and then restlessly 
experiments. “No one on the controller team came to Valve to build a 
controller,” says Walker. “One of the main people started as a level designer 
at another company, then went off to do hardcore particle effects and game 
design, then came to Valve. He programs, he did level design on Half Life 2 – 
but he’s spent the last two years writing code for the controller.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fsteam-controller-valve-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bcb0ad83a58787b9fc779ee03269b86e01c23b0%2F0_147_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20Steam%20Controller%20tells%20us%20about%20the%20way%20Valve%20works&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fsteam-controller-valve-gaming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20Steam%20Controller%20tells%20us%20about%20the%20way%20Valve%20works&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fsteam-controller-valve-gaming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bcb0ad83a58787b9fc779ee03269b86e01c23b0%2F0_147_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 Valve’s work in virtual reality was aided by the development of the Steam 
Controller, which influenced the two control devices used with the HTC Vive. 
Photograph: Ritchie B Tongo/EPA 
What has happened with Steam Controller is also a perfect symbol of the Valve 
business model. “A controller is quite a complicated thing,” says Johnson. “You 
have a bunch of choices when you manufacture something and a lot of those are 
trade offs between flexibility and cost. We took the maximum flexibility choice 
because if we’re building hardware and we’re targeting the PC, which is this 
really open system, we can’t necessarily anticipate the things we’re going to 
need to build very far in the future.

“So we said, let’s build a manufacturing line that’s considerably more 
expensive but lets us create whatever we want in the future. That’s kind of the 
Valve approach. We always try to make long term decisions, and that applies to 
manufacturing hardware or hiring hardware people. We didn’t bring in a 
third-party company to solve all our hardware problems. We approached it like 
we approach everything else: these are our customers. We’re kind of control 
freaks when it comes to our customers. Hopefully in a good way.”

But perhaps the clearest message this strange contraption sends out is that 
Valve remains a company of geeks. Even while controlling the dominant force in 
PC games distribution, making $1.5bn a year in revenue, it is still toying with 
the industry as though it’s an amusing sandbox simulation. Vive, like the Steam 
Controller, may turn out to be an expensive, fascinating oddity. But that won’t 
stop Valve. This is a company of very clever people who enjoy the process of 
making stuff.

“We have robots stamping out our hardware now,” says Walker, almost wistfully. 
“There was some sadness from the hardware focused people when they tried to get 
the rest of us excited about the fact that the controller assembly line is 100% 
automated. They said this is the most automated assembly line in the US. They 
even sent us video evidence. We were like ‘aren’t all controller assembly lines 
automated?!’. That made them very sad.”
 