
There’s no stopping La La Land, the post-truth underdog

Right from the start, which saw Jimmy Fallon’s opening skit entirely devoted 
to a spoof ofLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, it was obvious Damien Chazelle’s hymn to Hollywood had converted the 90-odd 
members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association – men and women who had left 
their homelands to travel to La La Land and pen their own hymns to Hollywood.
Golden Globes v Oscars 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=946244df-0106-4ff3-affb-a9f10a5e61d6>
But just how faithful the converts proved couldn’t quite be predicted: the 
film took seven gongs over the evening (best song, best score, best director, 
best screenplay, best actor, best actress,best comedy or musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-live-jimmy-fallon-la-la-land-moonlight-stranger-things>
), beating the likes of One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest to make new record.

So how did they do it? Especially when some of the awards (such as screenplay) 
were felt by some to be a bit optimistic? Well, that opening sequence was also 
significant, because it showed thatLa La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land> is a lot easier to parody than, 
say, Moonlight (black gay man in Miami struggles with sexuality and addict 
mother) and Manchester by the Sea (gloomy janitor returns home after the death 
of his brother to grapple with previous family tragedy) – and may end up with a 
lot more cultural currency, even significance, as a result.

That the Globes split their categories (drama and comedy or musical) naturally 
favours movies such as Chazelle’s, but, asBenjamin Lee pointed out in his 
liveblog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-live-jimmy-fallon-la-la-land-moonlight-stranger-things>
, every La La acceptance speech also pushed the notion of the movie as an 
underdog – a crazy mad idea and a wild punt for the studio to back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655aa8d047f8969d0169e305159233f189ae84dc%2F0_139_5457_3274%2F5457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Golden%20Globes%3A%20Meryl%20Streep%20always%20wins%20and%20Ryan%20Gosling%20never%20fails&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Golden%20Globes%3A%20Meryl%20Streep%20always%20wins%20and%20Ryan%20Gosling%20never%20fails&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655aa8d047f8969d0169e305159233f189ae84dc%2F0_139_5457_3274%2F5457.jpg>
 Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone with their awards. Photograph: Kevork 
Djansezian/NBC/(Credit too long, see caption) 
But remember: this is a romance starring Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone, directed 
by a man whosemost recent movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review> won three 
Oscars, and which – like Argo and The Artist – strokes that hand that feeds it. 
But, whatever works.

Unless it’s the actual underdog … 

La La Land’s main rival, Barry Jenkins’s Moonlight, went into the race with 
nearly the same number of nominations, and came away with just one win. But 
what a win:best drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/live/2017/jan/08/golden-globes-2017-live-jimmy-fallon-la-la-land-moonlight-stranger-things>
. The fact it was robbed in the supporting actor category (where Mahershala Ali 
lost out to Aaron Taylor-Johnson) may even help its chances going forward – for 
what we now have is a genuine underdog (albeit one that’s so far picked up 120 
awards) with a little outraged momentum behind it (thought #JusticeForMoonlight 
felt a bit of a trending punt). The last movie to take just best drama at the 
Globes? Best picture Oscar winner12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/09/12-years-a-slave-review> …

Congratulations can still come with a bouquet of barbed wire

Despite significant wins for actors of colour actors this year, there were 
slightly fewer than expected (see Ali), and efforts to forget the 
#OscarsSoWhite controversy were undermined by not one, but two, people (George 
Bush’s daughter, Michael Keaton)conflating the names of the two big nominated 
movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/hidden-fences-golden-globes-2017-mistake>
 featuring black actors. Fences are still visible; perhaps Figures still 
aren’t, quite.

Meryl 2020
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Globes%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Globes%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&media=>
Meryl Streep attacks Donald Trump in Golden Globes speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
Can a blonde white woman in her late 60s defeat Donald Trump? If anyone can, 
Meryl can. Herspeech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 picking up the Cecil B DeMille lifetime achievement award was easily the 
runaway moment of the night: impassioned, funny, fearless and picking up 
perhaps the prize dreadful moment in the president-elect’s campaign: his 
mocking of a disabled reporter on the campaign trail.

It kind of broke my heart, and I saw it, and I still can’t get it out of my 
head because it wasn’t in a movie. It was real life. And this instinct to 
humiliate when it’s modelled by someone in the public platform by someone 
powerful, it filters down into everybody’s life because it kind of gives 
permission for other people to do the same thing.

Disrespect invites disrespect. Violence incites violence. When the powerful 
use definition to bully others, we all lose.

Trump duly responded, not on Twitter, but by telling the New York Times he 
hadn’t watched the show but was “not surprised” that the “liberal movie people” 
ridiculed him. Sad!

Hugh Laurie for VP

A shock choice for supporting actor in a drama series – over favourite John 
Lithgow for that other great statesman, Churchill – but Laurie made up for it
with a pitch-perfect address 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/golden-globes-2017-watch-hugh-laurie-night-manager-acceptance-speech-donald-trump-a7516676.html>
, which preceded Streep’s and lamented that this was likely the last Globes 
ceremony. Accepting the prize “on behalf of psychopathic billionaires 
everywhere”, Laurie said:

I don’t mean to be gloomy, it’s just that it has the words ‘Hollywood,’ 
‘Foreign’ and ‘Press’ in the title. I just don’t know … I also think to some 
Republicans, even the word ‘association’ is slightly sketchy.

Viola Davis for secretary of state

A controversial one this, not because she aced the supporting actress 
performance for which she won her prize, nor for her great speech, nor even her 
composed anti-Trump rant backstage:

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fviola-davis-makes-powerful-anti-trump-speech-backstage-at-golden-globes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viola%20Davis%20makes%20powerful%20anti-Trump%20speech%20backstage%20at%20Golden%20Globes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fviola-davis-makes-powerful-anti-trump-speech-backstage-at-golden-globes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viola%20Davis%20makes%20powerful%20anti-Trump%20speech%20backstage%20at%20Golden%20Globes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fviola-davis-makes-powerful-anti-trump-speech-backstage-at-golden-globes-video&media=>
Viola Davis makes powerful anti-Trump speech backstage at Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/09/viola-davis-makes-powerful-anti-trump-speech-backstage-at-golden-globes-video>
But for allowing us all to get a glimpse of the real Streep, sharing a strange 
food-shaming incident in her introduction to the great woman.

Streep: ‘What’d you do last night, Viola?’

Davis: ‘Oh, I cooked an apple pie.’

Streep: ‘Did you use Pippin apples?’

Davis: ‘Pippin apples, What the hell is Pippin apples 
<http://www.cookinglight.com/food/in-season/healthy-apple-recipes/german-apple-pancake>
? I used Granny Smith apples.’

Streep: ‘Did you make your own crust?’

Davis: ‘No, I used store-bought crust. That’s what I did.’

Streep: ‘Then you didn’t make an apple pie, Viola.’

Davis: ‘Well, that’s because I spent all my time making collard greens! I make 
thebest collard greens 
<http://www.myrecipes.com/recipe/ultimate-classic-collards>. I use smoked 
turkey, chicken stock and my special BBQ sauce.’

Streep: ‘Well, they don’t taste right unless you use ham hocks. If you don’t 
use ham hocks, it doesn’t taste the same.’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgYTmZHfoqYI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgYTmZHfoqYI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgYTmZHfoqYI&media=>
Accidents can happen, thank God

In what looked like one of the most locked-down ceremonies in years, a couple 
of bona fide surprises leapt out. The first with the HFPA’s love for Paul 
Verhoeven’s hot-potato rape revenge comedy Elle – a movie previously deemed too 
controversial for major acclaim. But it took not just best foreign language 
film (over the more politically safeToni Erdmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/13/toni-erdmann-review-long-german-comedy-is-slight-biting-little-miracle>
) but also best actress for Isabelle Huppert: now a major Oscar contender, 
leaving both previous frontrunners (Natalie Portman and Emma Stone), fretting 
into their frocks.

The second shocker also showcased the Globes’s more offbeat taste: two big 
wins (best comedy series, best actor for Donald Glover) for Atlanta, about the 
city’s rap scene. The Globes can be notoriously wacky – this time round, in a 
good way.

We need to pin our hopes on the other Jimmy
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du_QQgz74qpo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du_QQgz74qpo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du_QQgz74qpo&media=>
Fallon had a lot to live up to. In part because Amy Poehler and Tina Fey set 
such a high benchmark forthis gig a couple of years back 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dZRTIX4Dxo4>; also because Fallon patsied 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/jimmy-fallon-donald-trump_us_57dbecd4e4b0071a6e06801e>
 to Trump on his chatshow a couple of months back. But despite a fewearly digs 
<http://www.foxnews.com/entertainment/2017/01/08/jimmy-fallon-kicks-off-golden-globes-with-trump-jabs.html>
 at the president-elect, he failed to deliver. Most glaring was his inability 
to competently wing it when the teleprompter broke. All such issues were 
highlighted by the brilliance of some of the presenters, in particular Kristen 
Wiig, who having stolen the showin 2013 with herWill Ferrell double act 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDvZrubaEwA>, repeated the trick this time 
with Steve Carell. Can fellow talk-show host Jimmy Kimmel top it at the Oscars 
next month? Probably.

Heartthrobs are called heartthrobs for a reason

Ryan Gosling’s best actor speech saw peak metrosexual pin-up this year: losing 
nominees Ryan Reynolds and Andrew Garfield shared a snog, while Gosling further 
confirmed his dreaminess at the podium. He ended his speech by paying tribute 
to his “lady”Eva Mendes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/eva-mendes> for 
looking after their daughter and her brother (who had cancer, and to whose 
memory he dedicated the prize) while she was pregnant with their second child 
and he was off twinkling his toes on La La Land. “So, sweetheart, thank you.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV9KaXEjs5ss&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV9KaXEjs5ss>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV9KaXEjs5ss&media=>
Tom Hiddleston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston>, meanwhile, 
went full humanitarian, closing with a story about a recent trip to South Sudan 
with the UN Children’s Fund and dedicating his prize to aid workers everywhere. 
The weird cuts to Christian Slater and the kids from Stranger Things didn’t 
help, but it was still stirring stuff.

The Brits are coming! But so is Netflix

Hiddleston won for The Night Manager, the Beeb’s big hit of the night – gongs 
also for Laurie and Olivia Colman – but the 
series-which-should-have-been-made-by-the-BBC-but-wasn’t took best TV series 
(drama) and best actress (for Claire Foy). After the anti-climatic hoohah 
around Netflix’s first big film production,Beasts of No Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/beasts-of-no-nation>, the streaming service 
finally made good. Lucky, given The Crown still has five very expensive series 
still to fund and run.

Real actors are never off
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60be12611f8775519238444362ef9e1229a75be8%2F0_181_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Golden%20Globes%3A%20Meryl%20Streep%20always%20wins%20and%20Ryan%20Gosling%20never%20fails&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20Golden%20Globes%3A%20Meryl%20Streep%20always%20wins%20and%20Ryan%20Gosling%20never%20fails&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fwhat-we-learned-from-the-golden-globes-meryl-streep-always-wins-and-ryan-gosling-never-fails%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60be12611f8775519238444362ef9e1229a75be8%2F0_181_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Lithgow backstage with Claire Foy and Peter Morgan. Photograph: Mario 
Anzuoni/Reuters 
Greatest ad-lib of the night? Probably John Lithgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-lithgow>, who channelled Churchill 
with aplomb in the press room. Being told his fly was undone, Lithgow quoted 
back the great cigar-chomper: “It’s not a problem. A dead bird never leaves its 
nest.” The runners-up prize goes to Hugh Grant, wrongly leaked as the winner of 
best actor (comedy or musical), who describes the plot of Florence Foster 
Jenkins as, accurately enough, about “a woman slowly dying of syphilis”.
 