
Shall we have an athleisure recap? Right, so here’s an omnibus edition of what 
you may have missed. I won’t bore you with the fastest-growing-retail-sector 
stuff. What you need to know is that (a) the sweatshirt is the new crewneck; 
(b) tracksuit bottoms are now several rungs higher on the fashion pecking order 
than jeans; and (c), Olympics or no Olympics, it’s a safe bet that whoever is 
declared overall winner of 2016 will be wearing a tracksuit, probably the
sold-out deconstructed one by Parisian label Vetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/25/take-the-money-and-run-the-rise-of-the-1000-tracksuit>
.

Where do polo shirts fit into this? The polo shirt is the athleisure update on 
the T-shirt, in the same way that the sweatshirt is the new crewneck. The tone 
of fashion is shifting from that architectural-minimalist, “I probably work in 
an art gallery” look to something both sportier and a bit more brassy. Looks 
that would have been a bit naff – a bit Westfield, if you know what I mean – 
are now deeply fashionable. Tracksuits, say. And polo shirts.

Today, I am also wearing fashion’s other big deal right now: the midi-length 
skirt. It’s a strange disconnect of the current scene that there are loads of 
desirable mid-length skirts out there, but not many top-half options that work 
with them. A plain crewneck T-shirt tucked into a calf-length skirt sounds a 
good idea, but ends up looking too slumpy – on me, anyway. I have seen other 
people in a long skirt with a snazzy bomber, but when I tried the combo it 
looked as if I’d panic-bought an Amazon dressing-up costume (Cool Fashion 
Blogger Shoreditch – Adult Size). A polo shirt, however, has just enough 
structure and just enough fashion. (Stella McCartney’s SS16 show put simple, 
block-coloured polo shirts with matching skirts.) There is something 
brilliantly direct about a polo shirt – see Vicky McClure as Lol inThis Is 
England 90 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/this-is-england> – that 
offsets fashion-y pieces such as my JW Anderson ruffled skirt here.

What I wore this week: a pie-crust blouse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/08/what-wore-this-week-pie-crust-blouse-jess-cartner-morley-fashion>
Two last points: never, ever pop the collar on a polo shirt, as this tips you 
into Abercrombie & Fitch territory; and if you must wear it with jeans, you 
must not wear a belt. Sorry to be blunt: it’s the polo shirt talking.

• Jess wears polo shirt, £70, fredperry.com <http://www.fredperry.com>. Skirt, 
£365, by JW Anderson, fromharveynichols.com <http://www.harveynichols.com>. 
Platforms, £139, senso.com <http://www.senso.com>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 