
What is MDG 6 all about?

When the millennium development goals (MDGs) were devised, Aids, malaria and 
tuberculosiskilled approximately 6 million 
<http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/about/diseases/> people each year. World 
leaders felt it was imperative to have a goal dedicated to tackling this deadly 
trio.

MDG 6 <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/aids.shtml> has two targets on HIV 
and Aids – the first to halt and begin to reverse the spread of the HIV virus 
by 2015, and the second to achieve universal access to treatment for all those 
who need it by 2010. Progress on these targets is measured by a range of 
factors, including HIV rates among young people aged 15 to 24, rates of condom 
use, knowledge of HIV and Aids among young people, and the number of people 
with advanced HIV infection who have access to antiretroviral drugs.

A third target aims to halt and reverse the spread of malaria and other major 
diseases. This is measured by malaria incidence and related deaths, the 
proportion of children under five sleeping under insecticide-treated nets, and 
the proportion of children under five with fever who are treated with 
anti-malarial drugs.

The only other major disease mentioned is TB, the spread of which also needs 
halting and reversing by 2015 under MDG 6 indicators.

Why is TB the only other disease mentioned?

Some health advocates have argued 
<http://trstmh.oxfordjournals.org/content/102/6/509.full?sid=58d1a447-3649-48dc-8ffa-539eb5f3796d>
 that by focusing on the big three killers – Aids, malaria and TB – MDG 6 has 
neglected other diseases, leaving them without the funding required to combat 
them. Plans to address the burden of other diseases have been rolled out by 
countries individually.

The World Health Organisation has focused on 17 neglected tropical diseases 
<http://www.who.int/neglected_diseases/diseases/en/> (NTDs) endemic in 149 
countries and affecting more than 1.4 billion people. They includedengue fever 
<http://www.who.int/denguecontrol/en/>, rabies 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs099/en/>, trachoma 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs382/en/>, leishmaniasis 
<http://www.who.int/leishmaniasis/en/> and soil-transmitted helminthiases 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs366/en/>. These diseases are 
prevalent in both low-income countries and wealthy regions. Dr Peter Hotez, an 
NTD specialist, estimates that about12 million Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/21/wealthier-countries-neglected-tropical-diseases>
 have one or more tropical disease.

Meanwhile, non-communicable diseases 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs355/en/> (NCDs), which include 
diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancers, kill approximately 38 million 
people each year, withalmost three-quarters 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs355/en/> of deaths occurring in 
low- and middle-income countries. Despite posing a significant risk to the 
health and development of poorer countries, NCDs received little attention and 
health advocates sayattracting funding has been challenging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/sarah-boseley-global-health/2011/apr/06/cancer-aid>
.

Will the goal be met?

UN data <http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mdg/Data.aspx> indicates that the world is on 
track to meet its target of halting and reversing the spread of malaria and TB, 
but will fail to meet all targets on HIV and Aids.

Progress on malaria has been significant 
<http://www.who.int/features/factfiles/malaria/en/>, but the disease remains a 
major killer in low-income countries. Global malaria mortality rates fell by 
47% since 2000, from 985,000 malaria-related deaths in 2000 to 584,000 deaths 
in 2013. There was a 54% reduction in Africa. This progress has been attributed 
to the scaling up of malaria prevention and control methods such as greater 
access to diagnostic testing and treatment, increased use of insecticidal bed 
nets and higher rates ofindoor residual spraying 
<http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/malaria_worldwide/reduction/irs.html>.

The world has achieved its target to halt and reverse the spread of TB, with 
the prevalence of the disease falling by an estimated 41% between 1990 and 
2013. Globally, theTB death rate 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/> fell by an estimated 45% 
in the same period. TB treatment success rates have risen and remain above 85%. 
Despite this progress, multi-drug resistant TB remains an obstacle.

The number of new HIV infections has decreased, but not fast enough 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
, declining by 44% among every 100 adults between 2001 and 2012. Despite this 
progress, there were an estimated2.3 million cases 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
 of people newly infected with HIV and Aids, and 1.6 million Aids-related 
deaths. By the end of 2013, approximately 12.9 million people were receiving 
antiretroviral therapy globally. Of these, 11.7 million lived in low- and 
middle-income countries, accounting for 36% of people living with HIV in these 
countries. TheWHO says <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs290/en/> 
that if current trends continue, the target of placing 15 million people on 
antiretroviral therapy by 2015 will be reached.

Of particular concern, however, is an increase in risky sexual behaviour and 
insufficient knowledge about HIV among young people. The UN’s2014 progress 
report <http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/publications/mdg-report-2014.html>
 found that in sub-Saharan Africa, only 39% of men and 28% of women aged 
between 15 and 24 had knowledge of HIV. It also found that condom use among 
young people who had higher-risk sex was 57% for men and 37% for women, far 
below the 95% target.


How does MDG 6 fit into the new development goals?

The sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
, set to replace the MDGs, feature a far more comprehensive list of global 
health targets than their predecessors. The new health goal aims to “ensure 
healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages”, and encompasses13 
targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive#3>
 on issues such as child and maternal health, disease prevention, tobacco 
control, alcohol abuse, sexual and reproductive health and global health 
epidemics.

The new goal also aims to address concerns that the MDGs sidelined NTDs and 
NCDs, with both groups of diseases mentioned explicitly. The targets include 
ending the epidemics of Aids, TB and NTDs by 2030, and reducing by one-third 
premature mortality from NCDs. Mental health,also absent 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1201694/> from most MDG 
discussions, has been included in the SDGs. The health goal contains a target 
to promote mental health and wellbeing.
 