
A flat white is not a coffee. Not here; hasn’t been for weeks. It’s a shoe. In 
fact, it isthe shoe. If you make one update to your summer wardrobe, make it 
a flat white shoe.

A flat white means a sporty, minimalist, white shoe. In its most fashionable 
form, it is pared back to simple, smooth lines with no hardware. Imagine if
Rachel Whiteread <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whiteread> were designing 
trainers instead of sculptures and you have the idea. But anything flat, white, 
laid-back and unisex counts, from a glossy loafer to a classic trainer.

The flat white is the lovechild of the two shoe styles that have dominated for 
five years. One isthe Adidas Stan Smith trainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/22/2015-stan-smith-went-mass-adidas-sneakers-trainer>
, the anti-status status shoe that has ruled the fashion front row. The other 
is the skin-toned, high-heel court shoe, beloved of theDuchess of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge>, and the default, 
play-it-safe smart shoe on red carpets, in table-service nightclubs and at 
weddings. The flat white blends the cool comfort of the trainer with the 
near-invisible elegance of the nude pump.

Fashion editors have a tendency towards hyperbole, always proclaiming the 
rose-gold ear cuff or the white denim culotte to be the latest must-have – with 
the result that, like the boy who cried wolf, our shout-outs eventually fall on 
deaf ears. All of which is a desperate disclaimer before I try to convince you 
that the flat white shoe really, truly is a gamechanger.

Like all sensible people, I outfit-plan from the bottom up. The day dictates 
the shoes, the shoes dictate everything else. There are many days when comfort 
is non-negotiable, but the agenda calls for smart. Those were ballet flat days 
for years; now, they’re flat white days.

What I wore this week: athleisure | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/06/athleisure-polo-shirt-skirt-jess-cartner-morley>
A flat white works with almost anything, but particularly with a midi-length 
skirt. The trouble with these skirts, I find, is that you buy them thinking 
they are modern and edgy, but when you wear them with, say, a court shoe, they 
look like unreconstructed sensible-mum wear. This shoe brings a dynamic, whizzy 
kind of understatement. Right now, there is no better way to start your day 
than with a flat white.

• Jess wears slip-on trainers 
<http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk/sneakers/sneak-peek/invt/104780>, £145, 
russellandbromley.co.uk.Top 
<http://www.cosstores.com/gb/Women/Tops/Draped_top/46885-41940214.1#c-22755>, 
£69, cosstores.com.Skirt 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/leather-belted-a-line-wrap-skirt/p/p22452780?prevPage=plp>
, £129, marksandspencer.com.Chair 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/malmo-armchair/p/p22386804001?prevPage=plp>, 
£249, marksandspencer.com.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 