
What is MDG7?

MDG7 <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/environ.shtml> is a broad goal with a 
mix of ill-defined aims and more precise ones. Its four targets focus on 
sustainable development, environmental protection, access to safe drinking 
water and sanitation, and improving the lives of millions of people living in 
slums.

The first target (7a) calls for the principles of sustainable development to 
be integrated into “country policies and programmes”, and for the reversal of 
the loss of environmental resources.

The second (7b) aims for a significant reduction in the rate of biodiversity 
loss by 2010.

The third (7c) aims to halve, by 2015, the proportion of the population 
without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.

The final target (7d) seeks the achievement, by 2020, of a significant 
improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.

Will the goal be met?

Only in part – and a glance through the progress of recent years reveals a 
distinctly mixed picture.

7a: Although the 26 years since the adoption of the Montreal protocol on 
substances that deplete the ozone layer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/sep/30/comment.environment> 
have produced a reduction of more than 98% in the consumption of 
ozone-depleting substances, global emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) reached
32.2bn metric tonnes in 2011 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCIQFjAAahUKEwihs46W-uvGAhWuFtsKHZ2gDzg&url=http%3A%2F%2Fedgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu%2FCO2REPORT2012.pdf&ei=whauVaHKB66t7Aadwb7AAw&usg=AFQjCNEugqnFg34xYQE_7y0ZFY3g14Y0KQ&sig2=vS_Cn9SfG9qZDl_-WP0KMQ&bvm=bv.98197061,d.ZGU>
 – a 48.9% rise above the 1990 level. The rapid growth in CO2 emissions, which 
increased by 35% between 2000 and 2011 compared with 1990-2000, is mostly down 
to fast emissions growth in developing regions.

While about 13m hectares of forest were lost worldwide each year 
<http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/40893/icode/> between 2000 and 2010, the 
planting of forests on land where there were none before (afforestation) – 
coupled with the natural expansion of forests – has reduced net loss from an 
average of 8.3m hectares annually in the 1990s to an average of 5.2m annually 
between 2000 and 2010. TheUN <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> 
attributes the slowdown in deforestation to measures taken by countries such as
Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, Chile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>, China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, Costa Rica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/costa-rica>, Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> and Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam>.

7b: According to the UN, protected ecosystems covered at least 14% of land and 
coastal marine areas worldwide by 2012 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0CCUQFjABahUKEwi72sT8-uvGAhXkCNsKHRXhC5I&url=http%3A%2F%2Funep-wcmc.org%2Fsystem%2Fdataset_file_fields%2Ffiles%2F000%2F000%2F263%2Foriginal%2F2014_UN_List_of_Protected_Areas_EN_web.PDF%3F1415613322&ei=mBeuVbuuOOSR7AaVwq-QCQ&usg=AFQjCNHqhdBAJJxiud8MpTjY0DeSwSxadQ&sig2=GH3089Q_ElxVje-SvX3goQ&bvm=bv.98197061,d.ZGU>
. Despite such conservation efforts, however, theInternational Union for the 
Conservation of Nature’s Red List 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/iucn-red-list> of threatened species 
reveals that, overall, species are declining in both population and 
distribution.

7c: The good news: the world met the target of halving the proportion of 
people without access to improved sources of water in 2010 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/environ.shtml> – five years ahead of 
schedule. But while2.6 billion people gained access to better water sources 
between 1990 and 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/01/billions-have-no-access-to-toilets-says-world-health-organisation-report>
, 663 million are still without improved drinking water.

Efforts on sanitation have fared far less well: 2.1 billion people have gained 
access to improved sanitation since 1990, meaning the target has been missed by 
nearly 700 million people. Approximately2.4 billion people in developing 
countries <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2015/jmp-report/en/> – 
a third of humanity – still lack access to improved sanitation facilities, 
while 946 million people still defecate in the open. In August 2014, the UN 
deputy secretary general, Jan Eliasson, described sanitation as“the most 
lagging” of all the MDG targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/28/toilets-lives-un-chief>
 and said the lack of progress on building toilets and ending open defecation 
was hindering development and robbing people of their dignity. The UN estimates 
that more people have access to mobile phones than toilets.

7d: The target was met and exceeded, with more than 200 million people in slums
 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
 gaining access to either improved water, sanitation, durable housing or less 
crowded conditions between 2000 and 2014. Over the same period, the proportion 
of urban residents in developing countries living in slums dropped from 39.4% 
to 29.7%. However, increasing urbanisation has produced a rise in the overall 
number of slum dwellers from689 million in 1990 to 792 million in 2000 and 880 
million today 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCIQFjAAahUKEwjU0bSA_OvGAhUol9sKHUIpDYc&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.un.org%2Fmillenniumgoals%2F2015_MDG_Report%2Fpdf%2FMDG%25202015%2520rev%2520(July%25201).pdf&ei=rRiuVZTHHaiu7gbC0rS4CA&usg=AFQjCNG-x5y0FL55ntJU6NhDYrhEEGMYPg&sig2=2m5g6CfL6cAY5XhLz3Ijbg&bvm=bv.98197061,d.ZGU>
.

How does MDG7 fit into the sustainable development goals?

The concerns and aspirations of MDG7 are echoed in five separate sustainable 
development goals (SDGs) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
, comprising a total of 46 targets.


SDG12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive#sdg12>
 aims to ensure “sustainable consumption and production patterns”, whileSDG13 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive#sdg13>
 seeks “urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts”.SDG14 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive#sdg14>
 calls for the conservation and careful stewardship of oceans, seas and marine 
resources for sustainable development.

SDG15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive#sdg15>
, meanwhile, aims to “protect, restore and promote sustainable use of 
terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and 
halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss”.

Water and sanitation figure prominently in SDG6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive#sdg6>
, which aims to “ensure availability and sustainable management of water and 
sanitation for all”. As well as seeking universal and equitable access to safe 
and affordable drinking water by 2030, the goal aims at access to adequate and 
equitable sanitation and hygiene for all by the same date, with special 
attention given to the needs of women and girls – and to ending open defecation.
 