
What is millennium development goal two?

The second <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/education.shtml> of the eight 
development goals launched at the turn of the century called for every child in 
the world, boys and girls alike, to receive a full course of primary school 
education by 2015. Progress towards this lone target has been measured by 
looking athow many children enrol 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.PRM.NENR> in primary education, how many
complete the process 
<http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mi/wiki/2-2-Proportion-of-pupils-starting-grade-1-who-reach-last-grade-of-primary.ashx>
, and how many 15- to 24-year-olds areable to read and write 
<http://mdgs.un.org/unsd/mi/wiki/2-3-Literacy-rate-of-15-24-year-olds-women-and-men.ashx>
.


Millennium development goal 2: 15 achievements on education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/millennium-development-goal-2-15-achievements-on-education>
Will the goal be met?

The headline figures might suggest a success story in the making, but the 
short answer is no. In 2012, the most recent year for which worldwide data is 
available, 58 million children aged between six and 11 were out of school. The 
problem was nowhere more acute than in sub-Saharan Africa, where roughly30 
million children were affected 
<http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Documents/fs-28-out-of-school-children-en.pdf>
. So while more children are registering for primary school than ever before – 
in 2012 the global figure stood at 90%, up from 83% at the turn of the century 
– the ideal of universal enrolment remains elusive. Progress since the turn of 
the centurywas made mostly before 2007 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
, with only an additional 2 million children making it to the classroom since 
then. Moreover, about a quarter of children worldwide – half of them living in 
conflict-affected areas – drop out of primary school before their studies are 
complete, a statistic that hasremained unchanged 
<http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Documents/fs-28-out-of-school-children-en.pdf>
 since the millennium development goals were introduced. And while there has 
been a slight increase in literacy among 15- to 24-year-olds, which went from 
87% in 2000 to 89% in 2012, again there is a sting in the tail, with126 million 
young people 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/2014%20MDG%20report/MDG%202014%20English%20web.pdf>
 worldwide still unable to read and write. It does not help that donor funding 
for education hasbeen in decline since 2010 
<https://efareport.wordpress.com/2014/06/11/aid-to-education-has-fallen-by-10-since-2010/>
.

How have girls fared?

Again, it’s a mixed story. The education goal called for “girls and boys 
alike” to receive a primary school education, but it failed to acknowledge that 
the challenges they face are far from alike. In some poor countries, sons are 
still seen as the breadwinners of the future, and their education prioritised 
over daughters. This means they are more vulnerable to early or forced marriage 
and early pregnancy, and are often left to shoulder a disproportionate share of 
the domestic workload. On the plus side, perhaps partly because of the emphasis 
on education in thegender equality goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/26/millennium-development-goal-three-gender-equality-explainer>
, boys and girls are now enrolling for primary school in equal numbers. That, 
though, means very little if they subsequently fall by the wayside, and the 
reality is thatfor every 100 boys out of primary school there are 117 girls 
<http://www.unicef.org/mdg/education.html>.

Uganda’s success in universal primary education falling apart | Alon Mwesigwa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/uganda-success-universal-primary-education-falling-apart-upe>
What still needs to be addressed?

Increasing primary school enrolment without making provision for improved 
access to secondary and higher education was a fundamentally flawed strategy. 
Governments and donors supported the education goal by building and equipping 
new primary schools, in the process creating a burgeoning generation of young 
learners. But not enough provision was made for what would happen further down 
the line. The consequences of this approach are perhaps nowhere more apparent 
than in sub-Saharan Africa, where more than half of children old enough to be 
in secondary school are no longer in education, even though the region has 
recorded the most significant increase in primary school enrolment since the 
turn of the century. In some cases, buildings and books were emphasised over 
the more basic aim of improving literacy. Moreover, inadequate resources made 
it difficult to reduce class sizes, increase the number of qualified teachers, 
promote better teacher training or enhance academic curricula. Building more 
schools while neglecting to populate them with enough skilled teachers who were 
paid on time was not a recipe for success.

How did MDG2 fit with existing global education initiatives?

In April 2000, at the World Education Forum in Dakar, 164 countries pledged to 
meet a set of six targets by 2015. The agenda called for expanded and improved 
early childhood care and education, and stipulated that school attendance for 
children should be compulsory, free of charge and of good quality. It also 
promoted lifelong learning, adult literacy, the provision of learning 
opportunities for old and young, gender equality and an all-round improvement 
in education quality. But theEducation for All initiative 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/education-for-all/>
 wasovershadowed by the millennium development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/09/education-for-all-scheme-failed-meet-targets-unesco>
 and their emphasis on universal primary education. As the UN Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organisationsaid in a recent report 
<http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002322/232205e.pdf>: “The focus on 
universal primary enrolment meant less attention to other crucial areas, such 
as education quality, early childhood care and education, and adult literacy.”

What steps will the sustainable development goals take to address the original 
education target’s shortcomings?

The new education goal promises to be far more comprehensive than its 
predecessor. Goal fourproposes that 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/education-for-all/>
, by 2030, “all girls and boys [should] complete free, equitable and quality 
primary and secondary education”, a formula that – in succinctly covering many 
existing problem areas – suggests lessons have been learned. There is a clear 
anxiety to touch all the relevant bases, with targets devoted to preparing 
children adequately for primary school, university and professional life. 
Schools must be sensitive to the needs of both sexes, with provision made for 
disabled children and a greater emphasis on safety and quality. Percentage 
targets for literacy, numeracy, life skills and – crucially – teacher training 
will be set when the sustainable development agenda isformally adopted in 
September <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/summit>.
 