
Imissed the first wave of rave, so the appeal of the bomber jacket was lost on 
me. The shiny surface and zipper placement always seemed an odd mix of gaudy 
and conservative: an identity crisis with two sleeves. But then along cameRyan 
Gosling in Drive <https://www.theguardian.com/film/drive>. His dawn-lit silver 
scorpion jacket was a definitive piece of bad-boy costuming and nudged the 
leather jacket into second place (we all want to imagine ourselves as the 
cinematic bad boy, right? Even though we’re probably “unnamed party guest 
number two”). It presaged the revival of Japanese souvenir jackets and Saint 
Laurent’s eagle bomber that was worn by every male celebrity you can think of 
(Kanye West and Keith Richards included).

Despite this, I still balked at the idea of a bomber. Mainly because almost 
all the jackets I own are made for practicality; the extreme-weather parka that 
looks like a prehistoric animal and is built for tramping through the 
Highlands, rather than nuzzled into a hot armpit on public transport. The 
jackets I remember most fondly are from childhood: synthetic fabrics in bright 
colours from C&A smelling of burnt curries with a top note of fresh plastic 
toys.

What I wore this week: wide-legged trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/19/wide-leg-trousers-for-men> 
Everyday, all-weather jackets should be simple, familiar items into which you 
can slip without a thought. They should be the sartorial equivalent of the best 
friend with whom you immediately fall into easy silences and pig Latin 
in-jokes. This bomber I’m wearing today feels as if it could become, if not a 
best friend, at least a good companion.

The feel of it is quite luxury and made me come over a bit Italian rally car 
driver (for context: in my own clothes, I usually feel like a bass player in a 
1990s indie revival act). At the same time, the fabric is extremely 
comfortable, a robust, sensible choice for our monoseasonal weather, as well as 
– in a shade of dark purple (very aubergine emoji) – extremely cool.

• Jess Cartner-Morley is away

• Priya wears Jacket 
<http://www.riverisland.com/men/coats--jackets/bomber-jackets/dark-red-bomber-jacket-295071>
, £55, riverisland.com. T-shirt, £175, by Marni, frommrporter.com 
<http://mrporter.com>. Jeans, £30, topman.com <http://topman.com>. Trainers 
<http://www.whistles.com/men/shoes/low-top-leather-trainers-20507.html?dwvar_low-top-leather-trainers-20507_color=White#start=1>
, £115, whistles.com.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
 