
As an early-evening rain begins to pour, a family of four peer through the 
fence at Rio’s darkened Olympic park. Four months after the Games ended, there 
are few signs of life.

Leonardo Pasta, 40, an IT technician, and his family are Brazilian but live in 
Stoke-on-Trent, so their experience of the Games – like most people’s – was 
confined to television. “I thought they were really good,” Pasta says, as he 
leads his children into a new bus rapid transit (BRT) line station. “There is 
always the question of corruption, but they left a good image.” His wife, 
Danielle Santos, who works in retail, agrees. “With all the worry we had 
before, the result was more positive than we expected,” she says.

The mood before the games was so gloomy that Brazilians generally had low 
expectations; for many in Rio,the post-Olympic scenario is even darker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/22/rio-2016-international-olympic-committee-president>
. In the months before the Olympics began, an enormous graft scam at the 
state-run oil company, Petrobras, brought hundreds of thousands on to the 
streets to call for the impeachment of Brazil’s president, Dilma Rousseff. 
Although not directly accused, she was ousted for breaking budget laws a week 
after the Games ended.

After the party: Rio wakes up to an Olympic hangover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/21/rio-2016-olympic-games-brazil-legacy-party>
The state of Rio declared it was broke and was rescued with a R$2.9bn (£700m) 
government bailout. To add to that, there was the Zika epidemic, rising crime 
and Brazil’s worst recession in decades. No wonder Brazilians were hoping 
things wouldn’t deteriorate to the point that Rio would be shamed in front of 
the world.

In the end, the Olympics were a success – at least on television, and here in 
Barra de Tijuca, an upscale west Rio suburb of condominiums, malls and 
freeways, many saw them as a boon. Barra’s Olympic hub benefited from a new 
metro line and BRT routes connecting it to the rest of the city. “The transport 
works really well,” says Walfredo Heringer, 68, as security buzzes him into the 
gated condominium opposite the Olympic park, where he lives. “It improved the 
real-estate market.”

But working-class Brazilians commuting from far-flung, lower-income areas to 
work in Barra say the Olympics brought them few tangible benefits. Vagner de 
Santana, 39, waiting for a bus outside the Olympic park, says the construction 
company he works for is so cash-strapped it hasn’t paid his salary for two 
months, even though it worked on Olympic contracts. Brazil’s chronic 
unemployment levels mean its workers are scared to quit, his colleague, Fabio 
Lobo, says. “That is why we have to accept it.”

The Olympic legacy <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/olympic-legacy> is also 
clouded by corruption allegations. Rio state’s former governor Sérgio Cabral is 
in jail, accused of leading a gang that pocked R$217m in bribes on public works 
during his eight-year rule, including the renovation of Rio’s Maracanã stadium, 
where the opening and closing ceremonies were held. The companies involved are 
also embroiled in the Petrobras scandal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwhat-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F580f0c2c09b19873f8867950e29f0d1328f19aa6%2F0_95_3829_2298%2F3829.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20Olympic%20legacy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwhat-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20Olympic%20legacy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwhat-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F580f0c2c09b19873f8867950e29f0d1328f19aa6%2F0_95_3829_2298%2F3829.jpg>
 Police face protesters in Rio on 6 December. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty 
Images 
Cabral denies the charges. But the state government is running a R$17bn annual 
deficit, which his successor, Luiz de Souza, blames on falling oil tax 
revenues. De Souza is trying to introduce austerity measures that state 
employees, including firemen, police, teachers and prison guards, have angrily 
protested against.

On 6 December, these protests descended into violence when riot police fired 
rubber bullets, tear gas and percussion grenades at protesters threatening to 
invade the state assembly.Rio’s city centre was turned into a riot zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/brazil-rio-de-janeiro-police-pepper-spray-protest-olympics>
 as some protesters threw rocks and others burned barricades, vandalised an 
empty office block and torched a small digger.

“I have never seen anything like this,” says David Sampaio, a police officer, 
who took part in the demonstration. Officers say the state’s financial crisis 
has led to late salaries and shortages of everything from toilet paper to 
ammunition. Attacks on police bases installed in favelas – low-income, 
improvised communities – by armed drug gangs have increased. And with them, say 
some favela residents, so have police abuses.

“It is total chaos. [There is] war between police and drug gangs,” says 
Eduardo Lima, a PE teacher who lives in Fallet, a favela in central Rio. 
“Unfortunatelywe are paying the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/rio-olympics-residents-impact-future-legacy>
.”

Following the murder of an Italian tourist in a neighbouring favela, five 
people were killed in a police operation in Fallet on 9 November. Fallet is 
near the Marina da Glória, where Olympic sailing races were held, and Santa 
Teresa, a district popular with tourists. But there are no resources for the 
sport classes Lima holds for children who idolise Brazilian gold medallists 
such as judoka Rafaela Silva and footballer Neymar. “They said they would leave 
a legacy. They left no legacy at all,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwhat-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7240de41eb1de4d6db824b3f530cc96544627603%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20Olympic%20legacy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwhat-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20Rio%E2%80%99s%20Olympic%20legacy%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fwhat-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7240de41eb1de4d6db824b3f530cc96544627603%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Jonatan Silva and family at Rio’s renovated port. Photograph: Dom Phillips for 
the Guardian 
Aside from the new transport links, Rio does have one other concrete legacy – 
a renovated port area with a tram service, where a waterfront walkway leads to 
the new Museum of Tomorrow and a pedestrianised square. This big, safe public 
space has proved hugely popular with all social classes.

On a sunny Saturday afternoon, Jonatan Silva and his young family take 
pictures in front of the new museum. They say that security, health and 
education are all precarious in the city, which has seen precious little 
Olympic benefit. “Just this here,” Silva says. “The rest is all shit.”
 