

This weekend, the Mediterranean will come galloping into the heart of Berlin. 
As part of the commemorations for the 70th anniversary of the end of the second 
world war in Europe, 20 monumental horses – variously made of Italian marble, 
bronze, cast iron and granite, some of them six metres tall – will be installed 
in front of the Brandenburg Gate.

At first sight, the animals resemble the four bronze horses by sculptor Johann 
Gottfried Schadow that have sat atop the gate since 1793, one of the city’s 
iconic landmarks. On closer inspection, the new arrivals look decidedly more 
war-torn: cracks pattern the bronze like scars, ribcages are showing, flames 
seem to have licked up the beasts’ flanks.

Their creator, Mexican painter-turned-sculptor Gustavo Aceves, says that for 
him personally, the domesticated horse will always be a “symbol of Western 
culture”, having first arrived on the shores of the Americas with the Spanish 
conquistadors in 1519. But here on Pariser Platz, with the triumphant quadriga 
looking down from up high, Aceves’ equines spark all sorts of associations.

Sculpted out of Italian stone in Pietrasanta near Pisa, modelled on Leonardo 
da Vinci’sGran Cavallo sketch 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/5/54/Study_of_horse.jpg/220px-Study_of_horse.jpg>
, and referencing the Greek myth of the Trojan horse, the installation forces 
passersby to consider Germany’s cultural debt to southern Europe, at a time 
when theGreek debt to Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/apr/27/greek-finance-minister-debt-talks-eurozone-live>
 andGerman wartime debt to Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/06/greece-puts-figure-of-279bn-on-claim-for-german-reparations>
 are very much in the headlines. “Without the horses on top of the Brandenburg 
Gate, this would only be a dialogue with art history,” Aceves says. “Now it’s a 
dialogue with live history.”

Without the horses on top of the Brandenburg Gate, this would only be a 
dialogue with art history
Gustavo Aceves  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fwhat-the-brandenburg-gates-pop-up-horses-say-about-the-state-of-berlins-public-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430398331551%2Fa8d2cf41-4572-4758-933f-0333bf1776f8-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20the%20Brandenburg%20Gate's%20pop-up%20horses%20say%20about%20the%20state%20of%20Berlin's%20public%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fwhat-the-brandenburg-gates-pop-up-horses-say-about-the-state-of-berlins-public-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20the%20Brandenburg%20Gate%27s%20pop-up%20horses%20say%20about%20the%20state%20of%20Berlin%27s%20public%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fwhat-the-brandenburg-gates-pop-up-horses-say-about-the-state-of-berlins-public-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430398331551%2Fa8d2cf41-4572-4758-933f-0333bf1776f8-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mexican artist Gustavo Aceves oversees the installation. Photograph: Paul 
Zinken/dpa/Corbis 
Given their symbolic and literal weight – the head of the granite horse alone 
weighs 600 kilos – what is most remarkable is how briefly these war horses will 
make an appearance in the German capital. On 10 May, after just over a week, 
they will be packed up and trucked off to new destinations: first to Venice, 
then to Mexico City. Beijing, Hamburg, Paris and London are also in discussions 
about hosting Aceves’ horses in the coming years.


The trend towards temporary installations in urban public art is nothing new. 
Many of the permanent artworks commissioned through state-sponsored “percent 
for art” programmes, such as America’sArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> in Architecture or Germany’s 
Kunst am Bau programmes, now look trapped in the fleeting aesthetics of their 
era. Temporary installations such as the one on Trafalgar Square’s fourth 
plinth, on the other hand, find it easier to command attention and are cheaper 
for the city to maintain and protect from vandalism. But in Berlin’s case, it 
has an absurdist twist: a pop-up show with materials usually picked to denote 
permanence and durability.

The project has also profited from geopolitical circumstances. With diplomatic 
relations between Europe and Russia in permafrost, there will be no big state 
ceremony at the Brandenburg Gate, and the installation will take centre stage 
rather than merely framing speeches by heads of state.


This latest public art stunt fits with the wider strategy of a city that is 
actively trying to fashion itself as Europe’s art capital. To commemorate the 
25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall last November, authorities 
installed a Lichtgrenze or “border of lights” made up of 8,000 illuminated 
helium balloons, which were then released into the night sky one by one, 
symbolicallydissolving the old division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/09/berlin-wall-fall-remembered-residents-25-anniversary>
 between the eastern and western halves of the city. For the 75th anniversary 
of Reichskristallnacht in 2013, shopfronts were fitted withimages of shattered 
glass 
<http://www.euronews.com/2013/11/08/window-onto-a-painful-past-berlin-remembers-kristallnacht/>
.

What makes Berlin different from other big European cities is that all these 
projects are orchestrated not directly by the city but a separate limited 
company, called Kulturprojekte Berlin, which mostly uses the city’s money but 
retains autonomy in the commissioning process.

There are things happening in Berlin that you wouldn’t see in other cities
Lutz Henke 
In ideal circumstances, such an arrangement avoids public artworks being 
chosen by committee, or as a result of political trading, allowing curators to 
concentrate on the work itself. In Britain, artists such as Antony Gormley have 
repeatedly criticised the lack of a structure to shortlist and judge public 
artworks: “Here, the standards are very low [for] the way submissions are 
judged,” Gormleytold the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/news/modern-public-artworks-are-crap-says-gormley-this-is-how-it-should-be-done-791922.html>
 in 2008.

In a city as full of artists as Berlin, Kulturprojekte also has its critics, 
who point out that the body tends to choose headline-grabbing spectacles over 
more quietly spoken works. But even they admit that Berlin now punches above 
its weight when it comes to public art.

“There are fewer restrictions here, and a greater acceptance for when you 
break the rules than in New York, London or Paris,” saysLutz Henke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lutz-henke>, a curator specialising in 
public and street art. “There are things happening in Berlin that you wouldn’t 
see in other cities.”

 * The Bilbao Effect: is ‘starchitecture’ all it’s cracked up to be? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/30/bilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings>


 