
Awesome news just in for the busy festive season. The “natural look” is in. 
Result! Run a brush through your hair and dab a bit of concealer on any obvious 
pimples, and off we go.

Oh ... wait. The “natural look”, according to Kim Kardashian 
<https://intothegloss.com/2015/02/kim-kardashian-makeup/>, for casual days when 
she’s doing her own makeup, involves “old school, heavy foundation” and “a 
matte bronzer ... I always contour my nose, and I love to contour my cheeks.” 
That messy bob Gigi Hadid had for the American Music Awards? Turns out it was a 
wig,which her hairstylist casually noted took two hours to put in place 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/28/fashion/gigi-hadid-fake-bob-how-to.html>, 
after which there was some additional styling to be done. (He recommended an 
$18 volumising power that “makes you look like you just casually pushed your 
hair back”.)

At last month’s Victoria’s Secret show, the beauty buzzwords were “minimal”, 
“natural” and “simple”. There was talk of little flushes of blusher, and of 
working with the natural texture of each girl’s hair. Confusingly, though, 
there were also endless photos of the models sitting patiently at their makeup 
stations, hours before call-time, with their hair netted in hot rollers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fnatural-kardashian-models-celebrities-bouncy-waves-full-makeup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F183ff6b9d1882980ef4984a68ebc00dd5c6edc69%2F1199_306_1201_721%2F1201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20%E2%80%98the%20natural%20look%E2%80%99%20mean%20in%20the%20Kardashian%20age%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fnatural-kardashian-models-celebrities-bouncy-waves-full-makeup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20%E2%80%98the%20natural%20look%E2%80%99%20mean%20in%20the%20Kardashian%20age%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fnatural-kardashian-models-celebrities-bouncy-waves-full-makeup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F183ff6b9d1882980ef4984a68ebc00dd5c6edc69%2F1199_306_1201_721%2F1201.jpg>
 That ‘messy’ bob … Gigi Hadid at the American Music Awards, Los Angeles, 
November 2015. Photograph: Buckner/Variety/Rex Shutterstock 
The relationship between how we look naturally and how we wish we looked 
naturally has always been highly charged, and one that many women negotiate at 
least in part with their fingers crossed behind their backs. Nothing new here: 
it has fuelled a cultural fascination with lucky winners of the 
aesthetic-genetic lottery from Aphrodite to #wokeuplikethis. The Pollyanna 
viewpoint would therefore be that since artifice and aspiration will always be 
with us, it is more wholesome to celebrate a healthy, flesh-and-blood 
complexion – even one enchanced by a little flush of blusher – than the 
blanking out of the self under a full mask of makeup.

But what has changed – in what surely will become known in the future as the 
Kardashian age – is that a new obsession with banality has fused with our 
fascination with beauty. We don’t want black tie, red-carpet glamour; we want 
cute bathroom PJ selfies. We are less interested in what movie stars wear to 
premieres than in what they wear on the school run. And so, to entertain us, 
celebrities play adorably at normal life, for the cameras.Three of the 10 
most-liked Instagram photos of 2015 so far are of Taylor Swift at home with her 
cats 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/2015s-most-liked-instagram-posts-by-pop-stars-20151204>
. One is a Selena Gomez selfie, taken in a car, in which the caption notes that 
the plain grey top is her favourite sweatshirt.

Like Marie Antoinette in her Petit Hameau, the stars act out being regular 
folk by driving the Range Rover from Starbucks and SoulCycle. This is normal 
life play-acted for the masses by the beautiful people – as entertainment, but 
with a little nugget of pit-of-the-stomach insecurity lobbed in there. Last 
week, I got a press release about a new range of suck-you-in shaping underwear, 
specifically designed to be worn under your gym gear in order to look svelte 
while working out.

But if we normalise the wearing of Spanx, if we call what models look like 
after makeup and hot rollers a “natural” look, where exactly does that leave 
what we look like naturally? Is it still even allowed, to look like that? Do we 
have to fluff up our hair all the time? I had to switch hairdressers recently 
because he just could not get his head around the fact that I only blow-dry my 
hair on special occasions, and 19 washes out of 20 I just leave it to dry by 
itself. However many times I explained to him that any style that needed 
blow-drying was a complete waste of time, he didn’t seem to believe me. Now 
that “natural” means blown-out, bouncy waves, we don’t even have the vocabulary 
to talk about how we naturally look. Faux-natural is a problem if it turns 
natural into a dirty word.
 