
Not to wish the summer away or anything, but it is only a couple of weeks 
until the September fashion glossies land on newsagents’ shelves, their club 
sandwich thickness the first reminder that the back-to-school season will soon 
roll around. It is the one aspect of summer being finite that comes 
as a relief. An endless summer would be idyllic in pretty much all other ways, 
except the matter of what to wear.

Autumn clothes mark a return to solid ground. Proper shoes instead of sandals 
with snap-prone straps. The familiar rote layering of a jumper over a shirt, as 
reassuring as butter on toast. I’ve nothing against kaftans on the beach, but 
smart-ish daytime, which is a dress code most of us have to adhere to a lot of 
the time, is difficult in summer. What it boils down to is that when you dress 
lightweight, you look like a lightweight, and so summer dressing is never as 
easy as it should be. A shirtdress has that trenchcoat-ish thing of looking 
appealingly crisp and chic on the hanger or page, but somehow dissolving into a 
crumpled blob when you put it on.

Something unexpected has happened this summer. The kind of celebrities you 
assume are utterly irrelevant to actual, real, grownup life –Gigi Hadid 
<https://www.instagram.com/gigihadid/?hl=en>, the bit-part Kardashians  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/14/whats-wrong-with-studying-the-kardashians>
– have come up with a trend that has useful application in the real world of 
tricky summer dressing. What you do is pick a pale shade – blush, beige, grey – 
and wear more or less the same colour from top to toe. Including shoes and 
coat: that part is important. But that’s all there is to it. It’s not rocket 
science, the world of celebrity fashion.

What I wore this week: bright patches | Jess Cartner-Morley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/01/what-wore-week-bright-fabric-patches-jess-cartner-morley>
It seems a counterintuitive way to dress. I feel like I’m at risk of 
dissolving into a blur. Surely a navy blazer or a bright white shoe would give 
the look a sharper edge? But the consistency of colour makes a simple outfit – 
a skirt, a stretchy top, a light top layer – look considered. Formalises it, 
somehow. (All white works, too, but only when boxfresh.) The modern way to 
shade all comers this summer? Stay pale all over.

• Jess wears pleated jacket 
<http://www.zara.com/uk/en/woman/outerwear/view-all/fine-pleated-hem-jacket-c719012p3458019.html>
, £39.99, zara.com.Top 
<http://www.missselfridge.com/en/msuk/product/clothing-299047/tops-299061/camel-sleeveless-peplum-top-5587269?bi=60&ps=20>
, £25, missselfridge.com.Skirt 
<http://shop.mango.com/GB/p0/woman/clothing/skirts/midi/cotton-pencil-skirt/?id=61083558_09&n=1&s=prendas.faldas>
, £17.99, mango.com.Shoes 
<http://www.dunelondon.com/mexico-cross-strap-platform-sandal-0088505410035350/>
, £70, dunelondon.com. Watch, Jess’s own.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson for the Guardian. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close 
at Carol Hayes Management.
 