
The Obamas had an impact on fashion. What effect will the Trump presidency 
have on the fashion industry?

Carrie, by email

Hello, readers.I’m writing this from under my bed, where I’ve been wearing my 
pantsuit for seven days straight now. I have drunk all the alcohol in the house 
so have since moved on to cleaning fluids. I’m seeing spots, which is what I 
hoped for because I think we’ve all had quite enough of reality this week. 
Washing-up liquid is my tipple of choice now, folks.


Maybe you’ve turned to this article to get a break from all the election 
coverage. Light relief, perhaps, or maybe just a change of tune. And I want to 
oblige you, I really do. But it’s hard to be all business-as-usual – making 
jokes like, “Ha ha, hotpants are stupid,” and “OMG did you see whatBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> wore this week?” (that’s usually 
what happens here, right?) – when you’re starting to eye up the oven cleaner as 
a chaser.

Come on, Freeman. You’re a professional. You covered the hell that is Milan 
menswear fashion weeks four years running – you can handle this. So what can we 
say about the Trump era – [gags on own tongue] – from a fashion perspective?
Barack <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> and Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> did affect fashion. In 
fact, Michelle is onthe cover of US Vogue this month 
<http://www.vogue.com/13501355/michelle-obama-december-cover-interview-first-lady-white-house-departure/>
 – again – looking so gorgeous you wonder how any models get jobs these days.

Their popularity among fashion folk is because the Obamas are genuinely – and 
I’m going to use a technical term here so have a dictionary ready – hot as 
hell. This demographic – “coastal elites 
<http://www.vox.com/identities/2016/11/11/13589118/trump-voters-media-bubble>”, 
as I believe they are called nowadays – genuinely liked them, and that made it 
even easier to hold them up as fashion icons.

Which brings us to the Trumps. Now, I appreciate we should all be approaching 
this presidency with an open mind and hopeful heart and yadda yadda yadda. But 
I think it’s a pretty safe bet thatAnna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour> won’t be inviting Mr and Mrs 
Trump to grace the pages of her magazine with quite the same joy in her heart 
as she did with the Obamas. I’m sureTrump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> supporters – and doubtless 
Trump himself – will put this down to “elitism” and “snobbery”, and that’s a 
fair point, of course, given Vogue’s well-known prejudice against Manhattan 
billionaires. And yet, despite that, Vogue has been a friend of the Trump 
family for decades, as is inevitable given that Wintour and Trump were both 
major figures in 80s New York so probably waved at each other across the Four 
Seasons every other day for the past three decades. Ivanka, Trump’s adored (a 
little too adored <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=diMp241gAcw> for the comfort 
of some of us) daughter, has been featured in gushing fashion magazine articles 
for years. And yet, somehow I don’t think that’s going to happen any more. It’s 
hard to present a young woman as the paragon of modern day feminism – she has 
babies … and works! And gets a daily blow dry! HOW DOES SHE DO IT!?!? – when 
her father is on tape talking about his fondness forgiving women surprise 
manual smear tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
.

It’s almost poetic, really: all his life Trump just wanted respect, and his 
urge to run was almost certainly lit when Obamapublicly mocked him at the 2011 
White House Correspondents’ Dinner <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k8TwRmX6zs4>
. And he won! But at the cost of ever him or his family ever having any respect 
from precisely the kind of people he always wanted it from. Is this an O Henry 
short story or a Dilbert cartoon strip? So in terms of their affect on high 
fashion, no, I don’t think the Trumps will have much of an impact. Is this 
elitism or just fashion people not feeling especially fond of a politician who 
won by employing blatantly misogynistic and racist rhetoric? Because of all the 
things you can criticise the fashion industry for, it does, at least, employ a 
lot of women and gay men. So it tends to have a pretty liberal bent, and you 
can call that elitism if you like, but it looks more like people simply 
following their beliefs to me. I say potato, you say grab ’em by the pussy. 
Pass the oven cleaner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Ffashion-trumps-obamas-elitism-snobbery-donald-melania-taylor-swift-election-result%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa73cd2a3152fbaa126783125d84ec4f2e740bafa%2F0_251_2424_1454%2F2424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20it%20comes%20to%20fashion%2C%20the%20Trumps%20are%20not%20the%20new%20Obamas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Ffashion-trumps-obamas-elitism-snobbery-donald-melania-taylor-swift-election-result%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20it%20comes%20to%20fashion%2C%20the%20Trumps%20are%20not%20the%20new%20Obamas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Ffashion-trumps-obamas-elitism-snobbery-donald-melania-taylor-swift-election-result%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa73cd2a3152fbaa126783125d84ec4f2e740bafa%2F0_251_2424_1454%2F2424.jpg>
 Taylor Swift … why the reticence? Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
As we know, politics are decided by celebrities these days. Which celebrities 
failed us this time?

Nadia, by email




Look, I have no appetite for the blame game. What’s the point? We will never 
have a woman president because a short-fingered vulgarian is about to destroy 
the world. But! I will make an exception when it comes to blaming celebrities 
andTAYLOR SWIFT <https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> I AM LOOKING 
AT YOU.

As we all know now, white women without college degrees voted for Trump 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/11/hillary-clinton-white-women-vote/507422/>
. But you know who white women listen to? That’s right – Taylor Swift. Swift 
remained intriguingly silent during the campaign, which seemed odd, considering 
her much-vaunted best friend,Lena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham>, was anything but. Even 
Swift’s eventual, and very last-minute, admission that she was voting for 
Clinton was made through the medium of a polo neck (it’san Instagram thing 
<https://www.bustle.com/articles/193906-is-taylor-swift-voting-for-hillary-clinton-her-election-day-sweater-might-be-a-hint>
) rather than a full-throated endorsement.

So why the reticence, Tay-Tay? Maybe she feared alienating her 
country-and-western base. Maybe her well-known loathing forKaty Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/katy-perry>, who has long been a Clinton 
supporter, trumped her politics. Maybe she’s just a big coward. Who knows? But 
you know what, Taylor? Makingmusic videos with Victoria’s Secret models 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QcIy9NiNbmo> about how much you love female 
solidarity means sod all if you can’t even be bothered to speak up for a woman 
running against a raging misogynist. Walk the walk, Swiftie.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 