
Ahead of James Bond’s arrival in Rome to shoot new instalment Spectre, some 
locals openly questioned whether the eternal city was in any state to receive 
the dapper British spy. But a month into the shoot, and despite misgivings over 
increased traffic from some Romans, director Sam Mendes’ team has won praise 
for helping to clean up rubbish-strewn, graffiti-plagued areas as part of the 
filming process, reports the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/destinations/europe/italy/rome/11465758/James-Bond-film-crew-clean-up-Rome-on-Spectre-shoot.html 
http://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/03/rome-james-bond-shoot-cleanup-spectre-007>
.

Producers are said to have worked with city council workers on the clean-up 
project, while their introduction of private security firms has helped rid the 
city of much-detested unlicensed parking attendants in the touristy Trastavere 
district near the River Tiber. Location fees have brought an estimated €1m into 
public coffers and news website Linkiesta last week summed up the positive 
reaction to the arrival of 007 production company Eon with the header “The 
mayor of Rome is Bond. James Bond”.

The picture is a far cry from the one painted last month by campaigners 
writing on theBasta Cartelloni blog 
<http://www.bastacartelloni.it/2015/01/ciak-si-gira-nel-degrado-dal-22.html>, 
who suggested prior to Bond’s arrival that the state of the city was likely to 
shame Romans. They published photographs showing the 15th-century Ponte Sisto 
pedestrian bridge appearing dirty and adorned with graffiti and garbage, with 
the nearby Tiber Farnesina street (where a car chase was due to take place) 
appearing to be in a similar state.

Meanwhile, the makers of Spectre have received a less cheery welcome in 
Cardiff, where producers have been refused permission to shoot in the main 
building of the Welsh Assembly, known as the Senedd,reports the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-31861644>.

A spokesperson for the Assembly said in a statement: “The Senedd’s Siambr 
[chamber] is the home of Welsh democracy and seat of government forWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>. Some media activity is allowed in the 
Siambr when it relates to the work of the assembly or reflects the Siambr’s 
status as the focal point of Welsh civic life. It is not a drama studio.

“Decisions on requests from the creative industries to use the assembly’s 
estate are made on a case by case basis, and we are proud to have collaborated 
with many television and film companies on drama productions such as Sherlock 
and Dr Who. The request byJames Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond> to use the Siambr was turned down 
and they were offered alternative locations on the estate which they 
subsequently declined.”

It is not known why Bond would have wanted to shoot in the chamber. Producers 
have been filming the 24th official 007 movie in London, Rome and the Austrian 
Alps over the past month. Daniel Craig returns for his fourth turn as Bond in
Spectre <https://www.theguardian.com/film/spectre>, which also stars Christoph 
Waltz, Léa Seydoux and Monica Bellucci. The film is expected to hit UK cinemas 
on 23 October and will debut in the US on 6 November.
 