
Last week, a Reddit user uncovered an old Myspace page from 2008 
<https://myspace.com/ismellpanties/music/song/lilo-fucks-stitch-3782520-3760854>
 entitled I Smell Panties. It contained a song called Lilo Fucks Stitch in 
which, over a rudimentary piano backing, the performer assumes the role of the 
beloved Disney character Stitch and details all the sexually transmitted 
diseases he caught following intercourse with his owner Lilo. It turns out that 
the page was made and abandoned by the rapper Tyler, the Creator.

Yahoo is not alone: six failed tech companies and how they fell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/failed-tech-companies-yahoo-verizon>
It’s unclear how mortified Tyler will be by this discovery – after all, it’s 
no saltier than much of his commercially available work – but it’s by no means 
the first pre-fame celebrityMyspace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/myspace> page to rise from the depths 
and haunt its creator. There are others. So many others.

Tom Hardy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8dc35e2477017d620654413b1c2379b1aedab61%2F0_0_1520_1121%2F1520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20celebrities%20used%20Myspace%3A%20the%20profiles%20A-listers%20try%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20celebrities%20used%20Myspace%3A%20the%20profiles%20A-listers%20try%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8dc35e2477017d620654413b1c2379b1aedab61%2F0_0_1520_1121%2F1520.jpg>
 Photograph: Myspace 
The Dark Knight Rises star’s Myspace page is a golden demonstration of 
everything that can happen if you free a celebrity from the clutches of 
publicists. It is at once utterly barmy (“I am a goldfish walking through the 
desert,” it reads, shortly after the bit that goes: “I could so easily be dead. 
My head is like a dangerous neighborhood I should never be in it without an 
appropriate adult”) and perfectly glorious. There are photos of Tom, but the 
vast majority of them show him in just his pants, duckfacing like his very life 
depended on it. There is a sense these days thatTom Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy> is doing his best to escape the 
abject sluttishness of his Myspace presence, in order to reach the giddy 
heights of respectability. This is genuinely a crying shame.

Harry Styles 

In its current and unusably terrible incarnation, Myspace is basically a 
repository for three-year-old Harry Styles fansites. However, this is the 
original and best. Created when he was basically a child,Harry’s page 
<https://myspace.com/152434996/photos> contains five photos, two of which are 
identical chin-stroking Andy Warhol montages. There’s a blurry selfie taken in 
a mirror, camera flash and all. There’s a photo at dinner. But, best of all, 
there’s a picture with his parents. His mum and dad are simply smiling for the 
camera. Harry, though, is pulling a face like Jim Carrey in The Mask and daring 
us to imagine what a megastar he’s about to become. Unlike many celebrity 
Myspace pages, Harry’s is still publicly accessible. This is entirely to his 
credit.

Taylor Swift 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe457c590b7c1ec9a215313f5a761af474681b966%2F0_0_663_607%2F663.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20celebrities%20used%20Myspace%3A%20the%20profiles%20A-listers%20try%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20celebrities%20used%20Myspace%3A%20the%20profiles%20A-listers%20try%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe457c590b7c1ec9a215313f5a761af474681b966%2F0_0_663_607%2F663.jpg>
 Photograph: Myspace 
Made when she was just 18 
<http://www.breatheheavy.com/taylor-swifts-decade-old-myspace-page-exposed/>, 
Swift’s Myspace bio reads like the confessional scene from a Nora Ephron film 
translated from English to Chinese and back again several thousand times. It’s 
like a Hank Kingsley tone poem. “In my spare time, I like to conduct random 
baking experiments in my kitchen and write letters to people,” it goes. And “I 
love surprises and hardwood floors”. And “I like to read up on weird medical 
problems, so if one of my friends ever complains of a headache or stomach ache, 
I’m probably going to spout off 12 different things that could be wrong with 
them. Because I’m way paranoid.” And “I’m not a big deal. At all”.

Katy Perry

Perry joined Myspace just as she became famous, but her old page 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20080705084702/http://www.myspace.com/katyperry> 
still feels ramshackle and homemade. It boasts of appearances on webisodes and 
mentions in Penthouse. Its “Things to know about Katy Perry” section includes 
both “Not a vegetarian, but drives a hybrid :) hee hee” and “I LOVE 
rollerskating, MINATURE GOLF and ice skating :)”. Perhaps the most galling 
signifier of the age, however, is the fact that one of her top friends is Mika.

Lana Del Rey 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee02257f56993c6a956acf790e3943322949d2ea%2F0_0_750_628%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20celebrities%20used%20Myspace%3A%20the%20profiles%20A-listers%20try%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20celebrities%20used%20Myspace%3A%20the%20profiles%20A-listers%20try%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fmyspace-celebrities-tyler-creator-taylor-swift-tom-hardy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee02257f56993c6a956acf790e3943322949d2ea%2F0_0_750_628%2F750.jpg>
 Photograph: MySpace 
Lana Del Rey’s Myspace page 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20071117101452/http://myspace.com/therichwhores> 
commits many crimes. Most egregiously, the page was made when Lana Del Rey was 
simply known as Lizzy Grant. Then there are her listed influences, which at one 
point included “Coney Island”, “Britney Spears” and “Motorcycles”. Worst of 
all, though, Lana Del Rey’s preferred choice of font was Impact, which meant 
you couldn’t look at it for more than five seconds without getting a cluster 
migraine.

Tom Hiddleston 

Correctly deleted at the moment he became famous, Hiddleston’s Myspace 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20120607034305/http://www.myspace.com/tomhiddleston>
 offers a tantalizing peek at a tormented soul. The results of his Superhero 
Personality Test reveal him to be 85% The Flash and 67% Supergirl. He lists his 
general interests as “the usual”, which clearly means he has no general 
interests. Also, it’s very important to point out that one of his favorite 
films is listed as Meet the Fockers.
 