
It seems that the majority of the coverage of fashion weeks is not of the 
clothes on the runways but the ridiculous ones worn by people at the shows. Why 
is this? And isn’t this kind of blatant attention-seeking a bit tragic?

Carole, by email

You are absolutely right, Carole, that the shows have become at least as much 
about the clothes people wear as they are about the ones on the runway. The 
rise of “street style” – the term for photos of people wearing outfits out and 
about – is the purest form of what people mean when they talk loftily about 
“the democratisation of fashion”.

Now anyone can take photos for fashion blogs, not just accredited 
photographers with access to the Prada show, and anyone can be celebrated as a 
fashion icon, not just models and celebrities. That’s the theory, anyway. Of 
course, as with pretty much everything cited as evidence of fashion’s all-new 
and improved nature, this is cobblers. It’s like how fashion magazines now 
insist that they celebrate a “healthy” physique as opposed to merely a “thin” 
one; by “healthy” they mean “a very thin model who looks like she spends five 
hours a day with a personal trainer and has launched an athleisure clothing 
line”. The vocabulary has altered a little but, really, it is all business as 
usual. After all, for all the talk of the “democracy” of street style, it is 
still, by and very large, only thin and beautiful people wearing expensive 
clothes who are photographed. Nonetheless, the simple fact that they are on the 
street as opposed to a runway gives the illusion of accessibility and 
relatability: two concepts people desire now and so fashion feels it has to pay 
lip service to them, fraudulent and tokenistic as it may be.

Obviously, at a fashion show you will find people who enjoy dressing up, which 
is why fashion weeks are peak time for street-style photographers. So because 
there are now so many of these snappers outside the shows, anyone who gets some 
kind of kick out of being photographed for a fashion blog will dress 
accordingly. Which in turn brings more photographers. Which means – OK, you get 
the picture.

Now, I do see what you mean, Carole, about the attention-seeking, but for a 
different reason from you. I have no problem with people dressing up for shows: 
if anything, I think it’s polite to the designers to make a bit of effort. And 
for heavens’ sake, if you can’t have a bit of fun with the dress-up box at a 
fashion show, where can you? But there is definitely something a bit weird 
about how desperately some people old enough to know better now want to be 
photographed by the street-style bloggers. Sure, everyone likes to be admired 
from time to time, but there is a fine line between “appreciating admiration” 
and “desperately needing external validation”, and I think you’ve crossed that 
line when you’re over 40 and you post on Instagram every time you’re featured 
on a street-style blog. This is the fashion equivalent of retweeting a 
compliment, and neither form of behaviour is acceptable from anyone over 18. 
For heaven’s sake, how can we convince the younger generations that they 
shouldn’t rely on external approval when we, the oldsters, are doing just that? 
Rein it in, people. If you want to dress up, dress up! But do it for yourself, 
not for a 22-year-old Russian style blogger.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffashion-week-street-style-catwalk-brangelina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6144d189b0b162399e1019af69097a754fb82582%2F0_150_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=When%20did%20street%20style%20become%20more%20important%20than%20the%20catwalk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffashion-week-street-style-catwalk-brangelina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=When%20did%20street%20style%20become%20more%20important%20than%20the%20catwalk%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffashion-week-street-style-catwalk-brangelina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6144d189b0b162399e1019af69097a754fb82582%2F0_150_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Star-struck ... the fact is, a lot of people want to read about Angelina and 
Brad. Photograph: Kevin Winter/Getty Images 
Bloody hell, there were about a hundred articles about Brad Pitt and Angelina 
Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> on the Guardian website 
last week!!!!!! Is this a newspaper or Hello! magazine?????

Too many people, Out there

And once again, we must return to a regular feature on this page entitled, 
“Just because something does not interest you does not mean it is not 
interesting.” Here’s how this story goes, folks: no, a celebrity’s divorce is 
not hard news in the way, say, attacks in Syria are. But it is still an event 
in which a lot of people are interested and, guess what, covering the latter 
does not mean not covering the former. All interests can be catered for on the 
crazy world wide web where space is limitless. So if you don’t want to read 
about Brad and Angelina, allow me to direct you to the literally billions of 
other articles out there about other subjects.

If it upsets you so much that the papers ran some coverage of a story that you 
don’t find interesting, imagine how I feel every four years during the World 
Cup. So don’t rage at the papers for daring to not cater to your specific 
interests: either skip the stories that don’t appeal to you and read something 
else, or set up your own paper that will only cover your kind of stories. The 
choice, as Graham from Blind Date used to say, is yours!

The fact is, moral high ground inhabitants, a lot of people want to read about 
Pitt and Jolie, because they have been part of the pop culture landscape for 
over 20 years. If these people actually buy the newspaper to read this story, 
well, newspapers will have more money to cover stories like Syria. So win-win! 
Of course, this only works if readers actually pay to read stories, as opposed 
to just reading everything on the web for free and then complaining about the 
diminished investigative and foreign news coverage in favour of regurgitated 
press releases about celebrities. But that’s another issue for another day, eh, 
readers?
 