
It turns out that president-elect Trump shares more opinions with those 
out-of-touch “liberal movie people” than he might like to acknowledge. After 
all, the view that Meryl Streep is an overrated actor was first expressed 12 
years ago – by Meryl Streep herself. Picking up her2004 Emmy for best actress 
in Angels in America <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBe8RVhRiuc>, she 
admitted to the audience: “You know, there are some days when I myself think I 
am overrated.” This was met by the same cacophony of laughter that presumably 
greeted Trump’s tweets this week, in which he lambasted Streep as “one of the 
most over-rated actresses in Hollywood”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meryl%20Streep%20attacks%20Donald%20Trump%20in%20Golden%20Globes%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmeryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video&media=>
Meryl Streep attacks Donald Trump in Golden Globes speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-donald-trump-golden-globes-defends-journalism-video>
The question of whether Streep has the whole industry hoodwinked with all that 
pretend good acting – rewarded with 30Golden Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> nominations (and eight wins), 
19 Oscar nominations (and three wins), five Grammy nominations, 17 Screen Guild 
nominations (and two wins), 13 Critics’ Choice awards (and three wins), 15 
Bafta nominations (and two wins), three Emmy nominations (and two wins), one 
Tony nomination and a Presidential Medal of Freedom – has clearly been 
preoccupyingGeorge Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>, 
too. Speaking at a reception for the Netflix documentaryThe White Helmets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/23/the-white-helmets-syria-volunteer-rescue-workers-heroes-hope-horror>
 on Monday night, he pondered whether this was the best use of the 
president-elect’s brain capacity, and how exactly the Golden Globes tied into “
running the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/10/george-clooney-voices-support-for-meryl-streep-anti-trump-speech>
”.

Meryl Streep has hit on star-struck Trump’s big weakness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/09/meryl-streep-trump-big-weakness-golden-globes-speech>
Nonetheless, in the spirit of “if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em”, he knowingly 
waded into the debate, and mockingly called into question Streep’s ability to 
act, even when playing an uptight animated mammal called Felicity.

“You know I’ve always said about Meryl that she is one of the – maybe the most 
– overrated actresses of all time,” joked Clooney. “She and I worked together 
on Fantastic Mr Fox, playing husband and wife, and I will tell you, even as a 
fox – a FEMALE fox – she was overrated.” Given that this is a film about a poor 
fox stealing from wealthy landowners in order to share the wealth with his 
fellow impoverished farm animals – clearly advocating a communist 
redistribution of resources – perhaps this is also the role that convinced 
Trump of Streep’s theatrical inadequacies. More likely, though, is Streep’s 
turn inMamma Mia! <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/jul/10/film.reviews>
. The songs of Abba advocate love for the obviously foreign Fernando and deign 
to sing in both French (Voulez-Vous) and Spanglish (Chiquitita), which, to the 
ears of Trump, surely sound nothing short of unpatriotic.
 