
Suspenseful it may not have been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-2016-predictable-race-still-brings-joy-to-a-battered-france>
, but the 2016 Tour de France was nip and tuck in one way: the time gaps behind 
the winner. Chris Froome’s victory margin was 3min more than in 2015 ahead of 
Nairo Quintana, but the gap to the rider in 10th was only 7min compared with 
17min last year; 21min in 2014 for Vincenzo Nibali and 17min again in 2013. 
Incredibly, after 89 hours of racing, a mere 180 seconds spanned the riders 
between second and 10th. What this says is that Froome may be a decisive winner 
but he is not as dominant as, say, Miguel Indurain or Lance Armstrong who would 
pulverise the race. This points to a levelling of the playing field within 
cycling, given that only one team – Movistar – placed more than one rider in 
the top 10 overall.

Chris Froome's Tour de France win puts him among greats | William Fotheringham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/24/tour-de-france-2016-predictable-race-still-brings-joy-to-a-battered-france>
Some of Froome’s future challengers will lie within that top 10, but there are 
absentees. Similarly, it doesn’t figure that just because a rider has finished, 
say, eighth in 2016, that he will automatically return in 2017 stronger, wiser, 
and with a better team, and in a position to challenge Froome as he and Sky 
attempt to win a fifth Tour for the British team in six years.

Some of those within the top 10 produced their best Tours in several attempts, 
suggesting this might be an “outlier” performance – Daniel Martin is the 
obvious example here, with all due respect to one of cycling’s best climbers 
and most spectacular riders. Thus far, Martin looks like a brilliant one-day 
rider who has turned in the best Tour of his career; there is nothing to say he 
will improve further.

Beyond the obvious names, who have won at least one Grand Tour and confirmed 
that performance – Nairo Quintana, Vincenzo Nibali and Alberto Contador – and 
old lags such as Richie Porte and Thibaut Pinot, what prospects for 2017 have 
been thrown up by this year’s race?

Romain Bardet

The obvious name, given that he has produced two decent Tours in a row (fifth 
in 2015, with one stage win, second in 2016,with one stage win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/tour-de-france-2016-romain-bardet-chris-froome>
), he is improving year by year and he doesn’t appear to suffer from the 
inconsistency that afflicts French cyclists, who appear to suffer from being in 
the spotlight. Crucially, Bardet appears able to get through the first week of 
the Tour without struggling too much, while he is clearly learning year on year 
to find openings for himself. He has weaknesses compared to Froome, however, 
starting with his team, Ag2R. While probably the best value for money squad in 
cycling – Leicester to Sky’s Chelsea – and a model in terms of youth 
development, with eight “home-grown” riders in this year’s Tour team, they 
don’t have Sky’s budget or firepower. Bardet will have to get lucky to beat 
Froome. He will also have to improve his time trialling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%202016%3A%20Chris%20Froome%20wins%20for%20the%20third%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%202016%3A%20Chris%20Froome%20wins%20for%20the%20third%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights&media=>
Tour de France 2016: Chris Froome wins for the third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/25/tour-de-france-2016-chris-froome-wins-for-the-third-time-video-highlights>
Adam Yates

There has to be a chance that, having produced a Tour way above expectations 
in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/adam-yates-tour-de-france-2016-white-jersey>
 at the age of only 23, Yates may suffer a dip in performance the following 
season before bouncing back the following year. However, Yates’s trajectory to 
date has been sufficiently precocious – stage race wins, a Classic win in his 
second year – to suggest that he may buck that trend. It’s equally interesting 
to speculate about what will happen if Orica decide to unleash their other two 
bright stage race prospects – Yates’s twin brother Simon and the Colombian 
Esteban Chaves – alongside Adam in the French race. If the trio can be kept 
together and made to function as a unit with a strong squad built to back them, 
with a cleverdirecteur sportif in Matt White to keep them in order they just 
might present Sky with a serious challenge, if not next year then in 2018.

Louis Meintjes

The South African followed 10th in the Vuelta in 2015 with eighth in the Tour 
this year. Meintjes rode through the Tour even more unobtrusively than Adam 
Yates and would have stepped into the white jersey had the Briton faltered; he 
was only 2min slower in Paris. Meintjes has a background in Belgian racing – a 
spell at the UC Seraing and the Lotto-Belisol under-23 team – and picked up his 
first stage race win last year. Clearly he can time trial and climb 
excellently, but the big question is whether he can develop at the Lampre team, 
where he transferred this year from MTN-Qubeka.

Adam Yates: ‘I’ll be close to the back, working out who looks good’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/adam-yates-tour-de-france-2016-white-jersey>
Fabio Aru

One bad day does not a lousy Tour make. The 2015 Vuelta winner cracked on the 
final Alpine stage, which dropped him out of the top six overall, but in spite 
of the frustration he can treat this as a valuable learning experience in his 
first Tour. Crucially he got through the first week intact; later in the Tour 
there were flashes of brilliance, such as his third place in the Megève time 
trial to Froome and Tom Dumoulin and he attacked harder than most, albeit to no 
avail. He will return, older and wiser and stronger.

Miguel Ángel López

Yet another climbing prospect from Colombia, the 22-year-old hasn’t even 
ridden theTour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> but 
should be closely watched. In 2014 he won the Tour de l’Avenir, the traditional 
proving ground for talent of the future, while this year he scored a surprise 
win in the Tour of Switzerland. Not surprisingly given his youth, the Astana 
team are keeping him under wraps, but he could quite feasibly play a role in 
the 2017 Tour given the rate at which he is progressing.
 