
I read that this summer’s big fashion look is curtains. What does this mean?

Carla, by email 

Indeed, curtains are where it’s at now, and, sadly, this does not mean cutting 
down your curtains and turning them into a dress, asScarlett O’Hara memorably 
does <http://susanlmeissner.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/GWTWset4.jpg> when 
she goes to visit Rhett Butler inGone With the Wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gone-with-the-wind> (still my favourite 
fashion reference – bog off,Breakfast at Tiffany’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/breakfast-at-tiffany-s> and your boring black 
dresses, give me crazy-eyed Scarlett wearing a pair of old velvet curtains any 
day.) It means oversized florals, the sort normally found on curtains in the 
homes of fabulous elderly relatives, worn all over your person. Your style icon 
for this isAdele in her latest video 
<http://la.racked.com/2016/5/22/11741664/adele-send-my-love-to-your-new-lover-video>
, Send My Love (To Your New Lover) which, frankly, sounds like a parody of an 
Adele song title, but no matter, let’s focus on the frock.

Adele’s dress is gorgeous, as you’d hope it would be, given that it’s from 
Dolce & Gabbana and therefore cost about £5,000 – but then, as anyone who’s 
ever visited Knightsbridge, Dubai or Moscow knows, high prices on designer 
clothes are no guarantee of style. It also bears a striking resemblance to the
much-mocked floral Givenchy dress Kim Kardashian wore to the Met Ball in 2013 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2320532/Kim-Kardashian-misfires-Met-Ball-2013-slit-thigh-dress-fit-choice.html>
 when she was heavily pregnant, and this similarity furnishes us with three 
possible lessons, depending on your feelings for the Kardashian family. First, 
if you are Team Kardashian, you can say that this proves Kim was just ahead of 
her time. If you are anti-Kardashian, say Kim’s dress was hideous and Adele has 
shown us how to wear florals properly. And if you aremeh about the whole thing, 
you can say they both look like Mrs Doubtfire and let’s have no more of this 
nonsense.

I’m with number three here because, as the late and much missed Robin Williams 
memorably said 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2321356/Robin-Williams-weighs-Kim-Kardashians-floral-horror-dress-comparing-outfit-Mrs-Doubtfire.html>
, he wore florals in Mrs Doubtfire better than Kardashian at the Met Ball, and 
he definitely did, because he wasRobin Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robin-williams> and she’s Kim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>. Can Kim make unhappy 
schoolboys stand on their desks? Can she play a genie? I’d like to see her try. 
But the point is, these florals are frumpy and unless you’re as beautiful as 
Adele, most of us will look like Robin Williams in a dress. Not a bad look, but 
possibly not one you’d pay for.

There’s a lot of guff in fashion magazines about how frumpy trends like this 
are actually feminist because they’re not about looking sexy. But this is 
gold-plated nonsense. The truth is, these frumpy trends – florals, mid-length 
skirts, heavy tweeds, etc – are, if anything, even more elitist than the usual 
fashion looks because only the exceptionally thin and pretty can wear them 
without resembling a male comedian in bad drag, and yes, obviously, I am 
speaking from experience here.

It’s a shame, because these are precisely the kinds of clothes I like: the 
ones that aren’t screamingly obvious in their need for approval, the ones that 
are made to appeal more to women than men. But while curtains may be the look 
of the season, I’d prefer to watch Robin Williams than actually resemble him.

**

Why is the fashion industry so besotted by Kim Kardashian?

Catherine, north London 

Yes, it’s a Kardashian special this week. Wait, what do I mean “this week”? 
Every week is Kardashian Week because this is their world and we’re just living 
in it.

You are quite right, Catherine: the fashion world is so entranced by Kim K 
these days that it is all but slurping spaghetti with her, Lady and the 
Tramp-style, and the only reason it isn’t is because none of the people in this 
relationship do carbohydrates. In the past few weeksKim gave a talk at Vogue 
Festival in London 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/beauty/2016/05/21/kim-kardashian-on-contouring-vogue-festival>
, where she thrillingly revealed that “contouring is over”; she attended the 
Vogue 100 Gala; she went to the Met Ball in New York, invited by US Vogue’s 
Anna Wintour.

Just as a reminder here that Kim is famous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/why-is-kim-kardashian-famous>
 for three reasons: one, her father was friends with OJ Simpson; two, she was 
the victim of a sex-tape leak in 2006; three, her family has a reality TV show. 
None of these are the usual paths towards the fashion world’s snooty heart, and 
I find it honestly admirable how the Kardashians, through sheer wild-eyed 
determination, have made them so.

The short answer to Kim’s popularity among fashion folk is social media. 
Social media is a profoundly immature world, filled with adults worrying about 
their popularity as if they were nerds in high school. Kim’s one proven skill 
is mastering social media, and the fashion world has flocked towards her, 
desperate for the likes. We can despair of this but, really, I prefer to raise 
a vodka shot to Kim, our modern day Becky Sharp hacking her way through various 
social worlds, as chronicled now byVanity Fair, the magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/03/vanity-fair-hollywood-issue-awkward-covers>
 as opposed toVanity Fair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/23/william-thackeray-vanity-fair-100-best-novels>
 the novel.Plus ça change, eh?

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
 