
You are going to think I have spectacularly missed the point of the Formation 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/beyonce-formation-black-american-narrative-the-margins>
 when I say we need to talk about the Gucci blouse and skirt Beyoncé is wearing 
as the New Orleans police car she is lying on sinks under the Katrina 
floodwaters, but wait up. The fact that Formation is Beyoncé’s most 
high-fashion moment ever – she wears two new-season Gucci looks head-to-toe, 
exactly as they were seen on the catwalk – is not beside the point. As of this 
weekend, Beyoncé runs the world again. And this time, she is using fashion as 
armour and ammunition.

Until now, being fashionable has not really been what Beyoncé is about. Say 
what? That sounds counterintuitive, I know.Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> is the one of the most glamorous, 
distinctive, gorgeous, stylish women in the world. But being glamorous and 
distinctive and beautiful and stylish are all things you can achieve solo; 
being fashionable is something you can only do as part of a dialogue with what 
is happening in fashion. Until Formation, Beyoncé’s clothes have been about 
reinforcing her image as a superstar, not about winning fashion points.

Every designer in the world wants to dress Beyoncé. Her signature power move 
has been to wear the world’s most sought-after labels, but in custom-made 
pieces that channel no one’s aesthetic but her own. So when Donatella Versace 
or Alexander Wang makes a dress for Beyoncé, it is a Beyoncé dress first and 
foremost. At theMet Gala last year 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/gossip/beyonce-shares-2015-met-gala-gown-no-show-red-carpet-article-1.2210326>
, Beyoncé wore a dress custom-made for her by Riccardo Tisci at Givenchy. The 
Met Gala is fashion’s biggest night of the year, and the dress you wear is 
everything. Except not if you are Beyoncé. Beyoncé’s dress was so transparent 
as to be barely visible. The red carpet was a showdown between the fashion 
industry and Beyoncé, who appeared to be nearly naked. (Beyonce won, naturally.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbeyonce-formation-video-fashion-gucci-catwalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49c3e24dd1f8d5b1a0e47d3377006d7c8873718%2F0_0_3257_4886%2F3257.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Formation%20is%20Beyonc%C3%A9%E2%80%99s%20most%20high-fashion%20moment%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbeyonce-formation-video-fashion-gucci-catwalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Formation%20is%20Beyonc%C3%A9%E2%80%99s%20most%20high-fashion%20moment%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fbeyonce-formation-video-fashion-gucci-catwalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd49c3e24dd1f8d5b1a0e47d3377006d7c8873718%2F0_0_3257_4886%2F3257.jpg>
 The Gucci spring/summer 2016 show at Milan fashion week. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
Cut to Formation. In the opening and closing shots Beyoncé wears a Gucci shirt 
and skirt, which are not onlyexactly as seen on the catwalk 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2016-ready-to-wear/gucci/slideshow/collection#8>
, but are printed all over with the name Gucci, and are styled in the same way 
(shirt buttoned to the neck, tucked into the waistband of the skirt) as they 
were for Milan fashion week. Then in a shot on a balcony, she wears a lilac and 
turquoise chiffon Gucci dress, againreproduced faithfully from its first 
catwalk outing 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2016-ready-to-wear/gucci/slideshow/collection#57>
. There is a specificity to this that makes the point that Beyoncé, who you 
perhaps thought was too high in her starry orbit to notice stuff down on Earth, 
is paying attention after all.

It is the forensic detail in Formation’s visuals and lyrics that makes it 
powerful – the line about having hot sauce in her bag is so good, it’s got its 
own bag – and these clothes make a direct link between the catwalk and 
Beyoncé’s body. In Formation, what she is wearing is not just about her. Unlike 
superstar, league-of-her-own Beyoncé, this Beyoncé is connected to us, and to 
what we are wearing. (Or will be, when Zara does a high-street version, which 
won’t be long.) It doesn’t feel accidental thatGucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci> just happens to be the most talked 
about, compelling and culturally engaged label on the fashion scene right now. 
By allying herself with the brand, Beyoncé puts herself back in the fashion 
conversation.

Two of the most charged outfits Beyoncé wears are white lace dresses, with all 
the associations of Southern culture, race, femininity and class that those 
carry. So it is interesting that rather than using vintage pieces to create 
something bespoke, both are this-season catwalk fashion by small, critically 
rated labels. The high-collared dress she wears with the parasol is themaster 
chemisette tunic by Zimmermann 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2016-ready-to-wear/zimmermann/slideshow/collection#8>
, the off-the-shoulder gown worn with a white hat isby Alessandra Rich 
<http://www.vogue.com/fashion-shows/spring-2016-ready-to-wear/alessandra-rich/slideshow/collection#16>
. Wearing current-season fashion when making a point about how history informs 
our ideas of beauty is a neat way of underlining the degree to which historical 
associations – white lace, high collars, corsets – live on in fashion.

Oh, one more thing. Is now a good time to mention that Beyoncé is about to 
launch a clothing line? She slays. All day.
 