 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fboudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac172a4e598193bd1a60a48e16016230ab965169%2F0_0_3456_5134%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20boudoir%20chic%20highlights%20a%20fundamental%20change%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fboudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20boudoir%20chic%20highlights%20a%20fundamental%20change%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fboudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac172a4e598193bd1a60a48e16016230ab965169%2F0_0_3456_5134%2F3456.jpg>
 Alexa Chung wears Gucci’s sliced loaf shoe. Photograph: 
Pixelformula/Rex/Shutterstock 
At New York fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/new-york-fashion-week>, the rise of 
boudoir chic – the art of dressing in luxe sleepwear in the daytime – showed no 
sign of abating. Gucci’s slipper shoe (the furry Princetown “sliced loaf”) was 
seen on the frow on the feet of Zoë Kravitz and Man Repeller’s Leandra Medine. 
Meanwhile, the silk pyjama top from spring/summer 2016 (seen in collections 
from Givenchy and Alexander Wang) was recently modelled by Margot Robbie on 
Jimmy Kimmel Live!, and has made its way on to the high street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fboudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c9011b01ce9eeb66fdddcc91fa5e9d1d722736%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20boudoir%20chic%20highlights%20a%20fundamental%20change%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fboudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20boudoir%20chic%20highlights%20a%20fundamental%20change%20in%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fboudoir-chic-change-in-fashion-slouchy-glamour-bed-relaxation-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c9011b01ce9eeb66fdddcc91fa5e9d1d722736%2F0_0_2000_3000%2F2000.jpg>
 Alexander Wang’s spring/summer 2016 collection featuring a pyjama top. 
Photograph: Edward James/WireImage 
The continued relevance of this trend has highlighted a bigger truth: that our 
rules about the clothes we wear has changed. Earlier this month, when the 
unwritten dress codes of the City of Londonwere revealed  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/top-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish>
(no brown shoes or ill-fitting suits and ties), they felt as if they existed in 
a different era. Indeed, the concept of the dress code has never felt more 
archaic and strange.

Partly, this is because both athleisure and, to a lesser extent, the 
utilitarian trend have absolutely altered the way we look at clothes. The idea 
of what is considered high fashion or “appropriate dressing” has been collapsed 
by the incorporation of elements such as the hoodie, the slider, the work shirt 
and the tracksuit jogger intocatwalk collections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/25/take-the-money-and-run-the-rise-of-the-1000-tracksuit>
. This intermingling of different looks and seasons (see thetrans-seasonal 
jacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/18/extending-your-summer-wardrobe-with-a-biker-jacket>
) has created an “anything is possible” attitude, while the rise of the
merchandise pop-up shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/20/kanye-west-v-morrissey-battle-of-the-fashion-pop-up-shops>
 has further muddied the waters. Is a price tag the only thing that separates a 
piece of everyday wear from a piece of haute couture? Kanye West attempted to 
articulate this change before his ill-fated Yeezy Season 4 collection: he 
stated that he would rather call his collection“apparel”, not fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/08/kanye-wests-yeezy-show-fake-malia-obama-and-terra-firma-bodycon>
, as if the latter was an old-fashioned term for this current movement away 
from clothes that were more one-offs, made for the catwalk.

After a looooong day (and week!) of work, it sure feels good to be lounging 
around the house and relaxing! <https://www.instagram.com/p/5AOrKdmJHs/>

A photo posted by Marc Jacobs (@themarcjacobs) on Jul 11, 2015 at 10:04am PDT

At New York fashion week, the retail-to-runway  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/05/burberry-ditching-of-seasonal-catwalks-signals-fashion-shakeup>
reality has begun (where you can go online and buy the items straight from the 
catwalk without seasonal delay), and shaken up the traditional fashion 
calendar. In wardrobe terms, this has opened up a new reality, a 
democratisation of looks and styles, where dressing as if you’ve just rolled 
out from under your duvet is the new normal.

 