
While much of the world has been enthralled by the charms of Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> for the past month, there 
have been certain international pockets of resistance.



On Monday Iran became the first country 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2016/aug/08/iran-bans-pokemon-go> to ban 
the augmented reality game, citing security concerns over its location-based 
technology, and in Russia officials have been whipping up hysteria over 
possible hidden dangers in the western-made game.

State TV channel Zvezda, run by the Ministry of Defence, recently published an 
article claiming that the CIA was interested in them because “they placed a
Pokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> gym in our building”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fwhy-is-russia-so-distrustful-of-pokemon-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005bb0142d5328f8755b1e5ac95dc196b6f76ab3%2F0_73_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Russia%20so%20distrustful%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fwhy-is-russia-so-distrustful-of-pokemon-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Russia%20so%20distrustful%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fwhy-is-russia-so-distrustful-of-pokemon-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005bb0142d5328f8755b1e5ac95dc196b6f76ab3%2F0_73_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
 In scenes now familiar the world over, a crowd of Russian Pokémon Go players 
follow a catch in Moscow Photograph: Varlamov.ru 
Psychologist Lyudmila Polyanova suggested on a talk show 
<https://tjournal.ru/32143-degradiruushee-chelovechestvo-zhurnalist-pozhalovalsya-na-odnobokoe-osveshenie-pokmon-go-na-radio>
 that Pokémon Go was a western attempt to control the Russian population and 
make people infertile.

One Cossack leader warned 
<https://calvertjournal.com/news/show/6406/pokemon-go-reeks-of-satanism-say-russian-cossacks>
 that the game “reeked of satanism”.

And pro-Kremlin blogger Ilya Varlamov compared  
<http://varlamov.ru/1854089.html>Muscovites catching Pokémon to police catching 
opposition leaders in banned political protests — his implication being that 
both players and protesters were indulging in a similarly pointless activity.

Numerous politicians have called for the game to be banned 
<https://lenta.ru/news/2016/07/18/pokemon/> and conspiracy theories about 
sensitive data being collected through the cameras of players’ phones have also 
been mooted.


But in contrast to such warnings, the real problems with Pokémon Go stem from 
individuals loosing awareness of their surroundings as they become otherwise 
engrossed.

A player trying to catch virtual Pokémons might walk into the traffic, a 
lamppost or – at the worst – have their phone stolen. But the game has 
advantages too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fwhy-is-russia-so-distrustful-of-pokemon-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb50e0a5f9356da32b6b60941a6c5024737f4369%2F0_73_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Russia%20so%20distrustful%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fwhy-is-russia-so-distrustful-of-pokemon-go%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Russia%20so%20distrustful%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fwhy-is-russia-so-distrustful-of-pokemon-go%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb50e0a5f9356da32b6b60941a6c5024737f4369%2F0_73_1100_660%2F1100.jpg>
 ‘Traffic, lampposts and the occasional mugging are the biggest dangers’ 
Photograph: Varlamov.ru 
Living in a tourist hotspot like St Petersburg the novelty of the sights wears 
off after a few years. But then you download Pokémon Go and discover that 
you’ve been walking past historical reliefs of cute cats and a monument to 
Kolobok, the cartoon bread roll from Russian fairytales, without ever knowing.

It’s also a welcome reminder that Vladimir Lenin lived in nearly every 
building in your neighbourhood – you just stopped noticing the commemorative 
plaques.

How Pokémon Go takes us back to the real world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/07/pokemon-go-back-to-real-world>
Such benefits  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/pokemon-go-app-moscow-russia-historic-figures>
have been recognised by the Moscow authorities who have developed a Pokémon Go 
style app to encouraged tourists to hunt out the city’s historical landmarks.

But are Russian users vulnerable to local inference? While Varlamov’s 
comparison to political protests is a stretch at best, it does highlight 
Russia’s current laws and how they might be misused in the future.

A Russian law banning “unsanctioned gatherings”, initially used to shut down 
political protest andmarches for LGBT rights 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2016/may/2/lgbt-activists-banned-russian-may-day-parade-not-n/>
, has been recently used to persecute non-political activities.

In several cases musicians playing on the streets of Moscow have been fined, 
not for begging, exceeding noise levels or public disorder, but organising a 
“mass gatherings of citizens”.

Almost everyone will have seen videos of people running to catch rare Pokémon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lgzcnhtr2Vo> and if this law can be used 
against anyone drawing a crowd it’s possible that the Russian police could use 
it to stop people playing the game.

MediaZona recently reported  
<https://zona.media/news/2016/05/08/pokemon-police.>that Moscow police have 
beefed up patrol units near Kitay-Gorod in the centre of the city where people 
gather to play the game. Police chief Kirill Vorontsov said it was “to keep the 
public order.”

Cultural elitism and general disdain for Moscow and St Petersburg’s 
mobile-obsessed millennials, the app’s main audience, have also contributed to 
the backlash.

There is also an entrenched distrust of entertainment and fun in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. In the land of classical novelists 
Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn chasing cute little monsters is not 
an activity to be publicly endorsed.

A version of this article first appeared on The Calvert Journal, a guide to 
the new east 
<http://calvertjournal.com/features/show/6502/chuvashia-cheboksary-hop-growing-russia>
 