
Moschino <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/moschino> recently launched its 
spring/summer 2017 “Capsule” Collection – a colourful take on the word capsule, 
with the line inspired by prescription drugs. On sale in upmarket US department 
stores, it has drawn fervid criticism for making drugs look cool, funny and 
chic.

The Jeremy Scott-designed collection features massive orange drug-bottle bags 
($950), silver bags resembling giant blister packs, iPhone cases in the shape 
of pill bottles, T-shirts shouting, “Just say MoschiNO”, an orange drug-bottle 
minidress ($995) emblazoned with the words, “WARNING! Do not take medication on 
an empty stomach,” and, “KEEP ALL CAPSULES OUT OF THE REACH OF CHILDREN”. The 
invitation for last month’s show was a pill bottle and a handwritten 
“prescription”.

Doctors, addiction specialists and parents of overdose victims have spoken 
publicly about their anger that the collection has been launched when the US is 
experiencing a crisis in opioid addiction and deaths from overdose. There are
petitions to have the articles removed from public sale 
<https://www.change.org/p/marc-metrick-saks-fifth-avenue-marcello-tassinari-moschino>
. One signatory, a nurse, wrote: “Your willingness to profit off this epidemic 
that’s killing thousands astounds me.” Another entry from someone describing 
themselves as “parents of loss due to opioid overdose” reads: “Shame on these 
company CEOs and [their] buyers.” Nordstrom has nowpulled the collection from 
its stores <http://fortune.com/2016/10/07/nordstrom-moschino-drug/>.

Moschino and Scott both have a history of provocative branding. Pills were a 
motif on Scott’s own autumn/winter line in 2011 and, this February, he showed a 
collection inspired by cigarettes. Neither met overt controversy. Here, the 
line doesn’t reference brand names or specific drugs – it’s just pills. Or, is 
it?

Scott says 
<https://www.yahoo.com/style/people-are-not-happy-with-moschinos-new-pill-themed-fare-183139897.html>
 in his defence: “It’s literally a collection of capsules!” Bear with him. “And 
when Jacqueline Susann wrote Valley of the Dolls, she called capsule [pills] 
‘dolls’.” So, within one line, the motifs are at once innocuous and a clear 
reference to a book about women’s reliance on stimulants, antidepressants and 
sleeping pills. It seems a little … confused.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fwhy-moschinos-pill-themed-collection-is-causing-outrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cfb9d1c274cee4f0bbffd7df228b8409eafb032%2F0_482_2362_2133%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Moschino's%20pill-themed%20collection%20is%20causing%20outrage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fwhy-moschinos-pill-themed-collection-is-causing-outrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Moschino%27s%20pill-themed%20collection%20is%20causing%20outrage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fwhy-moschinos-pill-themed-collection-is-causing-outrage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cfb9d1c274cee4f0bbffd7df228b8409eafb032%2F0_482_2362_2133%2F2362.jpg>
 There has been public anger at Moschino’s pill-inspired collection. 
Photograph: Tristan Fewings/Getty Images for Moschino 
Moschino has defended the collection. In an email to Fox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2016/10/05/italian-fashion-line-under-fire-for-selling-drug-themed-clothing-at-nordstrom-saks.html>
, its says: “There was never any intent to promote prescription drug abuse … We 
are disheartened to hear that there has been a misunderstanding of the 
underlying theme of the collection.”

Ah, a “misunderstanding”. And therein lies the layer of sickliness that so 
often underpins dissent in fashion: the idea that, if you are upset by 
something, you don’t get the joke. If you don’t live in the fashion world, you 
couldn’t possibly get it. The word misunderstanding says: “It’s obviously not 
for you, then.” Only, it is for us. These clothes are on sale to the general 
public in massive mainstream stores.

Clever satire in fashion is powerful. Alexander McQueen did it in 2009 with 
his final collection, The Horn of Plenty – couture made from rubbish, in which 
models wore plastic bags on their heads. It was a comment on the absurdity of 
capitalism, and it ruffled plenty of industry feathers. Here, the joke just 
seems to be on anyone who isn’t laughing.

The implication in the fallout from this Moschino collection is that, in our 
outrage, we have got Scott all wrong. We have got him wrong a lot, it seems. In 
2012, Adidas pulled the release of the Jeremy Scott x Adidas Roundhouse Mid 
“Handcuffs” – a trainer with a yellow chain and heel cuff – after a widespread 
outcry that it symbolised slavery and promoted racism. “The design is nothing 
more than [the designer] Jeremy Scott’s outrageous and unique take on fashion 
and has nothing to do with slavery,” read Adidas’s statement. “Move on,” 
basically.

Scott’s vision was questioned again following his spring summer 2013 
collection with Adidas Originals – a series of dresses, tracksuits and shoes 
plastered with cartoonish renderings of Pacific Northwest Native American 
carvings, or “totem pole prints” as some commentators described them. Accused 
of blithe ethnic tokenism and parroting deep-rooted symbolism, the collection 
upset the Native American community. No statement was made but, again, Adidas 
did not make the collection available to the public.

The Capsule Collection might be tongue-in-cheek, but is it smart? For many, it 
is a pond-bottom display of poor taste. To a fashion cynic, it is 
controversy-by-numbers. Historically speaking, Scott is living up to his 
“outrageous and unique” status.

Can we give him the benefit of the doubt? It is unlikely that he, or his team, 
sat down and said: “Let’s promote addiction!” But where did context come into 
those conversations? What is a T-shirt made to look like a pill bottle trying 
to say about drug culture?

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/drug-use-illegal.htm> says that, in 2014, more 
people died from drug overdoses than any year on record. Drug overdose is the 
leading cause of accidental death in the US. At least half of all opioid 
overdose deaths involve a prescription opioid such as OxyContin or Vicodin. The 
overprescribing of opioids across the country is blamed for propelling some 
addicts to using heroin. A recentfilm by Vice 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/video/dopesick-fentanyl-deadly-grip> explores the 
deadly grip of fentanyl (a prescription painkiller 50 to 100 times more potent 
than morphine) and how addiction can make ribbons of people’s lives.

If your life has been affected by drug addiction, personally or peripherally, 
the, “It’s literally a collection of capsules!” declaration may curdle. For 
some, this particular punchline is likely to be lost like an empty box to the 
recycling.”


Anxiety for Beginners by Eleanor Morgan is out now 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Anxiety-Beginners-Investigation-Eleanor-Morgan/dp/1509813233>
 