
Name: The Blob.

Age: It was unleashed on the planet in 1958, making it 55 in your Earth years.

Appearance: Slimy, ruthless, voracious – it consumes everything in its path.

Enough about Eric Pickles. More about the Blob, please. The Blob is a 1958 
B-movie <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0051418/> about a protean jelly-like alien 
whose invasion of Pennsylvania seems unstoppable until hunky Steve McQueen 
takes out the space trash.

Excellent. But what's this got to do with the news? The Blob is also a term 
used by education secretaryMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> to lampoon critics in the 
education profession, including teachers who went on strike earlier this week.

Sounds like someone needs to go to simmer-down corner and think about why it's 
wrong to call teacher names. Gove is only copying William Bennett, a US 
education secretary who, in the 1980s, used the term to deride bureaucrats, 
unions, and education researchers sceptical of his reforms. Gove similarly 
believes a blob-like cabal is scuppering his initiatives.

Such as those marvellous free schools Gove favours, including the one they 
just had to close in Derby following a damning Ofsted report 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-24360100>? Typical blob-like Guardian 
response, if I may say so.

What's Gove's beef with the Blob? The hypothesised blobberati oppose academies 
and free schools, strike against performance-related pay and favour a 
child-centred approach to learning recommended by Piaget, Kohlberg, Illich and 
other dodgy, blobby penseurs.

What's Gove's alternative vision? He prefers a traditional teacher-led 
approach, though not that of the blob-like teacher he attacked for teaching 
GCSE students about Hitlerusing Mr Men characters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/09/michael-gove-mr-men-history-lessons>
.

Wasn't there a Mr Man character called Mr Blob? No. You're thinking of Mr 
Blobby. He lived at Crinkly Bottom with – there's no easy way to say this – 
Noel Edmonds.

Remind me. What happened at the end of The Blob? It was airlifted to the 
Arctic wastes where, legend has it, even to this day it lives in hope of 
another remake.

Don't say: "Blobby, blobby, blobby – out, out, out!"

Do say: "What do we want?" "An immediate end to infantile name-calling." "When 
do we want it?" "Weren't you listening? Immediately!"
 