
Australia Day <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> and 
Anzac Day are months away.

But I’m getting in early. It’s beyond time Australia cast off these sturdy 
cultural crutches that both, somehow, define national birth, so we can discover 
who and what we truly are.

Australia Day, celebrating British invasion in 1788 
<http://www.australiaday.org.au/australia-day/about-our-national-day/>, and 
Anzac Day, marking Australia’s involvement in the failed invasion of the 
Ottoman empire in 1915, are but relatively recent, fleeting moments of note 
among innumerable others in our 60,000-year continental human history.

Anachronistic, steeped in sentiment and myth, they belong largely to an 
Australia that was comfortable to (officially) define itself as being for the 
white man.

Some will always celebrate the arrival of the First Fleet on 26 January, 
despite the fact this day – more than any other – marks, forIndigenous 
Australians <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>
, dispossession and all its associated multi-generational malevolence.

Insofar as Anzac Day gives Australia an opportunity to remember its veterans 
of all wars and reflect upon the terrible human impact of armed conflict,each 25
th of April should rightly endure as a moment of national commemoration 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/commemoration/anzac-day/>. 

Though perhaps, it is time, too, for Anzac Day and, or, Remembrance Day 
<https://www.awm.gov.au/commemoration/remembrance/> (a day to supposedly 
remember all war dead and which falls on 11 November, the anniversary of the 
first world war armistice) to encompass recall of the tens of thousands of 
Indigenous warriors who resisted the European invasion here.

Indigenous Australians most ancient civilisation on Earth, DNA study confirms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/21/indigenous-australians-most-ancient-civilisation-on-earth-dna-study-confirms>
Many Indigenous service personnel – from the Boer war to the present – have 
described the anomalies they have felt between being recognised for fighting in 
the King or Queen’s uniform and the lack of (mainstream, cultural) 
acknowledgement afforded ancestors who resisted, with shield and spear, the 
imperial red-coats.

The anthropologist William Stanner 
<http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/stanner-william-edward-bill-15541> was not the 
first to see how Australian history had, like the continent itself, been 
colonised.

But he was among the first of his epoch to articulate the malaise that 
afflicted conversation about what should inform the national being.

And so in his 1968 Boyer lectures, Stanner referenced the “great Australian 
silence”. This was the failure of most books about Australia’s past to 
substantively address Indigenous history, not least resistance and black/white 
frontier violence.

Stanner said: “It is a structural matter, a view from a window which has been 
carefully placed to exclude a whole quadrant of the landscape. What may well 
have begun as a simple forgetting of other possible views turned under habit 
and over time into something like a cult of forgetfulness practised on a 
national scale.”

A national cult of forgetting.

The obverse, of course, is what the nation chooses to remember.

It's not 'politically correct' to say Australia was invaded, it's history | 
Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/mar/30/its-not-politically-correct-to-say-australia-was-invaded-its-history>
I’ve written before about how governor Lachlan Macquarie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/25/why-its-time-to-redefine-australia-day>
(monstrous in his treatment of Indigenous people) was responsible for creating 
the cult of white imperial/colonial self-congratulation that evolved from his 
“foundation day” into Australia Day.

For a long time now, especially since the cultural resurgence of Anzac in the 
1980s, Australian sentiment about national foundation has largely found 
anchorage in 26 January and 25 April.

Here’s a prediction: with the end of the centenary celebrations of the first 
world war in 2018 (upon which Australia is lavishing hundreds of millions of 
dollars), Anzac could assume a more low-key, contextual place in popular 
Australian consciousness. Meanwhile, mainstream debate about commemoration of 
Australia (Invasion) Day – with all its exclusive connotations for some 
migrants, religious minorities and Indigenous people – is, I think, a harbinger 
of potential future renaissance.

Will Australia Day be celebrated on 26 January in 50 years, even 20 or 10 
years? Doubtful.

But, like so much other important national business, consensus about the 
acknowledgment of Australia’s supposedly defining moments remains, for now, in 
the stultifying, python-grip of bipartisan major party politics.

Thankfully the path – blazed initially by Stanner and others including Henry 
Reynolds – is now being graced with significant others, notably and most 
recently, though by no means exclusively, Nick Brodie, Anna Clark and Mark 
McKenna.

Brodie’s new book bears the title 1787 
<http://hardiegrant.com.au/publishing/bookfinder/book/1787-by-nick-brodie/9781743791608>
 – a provocation to consider the tens of thousands of years of continental 
civilisation and external contact (with Macassans, Dutch, French and other 
British) that precedes the date that so fixates national memory, 26 January 
1788. There’s not room here to expound on its achievements, except to say that 
it is history – incisive, provocative, meticulously researched – at its best.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flanguage-is-my-identity-its-who-i-am-its-where-i-come-from-it-is-me-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Language%20is%20my%20identity.%20It's%20who%20I%20am%2C%20it's%20where%20I%20come%20from.%20It%20is%20me'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flanguage-is-my-identity-its-who-i-am-its-where-i-come-from-it-is-me-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Language%20is%20my%20identity.%20It%27s%20who%20I%20am%2C%20it%27s%20where%20I%20come%20from.%20It%20is%20me%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Flanguage-is-my-identity-its-who-i-am-its-where-i-come-from-it-is-me-video&media=>
‘Language is my identity. It’s who I am, it’s where I come from. It is me’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/sep/01/language-is-my-identity-its-who-i-am-its-where-i-come-from-it-is-me-video>
Meanwhile, McKenna’s From The Edge – Australia’s Lost Histories 
<https://www.mup.com.au/items/191129> is equally provocative, not least for its 
exploration of some telling early and complex relationships between European 
(and other) interlopers and the Indigenous inhabitants, that have been 
overlooked in mainstream Australian historical narratives. McKenna documents 
profound, life-saving acts of Indigenous generosity, recognised, gratefully by 
the imposters – but too often generally repaid with assumptions that the 
dark-skinned were, nonetheless, subhuman savages and, therefore, expendable.

Both books echo the multitude of stories that are in the ancient songlines, 
art, music and oral histories of Indigenous Australia. They amplify how our 
history is now intellectually and emotionally obliged to demonstrate that, in 
this timeless land, colonialism and all since is but a blink of the eye.

It’s hard, meanwhile, to find a pithier, more delightfully conversational book 
about history thanClark’s Private Lives, Public History 
<https://www.mup.com.au/items/163676>. It cleverly provokes thought and, 
inevitably, discussion about how and why we have defined ourselves as a nation. 
It should be in all classrooms.

Change is glacial. But it is coming.
 