
Looking after the IT security needs of about 170,000 students and 25,000 staff 
members at various locations around the world isn’t easy. Especially when the 
students have an average of two smart devices each and the staff an average of 
four.

“It has its good days and its bad days, like any other job,” says Tony Aramze, 
chief information security officer, Information Technology Services at RMIT 
University. “We do look after a lot of technology.”

Aramze and his team put controls in place to make RMIT’s global operation 
secure, and on a day-to-day basis monitor networks for potential security 
breaches, scanning hardware and software for vulnerabilities.

So does the system ever get attacked? 

How safe are you from hackers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/intel-better-it-decisions/2016/sep/30/how-safe-are-you-from-hackers>
“Everyone gets attacked every day,” he says. “Currently the most common type 
of attack is called Cryptolocker. You receive an email that masquerades as an 
organisation that you deal with, say, Australia Post. Click on the link and a 
virus can start infecting your computer. Because your computer is connected it 
can propagate across the entire network.

“We put processes and practices in place not only to detect and prevent those 
sorts of things from a technology perspective, but also educate the end user 
about the things they should be doing and not doing.”

Dan Morrison, senior engineer at digital gift card website Prezee.com.au, says 
maintaining business systems is a threefold task: making sure they are kept 
secure, performant (fast and responsive) and highly available.

“Having a critical business system unavailable for even a few minutes can 
bring an entire business to a screeching halt,” he says. “When you’re an IT 
person, you know it’s going to be a challenging day when you arrive in the 
morning to see everyone on the floor filing off towards the lifts for a coffee 
break.”

When the IT guys says no to a request, it’s usually for a good reason. Here 
are five commonly asked questions that might solicit a “no” from the IT guy 
(and the reasons why).

1. Can I ignore my computer when it says it needs to install an update? It 
wastes so much time.

Aramze: No. Flaws within the design of the software may exist. When you get a 
request to install an update it’s generally to address problem areas that have 
been encountered. If you don’t update you are potentially opening a door to an 
intruder, or your computer might not operate as effectively as it should.

Morrison: No. Ultimately, failing to install security updates can allow third 
parties to take over your computer. This could lead to, for example, your 
computer spamming your entire email contact list with advertisements for cheap 
Viagra. How are you going to explain that one to your client?

2. My kid wants to install a game on my work computer. Is that OK?

Aramze: No. Your work computer is a place of business. Everything on your 
computer that your organisation has given you has been vetted from a security 
point of view. If you were to install a piece of software alien to the 
organisation, that piece of software might introduce a virus that will infect 
your computer, and the network your computer is connected to.

Morrison: It’s generally not a good idea. It’s just not worth the risk if you 
don’t know exactly what’s installed. Would you let your kid drive your company 
car?

A good practice is to have not a password but a passphrase such as 
Today1smonsdayandimgoingtowork.
Tony Aramze  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fintel-better-it-decisions%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwhy-the-it-guy-always-says-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe159cc1f1eb5f65b19bac640f09eedc9ffe35a38%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20IT%20guy%20always%20says%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fintel-better-it-decisions%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwhy-the-it-guy-always-says-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20IT%20guy%20always%20says%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fintel-better-it-decisions%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwhy-the-it-guy-always-says-no%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe159cc1f1eb5f65b19bac640f09eedc9ffe35a38%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Photograph: Andrew Rich/Getty Images 
3. Can I keep my old password, and have the same one for all my log-ins? I can 
never remember them.

Aramze: No. People want it to be simple, which is why they use very small, 
five or six character words, and that’s how they get compromised. A good 
practice is to have not a password but a passphrase, such as 
Today1smonsdayandimgoingtowork. You could change one word of the phrase for 
different logins. There are also many technologies you could use, such as apps 
that manage passwords, but make sure they come from a reputable source.

Morrison: No. If a bad guy manages to compromise one of your accounts, they 
will immediately attempt to use those credentials on other websites. They will 
use automated scripts for this, which allows them to try your email/password 
combination on thousands of sites per second. So if you think there’s no way 
the bad guys could guess which sites you reused the same credentials on, you 
might be in for a nasty surprise.


4. What do you IT guys do all night? Play World Of Warcraft?

Aramze: It depends on the role that person has. Members of my team, if they’re 
working at night it’s because they’re managing an incident: cleaning up a 
situation or trying to recover the environment. They’re not playing games.


Morrison: Don’t be ridiculous. Counter Strike and Left 4 Dead.

5. Can I log into the system from home?

Aramze: Yes. Absolutely, as long as your organisation gives you a secure 
mechanism for you to log on to the network.

Morrison: Most businesses will allow employees to connect to business systems 
remotely via VPN, if they aren’t already available via the web. If your company 
doesn’t offer this kind of access, there’s probably a good reason, and you 
should raise it with your manager. IT departments can almost always accommodate 
remote access as long as it’s secure and auditable.

Amazing but true: the IT guy sometimes says yes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fintel-better-it-decisions%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwhy-the-it-guy-always-says-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda453535819d7846f24d52d23c7277a918fc4b4f%2F0_264_5606_3364%2F5606.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20IT%20guy%20always%20says%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fintel-better-it-decisions%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwhy-the-it-guy-always-says-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20IT%20guy%20always%20says%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fintel-better-it-decisions%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fwhy-the-it-guy-always-says-no%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda453535819d7846f24d52d23c7277a918fc4b4f%2F0_264_5606_3364%2F5606.jpg>
 Photograph: Andrew Rich/Getty Images  