
The guiding ideals of the Millennium Declaration 
<http://www.un.org/millennium/declaration/ares552e.htm> – freedom, equality, 
solidarity, tolerance, respect for nature and shared responsibility – promised 
a better world for all.

These glistening ideals were transformed by the technocrats of the development 
industry into goals and targets that for the most part reiterated existing 
unmet commitments, and seem as far from being achieved today as they did in 
2000.

Coming so soon after the Beijing platform for action 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/> set out a roadmap for 
achieving gender equality,millennium development goal number three 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/gender.shtml> served as both detour and 
deflection from the structural barriers to gender equality.

It fed a percentages game in which the urgent need to improve the quality of 
education and political representation was subordinated in favour of fast-track 
efforts to increase the number of girls and women entering schools and formal 
political arenas.

MDG3 was promoted with scant regard for education’s “hidden curriculum” or 
politics’ intensely patriarchal codes and practices. Sexual harassment, 
stultifying stereotypes in the curriculum and the classroom, lack of 
opportunities for political apprenticeship and for seats in the places of 
power, and a myriad other obstacles greeted women as they entered these 
institutions. The transformative potential of education remains unrealised.

Women’s rights networks and coalitions are continuing to show what a 
transformative agenda looks like. But while the push to fulfil the numerical 
targets set by the MDGs gets billions of dollars, the transformational work of 
women’s organisations is often absent from decision-making tables and starved 
of funds.

The transformational work of women's organisations is often absent from 
decision-making tables and starved of funds

In the name of “gender equality”, the development industry has entrenched 
tired and limiting stereotypes and left untouched the deep structures of 
privilege and power.

Divided into neat categories that bypass any real concern with power, 
inequality or difference, “men and boys” and “women and girls” could hardly be 
imagined as having a common interest in justice. “Women and girls” are 
clustered into a homogenous category as the deserving objects of empowerment, 
with scant mention of intersecting inequalities or of the reality of some 
women’s stakes in preserving patriarchy.

And amid all the talk about engaging men and boys 
<http://www.unfpa.org/engaging-men-boys>, we see a narrow focus on ameliorating 
the harms and hazards presented by those living precarious lives in the wake of
neoliberalism’s structural violence 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global-development/2012/oct/30/neoliberalism-approach-development-ignored-past-lessons>
 and a baffling silence about the work that’s needed to challenge and change 
the vested power held by those able to take full advantage of the “patriarchal 
dividend 
<http://australianhumanitiesreview.org/archive/Issue-Dec-1996/connell.html>” – 
and their role insustaining structural inequities 
<http://civicus.org/index.php/en/media-centre-129/news-and-resources-127/2200-securing-a-just-and-sustainable-world-means-challenging-the-power-of-the-1>
.

It’s time for a change.

There is much that those concerned with transforming development institutions 
can learn from the frames offered to us by theOccupy movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy>, Black Lives Matter 
<http://blacklivesmatter.com/> and a transnational sexual rights politics 
<http://www.sxpolitics.org/>. All take us back to a concern with our shared 
humanity, a concern captured in a concept that is ever more salient in these 
times:Hannah Arendt’s <http://www.hannaharendtcenter.org/> notion of 
“interest”, that which lies between us and “creates the conditions for reaching 
towards others and trying to become visible to them”.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
<http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/> gives us a vision of a world in which 
there is justice. To realise that vision, we need to go beyond the restrictive 
tropes of “investing in women and girls” and “engaging men and boys”, and to 
reclaim a vision of what it means to be human, and to be equal.

If the sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 are to offer anything, they must provide us with the tools to achieve this 
vision, rather than another set of grossly reduced targets and metrics that 
leave the real barriers to a fairer, better world for people of all genders 
unaddressed.
 