
Susie Orbach: ‘Not all women used to have eating issues. Now everybody does’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/22/susie-orbach-fat-is-a-feminist-issue-body-dysmorphia-china>
Lovely that the Women’s Equality party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/womens-equality-party> is campaigning 
against underweight models 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/04/minimum-bmi-checks-uk-models-womens-equality-party>
, but how long have we been moaning about this? Since Twiggy in the 60s, then 
the bookFat Is a Feminist Issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/22/susie-orbach-fat-is-a-feminist-issue-body-dysmorphia-china>
 in the 70s. And now here comes wretchedLondon fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> again, and more 
half-starved, spectral, bundle-of-twigs models will go tottering up and down 
catwalks dressed in oddities in size zero, that no one else can wear unless 
they’re very rich, very thin and driven half-mad by the dictates of fashion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Funderweight-models-womens-equality-party-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed457db9e6e703d666cd6efb49953921aabd25b%2F0_0_3280_4928%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20women%20still%20aspire%20to%20be%20half-starved%20bundles%20of%20twigs%3F%20%7C%20Michele%20Hanson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Funderweight-models-womens-equality-party-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20women%20still%20aspire%20to%20be%20half-starved%20bundles%20of%20twigs%3F%20%7C%20Michele%20Hanson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Funderweight-models-womens-equality-party-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed457db9e6e703d666cd6efb49953921aabd25b%2F0_0_3280_4928%2F3280.jpg>
 A slim model for Saint Laurent’s AW17 collection. Photograph: Martin 
Bureau/AFP/Getty Images 
Fashion week’s website <http://www.londonfashionweek.co.uk/> still features 
the same pasty coat-hanger waifs, looking glum and skinny as ever. Hasn’t it 
been like this forhundreds of years 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/h/history-of-fashion-1840-1900/>? Pain 
and discomfort. Nothing changes. Women have been plumped up, clamped flat and 
corseted; bosoms have been lifted, flattened, separated, squidged into a shelf; 
waists have gone up and down, but mostly squeezed in, with whalebone, metal and 
laces, making women breathless and constipated. More recently they’ve been 
dying of heart attacks and starvation, all for some crazed idea of what they 
ought to look like.

And look who is dictating their style – fellows such as John Galliano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/john-galliano> and Karl Lagerfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/karl-lagerfeld>. What bizarre and 
sinister-looking coves. Why would any woman take advice on how to look 
pleasant, from them? One was foundguilty of racist and antisemitic abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/08/john-galliano-guilty-racism-antisemitism>
, the other sellssets of coloured pencils for £2,250 
<http://gizmodo.com/this-is-what-a-3-000-box-of-colored-pencils-looks-like-1786052885>
. Meanwhile, even without these strange gurus, women have been trained up to 
independently wreck themselves. I used to see a young woman in the local 
supermarket dressed all in black with a very pale complexion and very red lips, 
and a waist about the size of my ankle. Where were her bottom ribs? Had she had 
them removed? How did her insides function? Is she still alive? What a worry.

“What do you think of London fashion week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week>?” I ask Olivia. “I 
don’t think about it,” says she. “It means nothing at all to me.” Very 
sensible. Why drive oneself to distraction over the world of extreme fashion? 
We’ll be dead before it changes. I don’t usually despair, but good luck to the 
Women’s Equality party. They will need it.
 