
The greatest challenge for the sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
(SDGs) is to eradicate poverty and hunger while maintaining sustainable food 
security for all in a crowded and dramatically unequal world. Although the 
world has succeeded in reducing poverty in accordance with the millennium 
development goal (MDG) targets, food security and adequate nutrition have not 
been achieved.

The MDGs failed to treat food as a human right. Experience shows us that 
neither markets nor governments protect access to sufficient and nutritious 
food for everyone. Only accountability by those who produce food and regulate 
society can hope to achieve this protection, and this means that access to food 
needs to be treated as a human right, and not just as a policy goal or an 
outcome of a productive economy. Several constitutions and courts in Latin 
America have recently moved in this direction by making the right to food a 
legally enforceable right, but the international system, including the UN, 
still lags behind.

According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), almost 1 billion 
people suffer from chronic hunger 
<http://www.worldhunger.org/articles/Learn/world%20hunger%20facts%202002.htm> 
and almost 2 billion are under-or overnourished 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/>.

What is the millennium development goal on poverty and hunger all about? | 
Mark Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/19/millennium-development-goal-one-poverty-hunger>
Children are the most visible victims of nutritional deficiencies. 
Approximately5 million children die each year because of poor nutrition 
<http://www.worldhunger.org/articles/Learn/child_hunger_facts.htm>. Access to 
adequate food during the first 1,000 days of life is vitally important for 
healthy future generations. Even a temporary lack of food during that crucial 
time has a negative effect on physical and intellectual development. I was 
shocked when told that in Haiti, even before thedevastating earthquake that 
ruined the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/series/rebuilding-haiti>, that 
small mud balls were being sold in the market to ease children’s hunger pangs.

Of the world’s hungry people, 98% live in developing countries. The root 
causes of food insecurity and malnutrition are poverty and inequity rather than 
shortages. FAO statistics confirm that the world produces enough food to feed 
the 7 billion people living today, andeven the estimated 9-10 billion 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/eric-holt-gimenez/world-hunger_b_1463429.html> 
population in 2050. Global agriculture produces 17% more calories per person 
today than 30 years ago, despite a 70% increase in population.

Despite this, for the 2 billion people making less than $2 a day – many of 
whom live in rural areas where resource-poor farmers cultivate small plots of 
land – most can’t afford to buy food. It is the economic system that is 
responsible for this prevalence of poverty and hunger. Recently, climate change 
has been added to the list of causes.

Smallholder farmers tell us that this is a lifestyle for them, not a business. 
When they have had to leave their land for financial reasons, they have never 
emotionally recovered. I have heard these stories in many places; not only in 
poor developing countries. It is a global phenomenon.

If the international community is serious about eliminating hunger, a shift is 
needed from a development model based on charity and aid to one based on human 
rights, reinforced by accountability mechanisms. Marginalised, disempowered and 
excluded groups previously locked out of development planning must have a 
place, including minorities, migrants, and poor, disabled, older and indigenous 
people. Non-discrimination and equality must underpin the entire SDG framework.

The role of women in development and food security is pivotal. Highlighting 
women’s rights in all other targets of the SDGs should be a priority. Of those 
suffering chronic hunger, 60% are women. This is especially ironic as women do 
most of the agricultural work in developing countries. Much of the work women 
do is unpaid and invisible, despite its indispensable role in feeding children 
and elderly people. Upholding women’s financial, educational and legal rights 
would be the best use of funds dedicated to eradicating hunger, poverty and 
child undernourishment.

Sustainable development goals: changing the world in 17 steps – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
Food security <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/food-security> 
is dependent on the sustainability of food supply. A major effort is needed to 
avoid practices that exacerbate the negative impacts of food production and 
consumption on climate, water and ecosystems. The SDGs should make a healthy 
environment an internationally guaranteed human right.

The SDGs should encourage governments to work towards policy coherence: 
agricultural policies should be compatible with environmental sustainability 
and trade rules consistent with food security. This will not be easy to 
implement. It will require allowing national food markets in developing 
countries to compete successfully against cheap imported food. It means 
altering international trade rules to prevent interference with domestic 
policies in developing countries designed to eradicate hunger and poverty.

Placing human rights at the heart of the SDGs presupposes both a strong 
accountability framework and the will to enforce this. Transnational 
corporations can be part of the problem, tending to undermine the livelihood of 
locals, displacing them from their home and land, interfering with their access 
to natural resources, and causing environmental destruction. Responsibility for 
human rights violations must extend to the private sector. International law 
has traditionally been reluctant to do this. It is encouraging to note that 
some modest steps have been taken recently to encourage corporate 
responsibility, including theUN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/business-cohesive-approach-human-rights>
 andMaastricht Principles for Extraterritorial Obligations 
<http://www.etoconsortium.org/nc/en/library/maastricht-principles/?tx_drblob_pi1%5BdownloadUid%5D=23>
 (pdf). The SDGs could incorporate these documents in their policy guidelines, 
or adopt their own version.



The new goals should not be allowed to operate as easily ignored principles, 
but need to be given teeth. We can eradicate poverty, maintain food security 
and ensure the right to adequate and nutritious food for all. These fundamental 
aims were long ago set forth in theUniversal Declaration of Human Rights 
<http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/>, and repeated in the International 
Covenant of the Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CESCR.aspx>. The task is 
huge, but the tools are there. The challenge is mainly a matter of fashioning 
political will strong enough to overcome entrenched interests in maintaining 
food insecurity.

• Hilal Elver is the UN special rapporteur on the right to food 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Food/Pages/HilalElver.aspx>
 