
What is the must-have fashion item this summer?
Sara, by email

Never before has there been such an obvious schism between the words of the 
elite and the actions of the proletariat. The elite, from their ivory towers 
(and I do love an ivory tower, me, although they are a devil to keep clean) 
make lofty pronouncements, but down on the ground, the people hear these words 
and their response is two-fingered. What? No, I’m not talking about politics – 
are you lost? This is the style section, for heaven’s sake! Work on your Google 
skills!I’m talking about fashion, of course.

Last week, I went on holiday (didn’t miss any news, did I?). I brought some 
typical holiday reading: Descartes, who I reread every summer,Thomas Piketty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/sep/21/-sp-thomas-piketty-bestseller-why>
, for light relief, and a 1,500-page biography ofLyndon Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/03/lyndon-johnson-pop-culture-all-the-way-lbj>
. I’m sorry, this column appears to have been hacked by some poseur giving a 
fake reading list to the books section of a national newspaper. Like every 
honest person on the planet, my holiday reading consisted of several magazines 
and aJilly Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jilly-cooper>. Anyway, 
there I was on my sun lounger, dutifully reading my US and UK Vogues, noting 
their rules for the coming season, about how one must wear “white accents” (I 
read that article three times and I still have no idea what it means), 
extra-high heels and horrible trench coats. And yet, when I looked around at 
the fellow Brits on the beach, it was very clear that there was only one 
essential fashion item this summer and it was definitely not featured in Vogue: 
Jamie Vardy Leicester City shirts.

On my (morning) flight were five young men in various states of inebriation 
(mainly the “about to hurl” state), all proudly wearing their Vardy shirts. 
They were audibly not from Leicester and so someone finally braved the threat 
of vomit in the face and asked why the Vardy love.

“We just like him,” one of the lads replied. “It was cool how Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> beat the usual big teams, 
you know?”

At the beach, the trend continued, with – at a rough estimate – one in four 
English male tourists sporting a Vardy shirt. Honestly, those Vardy shirts 
could support the entire English economy, and, by God, the English economy 
needs some supporting. PagingPhilip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/brexit-could-take-up-to-six-years-to-complete-says-philip-hammond>
!

I get why the narrative of the plucky underdog appeals to people, and it 
particularly appeals to Brits, because we tend to see ourselves as the 
underdogs, even while the rest of the world sees us as anachronistic snobs who 
once tried to colonise the world. That is why political movements that claim to 
represent the underdog appeal to Brits at the moment, but where has that got 
us? It got us Brexit, which brought us full circle but worse, with a remainer 
in charge, a narcissistic clown as foreign secretary and the whole world 
annoyed with us. Yay for the underdogs!

Can I blame Jamie Vardy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jamie-vardy> for 
this? I cannot. But I will say this: Britain, you think you are championing the 
small fry, the little guy, the nerd at the end of the movie who ends up getting 
the girl. But the rest of the world sees you as some utter moron in a Vardy 
shirt hurling your guts out at 11am on a flight to Spain. Food for thought, eh?

I am anti-fashion. Why can’t people just wear comfortable clothes?
Elaine, by email

Well, Elaine, they absolutely can and, in the very large main, do. There is an 
oddly common confusion between “fashion journalists” and “dictators”: just as 
film critics are telling you there are some good movies out there you could but 
are not legally obligated to see, so fashion writers are merely saying: “Here 
are some clothes! Aren’t they nice?” They’re not saying, “Wear this or taste 
blood, losers.” Or maybe that’s why people seem so scared ofAnna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/anna-wintour> ...


But let’s look at this “anti-fashion”. Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/02/amy-schumer-interview-trainwreck-judd-apatow>
 makes a similar claim in US Vogue: “I think that there’s a misconception in 
fashion that everybody wants in. I want out,” she says. But the tricky thing 
about defining yourself in opposition to fashion is that you’re still relying 
on it for your identity. Just as the opposite of love isn’t hate but 
indifference, so saying you want out of fashion is just another way of using 
fashion to make a statement.

For true anti-fashion we must return to Jilly Cooper. I love the clothes in 
Super Cooper’s books because they really are anti-fashion. Someone is always 
wearing a “shimmery leopard-print dress” (I’m only halfway through the upcoming 
novel,Mount! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/08/jilly-coopers-mount-gets-groomed-for-bookshop-impact>
, and I’ve counted three of these) and the men proudly sport gimmicky 
cufflinks. In Mount!, one character goes to a party in – and I quote – “an 
amazing leopard-print dress with a snarling leopard on the front, his huge eyes 
on a level with her boobs”. Now,this is anti-fashion, not the overly defensive 
insecurity Elaine and Amy are demonstrating that is often rooted in a 
misunderstanding of what fashion actually is. Cooper’s characters don’t care 
what a “white accent” is, they just want to wear clothes that – to quote the 
leopard dress-wearing character – “make an impact”, which invariably means 
“show off my boobs”. Look atSarah Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sarah-ferguson>: that is anti-fashion.

And good for her: these kinds of ladies always look like they’re having fun in 
their absurd dresses, whereas the self-described “anti-fashion” brigade 
generally look a bit resentful and regretful, like they’re trying to pretend 
they never wanted to go to that party they weren’t invited to anyway. But 
ladies, you are invited – fashion is just clothes that feel modern. That’s it. 
Anything else is leopard eyes on the nipples.
 