
Over the past few decades, the often tireless work of the women's movement 
around the world has brought positive change. There has been a growing 
recognition that countries cannot thrive if half the population is left out of 
education and work, or not included in decision-making. Laws have been 
introduced to recognise women's right to safety in and outside the home, equal 
pay in the workplace and equality under the law, and there have been 
attitudinal changes towards women.

The past 20 years have seen two landmark international agreements on women's 
rights. In September 1994, theInternational Conference on Population and 
Development <http://www.unfpa.org/public/icpd>, which met in Cairo, for the 
first time shifted the emphasis on population control from government efforts 
to reduce numbers through family planning, to look more broadly at women's 
empowerment and how their lives can be improved. It examined issues including 
access to decent reproductive health services, sexual health advice and support 
and through the elimination harmful practices, such as female genital 
mutilation (FGM) and forced marriage. About 179 countries signed up to the 
programme of action, which contained more than 200 recommendations.

The following year, in Beijing, the Fourth World Conference on Women 
<http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/platform/declar.htm> committed to 
achieving gender equality by removing the obstacles that limit women's 
involvement in public and private life and prevented them from an equal share 
in decision-making.

But with success comes the backlash, and that backlash has been increasingly 
evident over the past 15 years. As the UN looks to mark the 20th anniversary of 
the Cairo agreement this year, women's rights organisations are, more and more, 
having to concern themselves with fighting reactionary policies that seek to 
chip away at hard-won rights.

Globally, about one in three women will be beaten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/jun/20/women-violence-worldwide-statistics-who>
 or raped during their lifetime, and more than 140 million women and girls are 
estimatedto be living with the consequences of FGM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2013/jul/29/global-development-podcast-fgm-eradicated-generation>
. And despite numerous UN resolutions that state the importance of women's 
involvement in peace and reconciliation, women are still not invited to peace 
talks.

Women's rights groups are underfunded. Research by the Association for Women's 
Rights in Development (Awid) found that theaverage annual income of 740 
organisations 
<http://www.awid.org/Library/Watering-the-Leaves-Starving-the-Roots> it 
surveyed in 2010 was about $20,000 (Â£12,000).

On Tuesday, the Guardian launched a women's rights and gender equality section 
to provide a specific focus on the pressing issues affecting women, girls and 
transgender people around the world, and the critical work being carried out by 
women's rights movements.

This year is gearing up to be a key time for women's rights and gender 
equality. The UN Commission on the Status ofWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, being held in New York in 
March, will discuss progress against the millennium development goals and 
crucially look at how women feature in what comes next.

Despite loud calls for a standalone goal for gender equality to be included in 
any new set of targets after 2015, it is far from certain that this will be 
achieved. Sexual violence against women, particularly during conflict, is 
expected to receive global attention once again this year, with a summit hosted 
by the UK, and the anniversary of Cairo will be a chance for cool assessment on 
whether women have achieved the right to determine when, and if, they have 
children.

Working in partnership with Mama Cash <http://www.mamacash.org> and Awid 
<http://www.awid.org/>, we want this section to offer a safe forum for debate 
and for sharing ideas. We want to create a global platform for discussion that 
amplifies the voices of women's rights advocates who are normally left out of 
decision-making or not heard in mainstream media.

Tell us what you think and what you would like to hear more about. Email us at 
development@theguardian.com <mailto:development@guardian.co.uk>
 