
With less than three months to go before the UN climate change conference 
<http://newsroom.unfccc.int/> in Paris, a project at the forefront of urban 
sustainability in the city’s north-western suburb of Colombes faces impending 
closure – in favour of a car park.

Initiated in 2008 by Constantin Petcou and Doina Petrescu from Atelier 
d’Architecture Autogéreé <http://www.urbantactics.org/> (AAA), the award-winning
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/15/urban-common-radical-community-gardens>
R-Urban <http://r-urban.net/> scheme is composed of a co-working and making 
space, the Recyclab, plus (just down the road) an urban agriculture facility, 
Agrocité, which is made up of allotments, a micro-farm whose produce is sold 
locally and a school providing professional training in compost-making. There 
is also a community space and cafe where the food grown on-site is processed 
and sold at affordable prices.


Petcou points out that the UN’s intergovernmental panel on climate change 
(IPCC) <http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/> acknowledges the role of 
individuals and local governments in tackling climate change, and that R-Urban 
“is doing just that”.

“The scheme is all about local practices,” Petrescu adds, “but it’s also about 
scaling up through regional networks, and changing the way citizens in Colombes 
and elsewhere think about urban resilience.”

The project in Colombes is just gaining momentum. Shutting it down now would 
not make any sense
Constantin Petcou  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441810789386%2Ff083b02a-206a-473f-a2f8-a67227efc76a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20Paris%20suburb%20scrapping%20an%20urban%20farm%20to%20build%20a%20car%20park%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20Paris%20suburb%20scrapping%20an%20urban%20farm%20to%20build%20a%20car%20park%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441810789386%2Ff083b02a-206a-473f-a2f8-a67227efc76a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Food grown on-site is sold at affordable prices in the community cafe. 
Photograph: Alamy 
With the climate conference putting Paris in the global spotlight from 30 
November, the decision by the City of Colombes to abandon one of Europe’s most 
ambitious urban sustainability schemes seems almost comical in its timing.

The city council argues that the replacement car park is essential to serve 
the regeneration of the area – but Benoît, a long-term resident of Colombes who 
joined R-Urban in the project’s early days, points at all the spaces around the 
Agrocité that sit idle, ready to host the car park.

Claire, a retired nurse who lives nearby, adds that “most of the people around 
here do not have the money to pay for a parking spot anyway; the ones beneath 
the residential blocks are half-empty.” The mayor of Colombes did not respond 
to a request for comments.

While AAA could potentially rehouse the project and develop new schemes in 
other cities, “we don’t want to let the people of Colombes down,” Petcou says. 
“It’s great that other cities want to develop similar schemes, but the project 
in Colombes is just gaining momentum. Shutting it down now would not make any 
sense.” Yet the clock is ticking, with the project’s official funding coming to 
an end on 30 September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441810923991%2F11f1a38f-06f2-4136-84f2-b139d78993dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20Paris%20suburb%20scrapping%20an%20urban%20farm%20to%20build%20a%20car%20park%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20Paris%20suburb%20scrapping%20an%20urban%20farm%20to%20build%20a%20car%20park%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441810923991%2F11f1a38f-06f2-4136-84f2-b139d78993dc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Agrocité started in 2008: ‘It’d be such a shame to destroy all this for a 
boring car park.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Spending a rainy afternoon at the Agrocité, I am surprised to see so many 
people turning up despite the weather, checking on their allotments and 
spending some time chatting in the community cafe. The mix of people, from 
different origins and social backgrounds, exchanging gardening tips is 
unexpected.

The R-Urban project has provided life-changing opportunity for Benoît, who 
made the big step to leave his job in the print industry to lead initiatives 
around compost and recycling. Inspired by his collection of beer labels – 
700,000 and counting – he is now working with micro-breweries in Paris to 
recycle their waste, and is co-leading the School of Compost part of the 
Agrocité.

Benoît is among the R-Urban residents who have launched a petition to save the 
project 
<https://www.change.org/p/yes-to-preserve-r-urban-in-colombes-no-to-the-temporary-car-park-that-is-planed-to-replace-it-saverurban>
. Others, such as Claire, seem more fatalistic. She tells me she grew up on a 
farm in Lebanon, and was keen to take part in R-Urban as soon as it took off. 
“You see, here my daughter and I can grow our own vegetables, and we don’t use 
any pesticides. Organic fruits and vegetables are really expensive, so getting 
an allotment here has been nice.”

“We learn from each other,” says Catherine, a long-term Colombes resident and 
former home carer, who had to stop working for health reasons. “I did not know 
anything about farming or gardening – but, for instance, there are lots of 
people here from the West Indies who have patches of land back home where they 
cultivate vegetables. Then the Portuguese know how to grow cabbage, and so on.”


The mix of people, from different origins and social backgrounds, exchanging 
gardening tips is unexpected
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441811033197%2Fe59c9975-1954-4911-ba28-42c831c93037-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20a%20Paris%20suburb%20scrapping%20an%20urban%20farm%20to%20build%20a%20car%20park%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20a%20Paris%20suburb%20scrapping%20an%20urban%20farm%20to%20build%20a%20car%20park%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fparis-un-climate-conference-colombes-r-urban-urban-farm-car-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441811033197%2Fe59c9975-1954-4911-ba28-42c831c93037-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘We learn from each other’ … residents enjoy the community atmosphere at 
Agrocité. Photograph: AAA 
Catherine is busy baking cakes for the café. “It fills my free time, and you 
meet a lot of people. If the project moves away from here, I probably couldn’t 
get involved that much, as I have difficulty walking.”

Urban commons have radical potential – it's not just about community gardens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/15/urban-common-radical-community-gardens>
The dispute over the R-Urban project also reveals the difficulties lying ahead 
for thesoon-to-be-created Metropolis of Greater Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/26/ring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue>
. On the 1 January 2016, its official birth date, more than 120 municipalities 
and their individual mayors will attempt to start building a coherent 
metropolitan identity, addressing issues such as strategic planning, climate 
change and sustainable development.

The 400-or-so Colombes residents involved in the R-urban project would surely 
have some useful experiences to share with these mayors and town councillors 
about how to co-create a functional urban organisation. Showing me the 
luxuriant oasis of greenery that Agrocité has become over the years, Claire 
observes: “It’d be such a shame to destroy all this, just for a boring car 
park.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 