
"I'm not just talking about my wife, I'm talking about my life! I'm not just 
talking about one person, I'm talking about everybody. I'm talking about form, 
I'm talking about content, I'm talking about inter-relationships! I'm talking 
about God, the devil, hell, heaven! Do you understand? Finally?!"

The intellectual, neurotic Harding (William Redfield) lets off steam during 
one of five "group therapy" scenes inOne Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36306/one-flew-over-the-cuckoo-s-nest>. 
It sparks a fascinating set of reactions from other characters – the squealing 
Cheswick (Sydney Lassick), the taunting, swivelled-eyed Taber (Christopher 
Lloyd), the stuttering Billy Bibbit (Brad Dourif), the ghoulish Fredrickson 
(Vincent Schiavelli), the grinning, gormless Martini (Danny DeVito), and the 
cold, calculating Nurse Ratched (Louise Fletcher).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtvZ3cFO9f3I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtvZ3cFO9f3I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FtvZ3cFO9f3I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Jack Nicholson's Oscar-winning performance as the rebellious RP McMurphy takes 
a backseat here, and not for the only time in this remarkable 1975 film. That 
is because the other actors, most of whom were unknowns, carry it with equal 
skill and charisma. Their roles in this blackly amusing, often disturbing drama 
set in the 60s mental healthcare and the penal system, still absorb me after 
many viewings, and they inspire a closer look.

Director Milos Forman was originally spotted by producers Michael Douglas and 
Saul Zaentz for his 1967 filmThe Fireman's Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/88197/firemen.s.ball>, a comedy-drama 
about a fire department party in a small town going disastrously wrong. They 
were impressed by his ability to juggle many characters and make them funny 
without mocking them. More importantly, they were unable to find a backer for 
the Cuckoo's Nest after every big studio rejected it (despite Douglas's father 
Kirk having bought the rights and acted in the play version of Ken Kesey's 
novel in the early 60s), so the young Czech director fitted the low-budget 
bill. It was a fortunate choice, as Forman's casting of unknowns through 
"therapy session" group auditions was a masterstroke.
 Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex Features/Rex Features 
Each actor was chosen not just for their skill, but for their distinctive 
physical characteristics. However, this was no freak show, Forman brought out 
the best in these individuals, shooting and rehearsing in a real mental health 
hospital in Salem, Oregon. The institution's head, Dr Dean Brooks, allowed the 
actors to work at the hospital because he felt it would give the real patients 
a form of therapy. Actors spent time with patients, and then stayed in 
character during their lunch breaks. Many slept at the institution. When 
Nicholson arrived, just a week before shooting, he could barely tell the two 
groups apart.

Non-actor Brooks gave a superbly measured performance fielding Nicholson's 
improvisations <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dIzw6KKZLgA> as the psychiatric 
doctor Spivey (a recreation of his actual job). He also played a more tragic 
role in the life of actor William Redfield, privately diagnosing his leukaemia, 
a condition kept secret from other cast members during filming. Redfield died 
18 months later, giving his performance greater poignancy.

Another of Harding's pretentious and inappropriate phrases – "the 
juxtaposition of one person to another" – ironically has relevance to how the 
film was made. In the therapy scenes, Forman only used two cameras – one fixed 
on the main character of that session behind Nurse Ratched, the other roaming 
around, so that the actors did not always know whether they were being filmed. 
This method inspired an even greater range of facial expressions and responses. 
There's more of this in the hilarious passage when each escaped patient is 
introduced as a mental health academic before they get on the boat.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQH4NRIDjRjk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQH4NRIDjRjk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQH4NRIDjRjk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Forman's editing brought the best out of the performances. He once said that 
when he had cut the film and turned every bit of dialogue into rapid fire, the 
action had seemed to drag on too long. When he reintroduced more scenes, 
bringing back almost 20 minutes of furrowed brows or furtive glances into the 
final cut, he found the film flowed more comfortably and seemed shorter. He 
gave the audience more space to understand the characters. This is particularly 
well exemplified when Cheswick demands to have his cigarettes, and the chaos 
builds beautifully.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNI7K_ojMUoo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNI7K_ojMUoo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNI7K_ojMUoo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Some actors had minimal lines or none, but executed their roles with absolute 
precision. At the climax of the cigarettes scene, Bancini (Josip Elic) 
comically wanders into the group muttering, "I'm tired, I'm tired" (at the 
beginning of the film, he is woken and says he is "rested"). When McMurphy is 
desperate to watch the World Series baseball games and needs toget a "vote" 
from the other patients <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=So4uCbwuIdc>, it 
becomes the perfect opportunity for each minor character to do a turn, from 
ballroom dancing Ellsworth, to the disturbingly lobotomised Ellis (Michael "The 
Hills Have Eyes" Berryman), and the giant, Chief Bromden.
 Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
The chief – Will Sampson, a Native American park ranger and painter – showed 
immense skill and sensitivity in the role, not only by using his sheer physical 
size, but by letting his features become gradually more animated as the action 
unfolds. His character's moment of triumph comes at the film's climax, but his 
acting comes into its own with the most subtle of performances, particularly 
just before the disturbing electroconvulsive therapy scene, when McMurphy finds 
he has beenfaking his deaf-mute condition 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9HYH7LVWcc4>.

There are many group scenes that I could watch repeatedly, spotting something 
new every time. At my last viewing, I noticed for the first time in an early 
"medication" scene how Sefelt (William Duell) has his pill placed on his tongue 
as if taking communion, while in the background Ellis stands like a demented 
Christ. Characters' private worlds of turmoil reveal themselves in ever richer 
detail, whether in playground-type bullying over a game of Monopoly or in more 
tragic moments, such as when Billy is exposed under a full glare of shame by 
Nurse Ratched.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FY7xaCbMqpJI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FY7xaCbMqpJI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FY7xaCbMqpJI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Louise Fletcher won an Oscar as the stone-hearted nurse, managing to express a 
full range of emotions despite keeping her face completely still. There is 
nothing one-dimensional about her calculating coldness. She is propelled by a 
self-deceiving moral code – that she is doing the right thing by her patients. 
Brad Dourif's performance as Doc Cochrane in Deadwood comes close, but I don't 
think he has ever really bettered his early-career role as the suicidal Billy – 
insecure, mother-fearing, libidinous, angry and fragile.

One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/one-flew-over-the-cuckoo-s-nest> was a 
defining career moment for all who took part. Some, such as Danny DeVito and 
Christopher Lloyd, went on to bigger, but not better things, while others were 
rarely seen so prominently again.

More from the Why I love … series

Why we love … Dumbo's pink elephants 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/2013/aug/16/why-i-love-dumbo-pink-elephants> … 
Fight Club's first fight 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/2013/aug/13/why-i-love-fight-club-first-fight> … 
Jon Voight's shifty eyes 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/filmblog/2013/aug/19/why-i-love-jon-voight-shifty-eyes>
 