
When funders and activists consider those who need the most attention in 
tackling issues of health and high risk, one group, time and again, is being 
left out – women who have sex with women (WSW). People have different ideas 
about WSW – many of these ideas are strange, and most of them are wrong.

The general view, especially as far as rights are concerned, does not take 
into account the overlapping identities of these women. It seems to be little 
understood how WSW – including bisexual and transgender women who identify as 
lesbian or bisexual – can be affected by issues such as access to abortion, 
sexually transmitted diseases, and HIV and Aids. And there is little 
consideration about more pervasive issues such as consent and sexual violence 
within the community itself.

That society’s imagination about WSW runs away with them is evident everywhere 
– from the lesbian section in porn sites to inappropriate government 
interventions. Recently in Kenya, an all-girl speed-dating event was shut down 
by the Kenya Film Classification Board after its chief executive officer, 
Ezekiel Mutua,labelled the event a “lesbian orgy 
<http://holaafrica.org/2016/08/29/kenya-film-classification-board-bans-an-all-female-event-labelling-it-a-lesbian-orgy/>
” on Facebook.

How can we tolerate anti-LGBTQ rhetoric at a major human rights forum? | 
Gillian Kane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/15/anti-lgbtq-rhetoric-organisation-american-states-human-rights-orlando-shooting>
But misunderstandings also abound among women who have sex with women. After 
runninga series on safe sex and pleasure at the  
<http://holaafrica.org/2016/09/08/holaa-loves-pleaseher-a-workshop-on-sexysafety/>
HolaAfrica! 
<http://holaafrica.org/2016/09/08/holaa-loves-pleaseher-a-workshop-on-sexysafety/>
 hub, which I co-founded, it became clear to me that safe sex is rarely 
practised by the women. It also emerged that usingdental dams 
<http://sexualityandu.ca/stis-stds/how_do_i_protect_myself_from_stis_stds/dental_dam>
 (when one can actually find them) or discussing and engaging with issues of 
consent was rare.

This is despite the fact that there are instances of sexual assault within the 
queer female community, possible exposure to a number of STIs, and that 
sexuality is fluid and some women will still sleep with men. Sex between two 
women can put them at risk of contracting the human papilloma virus, chlamydia 
and gonorrhoea as well as the herpes simplex virus,some strains of which are 
becoming immune to treatment, according to the World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2016/antibiotics-sexual-infections/en/>
.

According to a recent study 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3696027/>, South Africa, 
Zimbabwe, Namibia and Botswana were reported as having a 9.6% rate of 
self-reported HIV infections among WSW. Some participants spoke of being 
surprised they could get infected by female partners.

Women who have sex with women are often left out of the safe sex narrative, 
which means they are frequently excluded from the sexual and reproductive 
health and rights agenda. In Africa, social and cultural obstacles – as well as 
government policies – make it extremely difficult for WSW to speak to health 
practitioners about sex, and to access dental dams and other means of safe sex.

Fortunately, some spaces seek to subvert these stereotypes and to address the 
proliferation of often incorrect assumptions.

Juicy Pink Box <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Juicy_Pink_Box> creates queer 
feminist porn depicting sex between two women. HolaAfrica! has produceda safe 
sex and pleasure manual entitled: Please Her 
<https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B9fxJySbT5pxVGFhYS1GUnZrWnc>, which tackles 
everything to do with safe sex between women, including using and caring for 
sex toys and matters of consent. HolaAfrica! also helda workshop 
<http://holaafrica.org/2016/09/05/pleaseher-a-safe-sex-and-pleasure-workshop-the-storify/>
 that discussed topics including the various benefits of clingfilm outside of 
making sandwiches.

Organisations such as Afra Kenya also hold events and meetings that cover 
issues relating to sex between women.

The silence surrounding women who have sex with women leaves people vulnerable 
and at risk, and unable to fully realise their health and bodily rights. Queer 
women in Africa have a right to know how to stay healthy. WSW need to be a part 
of thesex and reproductive health and rights conversation 
<http://holaafrica.org/2015/05/15/does-culture-preclude-the-right-to-safe-sex-on-the-continent/>
.

Despite not being as high risk as other groups, these women are still at risk, 
and and to leave them out of the conversation is to ignore a widespread and 
persistent problem.

• Tiffany Mugo is a media consultant and writer, and co-founder of HolaAfrica!
 