
Last week I did one of my fairly regular 
can-I-find-any-clothes-to-take-to-the-charity-shop wardrobe overhauls. These 
are useful because not only do they throw up stuff that I’ve never worn (get 
rid) but also stuff that I’d forgotten about but would really like to wear 
again (keep). Having spent the summer roaming free in shorts and relatively 
loose-fitting light jeans, I’ve been struggling to get back into tighter, 
darker jeans. Not because I’ve piled on the pounds, thank you – although that 
doesn’t help – but because I have become accustomed to the comfort. I don’t 
want to have to pogo  into my trousers. So I was delighted when I rediscovered 
an old pair of cords. They’re soft, they’re slim but not too slim, and they’re 
dark green. They almost feel like jogging bottoms. A dream to slide into.

The real boon is that apparently corduroy and the colour green are “key 
menswear trends” for the autumn. How remarkably prescient of me to have bought 
these deeply unfashionable olive cords fromAmerican Apparel 
<http://store.americanapparel.co.uk/> seven years ago. Of course corduroy will 
always have a lingering association with Open University professors and 
your grandparents’ settee, but don’t let that deter you.

When the arbiters of good taste APC 
<http://www.apc.fr/wwuk/index.html?gclid=CPmR3I6R2McCFUY8Gwodm_MLpQ> are making 
a baseball cap out of cord, you know it’s a safe bet. However, something to 
keep an eye on is the “wale” count. Wale is the rather pleasing term for the 
width of the cord (as measured by the number per inch) – and I will be sticking 
to higher wale counts, ie thinner cords. Thicker cords just look a bit too 
dated to me, and are way too heavy.

So far as the green trend goes, there are a couple of things to remember. 
First, don’t wear lots of different greens in one outfit unless you want to 
look like a shrub in a modern interpretive dance, or a member of the TA.

Second, keep your greens muted. Olive and bottle and khaki – not the sort of 
vivid Subbuteo-pitch green which will make you appear very “up for it” at a 
student Traffic Light party. Green goes well with neutrals, black, grey, navy 
and tan and so on. For example, some tan shoes will work with green trousers. 
But green looks ghastly with bright colours. That is a fact, and if it isn’t, 
it should be.

As avid readers (shhhhh) of this column will have picked up, I am a huge fan 
of bomber jackets, and I think they are best in green. There is a glut of 
MA1-inspired jackets out there, in a range of greens and from the dirt cheap to 
the sickeningly expensive. I always wanted a Chevignon 
<http://www.chevignon.eu/> one when I was a kid. I might see if I can find any 
on eBay. Please don’t beat me to it.

Follow Rick on Twitter @rickedwards1 
<https://twitter.com/rickedwards1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 