
At the EGX video games festival in Birmingham, Shuhei Yoshida, president of 
Sony Computer Entertainment Worldwide Studios,took to the stage and essentially 
confirmed 
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2015-09-26-sony-climate-not-healthy-for-playstation-vita-successor>
 that there will not be a follow-up to the PlayStation Vita handheld console. 
“The climate is not healthy for now because of the huge dominance of mobile 
gaming,” he lamented.

But is this true? 

When the smartphone started its inexorable rise as a gaming platform, thanks 
mostly to the launch of the iPhone in 2007, business pundits were leaping over 
each other to declare the imminent death of the specialist games console. Why 
would people pay hundreds of pounds for a dedicated games machine if they were 
effectively carrying one around in their pockets all day? And then the
PlayStation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation> 4 and Xbox One 
arrived, shifting tens of millions of units, selling faster than their 
predecessors and generally doing okay.

As for the handheld gaming sector, the area of gaming surely most at risk from 
mobile phones ... well, the Nintendo 3DS has now sold over 50m units, putting 
it within a whisker of the top ten best-selling games platforms of all time. It 
hasn’t done as well as theNintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> DS, of course (150m sales), 
but then, the DS has been on sale for over a decade and the 3DS has only been 
out for four years – and it arrived in a very different, much more fragmented 
and diverse, market place. Unlike Vita, however, it ignored most of its 
competition – from internet-connected consoles, to smartphones and tablets – 
and did its own thing.

Doing its own thing is something Nintendo has always understood, and why it 
has utterly dominated the handheld gaming sector. There were certainly other 
companies vying for a portion of the market when portable electronic games 
first started appearing in the late seventies, but it was Nintendo – or more 
specifically legendary industrial designer Gunpei Yokoi – that realised form 
factor, price, battery life and cuteness were going to be the defining features 
of a successful product.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fnintendo-handheld-gaming-sony-playstation-vita%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443520446659%2F5fc08d99-09bc-46bd-a214-a9d44f1f0c71-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20only%20Nintendo%20understands%20handheld%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fnintendo-handheld-gaming-sony-playstation-vita%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20only%20Nintendo%20understands%20handheld%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fnintendo-handheld-gaming-sony-playstation-vita%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F29%2F1443520446659%2F5fc08d99-09bc-46bd-a214-a9d44f1f0c71-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A girl playing a Gameboy during an anti-Iraq War demonstration in London 
Photograph: Martin Argles 
The Game & Watch games were super simple, based on very cheap LCD screens, but 
they looked lovely, they were sturdy and they were cheap. When the GameBoy 
arrived in 1989, its monochrome display looked out of step with the wondrous 
visuals of the 16bit console era, but again, the tech was inexpensive and 
sturdy, and the games (Tetris, Super Mario Land, et al) exploited the 
limitations in an entirely loveable way. The combination of portability and 
kawaii design sensibilities meant that people actively enjoyed taking these 
things around with them and showing them to others.

Nintendo knew almost instinctively that we would think of miniature games as 
endearing. There is just something about the reduced form factor that allows us 
to enjoy child-like experiences without feeling self-conscious. The industrial 
design legend Donald Norman talks about how humans project a series of 
expectations onto objects, and how designers need to understand these in order 
to make successful products. In short: we kind of want small things to be cute 
– and Nintendo gets that.

But Nintendo’s rivals have usually made the error of thinking that to compete 
with Nintendo they had to beat it in terms of technology. The Neo Geo Pocket 
and Bandai Wonderswan totally understood the appeal of cuteness, but they were 
largely restricted to the Japanese market. In terms of global competitors – 
from the Sega Game Gear, through the Atari Lynx to the PlayStation Portable and 
Vita – the philosophy has been “bringing the home console experience to your 
pocket”. Not only has that proved costly to the consumer in terms of retail 
price and battery life, it grates against what a lot of people want from a 
portable experience.

Sometimes, as a race, we allow ourselves to be loveable. It doesn’t happen 
much and we often have to express it in quite obtuse ways – through novelty 
socks, or action figure collections, or really liking Pixar movies. Portable 
games fit into this mode of thinking. The most successful handheld franchises – 
Pokemon, Animal Crossing, Cooking Mama, Professor Layton – they’re all 
reasonably complex experiences, but they’re also really, really cute. They fit 
the form factor – both physically and psychologically.
 Animal Crossing – Nintendo has always understood that we equate cute form 
factors with cute games Photograph: Observer 
The PlayStation Portable wasn’t cute. Vita isn’t cute. Both tried to compete, 
in industrial design terms, with home consoles and with smartphones, dropping 
into an awkward aesthetic space between the two. When gamers first saw Ridge 
Racer on the Sony PSP they gasped in wonder – a true console experience on the 
go – but it turned out that not many people wanted that; not just because PSP 
was more expensive, but because (to a lot of people) it just felt weird to sit 
on a bus with this ostentatious piece of cold, sleek gaming technology.

The idea of the Vita as a mini PlayStation 3 or 4 has stifled the creativity 
of developers. Stunted compromised spin-offs of major console titles like 
Uncharted and Call of Duty have done very little except underline the 
differences between a home machine and a portable gadget. They didn’t work. 
It’s no coincidence that the most successful series on Sony’s handheld machines 
– Monster Hunter – is very much in the Nintendo mould of highly sociable titles 
with childlike collection systems.
 Monster Hunter has proved one of the most successful brands on PlayStation 
handhelds because it is social and sharable. This dedicated Gathering Hall was 
set up for fans in London in 2009 Photograph: PR 
Sony has tried to innovate in hardware terms with OLED screens, proprietary 
memory card formats, proprietary optical discs and strange touch pads 
underneath the display. But these have usually been ignored by developers and 
read by consumers as a way to gouge more money from them. The philosophy of the 
home console race cannot be applied to the portable market because the consumer 
mindset is totally different. Sony may have had more success if it had really,
really pushed the product as a homebase for offbeat experiments and indie 
projects – there have certainly been plenty of those along the way. But the 
marketing attention was often elsewhere.

The GameBoy, the DS and the 3DS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3ds> 
haven’t just dominated this sector because they got the basics right – battery 
life, cost and sturdiness – they dominated because Nintendo understands that 
small things are cute and that cuteness pervades the whole experience. This is 
exactly what’s going on in the smartphone sector with Candy Crush, Fruit Ninja 
and Angry Birds. Bringing a game like Animal Crossing: Happy Home Designer into 
work or school is a very specific experience that has nothing to do with 
technology or gadgetry.

The Vita hasn’t really struggled because of mobile games, it has struggled 
because people don’t want to hug it.

 