
Sir Dave Brailsford, the Team Sky principal, breaking his silence on the 
controversial use of medical exemptions to allowSir Bradley Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bradleywiggins> to legally inject powerful 
corticosteroids, has trenchantly defended their conduct but promised more 
transparency in future.

Team Sky have much to explain after Bradley Wiggins meets Andrew Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/25/team-sky-bradley-wiggins> 
Twenty-four hours after Wiggins delivered a much criticised defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/24/bradley-wiggins-andrew-marr-unfair-advantage>
 of the three occasions on which he was injected with triamcinolone before his 
major races of 2011, 2012 and 2013, Brailsford insisted he had no regrets. 
“With hindsight we’ve looked at the recommendations, worked within the rules 
and applied the rules. That is what we did. We did do that. And we wouldn’t 
have done that if we didn’t think it was what was appropriate,” he told the 
Guardian.

But Brailsford, who played a pivotal role in British Cycling’s run of Olympic 
success before launchingTeam Sky <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-sky>, 
said that he accepted there was a need for more transparency in how the 
therapeutic use exemption system worked.

“Our intention is to change our policy and, with rider consent, to be public 
about TUEs. If someone did race with a TUE everybody would know beforehand,” he 
said.

“Or, if you needed a TUE, you wouldn’t race. I think we’re always learning 
lessons but, looking forward, the future is one where we need to drive towards 
greater transparency and making sure our policies are appropriate.”

Sir Dave Brailsford puts up stout defence but questions hang in the air
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/sir-dave-brailsford-stout-defence-team-sky-bradley-wiggins>
Brailsford was insistent that the team did the right thing in applying for 
TUEs for Wiggins in 2011, 2012 and 2013 and that he had full trust in the 
process put in place by the UCI. “I knew he had been to the specialist. We 
don’t sit down every week and discuss every rider’s medical records. That’s not 
what happens. There is an ongoing discussion. He comes back from the 
specialist, says we’ve been recommended this and we need to apply for a TUE and 
that’s done,” Brailsford said.

“It’s easy to stand here with hindsight and make those claims. Rather than 
live in the world as it is now I go back to the time and say: ‘What information 
did I have to hand at the time? What did I believe in and trust from a TUE 
process? Did I make the right decision at the time? Would I have done the same 
now at the same point in time with the same information? I think the answer 
would have been yes.”

Asked specifically about who knew about the TUEs, among 13 acquired by Team 
Sky since their formation, he said there was not a “broad church” of people 
involved. “It’s not a broad church of people that are going to get involved in 
something like that. I had been told he was going to see a specialist and apply 
for a TUE. I was always: ‘Guys, whatever happens in this team you stick to the 
rules,’” he said. “You do not break the rules. You stay the right side of the 
line and stick to the rules always.”

Asked whether it was right that Wiggins appeared to receive the TUE as a 
preventative measure, Brailsford said: “You don’t wait until you have an asthma 
attack to take a puffer. The principle is the same. He has been recommended 
this. For me personally, at the time, did it ring any alarm bells? No.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20did%20not%20seek%20an%20unfair%20advantage%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20on%20banned%20substances%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20did%20not%20seek%20an%20unfair%20advantage%E2%80%99%2C%20says%20Bradley%20Wiggins%20on%20banned%20substances%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Funfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video&media=>
‘I did not seek an unfair advantage’, says Bradley Wiggins on banned substances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/25/unfair-advantage-bradley-wiggins-banned-substances-video>
The injection of triamcinolone he received in 2012, before becoming the first 
British man to win the Tour de France, has come under particular scrutiny. 
Wiggins said on Sunday that he was “really struggling” with a pollen allergy in 
the run-up to the Tour, despite saying in his autobiography that he was in the 
form of his life and in good health.

“It’s difficult for me to comment on his comments in a book that he’s written. 
He’s had the opportunity to answer those. I haven’t seen the book. I’ve just 
got a process. We were abiding by all the UCI regulations. We were abiding by 
their no-needles policy,” Brailsford said.

The Team Sky principal insisted that “we never cross the line” but conceded 
that “at times, it’s challenging” to work out where the line is. “You can see 
from the scrutiny and the debate around this. It’s opinion. One thing is for 
sure, that you can see from the [Fancy Bears] hack that the TUEs are there,” he 
said. “In that sense, nothing wrong has been done in terms of breaking the 
rules. I think what people are questioning is whether it was inappropriate. At 
the time, having been involved in that process, I don’t think it was.”

Bradley Wiggins operated within doping rules – but rules may be wrong | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/bradley-wiggins-doping-rules-fancy-bears-tues>
Several experts have said that Wiggins would not have required the powerful 
corticosteroid if his condition had been properly managed. But Brailsford said 
he had complete faith in the system and in the UCI doctor Mario Zorzoli, who 
was briefly suspended in 2014 but later exonerated. It was Zorzoli who signed 
off on Wiggins’s 2011 TUE.

“He’s a great doctor, I must say. I’ve got lots of confidence in him. Even in 
the CIRC report, they credit the work he did. He was around the races, I knew 
him, I trusted him,” Brailsford said.

He also attempted to explain why Team Sky had never joined the Mouvement pour 
un Cyclisme Credible, whose members do not allow their riders to race if they 
require TUEs.

Brailsford said that when he first went to meetings about the nascent 
organisation, he was concerned that it would not go as far as Team Sky in its 
zero tolerance approach to former dopers and said he would rather work with the 
UCI to improve the rules for all teams rather than as part of a voluntary group.

“We have set out as a team to try and achieve high standards. I think we have 
achieved high standards and high results. We have been scrutinised many, many 
times in a fierce way over the last few years and still are,” he added, 
insisting he had “no regrets”.

“Everyone is entitled to their opinion. And if they have an issue or a concern 
or want to have an opinion they are absolutely entitled to. It’s up to us to 
demonstrate that we live by our standards and demonstrate that what we say is 
robust and in line with what we set out to do.”
 