
A Congolese king has introduced a specialised Wi-Fi network to a remote island 
after testing it in a similarly rugged and windswept environment: an estate in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> managed by a representative 
of Queen Elizabeth.

An estimated 250,000 people live the island of Idjwi in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/congo> (DRC), which 
has been referred to as a “forgotten population” by the world’s media.

There is no broadband infrastructure. Its benefits would be limited in any 
case: fewer than 10 homes on the island in the centre of Lake Kivu have a 
computer, while the cost of 3G and smartphones mean mobile internet is too 
expensive for most citizens, many of whom live on just a dollar a day.

But since May, 10,000 islanders have been able to access the free Wi-Fi being 
beamed across the lake by a powerful antenna. It’s a system otherwise known as 
“mesh Wi-Fi”, which starts with one connection – in this case in the town of 
Bukavu on the mainland 40 miles (60km) away – and then the signal is 
transmitted by a series of masts.

The new Wi-Fi supplies a kiosk in Bugarula, the island’s biggest village, 
which has five tablets and four computers. People can also pick up a signal 
within 100 metres of each mast. Unlike broadband, mesh Wi-Fi doesn’t require 
cables to be installed and people can makehomemade antennae 
<https://www.fjordnet.com/workdetail/bringing-the-internet-to-africas-forgotten-island/>
 out of scrap metal to share the connection.

The system was recently heralded Kevin Kelly, executive editor of Wired 
magazine, as atechnology to “shape our future 
<http://observer.com/2016/06/kevin-kelly-wants-people-to-embrace-the-futures-technological-promise/>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmesh-wi-fi-the-pioneering-network-linking-scotland-with-a-congolese-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffefe765eeee5b946909369fca8b61665f944487%2F183_0_1317_790%2F1317.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wilderness%20Wi-Fi%3A%20the%20pioneering%20network%20linking%20Scotland%20with%20a%20Congolese%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmesh-wi-fi-the-pioneering-network-linking-scotland-with-a-congolese-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wilderness%20Wi-Fi%3A%20the%20pioneering%20network%20linking%20Scotland%20with%20a%20Congolese%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmesh-wi-fi-the-pioneering-network-linking-scotland-with-a-congolese-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffefe765eeee5b946909369fca8b61665f944487%2F183_0_1317_790%2F1317.jpg>
 Equipment for mesh Wi-Fi arrives. Photograph: Fjord/First Light 
The Scottish test 

Fjord, the innovation consultancy company based in the UK 
<https://www.fjordnet.com/> and Ensemble Pour La Difference 
<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__www.ensemblepourladifference.org_&d=DQMFaQ&c=eIGjsITfXP_y-DLLX0uEHXJvU8nOHrUK8IrwNKOtkVU&r=DGERBqedq3OrbUodKhBUitwxQWhqUyneBjUS1YGQ0FI&m=uSXO7EHXwagS3z07Pof-kXavTRH1pr9ZrQG3MDLG2YM&s=DevzplHY-aVZbxwheKhb6ZdCrhFkMs6gyJhwu1l1N4M&e=>
, a social incubator based in Bukavu that are delivering the project for the 
Idjwi king Gervais Rubenga, wanted to test the system before shipping it out to 
east Africa, which is where the Brahan estate near Inverness comes in.

It was the ideal testing ground, thanks to the remoteness and limited 
interference from other signals, and the fact thatthe nephew of Lord-Lieutenant 
of Ross and Cromarty 
<https://www.fjordnet.com/workdetail/bringing-the-internet-to-africas-forgotten-island/>
, who manages the land, had already set up a mesh Wi-Fi system for her 
community.

The wind, rain and terrain were similar too, so much so that Patrick Byamungu, 
who leads the project in Idjwi for Ensemble Pour la Différence and travelled to 
Scotland for the test, says he could have been back in DRC. “It helped that the 
people were kind, friendly and keen to help,” he says.

After successfully setting up a mesh system that delivered fast internet, the 
Fjord team drew up a plan to install a tower that would take the internet from 
Bukavu across the lake directly to the centre of the island.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F173611176&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F173611176>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F173611176&media=>
 The system is tested in Scotland. 
Up and running in May, the new connection has has brought many changes to 
Idjwi. An online public display system in the local market has been installed 
and shares up-to-date news, health information and messages, all sent directly 
by Rubenga from his Android phone.

Traders have to travel to the mainland to sell coffee and fish, the island’s 
two biggest exports. Now they look up which markets will give them the best 
price and, crucially, check the weather forecast to see if it is safe to cross 
the lake.

The connection also helps people access news about the latest security 
situation in DRC which,according to Chatham House 
<https://www.chathamhouse.org/expert/comment/democratic-republic-congo-heading-another-civil-war>
, is locked in aslow-burning political crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/democratic-republic-congo-demonstrations-banned-police-killed-joseph-kabila-etienne-tshisekedi>
. This is information that previously could have taken weeks to reach the 
island, explains Byamung, who lives in Bukavu but travels to Idjwi at least 
twice a month.

Euan Millar, who is leading the project for Fjord, is also hopeful islanders 
may escape internet censorship imposed on the rest of the country. “The 
government is very controlling. If you apply for a phone contract you have to 
tell the names and numbers with all of your friends,” he says. On Idjwi, 
islanders can access the internet without having to disclose any personal 
details to the government, he adds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmesh-wi-fi-the-pioneering-network-linking-scotland-with-a-congolese-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95f8f8c945e72ad536e87ea86f30f3cc8e82a419%2F0_226_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wilderness%20Wi-Fi%3A%20the%20pioneering%20network%20linking%20Scotland%20with%20a%20Congolese%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmesh-wi-fi-the-pioneering-network-linking-scotland-with-a-congolese-island%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wilderness%20Wi-Fi%3A%20the%20pioneering%20network%20linking%20Scotland%20with%20a%20Congolese%20island&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fmesh-wi-fi-the-pioneering-network-linking-scotland-with-a-congolese-island%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95f8f8c945e72ad536e87ea86f30f3cc8e82a419%2F0_226_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 The Highlands of Scotland? No, the island of Ijdwi in DRC. Photograph: 
Fjord/First Light 
Idjwi is not the first place to benefit from mesh networking. It has been set 
up invillages in Brazil 
<https://webwewant.org/news/mesh-network-for-village-internet-access-in-brazil/>
, in rural areas from Scotland to Italy, and in Hong Kong, where protesters 
have used it tocommunicate out of the reach of government censors 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn26285-hong-kong-protesters-use-a-mesh-network-to-organise/>
. It’s “particularly scaleable” in the developing world where people can’t 
afford individual connections, Millar says.

Full access to the internet is free on Idjwi, funded by Fjord and Ensemble 
Pour la Différence, but the next stage is to make the project financially 
sustainable. The king and the UK team want to keep basic health information and 
news available free by charging residents $2 a month to browse Facebook, 
YouTube and other sites.

For Fjord, the ultimate goal of the project is to hand full ownership to the 
residents. However, while they are introducing new technologies “it will take a 
little time for people to find their feet”, Byamungu says.

While Byamungu says that accurate weather information has been the most 
immediate and obvious benefit of the project, he has also been encouraged to 
see everyone from young people to traders and teachers connecting with the 
world. “When I travel I see that everyone has this luxury, it should be the 
same on the island,” he says.

 