
Walking in on a costumed rehearsal of a scene at New York’s Metropolitan Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> is a thrilling experience. It’s 
difficult not to feel a flash of energy in the house when you hear a conductor 
shouting urgently over the music as the orchestra plays, communicating an 
interpretive wish to a particular soloist. Meanwhile, you can hear different 
technical department-heads whispering into headsets — and see stagehands moving 
props around (while artfully weaving around the singers who are still learning 
how to hit their marks).

But the rehearsal I walk in on Wednesday – a scene from Alban Berg’s Lulu, in 
a new production by South African visual artist and directorWilliam Kentridge  
<http://www.pbs.org/art21/artists/william-kentridge>– is busier than any I’ve 
encountered previously. Massive, writhing video projections of Kentridge’s 
famed ink-on-paper, collage style illustrations overlay the presentation of 
this aesthetically sensuous andphilosophically grim opera 
<http://www.metopera.org/Season/2015-16-Season/lulu-berg-tickets/> about a 
sexually voracious – and murderous – femme fatale. Kentridge’s images flutter 
in place, then blow away at precise intervals, recalibrating the physical set’s 
underlying art deco style every few seconds. The number of technicians in the 
aisles, on this occasion, seems approximately double the normal amount.

Lulu's her name, trouble's her game
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/mar/23/1> 
In the third-act scene under rehearsal, the ever-lusted-after Lulu is being 
blackmailed by multiple characters, one of whom, the vulgar Marquis, advertises 
coerced labour in his prostitution ring as an appealing alternative to jail. 
While soprano Marlis Petersen, an expert in the opera’s title role, stands on a 
chair to proclaim Lulu’s unsuitability for the gig, the actor playing the 
Marquis strides over the Met’s stage, and leans against a piano pulling duty as 
a stage prop.

Improbably, a dancer’s leg emerges, pointing skyward. As he dismisses Lulu’s 
objections, the Marquis fondles the hamstring, while oozing an oily, entitled 
lasciviousness. The frenetic image-making and gently surrealmise en scene is 
classic Kentridge, a world away from the straightforward but effectiveJohn 
Dexter 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/03/27/obituaries/john-dexter-64-english-director-of-both-theater-and-opera-dies.html>
production that America’s largest opera house has been using for decades – that 
is, until the new Kentridge version takes over, next week. (Alive broadcast 
<http://www.metopera.org/Season/In-Cinemas/> of this production is scheduled 
for select cinemas around the world, on 21 November.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fwilliam-kentridge-lulu-opera-metropolitan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446248521248%2F5f77e40c-f6b2-410b-bad6-bae309e5220d-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Kentridge%20on%20Lulu%3A%20'You%20know%20there%E2%80%99s%20going%20to%20be%20a%20body%20on%20stage'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fwilliam-kentridge-lulu-opera-metropolitan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Kentridge%20on%20Lulu%3A%20%27You%20know%20there%E2%80%99s%20going%20to%20be%20a%20body%20on%20stage%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fwilliam-kentridge-lulu-opera-metropolitan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F30%2F1446248521248%2F5f77e40c-f6b2-410b-bad6-bae309e5220d-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Lulu: sex and death. Photograph: Metropolitan Opera 
A man bearing no headset strides in front of my view. I’m rather irritated, 
then recognise from his shock of pure white hair, that it’s Kentridge himself. 
For the next 15 minutes, he paces the stalls from one end of the house to the 
other, checking sight-lines until it’s lunchtime.

“It’s the first time we’re seeing this scene with video and lights,” Kentridge 
says, sitting down next to me. “We’re looking at wigs, costumes, lights, video 
and the orchestra – five elements that are coming together today for the first 
time, to see how it fits. And it’s really only here in the house, not in the 
rehearsal room, where you can say: ‘You can watch this scene,’ or ‘it’s 
impossible to watch it, there’s so much going on.’”

Kentridge seems pleased overall by “the great first scene of the third act: 
where money and sex come together. Blackmail and making money in the stock 
exchange – and losing it. Which feels so completely contemporary as a 
phenomenon.”

On an partial first impression, his strategy for presenting the gloomy 
grandeur of Berg’s late-Weimar aesthetic does look compelling. Whereas the 
trend in recent productions of Lulu has trended to porny explicitness – as with 
Krzysztof Warlikowski’srecent staging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/11/berg-lulu-dvd-review-krzysztof-warlikowski>
 in Brussels – Kentridge seems to be charting a less cliched path to the 
opera’s famed luridness.

“It’s about saying: the object of desire doesn’t have to do with that first 
level of striptease and sexiness,” Kentridge tells me. “It has to do with all 
sorts of other things that trigger obsession: sometimes indifference on the 
part of the object of desire. That can be the most irresistible thing. What do 
you have to do to try to break through that barrier? So playing cold can be as 
obsessive-making and as desirous as playing hot.” Speaking of his work with 
Petersen, Kentridge says “we played with both of those elements, within her: 
when she’s in control of a situation – and is cooly being able to observe the 
growing infatuation of different men with her – to when she is unable to see 
herself.”

As with his house debut at the Met – a critical smash-hit production of 
Shostakovich’s absurdist opusThe Nose 
<https://www.metopera.org/Season/On-Demand/opera/?upc=811357016824> – the 
director is relying on some favored techniques, in presenting a hyperactively 
visual version of Lulu. English subtitles, for example, will be projected at 
the base of the Met’s stage (in addition to the customary digital texts that 
the Met produces on the backs of each seat). The idea, Kentridge says, is to 
give audiences the option of “one area of focus,” allowing spectators to keep 
their eyes firmly fixed on the fast-moving stage art.

“The principle that we had in The Nose, of large-scale projections and singers 
in front of them – or integrated or separated from them – is the same here,” he 
notes. “But here the whole world is constructed by the projections. Which 
aren’t projections of scenery, but projections of thoughts and images, largely 
of people. Different images of Lulu, details of the men in her life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUtDCwU73PBg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUtDCwU73PBg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUtDCwU73PBg&media=>
“At the starting point,” he continues, “I knew they were going to be ink 
drawings. The pages were constructed out of four or eight or 16 sheets of paper 
that were collaged. [Each] drawing is not just stuck together … they’re painted 
as fragments and then the whole is constructed by placing these fragments on 
top of each other, to find the drawing. So that in itself suggested a kind of 
fragmentation of the object of desire: how do you hold ‘who Lulu is’ together? 
She’s there, and you hope she’s going to be this goddess, but she’s not.

This instability, he says, is a theme of the opera. “In operatic terms, 
instability is always represented by death: something can’t hold, you know 
there’s going to be a body on stage. And so in the drawings, there are these 
unstable sheets of paper that can blow apart, that can come together. It’s both 
a formal device to work with the music, but it also becomes one of the themes 
of the opera.”

It’s also clear that the director is interested in engaging with Berg’s 
fascinating and idiosyncratic score – one touched by both the language of 
Schoenberg’s 12-tone (or, if you like, “atonal”) method as well as 
late-Romantic lushness. To that end, Kentridge-the-filmmaker has actually 
followed Berg’s multimedia instruction to shoot a film to go with the 
palindromic, two-and-a-half-minute Act II interlude (which represents Lulu’s 
imprisonment, contraction of cholera, and subsequent escape).

The Met’s previous production of Lulu originally included a rather uninspiring 
series of line drawings – as opposed to Berg’s requested live-action film – and 
those drawings were omitted entirely during that production’s last revival, in 
2010. By contrast, Kentridge’s film is a mini-masterpiece in and of itself. It 
respects the scenario scripted by Berg, while allowing for some poetic, 
noir-like smoky images beyond the composer’s imagining. (A few images of the 
interlude film can be seen in the Met’s trailer for this production.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZx6R6l0icDI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZx6R6l0icDI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZx6R6l0icDI&media=>
Critically, Kentridge’s version of the act two film refuses to fill in all the 
narrative lacunae that sit between the first and second halves of the opera. He 
retains the modernist abstraction that Berg seems to have desired, when 
cobbling together his narrative source material (that being the two different 
Lulu plays byFrank Wedekind 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/11/18/books/how-sex-killed-frank-wedekind.html?pagewanted=all>
: Earth Spirit and Pandora’s Box). Though by the time of his death, in 1935, 
Berg had only finished a short score to Lulu’s final act – the work is now 
performed with a version of the third act orchestrated by the composerFriedrich 
Cerha <http://www.friedrich-cerha.com/>– Kentridge notes that the overall work 
is steeped in the experimentations of Berg’s time. “The 20s and 30s [were] the 
heyday of German experimental cinema,” he says. “I’m sure it was completely in 
the air: short, nonlinear experimental films. … I’m sure it’s kind of like 
having a telephone on set: let’s break with the usual things you expect to see 
in an opera.”

In that same spirit of breaking with convention, Kentridge says he’s walking 
into the final week of rehearsal with an open mind about the character of Lulu 
herself. As a few of the Met’s staffers gathered behind us, eager to have 
Kentridge’s opinion on the details yet to be decided upon, he told me: “We’ve 
got the particular talents and remarkable skill of Marlis Petersen. And at the 
end of the six weeks of rehearsal, we’ll see it on stage on the first night – 
and we’ll see what our Lulu is. It’s not as if we start with a Lulu and then 
just execute her.”
 