
First there were mutterings, then there were street protests, but now 
Barcelona is showing signs of “tourist phobia”, the city’s guides are warning.

As many as nine million visitors are expected in Barcelona this year, crammed 
into a few small areas of a city of 1.6 million inhabitants, more than five 
times the number who visited 20 years ago. With the weak euro attracting ever 
more tourists, and as many as 2.5 million visitors disembarking from cruise 
ships a year, residents are feeling besieged.

“People push us, give us dirty looks and make nasty remarks when we’re showing 
tourists around,” said Mari Pau Alonso, president of Barcelona’s Association of 
Professional Tourist Guides.

Even Jordi Clos, head of the city’s hoteliers’ association, which wants to see 
visitor numbers rise to 10 million, says there is an “urgent need” to make 
citizens more sympathetic to tourists, given the “sense of being overwhelmed” 
that people have experienced in recent years.

“If we don’t want to end up like Venice, we will have to put some kind of 
limit in Barcelona,” said Ada Colau, the city’s new mayor, shortly after she 
was elected in May. She is proposing a moratorium on new hotels and licences 
for apartments rented to tourists.

A survey for the Exceltur tourist group revealed that there are now twice as 
many beds available in tourist apartments – some 138,000 – as there are in 
hotels.

Tourist flats offer a more attractive and economic deal to visitors, and their 
owners can expect rents at least 125% higher than they would receive from 
long-term tenants. While many are let through large online organisations, such 
as Airbnb, others are offered by homeowners trying to make ends meet during 
Spain’s prolonged recession.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fwill-people-barcelona-revolt-against-soaring-tourist-numbers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67eea1c531af5ada6e7010b882990e6cbd7c6691%2F167_0_4824_2893%2F4824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20citizens%20of%20Barcelona%20revolt%20against%20soaring%20tourist%20numbers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fwill-people-barcelona-revolt-against-soaring-tourist-numbers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20citizens%20of%20Barcelona%20revolt%20against%20soaring%20tourist%20numbers%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Fwill-people-barcelona-revolt-against-soaring-tourist-numbers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67eea1c531af5ada6e7010b882990e6cbd7c6691%2F167_0_4824_2893%2F4824.jpg>
 Barcelona’s beaches show another side to the city. Photograph: Manu 
Fernandez/AP 
Tourists spend 25m euros (£18m) a day in the city, and the industry accounts 
for 15% of Barcelona’s GDP and about 120,000 jobs. No one wants to drive 
tourists away, says Colau, but if the city becomes a “theme park” people will 
stop coming.

Ciutat Vella, the heart of old Barcelona and one of the most popular districts 
among tourists, has lost 13,000 residents in eight years, driven out by high 
rents and the relentless noise of tourism. Many areas, such as the famous Las 
Ramblas or the area around theSagrada Familia 
<http://www.sagradafamilia.org/en/> church, are in effect no-go areas for 
residents.

Colau suggests encouraging tourists to visit other parts of the city, but 
visitors are drawn to the old city, theAntoni Gaudí buildings 
<http://www.globotreks.com/destinations/10-gaudi-buildings-barcelona/> and 
Barceloneta 
<http://www.barcelona-tourist-guide.com/en/areas/barceloneta-beach-area.html>’s 
beaches. The city is the Mediterranean cruise capital and ships, some carrying 
thousands of passengers, have a huge impact. Passengers are disgorged at the 
city’s main sights and then leave, having bought little more than a souvenir 
and a bottle of water during their time ashore.

Their social impact is seen by many as hugely outweighing their financial 
contribution, leading some, Clos among them, to suggest a tax on cruises. So 
far, the 7m euros annual tax on hotels has been spent on promoting tourism, but 
the Catalan parliament is now considering using it to alleviate the industry’s 
effects.

Francesc Muñoz, professor of urbanisation at Barcelona’s Universitat Autònoma, 
goes further. “Why can’t hotel chains finance schools and nurseries?” he asks. 
“Why can’t cruise companies pay for roadworks?” That way, he argues, residents 
would see some palpable return for putting up with the tourist invasion.
 