
When António Guterres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/antonio-guterres-next-un-secretary-general>
 resigned halfway through his second term as Portuguese prime minister in 2002 
because his minority government was floundering, he did something unusual for a 
man who had seen the highest reaches of power.


Several times a week, he went to slum neighbourhoods on the edge of Lisbon to 
give free maths tuition to children.

“He never allowed a journalist to go with him or let himself be filmed or 
photographed, and he never let journalists talk to any of his students,” said 
Ricardo Costa, editor-in-chief of the Portuguese SIC News, who covered 
Guterres’s political career. The former prime minister told his surprised 
students that what he was doing was personal and not for show.

The Portuguese socialist, who becomes the next UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> secretary general on Sunday, 
is an intellectual who grew up underPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal>’s dictatorship and came of age 
with the 1974 revolution that ended 48 years of authoritarian rule.

Crucial to understanding Guterres, 67, is his Christian faith: his progressive 
Catholicism always informed his brand of social democratic politics.

In the heady days of Portugal’s revolution, it was rare to be a practising 
Catholic in a new Socialist party where many members had Marxist backgrounds. 
But Guterres, a star engineering student who grew a moustache in honour of the 
Chilean left’s Salvador Allende, would eventually become a modernising leader, 
arguing that his mission was social justice and equality.

On the Portuguese left, faith was a delicate issue that required discretion. 
Under Guterres, the country held a referendum in 1998 on a proposal to 
liberalise the strict abortion laws. Socialist MPs had a free vote and, as 
prime minister, Guterres chose not to officially campaign. But it was publicly 
known that he opposed changing the law, which irked many in his party. The no 
vote against liberalising the abortion law narrowly won, but turnout was so low 
that the result was not binding. Abortion laws were finallyrelaxed in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/12/gilestremlett.international> 
after a second referendum.

Born in Lisbon, Guterres spent stretches of his childhood with relatives in 
the countryside, where he saw the poverty of rural life under the dictatorship, 
and later volunteered with Catholic student groups on social projects in the 
capital.

In 1976, the young engineering lecturer was elected a Socialist MP in 
Portugal’s first democratic vote since the revolution. In parliament, he was a 
fearsome orator. Such was his talent for verbally destroying political 
opponents, he became known as “the talking pickaxe”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f8e8d7200fa57d799e2a22dcc18f4028daa40e6%2F0_0_1880_1354%2F1880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN's%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN%27s%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f8e8d7200fa57d799e2a22dcc18f4028daa40e6%2F0_0_1880_1354%2F1880.jpg>
 Tony Blair shares a laugh with António Guterres at the start of the Congress 
of the Socialist International in Paris in November 1999. Photograph: Laurent 
Rebours/AP 
Guterres became prime minister in 1995. His campaign slogan was “heart and 
reason”, a cry for more humanism and social politics. Three years earlier he 
had taken over the Socialist party and modernised it, although he remained to 
the left of contemporaries such asTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>. For years he led the 
Socialist International <http://www.socialistinternational.org/> international 
grouping of leftwing parties.

 With Portugal’s rapid economic growth and nearly full employment, Guterres 
was able to set up a guaranteed minimum income and nursery schooling for all. 
But he had failed to win an absolute majority and was condemned to preside over 
a tricky minority government. He had to rely on his skill for consensus, always 
having to negotiate with the opposition parties if he wanted to get anything 
passed – something he later argued was perfect training for running the UN.

 “He was a skilful person – very smart, very quick to understand the other 
point of view and very focused on having solutions – that’s why it worked,” 
said António Vitorino, Guterres’s deputy prime minister and defence minister.

 Guterres was furiously hardworking. But behind this was a backdrop of family 
tragedy. His wife, Luísa Guimarães e Melo, a psychiatrist with whom he had two 
children, had been critically ill for most of his time in government and was 
undergoing treatment at a London hospital.

 “It was one of the hardest moments of his political life,” Vitorino said. 
“Every Friday morning, he took a plane to London, spent the weekend there in a 
very desperate situation and then on Monday morning he was back at work. I was 
his deputy prime minister, I was amazed. I could never have done what he was 
doing.”

 In 1998, Guterres’s wife died. The following year, he threw himself into the 
general elections. He had hoped to win an outright majority but the Socialists 
ended up one MP short and began a second minority government. This time, a 
slowdown in the economy made things harder.

Guterres, privately growing disillusioned with internal party politics, turned 
increasingly to his interest in international diplomacy. He had already won 
praise for his role in resolving the crisis inTimor-Leste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/timor-leste>, a former Portuguese colony, 
which had erupted into violence in 1999 after a referendum vote in favour of 
independence from Indonesia. Guterres led diplomatic efforts to convince the UN 
to intervene to restore peace.

 In 2000, when Portugal took the rotating presidency of the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, its success was attributed to 
Guterres’s ability to get big leaders to agree and smaller leaders to be heard.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f73a0dab66b18d6951a7f944d328f24ee8179e%2F0_0_2048_1520%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN's%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN%27s%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f73a0dab66b18d6951a7f944d328f24ee8179e%2F0_0_2048_1520%2F2048.jpg>
 António Guterres is cheered after his party won Portugal’s general elections 
in October 1999. Photograph: Armando Franca/AP 
 “He did something very original: he looked at what every country wanted and 
set up an agenda that could be interesting for everyone,” said Francisco Seixas 
da Costa, a Portuguese diplomat who served as Guterres’s European affairs 
secretary. “Small countries disappear in the decision-making process so we 
tried to listen to their interests.”

 Guterres managed to talk down powerful leaders at loggerheads. “At the 
European council, I remember a conflict between Jacques Chirac and Helmut Kohl 
over one issue,” Seixas da Costa said. “Guterres asked for the floor. I was 
sitting next to him, I was afraid it might be naive. But he took the floor and 
made a proposal that covered both their interests, and it was a success. It 
worked. He had a fantastic capacity to moderate and create links and bridges.”

In 2002, halfway through his second term as prime minister, Guterres abruptly 
resigned after the Socialists suffered a drubbing in local elections. He 
famously said he wanted to avoid the country falling into a “political swamp” 
and that he had discovered “politics has its limits”.


 At the time he was unpopular, criticised for too much compromise and too much 
dialogue. But over the years since his departure, polls showed he was 
increasingly liked and seen as fair, serious and honest – a possible contender 
for Portuguese president, although he never wanted to return to national 
politics, preferring, he said, to make a difference on the world stage.

His decade serving as UN high commissioner for refugees (UNHCR) from 2005 to 
2015 was seen inPortugal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> as an 
obvious fit for his personality: socially engaged but seeking common ground.

 Guterres – who speaks Portuguese, English, French and Spanish and is now 
remarried to Catarina Vaz Pinto, who works at Lisbon city hall – was known in 
political circles for enthusiastic, cultured conversations on everything from 
ancient Greece to Middle Eastern culture, opera to geography.

Whenever he had free time during visits to Washington as UNHCR chief, he would 
get the organisation’s regional representative, Michel Gabaudan, to take him to 
Politics & Prose or another of the city’s bookshops.

“He’s an avid reader of history, and his pleasure was, if we had an hour, to 
go to a bookshop, so we would have access to books in English that weren’t easy 
to get in Geneva,” said Gabaudan, now president of Refugees International. “I’m 
sure this immense knowledge of past and ancient history did inform his 
political judgment.”

Guterres also took a broad approach to the UNHCR’s responsibilities. The 
organisation grew dramatically under his management, and not just because the 
number of the world’srefugees  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>
soared in the 21st century. He broadened the categories of people the UNHCR 
would seek to protect, including internally displaced people and migrants 
forced from their homes by natural disasters and climate change. He preferred 
the all-encompassing phrase “people on the move”.

He managed to persuade donors to fund the expansion by retaining their 
confidence that the money was well spent, and to do that he cut overheads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a8f5b53efab6ab22ab22ebe581ee9e2e8579689%2F0_0_2704_2080%2F2704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN's%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN%27s%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a8f5b53efab6ab22ab22ebe581ee9e2e8579689%2F0_0_2704_2080%2F2704.jpg>
 Guterres, then UN high commissioner for refugees, visits Ikafe camp for 
Sudanese refugees in northern Uganda in June 2005. Photograph: Radu 
Sigheti/Reuters 
“Like all UN organisations, as the organisation had grown up, it had become a 
little bit top-heavy and one of his first actions was really to slim down 
headquarters fairly substantially. He sent people back to the field and he put 
some of the services in much cheaper places than Geneva,” Gabaudan said.

“He never thought the details of finance were just for the technicians. I saw 
him looking at spreadsheets faster than his financial officer, spotting the 
line or column where we had a problem. So he was really as much hands-on about 
how the organisation worked as he was the top political figure and spokesman 
for refugees.”

When Justin Forsyth was chief executive of Save the Children UK, he travelled 
with Guterres to refugee camps in Lebanon, and recalled Guterres meeting a 
group of children. “The thing that struck me was him cross-legged on the floor 
of a tent talking to children. He really listens and he asks questions and he’s 
very moved by what he hears. He gets his hands dirty,” said Forsyth, the new 
deputy executive director of Unicef, the UN children’s charity.

Guterres’s tenure as high commissioner has attracted some criticism. Some 
former officials said he should have spoken out more strongly in defence of 
refugee rights enshrined in the 1951 refugee convention. “His record is very 
mixed, particularly on protection. His tenure was a rough time for the 
protection of refugees,” a former senior UN official said. He pointed to 
Thailand forcibly repatriating ethnic Uighurs to China despite the risk they 
would face persecution.

He argued that a tripartite agreement the UNHCR made with Kenya and Somalia on 
the voluntary return of Somali refugees had paved the way for the reported 
forced repatriations now under way in Kenya aimed at emptying its biggest camp, 
at Dadaab.

The former official said the EU’s deal with Turkey to repatriate refugees, 
also widely seen as a violation of basic principles of refugee protection, was 
largely negotiated while Guterres was at the helm, even if it was only signed 
in March this year, three months after he left.

“His style is to make general statements on the issue but not to directly 
challenge governments on their actions,” the former official said. “It raises 
concerns on what he would be like as secretary general.”

Jeff Crisp, who was head of UNHCR policy development and evaluation under 
Guterres and is now a research associate at the University of Oxford’s Refugee 
Studies Centre, said not all the criticisms could be pointed at the secretary 
general designate.

He said the UNHCR did push back against infringements of refugee rights by 
European states and had been strongly critical of the EU-Turkey deal. And he 
argued the tendency to address abuses by authoritarian states by 
behind-the-scenes persuasion had historically been the “institutional approach” 
taken by the UNHCR, before and after Guterres.

“I think you have to understand that UNHCR’s public criticism of states is 
very carefully calibrated and in general the more liberal a state is, the more 
publicly the UNHCR will criticise it,” Crisp said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9cc05e6b9e04436fefd24a3cce009149eeca7a7%2F0_0_1931_1159%2F1931.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN's%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Ant%C3%B3nio%20Guterres%20be%20the%20UN%27s%20best%20ever%20secretary%20general%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwill-antonio-guterres-be-the-uns-best-ever-secretary-general%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9cc05e6b9e04436fefd24a3cce009149eeca7a7%2F0_0_1931_1159%2F1931.jpg>
 Mariano Rajoy, the Spanish prime minister, and Guterres speak during a meeting 
in Madrid. Photograph: AFP/Getty 
Adaptable, consensual, affable, intellectual, Guterres is perhaps better 
qualified than any of his nine predecessors for the world’s most demanding job. 
But one of his deftest skills he learned not from the hurly burly of Portuguese 
politics, nor from the harrowing years at the UNHCR, but from his first wife.

At a Guardian event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/audio/2016/jun/14/next-un-secretary-general-meet-the-candidates-guardian-live-event>
 last June in which he debated with rivals for the secretary general job, he 
said her psychoanalytical insights were highly valuable. “She taught me 
something that was extremely useful for all my political activities. When two 
people are together, they are not two but six. What each one is, what each one 
thinks he or she is and what each one thinks the other is,” he said.

“And what is true for people is also true for countries and organisations. One 
of the roles of the secretary general when dealing with the different key 
actors in each scenario is to bring these six into two. That the 
misunderstandings disappear and the false perceptions disappear. Perceptions 
are essential in politics.”
 