
If you’ve been a gamer for at least 10 years, the chances are, your 
under-stairs cupboard is a shantytown of plastic guitars, dusty half-size drum 
kits and unsolvable tangles of wire.

Once upon a time, Guitar Hero and its many copycats ruled gaming, playing to 
arena-sized crowds of excited fans – but then they exited the business with 
unusual haste. The genre, in which players strap on plastic guitars and strum 
along in time with an eclectic soundtrack, was so dominant it even lured in The 
Beatles, that notoriously vigilant guarder of legacy. But it came at a cost. 
Viacom spent $20m (£12.7m) on advertising alone for The Beatles: Rock Band, a 
figure that illustrates both the belief in the genre at the time, and the depth 
of its subsequent fall. By 2010, wearied players had hung up their instruments 
en mass, and the flood of music games slowed to a drip.

Six years on and Guitar Hero, the game that took the genre mainstream, is set 
for a comeback in the form of Guitar Hero Live, designed by British developer 
FreeStyleGames <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> (creator of the 
superb DJ Hero series). The theory is unchanged: notes move towards you down a 
stave and, when they pass an on-screen marker, you must hold down the 
corresponding button on your toy guitar (which now has a six-button 
configuration: three buttons toward the top of the guitar neck, and three 
toward the bottom, in parallel) and strum. Correctly match the timing and the 
guitar note will play out. Miss and there’ll be an awkward splang in the 
soundtrack. You’re scored on your timing, and, unbroken strings of correct 
notes will earn you multipliers that contribute to a high score.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbolwf2q9Vb8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbolwf2q9Vb8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbolwf2q9Vb8&media=>
But while the action remains untouched, the aesthetic has been overhauled. 
Gone are the gangly 3D characters that posed and grimaced on stage behind the 
musical stave in the late 2000s. They’ve been replaced by filmed footage of 
adoring crowds and other band members, with whom you pretend to perform as you 
play through the soundtrack. There are no virtual characters or stages to be 
seen anywhere in the game.

Guitar Hero Live – music game returns with new guitar and fresh look
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/14/guitar-hero-live-the-music-game-returns-with-new-guitar-and-fresh-look>
Perhaps the most interesting element of nouveau Guitar Hero is not the switch 
from 3D models to filmed actors, but rather Guitar Hero TV, an always-on music 
television-style channel that enables you to play along via a slew of music 
videos, both vintage and contemporary. The results are visually closer to 
SingStar, Sony’s elegant karaoke series, with clean lines and an uncluttered 
heads-up display (HUD). Put the guitar down at any point, and the screen will 
clear, so you can watch the music video uninterrupted. Play along and you can 
alter the song’s difficulty on the fly. In contrast to earlier titles in the 
series, the game won’t kick you out if you miss to many notes.

The channels (of which there will be two at launch, themed around different 
musical styles) run to a programming schedule, just like MTV of yesteryear – 
although, if you have a particular song you’re into, you can play it 
immediately by spending a ‘play’ token, which are earned through playing the 
game. You can change channels at any time mid-song (there is an all new GHTV 
button on the new guitar peripheral itself) and at launch there will hundreds 
of tracks, all available for free, ready to look at and play whenever you want. 
If you want to own a particular song forever and not use play tokens, you can 
buy it for a small real money fee, or you can buy a “party pass” which unlocks 
every song in the game for an evening – ideal for when you have friends over 
and want to play together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4fQccRAO40U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4fQccRAO40U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4fQccRAO40U&media=>
As well as classic and contemporary music videos, GHTV will offer so-called 
premium shows, based on live recordings (in the demo, Activision showed off a 
live DVD, which could be watched and played along with, by the Black Veil 
Brides). These shows can be purchased for play or you can complete challenges 
to earn the right to play. The game might require you to score three stars or 
more on a trio of tracks in order to unlock the premium show – although, if you 
go the challenge route, you’ll have to attempt three new challenges to play if 
for a second time, and so on. The premium shows offer premium rewards, such as 
themed fretboards – theres a steampunk version, decorated with spinning cogs 
and whizzing sound effects – or an upturned skateboard deck.

Activision plans to add swathes of new songs to GHTV during the year, a 
generous model that seeks to solve one of the issues that arguably led to the 
genre’s downfall: the need for players to constantly add buy new add-on packs 
in order to expand their song library. It’s also an inventive way to bring the 
art of the music visual back into the living room – a video game to save the 
radio star.
 