
So will the ban on lettings agents charging fees to tenants push rents up? 
That’s the question many renters will be asking after the government’s autumn 
statement announcement.

The good news is that this is more than a proposal: the chancellor, Philip 
Hammond,said ministers “will” bring in a ban 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
, which means that tenants will no longer have to pay fees that can run into 
the hundreds when they sign a new tenancy agreement. But some felt there was a 
worrying lack of detail – Hammond merely said it would happen “as soon as 
possible”, while the Treasury said the government “will consult on this in due 
course”. So it’s far from clear when the fees will be outlawed.

But how much do people actually pay? There are varying figures. The latest 
English Housing Survey, published in July, found that 40% of private renters 
were charged a fee by a letting agency or landlord in 2014-15, at an average of 
£223.Citizens Advice last year put the total average tenancy fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/27/letting-agency-fees-cost-tenants-337-citizens-advice>
 at £337, while a 2013 report from housing charity Shelter said one in seven 
(15%) renters using an agency forked out more than £500.

However, the biggest area of debate was whether the ban will drive up rents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/rents-unfair-letting-fees-tenants-charges>
, on the grounds that landlords will now have to pay these costs and will 
simply pass them on to tenants. Or will landlords or letting agents absorb the 
costs?

Guardian Money decided to round up the views of experts and commentators on 
the key question of whether the ban will mean higher rents.

I’m an estate agent. Philip Hammond ought to cap letting fees, not ban them | 
Jonathan Parker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/estate-agent-philip-hammond-cap-letting-fees-ban-them-regulate>
No it won’t/most likely won’t

Generation Rent, which campaigns for better privately rented homes, says: “We 
don’t think it will [push up rents], mainly because rents are really just set 
by what people are prepared to pay in the market. Rents have been rising 
because demand has been so high.” The organisation says the fact that there is 
such huge variation in the level of fees charged shows there is a lot of scope 
for getting these costs down. It adds that landlords will have the power to 
shop around for lower fees.

PricedOut, the group campaigning for affordable house prices, believes it is 
“very likely that landlords and agents will bear most of the costs, as they 
have done in Scotland, which banned fees years ago”. It adds that even if all 
fees were to be passed on in the form of higher rent, “this will still benefit 
tenants, as their costs will be spread and they will find it easier to move 
home, giving them more bargaining power”.

Shelter published a report in 2013 
<https://england.shelter.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/834832/6636_Scottish_letting_fees_report_v9.pdf>
 that looked at what had happened in Scotland. There, it has been illegal to 
charge “premiums” – fees charged at the start of a tenancy, in addition to rent 
and the deposit – to renters since 1984. However, the law wasn’t enforced until 
2012, when it was clarified. Shelter said its research had shown that landlords 
in Scotland “were no more likely to have increased rents since 2012 than 
landlords elsewhere in the UK”. In fact, only one landlord in 120 surveyed said 
they had noticed an increase in agency fees and had passed this on to their 
tenants.

easyProperty, the online estate agent, says: “Any sensible agency won’t pass 
on the charges to landlords due to competition in the sector, so we don’t 
foresee rent rises, as there is no need to add the fees to rents.”

What is it like to rent in Britain today? Share your story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/what-is-it-like-to-rent-in-britain-today-share-your-story>
Yes it will

Housing minister Gavin Barwell was asked two months ago whether he would 
follow the Scottish example and ban letting fees.He tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/gavinbarwellmp/status/777852917013512192>: “Bad idea – 
landlords would pass cost to tenants via rent. We’re looking at other ways to 
cut upfront costs & raise standards”. It’s not clear whether Barwell has since 
changed his mind… or had it changed for him.

Beresfords, a chain of estate agents, says: “Ultimately landlords will be 
expected to pick up most, if not all, of any fees lost by agents. However, 
landlords will want to recoup such increases, and the most obvious way to do so 
is by increasing the rent. Unfortunately, over time, tenants could end up 
paying much more in uplifted rent than what they would have expected to pay in 
initial fees at the outset.”

The Residential Landlords Association says: “This will not help tenants, 
especially those who are ‘just managing’. Agents’ fees have to be paid by 
somebody. If any extra fees are passed on to landlords, tenants will end up 
paying them for ever, as rents will increase.”

Simon Gerrard, MD of London estate agency Martyn Gerrard and a past president 
of the National Association of Estate Agents, says yields for landlords are 
already low, “so lowering them further means landlords will simply sell rather 
than rent, which will push rents up even higher because there will be less 
stock”. He adds: “The landlords that do stay in the market will have to 
increase rents to cover these new costs.”

Maybe …

Lord Bourne of Aberystwyth, a communities minister, said during a House of 
Lords debate 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Lords/2016-11-18/debates/DFF19B1B-3A2F-4A8D-B203-FB239457ADC8/Renters%E2%80%99RightsBill(HL)>
 on 18 November that Gavin Barwell has “been clear that we must be mindful of 
the potential impact on rents from banning fees paid by tenants… This is not a 
straightforward issue, and we have to be careful that any changes do not have 
impacts elsewhere”.

‘We’ve nothing to save after £2,300 on rent and childcare’

Over the past decade Sarah Cross has become an expert on London’s rental 
market, having moved every year between 2007 and 2015 – often not out of 
choice. So she was pleased at the government’s decision to ban letting agents’ 
fees to tenants. “That’s a really positive thing – previously we’ve paid nearly 
£1,000 just in fees and charges.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbanning-letting-fees-higher-rents-tenants-ask-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f51f4a535693087e96b1030f554f7e9d7e33253%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20banning%20letting%20agency%20fees%20lead%20to%20higher%20rents%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbanning-letting-fees-higher-rents-tenants-ask-experts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20banning%20letting%20agency%20fees%20lead%20to%20higher%20rents%3F%20We%20ask%20the%20experts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fbanning-letting-fees-higher-rents-tenants-ask-experts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f51f4a535693087e96b1030f554f7e9d7e33253%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Sarah Cross and her son Oliver. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Like many young couples in the capital, Cross and her partner work full-time 
but are still priced out of buying. They rent a “very compact” two-bedroom 
house in Leytonstone, east London, where they live with their son Oliver who is 
nearly two and attends nursery.

She and her partner both earn above the national average – their household 
income is £80,000 – but they still can’t afford to buy a family house in 
London. “We have no money to save after rent and bills,” says Cross, 31, who 
works as an operations specialist for a major company. This also means the 
couple’s plans to grow their family are currently on hold. “We’d like another 
child, but living in London limits your funds – and we don’t really feel like 
we have enough behind us to have a larger family.”

The couple pay around £1,300 a month in rent, with childcare swallowing a 
further £1,000. They are clearly not financially destitute – “We go on holiday” 
– but Cross adds: “One of us basically pays the rent and bills, and the other 
pays for childcare and essentials.”

Having had to move so often in the past, the birth of Oliver in 2014 saw them 
negotiate a two-year contract “to ensure we wouldn’t have to disrupt our whole 
lives one year later”.

Cross says that, like many people, they are in a catch-22 situation: house 
prices are stratospheric because too few homes have been built in London to 
sustain the number of people, but they don’t feel they can move out because 
“the employment wouldn’t be there”.

She says something needs to be done to get the capital’s housing market 
working properly. She is “intrigued” by the news of 40,000 additional 
affordable homes, but says: “It’s really important we build more affordable 
homes that are fit for purpose – we’ve viewed several shared ownership schemes 
and haven’t found one appropriate for family living - and that maybe we limit 
the price that we pay on rental properties.”

Cross is a supporter of the charity Shelter, which also welcomed the decision 
to ban letting agent fees.
 