
It happened in a classroom, on the desks of the village school. It was dark, 
so the doctor operated on the women by torchlight. The procedure only took two 
minutes; many women did not even know that they had been permanently sterilised.

That Saturday night, in January 2012, 53 women from the village of Kaparfora 
in the northern Indian state of Biharhad tubectomies over a period of two hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/15/uk-aid-forced-sterilisation-india>
, under the supervision of a local NGO. The school desks where the operations 
took place were never disinfected; the doctor never changed his gloves, and the 
medicines were past their use-by dates, violating a number of government 
guidelines. After the operations, the doctor left the school, ignoring the 
wails of the bleeding women in the classroom.

Devika Biswas, a health activist from the region, who visited Kaparfora a 
month after the event on a fact-finding mission, says she was “aghast” at the 
conditions she saw. “I was feeling so bad. I thought, is this my country? Not a 
single woman was screened to see if there would be any complications. One of 
the women who was sterilised was actually three months pregnant, and she ended 
up miscarrying her baby. I mean, they were just butchering women.”

Indian women die after state-run mass sterilisation campaign goes wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/11/indian-women-die-mass-sterilisation-camp>
Biswas recalls the words of one woman she met in the village. “She looked sad 
so I asked her to speak her mind. She said to me, ‘The government puts no value 
on our lives, so they can do anything to us.’”

Biswas filed a petition to the supreme court based on her findings. After a 
four-year legal battle with the government, this September the court ordered 
the governmentto shut down sterilisation camps across India within three years 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwjvweTm6OvPAhWqIsAKHQGVDbkQFggkMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fsupremecourtofindia.nic.in%2FFileServer%2F2016-09-14_1473844895.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEq_YUOjN7JLp3X-hJivENa15V3Hg&sig2=bskUmd-ljNOiEEBehGooug&cad=rja>
. Though women can still go to health clinics and request to have tubectomies, 
sterilisation camps run either by state government officials, or outsourced to 
local NGOs, in which doctors go out to villages and encourage women to have 
their tubes tied, will be illegal.

The supreme court’s verdict is a historic victory for women’s rights activists 
who have campaigned againststerilisation camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/12/india-mass-sterilisation-wife-died-tremendous-pain>
 for decades. The ruling could mean that, for the first time, India moves away 
from family planning policies that focus on women rather than men and provide a 
wider range of contraception, particularly in rural clinics.

The judge told state governments to increase compensation payments to victims 
of botched surgeries. “It is time that women and men are treated with respect 
and dignity and not as mere statistics in the sterilisation programme,”wrote 
Justice Madan Lokur 
<http://supremecourtofindia.nic.in/FileServer/2016-09-14_1473844895.pdf>in the 
judgment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fwill-closure-india-sterilisation-camps-end-botched-operations-supreme-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c8ed59aa39ee9fbb966c9a0af8f8980a5b0222f%2F0_0_3500_2419%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20closure%20of%20India's%20sterilisation%20camps%20end%20botched%20operations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fwill-closure-india-sterilisation-camps-end-botched-operations-supreme-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20closure%20of%20India%27s%20sterilisation%20camps%20end%20botched%20operations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fwill-closure-india-sterilisation-camps-end-botched-operations-supreme-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c8ed59aa39ee9fbb966c9a0af8f8980a5b0222f%2F0_0_3500_2419%2F3500.jpg>
 The mother of 30-year-old Phoolbai, who died after she underwent surgery at a 
government mass sterilisation camp. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
India’s controversial sterilisation drives, funded by the World Bank, 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-30040790> USAID 
<https://www.pop.org/content/usaid-funding-sterilization-camps-india>, and 
other international organisations have been at the core of the country’s 
efforts to minimise population growth since the 1980s. Unlike China, where, 
until last year, astrict one-child policy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/29/china-abandons-one-child-policy>
has slowed population growth, India’s government offers cash incentives to 
women and men who choose permanent sterilisation in an attempt to bring down 
the national fertility rate.

Quotas for sterilisation and cash incentives to doctors and village health 
workers who bring women to camps have led to mass operations – sometimes even 
on very young women in their early twenties – increasing the risks of infection 
and poor care. The sterilisation camps became a national embarrassment when15 
women died 
<http://www.hrln.org/hrln/reproductive-rights/reports/1661-fact-finding-report-on-sterilization-access-to-contraceptive-information-and-services-and-womens-health-in-bilaspur-district-chhattisgarh-14-18-november-2014.html>
 after botched tubectomies in the northern state of Chhattisgarh.

The focus on permanent sterilisation comes from a long-rooted belief that 
overpopulation is at the heart of India’s major problems of hunger,poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/25/india-sanitation-drive-toilet-or-safe-drinking-water-stark-choice>
, poor education and poor healthcare. India has the world’s second biggest 
population after China,1.25 billion people 
<http://data.un.org/CountryProfile.aspx?crName=INDIA>, roughly equivalent to 
the populations of Europe and North America combined.

While family planning clinics around the country offer free oral 
contraceptives, IUDs and condoms, these methods are unpopular and associated 
with promiscuity. Vasectomies, cheaper and easier sterilisation procedures for 
men, are available too, but the stigma of being unmanly, and the memory of 
former prime ministerIndira Gandhi’s fertility control drives in the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/nov/12/indias-sterilisation-drive-is-barbaric-and-disproportionately-targeted-at-women>
, in which millions of men were forcibly sterilised, have stuck.

India's sterilisation camps must give way to proper family planning | Shree 
Venkatram
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/nov/22/india-sterilisation-camps-family-planning-tragedy>
India sterilises more women than any other country in the world. “The 
government’s strategy has always been female-focused,” explains Sarita 
Barpanda, from theHuman Rights Law Network.  <http://www.hrln.org/hrln/>

“All the programmes are targeted at them. Many women are coerced into having 
sterilisations. The fact that the government has given so much of the 
responsibility for sterilisations to private organisations suggests how 
valuable a woman’s life is.”

Barpanda has further stories of atrocities during the sterilisation drives 
around the country. “In Orissa,they used bicycle pumps 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/india/odisha-doctor-uses-bicycle-pump-for-sterilisation/story-yIFEFxFXMOitR6nxTgr8aL.html>
 in the operations because the doctors did not have up-to-date medical 
equipment,” she says. “In Himachal Pradesh, one doctor did five surgeries and 
thenpassed out drunk halfway through the sixth 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/drunk-doctor-performs-family-planning-operation-on-five-falls-asleep-while-sixth-on-operating-table/>
. InMalda, in West Bengal 
<http://www.hrln.org/hrln/images/stories/pdf/A-Fact-Finding-Report-of-the-Sterilisation-Camp-Held-at-Manikchak-Rural-Hospital.pdf>
, they had no beds for the women, so they had to lie out on the ground, in the 
cold after the operations,” says Barpanda. “Almost every state was reporting 
violations of the government’s sterilisation guidelines.”

In 2007, the supreme court ruled that the national government was responsible 
for maintaining standards in sterilisation procedures 
<https://www.escr-net.org/caselaw/2013/ramakant-rai-v-union-india-wp-c-no-209-2003>
. It also asked state governments to introduce quality control commissions to 
ensure high standards in family planning clinics and camps, but these bodies 
have not been established.

In a statement to the Guardian, a spokesperson from the Ministry of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Family Welfare said the 
botched sterilisations were “a one-off” and were the exception rather than the 
rule.

The ministry said it had made many attempts to improve standards at state-run 
sterilisation camps. “The government of India has formulated several manuals 
and regular updates for the guidance of the state governments and union 
territories to address all aspects of conducting sterilisation procedures. The 
government of India has also issued advisories to all the states and union 
territories to adhere to the standard operating procedures at all levels to 
prevent and pre-empt incidents that might adversely affect the health of 
clients due to sterilisation procedures. These have been extensively 
disseminated across states.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fwill-closure-india-sterilisation-camps-end-botched-operations-supreme-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfac1b80d8ac1ccc3e8a2e4855ecdfc8fa6d8ab0%2F0_0_3500_2452%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20closure%20of%20India's%20sterilisation%20camps%20end%20botched%20operations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fwill-closure-india-sterilisation-camps-end-botched-operations-supreme-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20closure%20of%20India%27s%20sterilisation%20camps%20end%20botched%20operations%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fwill-closure-india-sterilisation-camps-end-botched-operations-supreme-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfac1b80d8ac1ccc3e8a2e4855ecdfc8fa6d8ab0%2F0_0_3500_2452%2F3500.jpg>
 Women who underwent sterilisation surgery queue to receive food inside a 
hospital in the eastern Indian state of Chhattisgarh, in November 2014. 
Photograph: Anindito Mukherjee/Reuters 
The spokesperson said that the supreme court’s decision to phase out 
sterilisation camps was “in alignment with the government of India’s own 
endeavour in that direction over a period of three years”.

Contraceptives were being offered free of charge to any couples wanting them, 
added the spokesperson, and the government is increasing access to family 
planning.

But Biswas says she doubts the supreme court’s order will make much 
difference. “The government is responsible – they are perpetual violators of 
the rights of women in this country, but I just don’t think anything will 
change.”

Barpanda is more optimistic. “They’ve already stopped the camps in Orissa,” 
she says. “This was a really big thing for the supreme court to pass. But I 
don’t know if I would call it a victory because so many people have lost their 
lives.”
 