
Spare a thought for Miss Sloane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/11/miss-sloane-review-jessica-chastain-washington-lobbyist-film>
, a liberal political thriller that dared to wade unarmed into cinemas just 
after the US election. StarringJessica Chastain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jessica-chastain> in the title role, the film 
risked the wrath of an emboldened “alt-right” and a resurgent National Rifle 
Association (NRA) with its tale of a Washington lobbyist who pushes for 
increased gun control. But reviews were lukewarm and the punters stayed away,in 
the US at least 
<http://dailycaller.com/2016/12/13/box-office-disaster-no-one-expected-jessica-chastains-gun-control-movie-to-flop-this-hard-video/>
. Miss Sloane preached its lonesome liberal message to rows of empty seats.

I would like to file Miss Sloane as that rarest of things – an anti-gun 
Hollywood blockbuster – except that is not quite the case. One, because the 
film was bankrolled by a French company (EuropaCorp). And two, because even the 
film’s makers seem at pains to downplay its politics. “The issue of gun 
legislation isn’t itself the film’s subject,” cautions producer Kris Thykier. 
“[Screenwriter Jonathan Perera] placed an emotive issue at the heart of it, but 
it perhaps could have been one of a number of others.” Far safer, then, to view 
Miss Sloane as a study in compromise: a tentative shuffle-step on the road to 
redemption. On those few occasions when cinema finds itself at odds with the 
gun, it seems that it can not bring itself to disown the thing altogether.

From Wanted to Magnum Force: film posters that definitely don't glamourise guns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2008/sep/03/angelinajolie.wanted> 
One might even go as far as to think of this as film’s defining love affair; 
more glamorous than Bogart and Bacall, more tempestuous than Burton and Taylor. 
According to the documentary film-makerAbigail Disney 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abigail_Disney>: “The gun is the leading 
character in the blockbuster Hollywood film.” Out of the 100 top-grossing 
pictures of 2015, no fewer than 18 featured a firearm on the poster. And while 
Hollywood (as an entity) is broadly supportive of gun control, this stance is 
belied by the movies it makes. This is an ambivalent relationship, hopelessly 
confused at the core. Any attempt at separation carries with it the constant 
risk of backsliding.

Turns out it was not Jean-Luc Godard who first said: “All you need to make a 
movie is a girl and a gun.” That was DW Griffith, the father of film, right 
back when the medium was still finding its feet. The Great Train Robbery 
(1903), billed as the first movie western, showcased a pistol beingpointed and 
discharged right into the screen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hknJkYN5dqQ>. 
In the decades that followed, the genre would effectively “print the legend” of 
the second amendment and the NRA, celebrating the notion of a US made safe and 
maintained by the judicious use of firepower. Except that the gun – like 
Hemingway’s Paris – is a moveable feast. It is equally at home in gangster 
flicks and film noir, road movies and political thrillers. Increasingly, it is 
cropping up in kids’ pictures, too. A 2013 studyfound 
<http://www.thewrap.com/pg-13-movies-gun-violence-r-rated-films-study-finds/> 
that there is now more gun violence in PG-13 productions than in films that are 
rated R.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkHC7Ivprmlg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkHC7Ivprmlg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkHC7Ivprmlg&media=>
 Click here to see the trailer for Miss Sloane. 
“It used to be that gun violence was at least grounded in extreme life 
experiences – the second world war or the western,” says Steven Gaydos, 
executive editor of Variety magazine. “Fantasy violence didn’t dominate the box 
office the way it does now, postGeorge Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> and Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>. The movies took us into outer 
space and we’re still out there.”

Or to put it another way, the industry went global. About 70% of Hollywood 
revenue is now generated overseas 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/culture/story/20130620-is-china-hollywoods-future>. 
Gaydos blames the requirements of an international market that favours 
spectacle over drama, action over dialogue, homogenous fantasy over localised 
reality. He feels that PG-13 gun violence is just the natural byproduct. “And 
remember that these movies are made by gigantic global conglomerates, sometimes 
with defence contracts, so they’re making movies and weapons at the same time. 
And their basic ideology is not one I agree with. It’s the ideology of 
anti-intellectualism in the American tradition. Anti-experts. The primacy of 
taking power. And the solving of every problem with a massive show of force.”

Assuming this is a trend, we should all know where it ends – in a mammoth, 
gun-blazing, U-certificate bloodbath, conceivably enacted by superheroes and 
Smurfs. But maybe, even at this late stage, there remains a way back, a means 
by which Hollywood can begin to cool – or at least regulate – its abiding love 
of firearms. The opportunity is there; it simply needs to be taken. When Miss 
Sloane lobbies for stricter gun control, she could be addressing the film 
industry itself.

Here, inevitably, we risk blundering into the quagmire of artistic 
responsibility; the notion of a direct causal link between screen violence and 
real violence. The issue is vexed, impossible to conclusively prove or 
disprove. Yes, cinema is guilty of fetishising firearms, but does that 
automatically make it an accessory to a crime? According to theCongressional 
Research Service <https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL32842.pdf>, there are more 
that 300m firearms owned in the US. That’s approximately one for every person; 
three times as many as there were 50 years ago. So what is more significant 
factor? Access to guns or access to movies about guns?

Erika Soto Lamb is the chief communications officer at Everytown 
<http://everytown.org/>, the largest US organisation for gun violence 
prevention. She says: “We know American movies are watched by people around the 
world, but only in America does the problem of gun violence exist on this 
scale. Instances of gun homicide are 25 times that of other developed 
countries. So the problem is not the entertainment industry; it’s access to 
firearms.”

Lamb feels that, if anything, Hollywood stars have been a help not a 
hindrance. She points out thatJulianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore> is the chair of Everytown’s 
“creative council”, monitoring the depiction of firearms in the film industry; 
that the group’s other members includeSteve Carell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevecarell>, Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> and JJ Abrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jjabrams>. “I’ll take the help of any 
American – but particularly those with a big public voice,” Lamb says. “Those 
in the entertainment industry have a huge cultural influence in how we talk 
about gun violence.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwill-hollywood-ever-end-its-love-affair-with-guns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63d216f618b2877fd7564e671b9b4c29ec9e9294%2F0_277_1998_2723%2F1998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20Hollywood%20ever%20end%20its%20love%20affair%20with%20guns%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwill-hollywood-ever-end-its-love-affair-with-guns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20Hollywood%20ever%20end%20its%20love%20affair%20with%20guns%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fwill-hollywood-ever-end-its-love-affair-with-guns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63d216f618b2877fd7564e671b9b4c29ec9e9294%2F0_277_1998_2723%2F1998.jpg>
 Jessica Chastain in Miss Sloane. Photograph: Allstar/Archery Pictures 
No doubt they do – but these people risk sending mixed messages, too. There is 
something rum about the sight ofSylvester Stallone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sylvester-stallone> earnestly calling 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/08/14/rambo-hates-guns-how-sylvester-stallone-became-the-most-anti-gun-celeb-in-hollywood.html>
 for an assault weapons ban while simultaneously plugging a movie calledBullet 
to the Head <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/151227/bullet-to-the-head>. 
OrLiam Neeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson> calling 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/01/14/liam-neeson-angers-far-right-by-claiming-america-has-too-many-fcking-guns_n_6471046.html>
 for the repeal of the second amendment at a press conference forTaken 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/taken-3>. A few years back, rocked by the 
mass shootings in Aurora and Sandy Hook,Harvey Weinstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> was sounding positively 
Damascene. “I have to choose films that aren’t violent, or aren’t as violent as 
they used to be,” he said. “The change starts here.” He then went on to produce
Jane Got a Gun <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-got-a-gun> and The 
Hateful Eight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>.

I am not sure these men are hypocrites. I think it is more complicated than 
that. More likely, their tensions reflect the ambivalent nature of the average 
film-goer; even the contradictory nature of the US as a whole. These people are 
spooked by the glint of a gun on the street and seduced by the sight of a gun 
on the screen. They are torn between what is right for their conscience and 
what is right for their bank balance. In trying to have it both ways, however, 
they further muddy the waters.

“The tragic irony is that Hollywood is full of good, well-meaning people,” 
says Gaydos. “I like these people. I agree with their politics. But it’s like 
they don’t see the gunplay in film and TV as being within their control. It’s a 
kind of cognitive dissonance. Maybe they don’t want to think too deeply about 
what they have become. Which is basically the advertising arm of the NRA.”

It is almost enough to make you cherish Miss Sloane for at least pushing back 
against the prevailing tide, despite the fact that the film itself is a muddle; 
too slick in some places, too soft-headed in others. And yet the US, by and 
large, did not want to hear what it has say. The film opened on a limited run 
on 25 November, Black Friday, and was promptly written off as a box-office dud. 
The same day, incidentally, saw the nation’s gun dealersreporting 
<http://theweek.com/speedreads/664096/gun-sales-online-shopping-surge-black-friday>
 record business. If you want some sense of the scale of Hollywood’s challenge, 
consider this statistic. More Americans bought a gun on Black Friday than a 
ticket to see Miss Sloane.

Miss Sloane is out in the UK on 24 February
 