
Virtual reality <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/virtual-reality> is 
coming. 2016 will see the release of the first serious consumer VR headsets for 
20 years.

In the first quarter of the year, VR pioneers Oculus (a subsidiary of 
Facebook, sincea $2bn (£1.3bn) buyout in March 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/26/facebook-buys-oculus-virtual-reality>
) will launch the consumer version of their Rift headset to the world. In 
April, Taiwan’s HTC will launch the Vive, another PC peripheral developed in 
conjunction with gaming firm Valve. And at some point in the year – likely to 
be the first half – Sony will launch its PlayStation VR, an add-on for the 
Playstation 4, which will bring VR into the living room.

Those headsets aren’t the first to market, by a long way. In 1995, Nintendo 
released the Virtual Boy, a monochromatic headset that promised to offer true 
3D graphics in gaming for the first time. A clunky, desk-mounted device that 
sold for $180 ($280 in 2015 dollars, or £189) and gave users splitting 
headaches, it sold barely a tenth of whatNintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo> had hoped and was 
discontinued less than a year later.

The Virtual Boy was the most prominent failure of the first wave of virtual 
reality, but all shared the same fate. The technology simply wasn’t there: 
screens weren’t high-resolution enough to be placed that close to eyes, they 
couldn’t refresh fast enough to present a smooth image, and the processors 
behind them couldn’t push enough pixels to render a convincing world. The 
failure of the 90s wave of virtual reality was so complete that it killed the 
field for a generation.

Much of the credit for the revival of VR has to go to one person: Palmer 
Luckey, the founder of Oculus. Launched to the public with a Kickstarter 
campaign, his Rift headset raised $2.5m in 2012. It set off the wave of 
interest in the field that continues to this day. An outsider to the technology 
industry, Luckey wasn’t party to the received wisdom that VR was a fool’s game. 
He thought it was cool, and so did more than 9,000 others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-gaming-takes-off-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe42671a79c6b16af11841df018bce3dac7484fae%2F0_192_2919_1751%2F2919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202016%20be%20the%20year%20virtual%20reality%20gaming%20takes%20off%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-gaming-takes-off-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202016%20be%20the%20year%20virtual%20reality%20gaming%20takes%20off%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-gaming-takes-off-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe42671a79c6b16af11841df018bce3dac7484fae%2F0_192_2919_1751%2F2919.jpg>
 Palmer Luckey, co-founder of Oculus. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
But just as important, in a roundabout way, was the smartphone. Although no 
one would have guessed it as Steve Jobs stood on stage and demonstrated the 
first iPhone, the technology required to make a top-tier smartphone has a 
remarkable similarity to the technology required to make convincing VR. 
High-resolution screens, accurate motion sensors and compact form factors are 
all great in a modern smartphone, but they’re also step one in making virtual 
reality, well, a reality.

This was first illustrated in 2015 as Google Cardboard and the Samsung Gear VR 
bootstrapped a cheap-and-cheerful form of VR using smartphones. By slotting a 
phone into a head-mounted display, they offer access to simple virtual worlds. 
Google Cardboard, for instance (literally a laser-cut piece of cardboard, used 
for holding a compatible smartphone in place) was given away for free with the 
New York Times in November, paired witha VR app from the paper 
<http://www.nytimes.com/newsgraphics/2015/nytvr/> used “to simulate richly 
immersive scenes from across the globe”.

But where the coming crop of headsets differ from these is in quality. Simply 
put: they’re really, really good.

A modern smartphone provides a strong base on which to build a virtual reality 
headset, but it can’t hold a candle to a dedicated device. And VR headsets have 
been getting better just as fast as smartphones have been improving. When I 
first used an Oculus Rift in 2013 I was underwhelmed. The unit, which was the 
second public prototype, was clunky and ugly even before I put it on. Wearing 
it felt like having uncomfortable ski goggles clamped to my face, and the 
resolution of the screen was low enough that it felt like staring at the world 
through a mesh door. The demo – which featured me strapped into a 
roller-coaster – did little to help, with its comparison to a fairground ride 
serving only to emphasise the gimmicky aspect of the whole thing.

Two years later, using the final pre-release version of the Rift at an event 
organised byFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, and I 
finally saw what the fuss was about. Wearing the device that will hit shelves 
in less than six months, I sat in a spaceship, gazing around at the cavernous 
hanger within which it sat. A string of lights turned on in front of my ship, 
which began accelerating faster and faster until, suddenly, it emerged from the 
side of an enormous capital ship (which I could see if I craned my neck behind 
me), and I was left floating in the calmness of space. That was when the 
enemies ported in …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-gaming-takes-off-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3f9cb32e6512afad27760fe1f3a5090f863f933%2F0_219_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202016%20be%20the%20year%20virtual%20reality%20gaming%20takes%20off%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-gaming-takes-off-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202016%20be%20the%20year%20virtual%20reality%20gaming%20takes%20off%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fvirtual-reality-gaming-takes-off-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3f9cb32e6512afad27760fe1f3a5090f863f933%2F0_219_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 A gamer with the PlayStation VR headset. Photograph: Chesnot/Getty Images 
The game, Eve Valkyrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/24/eve-valkyrie-preview-virtual-reality>
, has been in development for two years, beginning as a tech demo for the 
platform in 2013. It’s now set to be a launch game for the Rift and for Sony’s 
PlayStation VR, and for anyone who’s harboured secret dreams of dogfighting in 
space (a group surely larger than ever following the release of Star Wars).

But there’s a problem: you will have to take me on my word. VR is notoriously 
hard to actually sell. A video of Eve Valkyrie, watched on your screen, will 
look like nothing special – just another space game. Because, without the VR, 
that’s all it is. A video of me playing Eve Valkyrie would be even worse: a 
technology reporter sitting in a chair, gurning and writhing, with a bizarre 
black box strapped to his face. Even if I look like I’m having fun, it’s not 
the best way of selling the hardware.

Game developer Mike Bithell, whose Volume: Coda 
<http://blog.us.playstation.com/2015/10/22/introducing-volume-coda-free-expansion-for-playstation-vr/>
 will be one of the launch titles for the Playstation VR, agrees with the 
concern, but thinks that the wow factor will be enough to overcome that initial 
hurdle. “You undoubtedly look very silly wearing these things, but if they can 
get folks trying them on in shopping malls, or party games that demand to be 
played with friends, I can see it going big,” he says.

What does virtual reality mean for advertising in 2016?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/dec/03/virtual-reality-in-advertising-2016>
Because of that, the early penetration provided by cheaper versions of VR such 
asGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Cardboard could 
counterintuitively spoil VR’s chances of taking off. Many who were unimpressed 
by the smartphone-strapped-to-your-face approach will be unwilling to give VR a 
second chance, even if future versions are considerably better.

Not everyone is concerned about an initial hurdle, however. Brian Blau of 
analyst firm Gartner dismisses the worry: “I believe that once people get a 
basic understanding of the device they instantly understand its power, even 
without trying one on. The notion of a wearable computer isn’t science fiction 
these days and people have a good understanding of what VR could do for them.”

For Blau, the real difficulty comes in the next step: “The VR experience is 
completely dependent on the device and the quality of the content. I’m 
convinced that the initial devices being released in 2016 are good enough, but 
it’s the content that must keep users coming back. Is there enough good VR 
content in the pipeline to keep users engaged with the devices over time? From 
early indications there are some great VR games and video experiences so I’m 
not worried, but ultimately this is a question that we can’t answer until we 
see how the general public reacts to these new types of personal computing 
devices and content.”


Even if it overcomes those hurdles, there’s another one waiting around the 
corner: cost. Both the Rift and the Vive require a top-flight gaming PC, which 
costs about £1,000, to power the devices – which themselves are likely to start 
around £300. Against that, the PlayStation VR, which only requires a £300
PlayStation 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation-4> on top of 
its own (unannounced) price, is comparatively cheap.

As a result, “it’ll remain a super exciting early adopter tech until the price 
comes down”, says Bithell. “It’s important to remember though that, while the 
price will be high, we’re not talking ‘buying the first 3D TVs to hit the 
market’ prices here.” The prices will be probably high enough, however, to 
prevent an immediate repeat of the last great crossover hit from gaming, 
Nintendo’s Wii.

That’s a shame, because some of the most interesting uses of VR are a long way 
from traditional gaming. As well as the burgeoning field of 360˚ cinema, which 
places viewers in the centre of the shot and allows them to look around as they 
see fit, there’s the looming presence of Facebook in the field. The social 
network is not the first thing that comes to mind when one thinks of gaming – 
but that’s not whatMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> cares about either.

Future of virtual reality lies in the hands of developers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/sep/09/virtual-reality-developers-games-hollywood>
“Imagine enjoying a courtside seat at a game, studying in a classroom of 
students and teachers all over the world or consulting with a doctor 
face-to-face – just by putting on goggles in your home,” he wrote when he 
announced Facebook’s acquisition of the company. “Virtual reality was once the 
dream of science fiction. But the internet was also once a dream, and so were 
computers and smartphones.”

But that’s further down the line. For the next year, the question will be 
whether a virtual reality headset can take its place on the gaming stage – and 
if so, which one. Bithell thinks so. “As products, all three are solid and 
ready for that audience. While I’m not expecting to be throwing my TV in the 
tip next Christmas, I think they’ll have a strong start, then it becomes about 
sustaining that success with software and further iterations on the tech.”

Gartner’s Blau thinks that “a single year isn’t enough time to get an overall 
picture of the future of VR”, but that it is “certainly enough time to fully 
understand how the first few years of VR technologies will do in the hands of 
consumers”.

Even now, with months to go until release, the state of virtual reality tech 
impresses me. I’ve written it off before, worried that over-promising and 
under-delivering would combine with the “dork factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/07/will-virtual-reality-overcome-the-dork-factor-time-magazine-oculus-palmer-luckey>
” to produce something dead on arrival. Now, I’m only sure of one thing: I want 
one. If you want me, I’ll be the one in the corner, gurning and writhing with a 
smile on my face.
 