
Regular readers will recall the fierce parliamentary battle over the Housing 
and Planning Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/03/no-further-concessions-on-housing-bill-minister-vows>
, which came into law this May. In the Lords, peers launched a raft of 
unsuccessful amendments to try to water down the “reforms” of social housing.

The final Act included pay to stay, requiring higher-paid council tenants to 
pay a higher rent, a “voluntary” right to buy for housing association tenants, 
with the discounts paid for by a forced sale of higher value council 
properties, and the end of lifetime tenancies for council tenants, to be 
replaced by fixed term tenancies.

The Guardian view on the housing bill: ideological overreach | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/08/the-guardian-view-on-the-housing-bill-ideological-overreach>
Almost every section of the 218-page Act requires ministers to issue detailed 
regulations to put flesh on the bones. But seven months on and only one set of 
regulations has been issued – to protect green belt land – while officials have 
admitted that the extension of right to buyhas been stalled due to Brexit 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/dclg-right-to-buy-extension-delayed-by-brexit-vote/7017489.article>
(£).

Many housing commentators believe that some of the hardline measures in the 
Act are now starting to crumble and will never see the light of day.

This week, the new housing minister Gavin Barwell announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/government-pay-to-stay-council-tenants-george-osborne>
 that he was scrapping the pay to stay proposals and that councils and housing 
associations will instead continue to have discretion on whether to charge 
higher rents.

The voluntary right to buy and the sale of higher value council properties go 
hand in glove. Tenants will not be able to buy their homes if councils do not 
bring in enough income from sales, but expert opinion says that when this 
measure was included in the 2015 Conservative manifesto the figures were worked 
out on the back of a fag packet. When a council sells a higher value vacant 
property it is supposed to fund five separate items – pay the administration 
costs of the sale, refund the debt on the property, provide a replacement 
property, pay the Right to Buy discount, and support a brownfield regeneration 
fund.

When John Perry at the Chartered Institute of Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> looked at the figures he 
estimated that higher value sales would bring in between £1.2bn and £2.2bn a 
year, much less than the £4.5bn assumed by the Conservative party. The lower 
figure of £1.2bn would fund only half the amount needed for right to buy 
discounts and although the higher estimate of £2.2bn would fund discounts in 
full there would be no money left over to replace the sold properties.

Government decides against 'pay to stay' plan for higher-income council tenants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/government-pay-to-stay-council-tenants-george-osborne>
There are also doubts about whether housing associations will be compelled to 
offer the right to buy to their tenants. When the National Housing Federation 
brokered the deal with the government it balloted its members. A total of 323 
members voted for, but 279 voted against, abstained or did not respond. The 
sector’s regulator, the Homes andCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> Agency, has already admitted 
that the voluntary nature of the scheme means that housing associations will 
not be downgraded if they fail to comply. At worst, refusenik housing 
associations might be expelled from the Federation. So the Conservative 
manifesto commitment to offer the right to buy to all housing association 
tenants is looking rather flaky. Many commentators believe that the right to 
buy and higher value sales will be severely watered down or quietly shelved.

But although the Housing Act might be crumbling, many social housing tenants 
still face an uncertain future.

In scrapping the pay to stay Barwell made it clear that local authorities will 
need to be rigorous about renewing fixed term tenancies and that social housing 
“should be targeted on those on lower incomes.”

On top of this, the cap on overall benefits of £20,000 (£23,000 in London) 
will affect up to 150,000 households and perhaps 500,000 children. Families who 
are forced to pay very high rents will have to decide whether to pay their rent 
from their other benefits or to move to cheaper, often less secure housing.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 