
An autonomous Uber malfunctioned while in “self-driving mode” and caused a 
near collision inSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>, according to a business 
owner whose account raises new safety concerns about the unregulated technology 
launch.

The self-driving car – which Uber introduced without permits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
, as part of a testing program thatCalifornia has deemed illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
 – accelerated into an intersection while the light was still red and while the 
automation technology was clearly controlling the car, said Christopher Koff, 
owner of local cafe AK Subs.

Self-driving cars: Uber's open defiance of California shines light on brazen 
tactics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
“It looked like the car ran the red light on its own,” Koff, 49, said of the 
self-drivingUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> Volvo, which has 
a driver in the front seat who can take control when needed. Another car that 
had the green light had to “slam the brakes” to avoid a crash, he said.

Koff’s story, which advocacy group Consumer Watchdog shared 
<http://www.consumerwatchdog.org/resources/ltsoublet122016redated.pdf> with 
state officials on Tuesday, directly contradicts Uber’s public claims that
red-light violations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/uber-self-driving-cars-run-red-lights-san-francisco>
 have been the result of “human error” and that the drivers, not the 
technology, have failed to follow traffic laws.

The new allegations – which Uber denied and which cover an incident three 
weeks ago – have come to light days after the corporation openlyrefused to 
adhere to California regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
, claiming that its defiance of government was an “issue of principle”.

Uber’s autonomous cars were first spotted 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/09/21/self-driving-uber-vehicles-spotted-on-the-streets-of-san-francisco/>
 on San Francisco streets in September, but the company formallylaunched a pilot
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
 program to riders last week. California officials have repeatedly said the 
ride-sharing corporation, which is headquartered in San Francisco, needs 
testing permits, noting that 20 other companies have followed protocols.

But Uber has ignored attorney general Kamala Harris’s threat of legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-defies-california-self-driving-cars-san-francisco>
, claiming it does not need permits since the vehicles have drivers monitoring 
and citing the cars’ “state-of-the-art” technology and “core safety 
capabilities”.

Koff’s account, however, suggests that the products may not be ready for the 
road and that safety mechanisms are insufficient.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uber%20self-driving%20car%20drives%20through%20red%20light%20in%20San%20Francisco%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fuber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video&media=>
Uber self-driving car drives through red light in San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/dec/15/uber-self-driving-car-drives-through-red-light-in-san-francisco-video>
It was around 5am local time, and Koff said he was standing 10ft away from the 
vehicle when he saw it stopped at a light. While the driver was talking to a 
passenger, who had a laptop out, the car suddenly drove forward into the red, 
according to Koff. The driver’s hands were not on the wheel, he added.

“He was not driving. It was in self-driving mode,” said Koff. He noted that it 
was foggy at the time and that there were construction trucks nearby shining 
yellow lights that could have possibly interfered with the technology.

It would not be the first time the computer in a self-driving vehicle made a 
basic error with potentially life-threatening consequences.

In May, the “autopilot sensors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
” on a Tesla Motors car failed to distinguish a white tractor-trailer crossing 
the highway against a bright sky, leading to thefirst known death caused by a 
self-driving car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/02/elon-musk-self-driving-tesla-autopilot-joshua-brown-risks>
.

Uber also admitted to the Guardian on Monday that its San Francisco cars have 
a “problem” with the way theycross bike lanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/19/uber-self-driving-cars-bike-lanes-safety-san-francisco>
, and the company’sself-driving cars in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/uber-self-driving-pittsburgh-what-drivers-think>
 have reportedlycollided with other cars 
<http://www.wtae.com/article/self-driving-uber-involved-in-collision-downtown/8059178>
 and driven thewrong way 
<http://qz.com/798092/a-self-driving-uber-car-went-the-wrong-way-on-a-one-way-street-in-pittsburgh/>
 on a street.


'We're just rentals': Uber drivers ask where they fit in a self-driving future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/19/uber-self-driving-pittsburgh-what-drivers-think>
Spokeswoman Chelsea Kohler declined to provide details about Koff’s claims and 
sent the Guardian a statement identical to the one she provided last week, 
citing “human error”, adding: “This is why we believe so much in making the 
roads safer by building self-driving Ubers.”

Kohler did not respond to questions about how the company knows the driver was 
at fault and whether he faced consequences. Last week, she said two drivers had 
been suspended after the self-driving vehicles had been recorded running red 
lights.

Critics have argued that regardless of whether violations occur in 
self-driving mode or while a human is in control, Uber needs to be responsible 
for dangers posed by its cars – and should be embracing regulators, not 
shunning them.

“Someone could be hurt or maimed or paralyzed for the rest of their life 
because we’re trying to rush something out there,” said Koff, noting that he 
also recently saw a driver in an autonomous Uber scramble to take control when 
it was trying to navigate around a nearby bus and an approaching ambulance.

John M Simpson, privacy project director for Consumer Watchdog, who filed a 
report based on Koff’s incident, said he suspects Uber does not want to follow 
regulations that would require it to disclose details about errors to the 
government.

“Being able to understand the traffic signal and respond appropriately is a 
key requirement of any so-called self-driving technology,” said Simpson, who 
has called for criminal charges against Uber. “It obviously failed that test.”
 