
There have been huge changes for women in terms of employment in the past 
decades, with women moving into paid employment outside the home in ways that 
their grandmothers and even their mothers could only dream of. In the US, for 
the first time, in 2011, women made up slightly more than half the workforce. 
There are (some) high-profile women chief executives. There is a small but 
increasing number of female presidents.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are moving into jobs that used 
to be done by men. Even those women working in factories or sweatshops have 
more choice and independence than if they remained at home. But their 
experience is contradictory, as feminist economist Ruth Pearson points out:
 As individual workers they experienced both the liberating or the 
“empowering” impact of earning a regular wage, and of having increased autonomy 
over their economic lives; at the same time many were also well aware of the 
fact that their work was low paid, both in comparison with male workers but 
also with women workers employed in industrialised countries. 
This contradiction is widespread – although more women are working, they are 
often still worse paid than men, in part-time jobs or in the huge informal 
employment sector with little protection and few rights. In many places, the 
increase in women working is simply driven by the necessity of having two wages 
to make ends meet.

And at the top of industry and government, the faces remain stubbornly male. 
In fact, there is some evidence that the numbers of women are actually 
decreasing. As Sheryl Sandberg, chief operating officer of Facebook, said: 
“Women are not making it to the top of any profession in the world.”

It is true that progress in terms of gender equality is uneven, but the 
proponents of the argument that women are taking over the world at work need 
only look at statistics on employment, equal pay and political representation 
of men and women to see just how wrong they are.

Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> analyses of labour markets 
tend to look at women’s participation in paid employment compared with men’s – 
and not the huge informal sector in which so many women work; selling a handful 
of tomatoes that they have grown in their gardens, picking cotton or sewing at 
night long after their children have gone to bed. The number of women owning 
small and medium-sized businesses is estimated to be between 8 million and 10 
million, and although this is still far fewer than that for men owning similar 
enterprises, numbers are slowly growing. In most countries, the informal sector 
is far larger than the formal one. For example, in south Asia more than 80% of 
men and women work in the informal sector, and in sub-Saharan Africa it is 74% 
of women and 61% of men.

There are also more women in formal paid work today than at any point in 
history. They now make up about 40% of the global formal labour force, and 43% 
of the agricultural labour force, although this varies considerably from 
country to country. For example, in the Middle East and north Africa in 2010, 
only 21% of women participated in the formal labour market, compared with 71% 
in east Asia and the Pacific. Men’s labour participation rates tend to be more 
stable, both across countries and in different income groups.

While they cannot be said to be representative, the highest positions are even 
more elusive for women: only seven of 150 elected heads of state in the world 
are women, and only 11 of 192 heads of government. The situation is similar at 
the level of local government: female elected councillors are under-represented 
in all regions of the world and women mayors even more so. And many of the 
women in top positions are already lined up for success. The few women in the 
Forbes rich list mostly come from rich families or business dynasties such as 
Walmart or Apple.

In the private sector, women are on most boards of directors of large 
companies but their number remains low compared to that for men. Furthermore, 
the “glass ceiling” has hindered women’s access to leadership positions in 
private companies. This is especially notable in the largest corporations, 
which remain male dominated. Of the 500 largest corporations in the US, only 23 
have a female chief executive officer. That is just 4.6%.
 Feminism and Men by Nikki van der Gaag. Image: Zed Books Photograph: Zed Books
Even in the 27 member countries of the EU, in April 2013 women accounted for 
only 16.6% of board members of large publicly listed companies. This is up by 
5% since October 2010, when the European commission announced that it was 
considering “targeted initiatives to get more women into decision-making 
positions”. But one in four big companies still have no women on the board at 
all, and the target of 40% by 2020 is still a long way off. Although there is 
little data on women managers in the global south, one paper on the subject in 
Africa notes that: “The few figures available showed wide disparities, with 
Egypt at one end of the spectrum with only 10% of managers being women, while 
Botswana at the top end had 30%.”

Globally, research by accountancy firm Grant Thornton in 2013 found that women 
now fill 24% of senior management roles, a percentage that is gradually 
creeping up. But women make up only 16% of board members in the rich-world G7 
economies compared with 26% in the Bric economies (Brazil, Russia, India and 
China) and 38% in the Baltic countries. Interestingly, one possible reason for 
this is that women in the latter have more access to childcare from extended 
families or from women they employ as nannies.

This means that in Japan, 93 out of every 100 people in top positions are men, 
in the US this is 80 out of 100, and even in the countries at the top of the 
list, only China has more women than men, and this is a leap from 25% the 
previous year. And interestingly, despite many years of legislation for gender 
equality, Sweden and Norway are only 27 and 22 in the ranking of top countries.

Women don’t have power in other areas either – even in 2013, they still made 
up only 21.4% of parliamentarians. Most recent figures show that 17.2% of 
ministerial posts worldwide are held by women – up from 16.1% in 2008, which 
shows just how slow progress can be.

Lack of political voice is critical given that this is where laws and policies 
that affect whole populations – both male and female – are made. In the UK, 
Dame Helena Kennedy, QC, noted in a speech on International Women’s Day:
 “You don’t have to believe in patriarchy to realise that the law was made by 
men and is dominated by men, and that the same goes for parliament. Which means 
that in all the making of the law, women are largely absent. It is not 
surprising that the law doesn’t work for women.” 
Women who are in powerful positions often find they face a daily barrage of 
sexist behaviour from men, which in many countries is outlawed in the 
workplace. And often, even among the elite, women do not do as well as men. 
Eighty-eight per cent of women aged 30-39 see their earnings decline when they 
have children. A study of Harvard graduates in the US found that median 
earnings in 2005 were $90,000 for women but $162,500 for men. Among full-time, 
full-year workers, median earnings were $112,500 for women and $187,500 for men.

What is interesting too is that despite the fact that in many countries girls 
are forging ahead of boys when it comes to educational attainment, this doesn’t 
always pay dividends when it comes to employment. Despite the youth bulge in 
much of the global south, even secondary and university education, where girls 
and young women are excelling, are failing to translate into employment for 
many young women. As one report from the World Bank notes: “Progress in 
education is not matched by higher labour force participation. By age 24, women 
lag behind in all regions. In Latin America and the Caribbean, the gap is 
around 26 percentage points. The gap is even larger in south Asia, where 82% of 
men are active in the labour market, against just 28% of women.”

If we look at the gender pay gap, the story is no better. An International 
Labour Organisation (ILO) study of 83 countries found that women earn 10%-30% 
less than men. Even in the US in 2010, women working full-time still earned 
only 77% of the male wage. In sub-Saharan Africa and east Asia and the Pacific, 
young women aged 15-24 who are working earn only 82% and 84% respectively of 
the amount young men earn in an hour. According to the ILO, if present trends 
continue, it will be another 75 years before the principle of equal pay for 
work of equal value is achieved.

In some countries, however, in Latin America and the Caribbean and Europe and 
central Asia, young women are beginning to earn the same and sometimes even 
slightly more than young men. And younger women everywhere seem to be doing 
slightly better in terms of earnings than older women, except in Latin America 
and the Caribbean, perhaps owing to progress in female education, but also 
probably because older women have taken time out to have children while younger 
women have not. Or because the pay gap is such that in many countries, 
including, for example, Brazil, middle-class women in paid work outside the 
home have been able to afford to pay other, poorer women to care for their 
children.

The cost of women not being engaged in paid work is huge: according to one 
report the economic cost of failing to educate girls to the same standard as 
boys in 65 low- and middle-income countries was estimated at $92bn a year. And 
according to the IMF, whole economies are losing out – if women and men had 
more equality at work, it would increase GDP in the US by 5%, in Japan by 9% 
and in Egypt by 34%.

None of this would seem to back up Hanna Roisin’s theory that the world of 
work is becoming a place where “women hold all the cards”.

Case study: fair pay for domestic work in Nicaragua
 You no longer have to lower your head and wait for the man to tell you what 
to do; now we make our own decisions and share activities and responsibilities 
with our partners. 
(Adilia Amador Sevilla from Achuapa, Nicaragua)

An innovative development is taking place in Nicaragua. A number of 
cooperatives with Fairtrade contracts are including in the costs of production 
a component for the unpaid work of women. This is exceptional in a world which 
consistently undervalues women’s work and refuses either to measure it or count 
it as economic activity, despite feminist campaigning over several decades. The 
money raised is being used by the cooperatives for collective projects to 
empower women and improve gender balance in the wider community. As Adilia 
says, the relations between men and women are being radically altered.

The starting point came in 2008, when the cooperative Juan Francisco Paz Silva 
needed to renew its Community Trade (equivalent to Fairtrade) contract for 
sesame oil with the Body Shop. The co-op and Etico (an ethical trading company 
that works closely with the co-op) both had strong gender policies and were 
looking for ways of supporting women through this contract. The idea of 
including a component for women’s unpaid work came as a flash of inspiration, 
as a recognition and recompense for the contribution to production made by 
women.

This calculation, and its addition to the costs, was accepted by the Body 
Shop, although they wanted more justification and more detail on what was 
actually being paid for. Subsequently, some coffee buyers have also agreed to 
make a similar addition.

Since this development started, there have been more women than men joining 
the co-ops as new members, an increase in the numbers of women initiating new 
projects, and a remarkable 100% payback rate on loans made to women.

These changes have led to an increased sense of self-esteem among the women, 
who now have greater confidence to speak and participate in the affairs of the 
cooperatives.

• This is an edited extract from Feminism & Men by Nikki van der Gaag 
<http://zedbooks.co.uk/node/17821>, published by Zed Books. The author will be 
in discussion with Dean Peacock ofSonke Gender Justice 
<http://www.genderjustice.org.za/> at an event at Bookmarks bookshop 
<http://bookmarksbookshop.co.uk/events>, London, at 7pm on Thursday 2 October
 