
The British Wool Marketing Board has a slogan at once complacent and 
defensive. Man it reiterates throughout its explanatory literature, cannot 
match it. And no synthetic fibre can rival wool’s list of virtues: it is 
hard-wearing; its texture pleases the touch, its lustre the eye; it sheds rain 
and it insulates the wearer from variations in temperature; it accepts dye 
readily so that all sorts of subtleties of shade are possible; and it comes, in 
Britain at least, in so many different strengths and qualities that it is 
extraordinarily versatile.

Wool’s decline after the last war had more to do with image than performance. 
The post-war world indulged itself in a passion for the synthetic, the 
“miraculous” fruits of mankind’s ingenuity. Synthetics were by-products of rich 
industries like petro-chemicals which not only understood image-building but 
could afford it.

At some point in the eco-conscious early seventies the pendulum began its long 
swing back aided by industry-promoting bodies like the Wool Secretariat which 
fought image with image by creating the Woolmark, now an internationally 
recognised symbol of quality.

The erstwhile enemy, technology, was pressed into service to augment wool’s 
natural strengths so that now it can also be shrink-resistant, moth-proof, 
fire-proof, shower-proof, stain-proof, and durably pleated (which means not 
quite permanently pleated).

There remains one problem, however. Wool is still a labour intensive, 
fragmented industry and that makes the stuff expensive. There are about 90,000 
wool producers in the United Kingdom producing about 35 million kilos a year – 
about 420 kilos each from an average flock of between 100 and 200 sheep. 
Centuries of selective breeding have evolved nearly 40 different pure breeds 
and many cross-breds (whereas Australia effectively produces 706 million kilos 
a year from two breeds). That is a buyers’ headache. The modern spinning 
industry needs large quantities of wool of uniform type and quality.

To bring some order into this wild variety and to ensure that the 
predominantly small producers get a good and consistent price for their 
fleeces, the British Wool Marketing Board was set up in 1950. Only the Shetland 
Isles are excepted from the law which insists that any farmer with more than 
four adult sheep must register with the board. His wool is then graded (there 
are more than 200 grades of British wool), matched with “clips” of the same 
grade from other farms, and auctioned in large bales in Bradford or Edinburgh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fwool-glamour-image-sweaters-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aad41bd3a5b968e720219dcde5b3c1df07b1b8b%2F401_612_2787_3663%2F2787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wool%20aims%20to%20sharpen%20up%20its%20glamour%20image%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2012%20Aug%201981&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fwool-glamour-image-sweaters-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wool%20aims%20to%20sharpen%20up%20its%20glamour%20image%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2012%20Aug%201981&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fwool-glamour-image-sweaters-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aad41bd3a5b968e720219dcde5b3c1df07b1b8b%2F401_612_2787_3663%2F2787.jpg>
 Lady Diana wears a wool jumper decorated with sheep to Windsor Polo, January 
1981. Photograph: Tim Graham/Getty Images 
It is an efficient operation and an economically successful one as long as 
exports can be maintained (the Blackface sheep of Scotland and its north of 
England cousins provide mattress-filling for Italian factories; British tweed 
and worsted is prized everywhere) and the domestic spinning and weaving 
industries remain healthy.

The former has recently been threatened by strong sterling and the latter by 
that and by recession at home. So a little more image-building is necessary. 
Richard Passmore, the Board’s promotion manager, has decided that, with quality 
firmly established in the public consciousness, glamour – as in high fashion – 
is the next key word.

Most top designers would use wool from choice, anyway, but they would probably 
not give too much thought to its origins and since British weaving mills are 
not, on the whole, producing the most exciting fabric to be had, they would 
quite probably choose foreign cloth.

So, at the behest of the Board, some of Britain’s brightest young designers 
have incorporated garments in British wool in their autumn collections. Among 
them are Wendy Dagworthy, Victor Herbert, Paul Howie, Anna Roose, Mulberry, 
Paul Smith, Margaret Howell, Kay Cosserat, Alison Taylor, Bridget Foley, and 
the heavyweights Daks Simpson and Aquascutum.

Rich browns and rusts are strong colours for the autumn, which is fortuitous, 
since the conservative, tradition-steeped majority of British weavers favour 
bracken and heather shades. Niggles aside, it is a stunning cross-section of 
the most exciting in British design and there is plenty of sizzling winter 
colour among the knits – especially Paul Howie’s.

And high fashion aside, the Board produces a mail order leaflet packed with 
British wool goodies from tartan car rugs through fleece jerkins, and Fair Isle 
jerseys, to fleecy toy lambs and teddies. Available from the British Wool 
Marketing Board, PD Dept, Oak Mills, Clayton, Bradford, West Yorkshire BD14 6JD 
(0274 882091).
 