
Labour isn’t working. That is to say: working for a living is not providing a 
living, at least not for the 7.4 million people, which includes 2.6 million 
children,who are living in poverty despite being in working households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
.

And yet how can this be? Hasn’t there been a “jobs miracle” in this country? 
Unemployment is below 5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/16/uk-unemployment-rate-wage-growth-earnings-brexit-business-live>
, and there are more people at work here than at any time before. There has 
been steady if unspectacular economic growth over the past few years, and the
national minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/the-national-living-wage-and-what-it-means>
 has risen quite sharply, for the over-25s at least. The official numbers – 
some of them – look pretty good. Something is amiss.

Research by the New Policy Institute <http://npi.org.uk/> for the Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation <https://www.jrf.org.uk/> reveals that high housing costs, 
cuts to working-age benefits and persistently low wages combine to keep working 
people at or below poverty levels. This is an economy almost designed to keep 
people poor. And whereas work has always been seen as the route out of poverty, 
now the offer of a job – perhaps part-time, low-paid, insecure – offers no such 
guarantees at all. The economistJohn Philpott has written 
<http://thejobseconomist.blogspot.co.uk/> that we seem to have chosen “a 
low-productivity, low-real-wage-growth, path to full employment. We could, and 
should, have done better.”

There has been head-scratching in Westminster over why an economic argument 
that seemed to persuade people to believe in the government at the time of the 
May 2015 general election failed to work a year later during June’s EU 
referendum. Perhaps at that May election the government was being given the 
benefit of the doubt for one final time. After several years of a squeeze on 
household incomes some were finally beginning to feel a bit better off, as 
petrol prices fell and a supermarket price war made the weekly shop a little 
cheaper.

But a year on the underlying reality had not improved. A vote for Brexit 
allowed millions of people to declare that they were not happy, much to the 
surprise of the experts in London who thought that the aggregate macro-economic 
data told a reasonably good story.

The former chancellor, George Osborne, was one of the main victims of this 
popular revolt. He has started to reflect on all this, as he told the Financial 
Times in September. “There’s a pretty profound sense out there that the 
system’s not working for people, and instead of telling people, ‘Shut up, 
you’ve never had it so good,’ you’ve got to respond to that,” he said. “I’m not 
sure I fully understand it.”

The system is not working because while there are still well-paid and 
stimulating jobs for some, for many the prospects are miserable. The gap has 
grown between those who can look forward to something like a career, and those 
who move in and out of precarious and badly paid jobs.

If business leaders do not invest in higher “value-adding” enterprises, or 
choose not to build up the skills and capabilities of their staff, then this 
pattern will not change. There will be “gigs” for lowly paid service jobs, and 
not a lot else.

Even in a sector that could see substantial growth, such as long-term social 
care, the preferred business model is a low- wage one. This is a question of 
value and values. Businesses could opt for a different approach – higher wages, 
greater job stability, a better quality of service – but they would have to be 
sure the demand would be there for the more expensive option. Cuts to local 
government budgets means this is unlikely to be the case for a long time to 
come.

Ignore people for long enough and they may start shouting. That is one way of 
interpreting at least one aspect of the Brexit vote. Those at the top have to 
start listening, and acting.

We need to rethink workers’ rights in today’s gig economy | Matthew Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/rethink-work-taxes-review-modern-employment-gig-economy>
But at the business, energy and industrial strategy select committee hearing 
earlier this week 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/business-energy-industrial-strategy/news-parliament-2015/corporate-governance-ev3-16-17/>
 I saw how much still needs to change. Two distinguished FTSE 100 company 
chairmen, Sir John Hood from WPP, the advertising group, and Jan du Plessis, 
chairman of the mining company Rio Tinto, were asked for their views on the 
relationship between pay at the top and the rest of the organisation.

While Du Plessis described the role of a chief executive as “frighteningly 
important”, with all that this might imply for what they get paid, he felt that 
publishing the pay ratio between the top and others in the workforce would tell 
us “nothing”.

Hood said that he struggled to understand what the concept of an average 
worker really signified in a professional services firm such as his. “I’m not 
even sure what the word ‘worker’ means,” he said.

For more than two decades employers have told us that their people are “their 
biggest asset”. Now, apparently, they struggle to recognise who or what they 
are. Work should be a route to a better way of life, but this will happen only 
when we value, and pay, people properly. We can and should do better.
 