
Manchester

The lunch al desko plague has thankfully yet fully to infect Manchester, where 
most workers still take a proper break. Drinking at lunch – or dinner, as most 
people still call the midday meal (tea is what you trough in the evening) – is 
far from unusual, especially on Fridays, when whole teams hit the pub for a few 
cheeky pints to welcome the weekend. AtCreative Concern 
<http://www.creativeconcern.com>, an ethical media agency in the ever 
fashionable Northern Quarter (NQ), “gin o’clock” is a sacred institution on 
Fridays at 4pm, joined occasionally by “wine on Wednesdays” if they are having 
a particularly good (or bad) week.


While Manchester’s evening dining options are still not up to London’s 
standards, the formerCottonopolis 
<http://www.mosi.org.uk/explore-mosi/explore-revolution-manchester/revolution-manchester-themes/cottonopolis.aspx>
 excels at cheap lunch eats.Katsouris <http://www.katsourisdeli.co.uk/>, a deli 
on Deansgate, one of the main thoroughfares, has a queue out the door every 
day, offering a range of hot roast meat sarnies for £3.50 a pop (£4, if you 
plump for the mutant granary bap), as well as ridiculously large plates of 
paella and Middle Eastern meze.Philpotts <http://www.philpotts.co.uk/our-shops/>
, a superlative sandwich chain originally founded in Chester, puts Pret to 
shame, though the latter is always hoaching on Cross Street.

Manchester is also very good at soup: Shlurp <http://www.shlurp.co.uk>, on 
Brazennose Street, offers an ever-changing menu of seasonal, locally sourced 
soups, and is a favourite of council workers at the nearby cavernous town hall. 
Back in the NQ, there’s a bearded hippy, operating asLunchbrakes 
<http://lunchbrakes.com/>, who arrives on a bicycle and shouts, “Soup and 
sandwich guy” as he rocks up with a basket and two giant flasks of soup: £1.40 
for a small chicken korma soup, £2 for a large.

It doesn’t look very inviting – it’s a tiny, no-frills place hidden down a 
back alley – but it is all about the food

“Rice’n’three” is another popular choice, the speciality of a host of 
deceptively basic-looking takeaway joints that all compete with a range of 
tasty curries and rice for a fiver.Little Aladdin 
<http://www.yelp.co.uk/biz/little-aladdin-manchester> and This & That 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/apr/10/top-10-budget-restaurants-manchester>
, both in the NQ, come recommended, whilePhatha Phat 
<http://www.phathaphat-m3.co.uk>, on Butter Lane near the legal district, is 
popular with lunching lawyers.

Many people head to the Arndale shopping centre 
<https://www.manchesterarndale.com>, bypassing the bland chains of the upstairs 
food hall for the market on the high street side, where you can eat your way 
around the world from stall to stall. If the sun’s out (“cracking t’flags”as we 
say in the north-west 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=crackin%20flags>), everyone 
will rush outside and crowd into the few sunspots not overshadowed by Victorian 
architecture. The town hall’s monument steps offer a great people-watching 
spot, while the summer lawn inSpinningfields 
<http://www.spinningfieldsonline.com>, a new glitzy development around the law 
courts, is a catwalk on a summer day. HP

My lunch: Tom Gilbart, 34, barrister (pictured top left)
My brother-in-law David and I are both lawyers. We like having lunch together, 
but don’t often get the chance because of the demands of our jobs. When we do 
manage it, we love eating at a “rice’n’three” place. There are a few dotted 
around the city centre, but our favourite isPhatha Phat 
<http://www.phathaphat-m3.co.uk>. It’s only a few yards away from some of 
Manchester’s most glamorous restaurants, and I have to admit that it doesn’t 
look very inviting. It’s a tiny, no-frills place hidden down a back alley, but 
it is all about the food.

Every day, the staff prepare a fresh selection of curries, daals and kebabs, 
and you take your pick with some rice and a salad. It costs £5 and is great 
value. Today we’re having slow-cooked lamb nihari, sag aloo, lentil dal, pilau 
rice, green salad and seekh kebab. At lunch, the place heaves with a wide range 
of people, and on Thursdays and Fridays you are lucky to get a table. The food 
is fresh, full of flavour and spicy without being overpowering. This sort of 
restaurant represents what I love about my home city: friendly and lacking in 
pretension, but excellent quality.

Rome

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435748965809%2Fcf55c50d-0760-4187-950a-d0a5106eb668-1649x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what's%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what%27s%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435748965809%2Fcf55c50d-0760-4187-950a-d0a5106eb668-1649x2040.jpeg>
 Andrea Zazzara in Rome. Photograph: Chiara Goia for the Guardian 
Three years ago, the government carried out a survey to find out how many 
people ate their lunch at home. The answer was 74.3%, a figure that says much 
about a country in which less than half of women have a paid job; one in which 
most of the population lives and works in villages, towns or small cities, 
where employees and employers alike can often get home for lunch and maybe even 
fit in apisolino (nap) afterwards.


Shopping, or doing any other kind of business, in an Italian provincial town 
is usually impossible between 1.30 and 3pm. And many establishments don’t 
reopen till 3.30 or even 4pm. Government ministers have more than once railed 
against the Italian lunch break, orpausa pranzo. One called it “a ritual that 
brings the whole of Italy to a stop”.

But the picture among city office workers is very different. In Rome, tavola 
calda establishments, where the food is laid out on a bar, are popular with 
office workers. Sometimes, it is self-service; sometimes, there is a server 
haring between tables. But the customers all get to sit down and relax.

The right to a lunch break – like almost everything in Italy – is enshrined in 
a law. The length of break is up to employers, and one survey by an Italian 
online recruitment agency found that 30% of its clients seldom left their desks 
at lunchtime, with 60% saying that a shortage of time forced them to rush. Then 
again, the same survey found more than two-thirds took lunch breaks that lasted 
an hour or more. JH

It’s slow food – I would never eat a sandwich in a bar, absolutely not
Andrea Zazzara 
My lunch: Andrea Zazzara, 43, lawyer
I’m normally in court until 1pm or 1.30pm, and then I have to go back to my 
chambers, so I generally don’t get out to lunch before 2pm. There’s a nice 
little trattoria nearby, so if I go out with colleagues, we ring ahead and say 
how many we are. The chef, Pasquale, will then cook us a pasta. But we don’t 
know what it is. It’s a surprise. He has a lot of imagination and revisits 
traditional recipes. My favourite is a spaghetti alla carbonara that he makes 
with tuna and courgette.

There’s another fantastic place nearby. There are tables, though not many. 
It’s slow food, really: nice, healthy ingredients and genuine flavours. It’s a 
bit like having a meal at home. But it does get very crowded, because this is 
how Romans particularly like to have lunch.

If I don’t have enough time, I’ll go to a place selling pizza al taglio (pizza 
sold in rectangular slices). But I would never eat a sandwich in a bar. 
Absolutely not. I think they’re unhealthy. And they might have been prepared 
somewhere else.

New York 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435747183331%2Ff05a426e-af83-4af2-ab11-b0ece1a73927-1020x711.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what's%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what%27s%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435747183331%2Ff05a426e-af83-4af2-ab11-b0ece1a73927-1020x711.jpeg>
 Amber Hoover in New York. Photograph: Adam Golfer for the Guardian 
The cliched impressions that outsiders have of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City are largely false: people 
aren’t especially rude; life doesn’t move unusually fast, most of the time; in 
the average neighbourhood, it’s impossible to order takeout food in the middle 
of the night. Lunchtime in midtown and downtown Manhattan is an exception, 
though. For those who aren’t stuck with sandwiches or salads at their desks, 
it’s a genuinely frenetic event, marked by a crazy multiplicity of choices: 
traditional diners and delis; “fast casual” chains serving burgers, burritos or 
customised salads composed from a selection of 60 ingredients; plus the new 
generation of food trucks, serving curries and pad thai, lobster rolls and 
bacon-flavoured ice-cream.


“Haste seems to be a controlling factor in the luncheon of the worker,” 
declared an article in Munsey’s Magazine in 1901 
<http://exhibitions.nypl.org/lunchhour/exhibits/show/lunchhour/quick>, a few 
years before “automats 
<http://exhibitions.nypl.org/lunchhour/exhibits/show/lunchhour/automat>” 
appeared in Times Square, offering pies and cakes from behind individual 
glass-fronted compartments, to shave off a few more seconds. The automats are 
gone, but the sense of haste lives on – although it’s recently grown easier to 
stop and breathe, too, thanks to the increase in pedestrianised areas, peppered 
with tables and chairs, orchestrated by Michael Bloomberg’s visionary transport 
commissioner,Janette Sadik-Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2011/jan/05/new-york-transportation-chief>
.

Elsewhere in New York, far grander things are happening at lunchtime: the city 
was the birthplace of the original “power lunch” (the phrase wasprobably coined 
to describe meals at the Four Seasons restaurant, on 52nd Street 
<http://www.cnn.com/2012/09/14/world/americas/zagat-power-lunch-guide>) and of 
the uptown, upmarket “ladies who lunch”,a term popularised by New York magazine 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ladies_who_lunch>. For the non-plutocrats, 
meanwhile, it’s a speedy but crucial change of scenery in the working day, 
marked by an ever-increasing range of food options. There are a thousand more 
tranquil places on the planet to eat your lunch, of course, but what New 
Yorkers know is that plunging into the manic energy of the city for half an 
hour can be just as restorative. OB

Lunch is, all too frequently, doing whatever I’m doing at my desk
Amber Hoover 
My lunch: Amber Hoover, 37, foreign rights specialist at a publishing firm
I’m eating braised beef over spinach, sriracha string beans and some sort of 
spring greens with onions. And rhubarb tea. From a place calledDig Inn 
<https://www.diginn.com/> – it’s pretty healthy, I think, and a good way of 
getting vegetables in my system. They even have a phone app, so I can pay 
without having to bother with cash. Because I work in publishing, there’s an 
entertainment element to lunch that happens sometimes – once or twice a week, 
I’ll have a business lunch, a proper sit-down. The rest of the time, lunch is 
either like this or, all too frequently, crammed in at my desk while I keep 
doing whatever I’m doing.

Rio de Janeiro 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435747536306%2F2bb4b3d3-9b26-42c7-9f99-a48f6c22ab56-1681x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what's%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what%27s%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435747536306%2F2bb4b3d3-9b26-42c7-9f99-a48f6c22ab56-1681x2040.jpeg>
 Clara Araújo in Rio. Photograph: Lianne Milton for the Guardian 
Typically, Cariocas [residents of Rio de Janeiro] lunch at a restaurante à 
quilo, a buffet where the price is determined by the weight of food on the 
plate. Almost all offer staple Brazilian fare, such as rice,feijão (black 
beans), meat,farofa (toasted cassava flour) and salgadinhos (a variety of 
savoury snacks), alongside various other dishes.


Brazil has large and long-established Japanese, Italian and Middle Eastern 
communities, meaning sushi, spaghetti andesfihas (an unleavened bread pasty 
introduced by immigrants from Syria and Lebanon) are commonplace. Mostà quilo 
restaurants also boast a salad bar.

They vary enormously in quality, price and atmosphere, but the high-end ones 
operate with the efficiency of a well-oiled production line. Customers are 
given tickets on their way in, form an orderly queue around the buffet, weigh 
their plates, then sit at a table where one of the waiting staff takes their 
order for drinks. Plates are cleared as soon as they are empty. Customers then 
queue again in front of the cashier, before handing their receipt to a member 
of staff who lurks by the exit. Lunch is often the only meal these restaurants 
serve, so ensuring a rapid flow of customers is key.

For high-end professionals, there are more traditional restaurants with a set 
menu, but such establishments are relatively rare. At the other end of the 
scale, there are plenty oflanchonetes, snack bars that serve salgadinhos and 
fruit juices, where customers generally eat standing up.

No one eats at their desk, because it’s considered bad manners, and grossly 
unhygienic. The importance of the lunch hour is such that the specific timing 
of the break is often written into contracts. Many workers also get food 
vouchers as part of their pay, with a daily allowance of about R$20 (£4) loaded 
on to a credit card, accepted at mostà quilo restaurants. Eating out appeals to 
the Cariocas’ natural sociability, allowing colleagues to spend time together 
chewing the fat outside the office. BD

Leaving the office is important, a chance to nourish myself and my creativity
Clara Araújo 
My lunch: Clara Araújo, 33, journalist for Criar Brasil, a media NGO
Today, I’m eating what I usually have for lunch: on one side of the plate I 
have a bit of salad, because my mother taught me it was important to have 
something healthy; on the other is the stuff I really like – a slice of meat in 
mushroom sauce and a couple ofesfihas, one filled with meat and the other with 
cheese.

I come to this restaurant regularly with my colleagues. We like it because 
it’s nearby and the food is varied and excellent value. All theà quilo 
restaurants in the centre of Rio are busy and noisy at lunchtime, but this 
place is still kind of intimate. There are even a few booths where couples can 
sit close together. For me, leaving the office for lunch is important. I don’t 
cook, so bringing food into work is not an option. I also like to get away from 
work for a while. Leaving the office gives you a chance to nourish both your 
belly and your creativity. You get the chance to interact with your colleagues 
in a different way.

Nairobi
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435747805086%2F97402913-be73-440b-8351-7ce0a0284a39-1020x711.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what's%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what%27s%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435747805086%2F97402913-be73-440b-8351-7ce0a0284a39-1020x711.jpeg>
 Jack Okinyi in Nairobi. Photograph: Sven Torfinn for the Guardian 
Lunch is a raucous and communal affair in the Kenyan capital. For many, it’s 
an escape from the drudgery of desk jobs, and they gather in the large 
restaurants around the business district, where they share hour-long sit-down 
meals.


Not too many people have time for a proper breakfast before work. Cut-throat 
competition in schools means that the kids have to set off for class in the 
half-light of dawn; adults, too, generally leave home in the early hours, to 
beat the city’s notorious traffic. Lunch offers a welcome respite. At around 
midday, office workers troop out, in groups of three or four, and sometimes 
even seven or eight, to find a good spot in their favourite restaurant. Very 
few people go out for lunch alone.

Local tastes vary, depending on affordability and a region’s culinary 
traditions. Cuisine from western Kenya is the most widespread, with smoked, 
fried or whole fish, sometimes stewed in coconut sauce – a popular choice. 
Those with a more adventurous palate can try boiled tilapia fish head, or 
chicken, beef or stewed goat tripe (the latter is a favourite at the popular
Ranalo Foods 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Ranalo-Foods-Kosewe/487365784662499> downtown). 
The national dish,nyama choma (goat rib roasted on an open spit), is mostly 
enjoyed on weekend afternoons with a couple of drinks.

Some choose to have their lunch at cafeteria-style restaurants, where they 
queue and then go out into the sunshine with their plates. But on a recent, 
unusually chilly Wednesday afternoon (temperatures anywhere below 20C are 
considered too cold by Nairobians), two sisters who work in computer sales, 
Marissa Oluchina and Emma Mwongeli, explained that they prefer having lunch at 
Abu’s Place, located just behind the city’s main mosque, which specialises in 
coastal dishes. Abu’s mainstay is pilau (rice cooked in a seasoned broth), 
while Mwongeli names a dish from the mountain region ofKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> as her favourite: “There is nothing 
as good as a nice plate of githeri [a mix of stewed maize and beans], topped 
with fresh avocado, to set you off into the afternoon in a good mood.” MM

I rarely have time for breakfast or dinner, so lunch is important. I always 
eat with a friend or two
Jack Okinyi 
My lunch: Jack Okinyi, 40, owner of a social media consultancy
I rarely have time for dinner or even breakfast, so for me lunch is the most 
important meal. I usually grab a snack at dinner time (or sometimes forget to), 
but I can never miss lunch. I work in downtown Nairobi, so most of the time I 
take my lunch there.

My favourite restaurant is Ranalo Foods <http://www.ranalofoods.com/>, which 
specialises in the traditional cuisine of my Luo people;Barack Obama Sr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/29/barack-obama-srs-grave-makeover-hopes-us-president-may-visit>
 is one of our more famous kinsmen. Most of the time, I have fish and a brown 
millet cake known as ugali. The fish can be deep-fried, smoked or boiled, but 
it is always tilapia. The restaurant sources it from the freshwater Lake 
Victoria, which has very tasty fish.

I always eat with a friend or two, since I do not enjoy eating alone. My 
favourite lunch is deep-fried whole tilapia withosuga (wild vegetables in 
cream) and brown ugali. At KSh 750 (about £5), the meal is relatively 
expensive, but the restaurant is very clean and the service is world class.

Beijing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435748495125%2F1d1f14e5-11b9-4c96-9aa7-1259114ac596-929x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what's%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20lunches%20around%20the%20world%3A%20what%27s%20in%20your%20lunchbox%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Flunches-around-the-world-summer-food-special%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435748495125%2F1d1f14e5-11b9-4c96-9aa7-1259114ac596-929x1020.jpeg>
 Zhang Tong in Beijing. Photograph: James Wasserman for the Guardian 
When it comes to a working lunch in Beijing, you can’t beat the baozi, or 
Chinese steamed bun. Legend has it taht the baozi was invented more than 1,800 
years ago byZhuge Liang <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zhuge_Liang>, a Chinese 
statesman and military strategist who is also credited with creating the 
wheelbarrow. Facing crisis when his hungry, dehydrated soldiers began to fall 
ill, Zhuge dreamed up the idea of making doughy, human head-shaped buns packed 
with pork and beef. They are said to have cured his sick warriors and 
guaranteed subsequent battlefield success.


Today, baozi can be found the length and breadth of China, and are eaten 
morning, noon and night by those in search of a quick, nutritious and filling 
snack. In China’s capital, where office workers generally get 45 minutes to an 
hour for their break, a lunch on the run means a trip to somewhere such as the 
Qingfeng Steamed Stuffed Bun Shop. With 290 outlets, Qingfeng is one of the 
city’s top bun makers, churning out 16 tonnes of baozi each day for famished 
Beijingers.

The baozi is so much a part of popular culture that even president Xi Jinping 
popped into one of Qingfeng’s shops 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1392160/president-xi-buys-meal-beijing-bun-shop?page=all>
 in an attempt to burnish his man-of-the-people credentials. The restaurant 
subsequently created the “Zhu xi tao can” or “President Xi Jinping combo 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2014-01/03/content_17214891.htm>” meal, 
which includes buns stuffed with onion and pork, stir-fried pig liver and 
intestine, and a plate of greens.

There are pork and spring onion buns, pork and cabbage buns, prawn and 
vegetable buns, and vegetarian buns, each costing up to 4.5 yuan (46p). Also on 
the menu are bowls of pumpkin porridge – a snip at 3 yuan (30p) – pork and 
spring onion buns, which cost 3.5 yuan each (36p), and bowls of spicy cold 
noodles that sell for 9 yuan (92p). TP Additional reporting by Luna Lin

It’s fast, it tastes OK and it’s safe. I look for fast-food chains that are 
clean and tidy
Zhang Tong 
My lunch: Zhang Tong, 43, insurance salesman
I’ll have steamed buns three or four times a week, and usually I’ll have six 
or nine buns a time – they’re made of flour and are stuffed with vegetables or 
meat. There are vegetarian ones, shrimp ones and pork ones, too. They cost 
15-20 yuan (£1.50-£2). It is fast food, it tastes OK and it’s safe. Because of 
all the food scandals in China, I look for restaurants that are clean and tidy.

In Beijing, common folk also go to restaurants that sell zhajiang mian – fried 
sauce noodles. There’s one just around the corner from here. The food is great, 
but the restaurant isn’t so clean. Sometimes I will eat with my colleagues and 
sometimes I dine alone – Chinese fast food chains are my go-to choices. I 
usually spend about 30 minutes having lunch. I hardly ever eat at my desk, 
because my job requires me to spend most of my working hours outside the office.
 