
The ancient church of Eklisia was once the heart of Gümüşlük. A tiny Byzantine 
building with a rounded roof and stone walls draped in bougainvillea, it squats 
on a hill above the village on Turkey’s south-west coast, looking out over a 
cove cluttered with small yachts and fishing boats to the shimmering sapphire 
of the Aegean.

For a few years, from 2004, it was home to the Gümüşlük international 
classical music festival, which ran for several weeks in late summer and became 
the focal point of the village’s tourist calendar.

By the time I arrive, however, the festival has moved elsewhere. (“Personal 
tensions,” I am told. “Don’t even ask.”) Eklisia, just 30 minutes from popular 
Bodrum, is in search of a new identity.

A new open-air bar next to the church affords golden sunset views, but it is 
tucked away from the main thoroughfare of restaurants along the beach, which 
means it is missed by anyone who doesn’t know it’s there. Consequently, its 
sparse clientele is made up of loyal old-timers. Turkish rakı is the drink of 
choice. An elderly DJ pumps out a persistently incongruous playlist of deep 
house.

As a place to volunteer, it is idyllic and frustrating in equal measure. The 
volunteers sleep on mattresses on the church floor and, beyond some minimal 
cleaning and cooking for the household, have no work to do at all. Requests to 
the owner for guidance procure vague mumbles about doing some gardening – in a 
“garden” that is composed entirely of gravel and cacti.

This leaves us with long, languid days in which we explore the ruined, 
half-submerged city of Myndos, venture inland to visit ruined churches and 
hammams, take picnics ofbörek (filled pastries made of a thin flaky dough) and 
fresh fruit to deserted coves, and snorkel among the rocks, watching darting 
silver fish.

It should be the perfect holiday. But volunteering tends to change your 
expectations of a trip. Living for free and searching for a deeper engagement 
with a place, we find our lazy days tainted with guilt and so resolve to get 
creative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fvolunteering-holidays-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413368080069%2F3dbba9be-2fd5-4023-b7dd-637a43e23b44-2060x1376.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Working%20holidays%3A%20raising%20the%20bar%20in%20Turkey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fvolunteering-holidays-turkey%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Working%20holidays%3A%20raising%20the%20bar%20in%20Turkey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F18%2Fvolunteering-holidays-turkey%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413368080069%2F3dbba9be-2fd5-4023-b7dd-637a43e23b44-2060x1376.jpeg>
 Cat Rainsford harvesting cactus fruits 
Using a fork attached to a long pole we harvest the cactus fruits from the 
garden, which we use to make jams and juices which we incorporate into a new 
drinks list for the bar. We plant herbs and chillies, and build a trellis for 
climbing plants. Finally, we spruce up the bar and plan a party.

As the DJ flatly refuses to deviate from his playlist, we build a fire pit 
some distance away, gather all the instruments we can find and put a call out 
for local musicians. We make posters promising all sorts of things we’re not 
sure we can provide and hope for the best.

On the night, the bar is more crowded than I’ve ever seen it. Our guitarists 
are joined by a cellist from the village and drums are passed around. The 
owner’s girlfriend, a professional harpist who practises in the church, is 
persuaded to play. Bach vies with the defiant pump of deep house under the 
rising moon. It’s not quite the much-missed classical festival, but the village 
pulses with music once more.

• Cat organised her trip through workaway.info <http://www.workaway.info/>, 
which features thousands of volunteering opportunities
 