
The World Bank has called for a fresh drive to tackle inequality after warning 
that the gap between rich and poor risks thwartingits ambition of eliminating 
extreme poverty by 2030 
<https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/how-world-bank-president-plans-eradicate-poverty-2030>
.

Ahead of its annual meeting with the IMF in Washington DC this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/global-economy-free-market-crossroads-only-state-offers-right-path>
, the Bank said that the number of people living on less than $1.90 a day – the
accepted benchmark for extreme poverty 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/overview> – had continued to fall 
despite the sluggishness of the global economy in the years after the financial 
crisis.

But it said faster growth and a range of anti-inequality measures would be 
needed to meet the twin goals set by its president,Jim Yong Kim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jim-yong-kim>: reducing poverty from just 
under 11% of the global population to 3% and boosting the incomes of the bottom 
40% of the population in each country.

Brexit, low growth and the spectre of protectionism stalk an IMF in sombre mood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/01/imf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit>
In the first edition of a new annual study – Poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/poverty> and Shared Prosperity – which 
will track trends in global poverty, the Bank said the number of people living 
on less than $1.90 a day had fallen by 100 million to 767 million between 2012 
and 2013, the latest year for which comprehensive data is available.

“It’s remarkable that countries have continued to reduce poverty and boost 
shared prosperity at a time when the global economy is underperforming – but 
still far too many people live with far too little,” said Kim.


“Unless we can resume faster global growth and reduce inequality, we risk 
missing ourWorld Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank> target 
of ending extreme poverty by 2030. The message is clear: to end poverty, we 
must make growth work for the poorest, and one of the surest ways to do that is 
to reduce high inequality, especially in those countries where many poor people 
live.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fworld-bank-renews-drive-against-inequality-imf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055c393bc90e3bc671e4dc83f6b2b6fbc90aad42%2F0_25_4752_2852%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Bank%20renews%20drive%20against%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fworld-bank-renews-drive-against-inequality-imf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Bank%20renews%20drive%20against%20inequality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fworld-bank-renews-drive-against-inequality-imf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F055c393bc90e3bc671e4dc83f6b2b6fbc90aad42%2F0_25_4752_2852%2F4752.jpg>
 Jim Yong Kim, president of the World Bank. Photograph: Saurabh Das/AP 
Progress in 2013 was due largely to developments in China, Indonesia and India 
– leaving half of the world’s poor living in sub-Saharan Africa. Poverty rates 
have fallen to 3.5% in East Asia and the Pacific – the region that includes 
China – and to 15% in South Asia, the region that includes India, but remain at 
41% in sub-Saharan Africa.


The Bank found that in 60 of the 83 countries studied, average incomes rose 
for the bottom 40% between 2008 and 2013 despite the deepest global recession 
of the post-second world war era.

Amid a growing backlash against globalisation driven by concerns that the rich 
have captured the gains of free trade, the Bank said global inequality had 
declined consistently since 1990. The narrowing of the gap has relied on fast 
growth in the world’s biggest developing countries, particularly China and 
India.

Historic opportunity to end poverty will be lost if we don’t tackle climate 
change | Jim Yong Kim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/23/historic-opportunity-end-poverty-will-be-lost-if-we-dont-tackle-climate-change>
The Bank said within individual countries, the improvement had been patchier. 
In 34 of the 83 countries monitored, income gaps had widened since 2008, with 
incomes of the richest 60% rising more quickly than those of the poorest 40%.

After studying a group of countries including Brazil, Cambodia, Mali, Peru and 
Tanzania, the Bank said a six-pronged approach was needed to tackle inequality.

That means:

 *  early childhood action focused on better nutrition 

 * universal health coverage 

 * universal access to good schools 

 * cash transfers to poor families 

 * better roads and electrification 

 * progressive taxation to transfer resources from rich to poor. 
“Some of these measures can rapidly affect income inequality. Others deliver 
benefits more gradually. None is a miracle cure,” said Kim. “But all are 
supported by strong evidence, and many are within the financial and technical 
reach of countries. Adopting the same policies doesn’t mean that all countries 
will get the same results, but the policies we’ve identified have worked 
repeatedly in different settings around the world.”
 