
Countries that fail to tackle the malnourishment and poor growth of their 
children face being named and shamed at the World Economic Forum as part of a 
mission to rid the world of stunting,the president of the World Bank told Sarah 
Boseley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/30/world-bank-name-and-shame-countries-fail-stunted-children>
.

Jim Yong Kim <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jim-yong-kim> said that 
stunting, which refers to children with a height well below the average for 
their age, is a humanitarian disaster and an economic issue that holds back 
nations. Kim said he would use the forum in Davos to point the finger at 
countries that neglect the issue: 24% of the world’s 667 million children under 
five are so under-nourished they are too short for their age.

He highlighted one of the world’s success stories on tackling stunting: Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/30/the-country-that-cracked-its-stunting-crisis>
, whereDan Collyns <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dan-collyns> reports 
thatstunting among children under five has dropped from 29% to 14% 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/health/three-factors-halving-childhood-stunting-peru-over-just-decade>
 in the seven years between 2007 and 2014, through a coordinated programme of 
cash transfers tied to regular health checks for children.

However, all countries are lagging behind on the nine global health targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/21/world-lagging-behind-global-health-targets-sustainable-development-goals-2030-lancet>
 for 2030, according to a report published in the Lancet, including the 
elimination of major disease epidemics and the reduction of health issues such 
as childhood obesity.

Elsewhere on the site
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fworld-bank-issues-warning-on-stunting-children-points-to-peru-success-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F085677918c8d20a421c2d525ab3e7661657d7af5%2F0_43_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Bank%20issues%20warning%20on%20stunting%20in%20children%2C%20but%20points%20to%20Peru's%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fworld-bank-issues-warning-on-stunting-children-points-to-peru-success-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Bank%20issues%20warning%20on%20stunting%20in%20children%2C%20but%20points%20to%20Peru%27s%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fworld-bank-issues-warning-on-stunting-children-points-to-peru-success-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F085677918c8d20a421c2d525ab3e7661657d7af5%2F0_43_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
‘Red tape’ locking small island states out of billions in climate funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/20/red-tape-locking-small-island-states-out-of-billions-in-climate-funds-commonwealth>

Ecuador’s foreign minister steps up campaign for UN tax body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/21/ecuador-foreign-minister-guillaume-long-steps-up-campaign-for-un-tax-body>

Sex workers in poor countries have no voice on UN consultation, activists say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/21/united-nations-consultation-sex-workers-poor-countries-no-voice-activists-say>

Swaziland’s reed dance: cultural celebration or sleazy royal ritual? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/22/swaziland-reed-dance-cultural-celebration-or-sleazy-royal-ritual-umhlanga>

UK officials cite ‘heightened scrutiny’ as cost of aid fraud breaks £1m barrier
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/23/uk-officials-cite-heightened-scrutiny-cost-aid-breaks-1m-barrier>

Who’s WHO? The six candidates for next World Health Organisation chief  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/23/world-health-organisation-director-general-six-candidates>

Women gain ground in Jordan election despite yawning gender gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/23/jordan-election-women-gain-ground-gender-gap>

More than a quarter of UK aid budget to fall prey to rival ministries by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/24/more-than-a-quarter-of-uk-aid-budget-to-fall-prey-to-rival-ministries-by-2020>

Chess centre in Kampala slum prepares children for next move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/29/chess-centre-in-kampala-slum-prepares-children-to-make-their-next-move>


From civil war to gang war: violence drives Salvadorans to makeshift camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/30/el-salvador-gang-violence-displaced-refugees-camp>

EU signs deal to deport unlimited numbers of Afghan asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/03/eu-european-union-signs-deal-deport-unlimited-numbers-afghan-asylum-seekers-afghanistan>

Opinion

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fworld-bank-issues-warning-on-stunting-children-points-to-peru-success-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e4e2cd05ae57c6b1a30c1f017aad0c9abceac2%2F0_198_2910_1747%2F2910.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Bank%20issues%20warning%20on%20stunting%20in%20children%2C%20but%20points%20to%20Peru's%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fworld-bank-issues-warning-on-stunting-children-points-to-peru-success-poverty-matters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Bank%20issues%20warning%20on%20stunting%20in%20children%2C%20but%20points%20to%20Peru%27s%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fworld-bank-issues-warning-on-stunting-children-points-to-peru-success-poverty-matters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e4e2cd05ae57c6b1a30c1f017aad0c9abceac2%2F0_198_2910_1747%2F2910.jpg>
Irina Bokova: At last the destruction of heritage is recognised as weapon of 
war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/28/destruction-of-heritage-weapon-of-war-timbuktu-shrines-irina-bokova>


Jonathan Glennie: If Colombia is to realise its potential, people must vote 
for peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/26/if-colombia-is-to-realise-potential-people-must-vote-for-peace-reject-violence>

Oluseun Onigbinde: Will Nigeria be left to repent at leisure if national 
assets are sold? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/01/nigeria-recession-repent-at-leisure-national-assets-sold>

Multimedia


‘My kids hate me … they remind me I sold them’: slavery and child labour in 
Ghana – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/30/ghana-slavery-child-labour-kids-hate-me-i-sold-them-in-pictures>

Sugaring the pill: tackling taboos on contraception in Nigeria – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/26/sugar-the-pill-tackling-taboo-family-planning-nigeria-in-pictures-world-contraception-day>

What you said

On Jonathan Glennie’s opinion piece about the vote on the peace accord in 
Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/26/if-colombia-is-to-realise-potential-people-must-vote-for-peace-reject-violence>
,wightanger said:


Sadly, unlike fellow Latin states, Colombia still has had no land reforms with 
about 40% of the country still “quasi-owned” (including how/who to vote for) by 
the traditional rural landowning elite and notably only around 15% of the total 
population actually voting.

Let’s hope that peace, both on paper and on the ground, will become a reality 
for ordinary Colombians, with some real steps towards both land reform and 
redress of a glaring inequality for such a small overall population.

Highlight from the blogosphere 

Writing for Humanosphere, Joanne Lu looks at a new report from Plan 
International, which says thatequality is impossible without better data on 
girls 
<http://www.humanosphere.org/basics/2016/10/gender-equality-impossible-without-better-data-girls-new-report-says/>
, and that the lack of credible statistics is rendering them invisible to 
governments and policymakers.

And finally …


Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian> on Twitter, and join Guardian Global 
development on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 