
As recent clashes in the north-west town of Wau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/05/violence-erupts-again-in-south-sudan-wau-as-faith-in-peace-deal-flounders>
 andJuba <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-36744636> have shown, South 
Sudan still has a long way to go to dispel entrenched mistrust and break the 
tussle for power between factions that fight on, five years after wegained 
independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/10/south-sudan-celebrates-independence>
.

At least 43 people died in the fighting between militia factions, and more than
70,000 civilians <http://www.un.org/press/en/2016/sc12431.doc.htm> have been 
forced to seek shelter in churches, the UN compound and surrounding villages.

When the conflict first broke out in the capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/23/south-sudan-state-that-fell-apart-in-a-week>
, Juba, in December 2013, it was described – at least to the outside world – as 
a conflict of personalities between two leading politicians, president Salva 
Kiir and former vice-president Riek Machar. There werepeace negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/27/south-sudan-president-salva-kiir-signs-peace-deal-despite-serious-reservations>
 last year in Addis Ababa, overseen by the Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development (IGAD), at which I was a member of the ecumenical delegation. Two 
months ago, Kiir and Machar finally agreed to share power in a transitional 
government.

Violence erupts again in South Sudan as faith in peace deal flounders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/05/violence-erupts-again-in-south-sudan-wau-as-faith-in-peace-deal-flounders>
History has taught us that after the signing of a peace agreement comes the 
arduous task of rebuilding our broken pieces – social and political 
relationships, the fragile economy, and the infrastructure of our states, 
devastated by the conflict. But what we are dealing with is a conflict deeply 
rooted in complex political and ethnic divisions that didn’t disappear the 
momentSouth Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> came into 
being on 9 July 2011.

Many people in South Sudan are wounded in spirit. The pain of decades of war 
has not been addressed; our hard-won independence did not bring justice for the 
many who had suffered. No one has been convicted of crimes against humanity, 
and people have not been able to tell their stories, to relate what happened to 
them and their family members. Without reconciliation and forgiveness, our 
wounds will remain open.

We in the South Sudan Council of Churches 
<http://www.fecclaha.org/index.php?option=com_k2&view=item&layout=item&id=97&Itemid=183>
 have called on the government to set up an independent committee to 
investigate the killings in Wau. Our greatest influence with the government is 
achieved through advocacy and an insistence that there is an appeal for calm, 
and also as a church, working with different ethnic groups on reconciliation 
and peace-building in our dioceses and parishes. We continue to appeal to the 
entire population to embrace peaceful means of resolving conflicts.

Churches represent perhaps the only “institution” that transcends ethnic and 
regional differences. The survivors of violence seek sanctuary in the safest 
place they know, which is often the local church compound. We do all that we 
can to give the suffering the food and water they need, as well as spiritual 
comfort.

As faith leaders, we not only represented our congregations and parishes in 
Addis Ababa, we were also able to bear witness to their suffering. The 
suffering of families fleeing their homes and living in dire conditions along 
the Nile; of mothers mourning the senseless deaths of their husbands and young 
sons; of children sick with disease, families surviving on very little food, 
and young people unable to finish their education.

Constant unrest impedes the delivery of much-needed aid to suffering people. 
International aid agencies likeCafod <http://cafod.org.uk/> and Trocaire 
<https://www.trocaire.org/>, with their local partners, have kept people alive 
with basic necessities such as food, clean water and sanitation. We badly need 
their humanitarian support to continue.

We are a people of one country. Let us not dare to lose this great, God-given 
opportunity to build a vision of peace through mutual dialogue for the whole of 
South Sudan. Our leadership must work together, with sincerity and courage, to 
bring the people of South Sudan the sustainable peace and security they so 
deserve.
 