Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbgQcilG-7as&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbgQcilG-7as>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbgQcilG-7as&media=>
While other superhero sagas have waned, withered and eventually dwindled to 
nothing in the past decade, X-Men has risen from the abject horrors of 2006’s 
The Last Stand to the mighty heights of 2014’s remarkably watchable Days of 
Future Past. Now Messrs McAvoy and Fassbender are returning with the wonderful 
J-Law in tow for May 2016’sX-Men: Apocalypse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-apocalypse>, the first trailer for 
which has just dropped. So what does it tell us?

X-Men: Days of Future Past review - 'like trying to follow two games of chess 
at once'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/13/x-men-days-of-future-past-review> 
Oscar Isaac’s Apocalypse looks like Darth Vader crossed with something out of 
Assassin’s Creed

Awakened from his slumber after several millennia, the godlike mutant 
Apocalypse is a chrome and matt black monstrosity, his metallic carapace 
apparently fused to his humanoid torso so that it’s impossible to see where one 
begins and the other ends.20th Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/20th-century-fox> have wisely opted to use 
extensive makeup instead of CGI – learning, perhaps, from Marvel’s rubbish 
rendition of Thanos in Guardians of the Galaxy. This means we’ll actually get 
to see the excellent Isaac under the mask, rather than his motion-captured 
spectre.

The X-Men are his tiny, mewling, pathetic puppets


The only drawback is that Isaac is only 5ft 7in tall. But the supervillain 
appears to be capable of size-shifting so no one’s going to be pushing him 
around any time soon. In fact, both James McAvoy’s Professor X and Michael 
Fassbender’s Magneto appear utterly powerless in the face of their new enemy. 
This looks like one of those X-Men movies in which the two former friends are 
forced to pair up to take on a greater foe – which could pay dividends if it 
works as well as it did in X-Men: Days of Future Past.

Bryan Singer is building a Ghostbusters-like backstory of ancient deities

In the comics, Apocalypse was the first mutant human, born more than 5,000 
years ago. In the most famous instalment, 1995’s Age of Apocalypse, the 
immortal emerges as the new ruler of an Earth on which mutants have enslaved 
their human counterparts. To enhance the backstory on film, it looks as if 
Singer has borrowed liberally from supernatural adventure fantasy fare such as 
Indiana Jones, The Mummy and Ghostbusters. Apocalypse explains that he has 
previously been known as Ra, Krishna and Yahweh. CIA agent Moira MacTaggert 
(Rose Byrne) is on hand to explain that the bad guy will recruit four followers 
to help him in his reign of destruction. Any minute now we can expect him to 
transform into theStay Puft marshmallow man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d-sALU_hveA> and go trampling round Manhattan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fx-men-apocalypse-trailer-oscar-isaac-sophie-turner-james-mcavoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52352be23d34c740fee43490b07f6da092369711%2F0_89_1182_709%2F1182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=X-Men%3A%20Apocalypse%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20full%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fx-men-apocalypse-trailer-oscar-isaac-sophie-turner-james-mcavoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=X-Men%3A%20Apocalypse%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20the%20first%20full%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fx-men-apocalypse-trailer-oscar-isaac-sophie-turner-james-mcavoy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52352be23d34c740fee43490b07f6da092369711%2F0_89_1182_709%2F1182.jpg>
 Apocalypse soon … Olivia Munn as Psylocke, Oscar Isaac as Apocalypse and 
Michael Fassbender as Magneto 
The new X-Men babies might be more than just hangers-on

Apocalypse could well be Jennifer Lawrence’s final turn as the mutant 
Mystique, whose appearance in the X-Men movies has coincided with the saga’s 
best reviews and performances at the box office. In order to fill the void she 
would leave, Fox has drafted in the likes of Game of Thrones’ Sophie Turner as 
the new Jean Grey, Olivia Munn as Psylocke and Alexandra Shipp as Storm. It 
looks as if they will each have a greater part to play than the superfluous Gap 
model teens who cluttered up the misfiring X-Men: First Class. We also get a 
brief glimpse of Evan Peters’s fabulously languid, time-tripping Quicksilver, 
who will surely be called upon to help out in more extended circumstances than 
his brilliant cameo in Days of Future Past.

James McAvoy’s Professor X is finally bald

In the comics, Charles Xavier is folically challenged from birth, slowly 
losing his hair over time. But Fox has so far chosen to give us a lushly 
coiffed version of the character in the shape of the excellent McAvoy, 
presumably to help differentiate him from the older Patrick Stewart. Now, in 
the closing shot of the trailer, we finally get to see the Scottish actor in 
canonically correct form, shaven-headed and in his iconic wheelchair. It’s a 
fine bonce, though the lack of hair has the unfortunate side-effect of making 
McAvoy look younger and less statesmanlike than he has previously appeared. How 
will he lose his hair? Chances are it will have something to do with being 
scared half to death by the sudden arrival on Earth of his terrifyingly 
omnipotent new nemesis.
 