
As incredible as it may seem to some veteran gamers, the Xbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> 360 is now 10 years old. Launched 
on 22 November in the US and 2 December in Europe, Microsoft’s second console 
arrived at a time in which HD televisions were just about taking off, and 
broadband internet connections were accelerating. Consequently, while the 
PlayStation 3 floundered in development hell, it was the 360 that brought in a 
new era of high-definition, highly connected play.

It was the Xbox 360 that really brought seamless social gaming to the console 
space. Although previous consoles had included internet connectivity,Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> made Xbox Live the centre of 
the gaming experience, providing players with intuitive online multiplayer 
experiences, as well as the ability to chat with friends as they played. The 
arrival of the Gamerscore and achievement points also brought a new high-score 
metric to gaming, giving owners a chance to compare themselves with their 
mates, and providing developers with a new way to get players really exploring 
their worlds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fxbox-360-at-10-memories-microsoft-console%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2fdcbbc51ed3787768928a02282947740126d2%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Xbox%20360%20at%2010%3A%20what%20are%20your%20memories%20of%20Microsoft's%20wonder%20console%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fxbox-360-at-10-memories-microsoft-console%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Xbox%20360%20at%2010%3A%20what%20are%20your%20memories%20of%20Microsoft%27s%20wonder%20console%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fxbox-360-at-10-memories-microsoft-console%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e2fdcbbc51ed3787768928a02282947740126d2%2F0_0_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 The Xbox 360 Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2 limited edition console. 
Photograph: Dan Steinberg/AP 
It was on Xbox 360 that we saw the rise of the online multiplayer shooter, at 
first through strategy co-op greats like Ghost Recon Advanced Warfighter and 
then through the increasingly dominant Call of Duty series. Here too we saw 
some great Microsoft exclusives flourishing – Gears of War, Forza Motorsports, 
Left 4 Dead – as well as the explosion of digital indie titles, through the 
likes of Braid and Geometry Wars.

For me, there have been many standout moments. The endless hours of tense 
GR:AW missions with three increasingly exhausted friends; marvelling at the 
humour and genius or Portal 2; laughing in disbelief through Bulletstorm (still 
one of the greatest shooters ever made); crawling through the undergrowth in 
Call of Duty 4’s seminal All Ghillied Up level; the wrenching sadness of The 
Walking Dead; the beauty and depth of emotion in Enslaved Odyssey to the West.

But mostly, the Xbox 360, for me, will be the place I discovered Minecraft. 
I’d heard about it before, of course, but at a Microsoft preview event just 
before the game’s release on the console, I sat down with producer Rog 
Carpenter who patiently gave me a tour of the game, and I remember saying that 
my young son would like it. I did not know thenthe journey that was opening up 
ahead of us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/04/minecraft-creator-notch-will-always-be-a-hero-to-me-he-gave-my-autistic-son-a-voice>
.

Games consoles <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games-consoles> are 
always about more than mere technology, more than the content of the games they 
display. We spend so long with these machines, often with friends and family, 
that they become part of our shared memories. Games take us back and put us 
together.

I will always own an Xbox 360 with Minecraft installed. 

But what are your memories of this mighty machine?
 