
Microsoft was surprised and fascinated by Sony’s decision not to support 4K 
UHD Blu-ray discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/playstation-boss-andrew-house-ps4-pro-our-approach-isnt-reactive-this-time-around>
 with its PlayStation 4 Pro console, an executive has revealed.

Albert Penello, who leads planning for the Xbox division, said that he 
expected Sony to feature a 4K disc player in its updated PS4 machine, which is 
launching on 10 November.Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> is supporting the format – 
which allows gamers to player UHD movies on their machine – in both its Xbox 
One S and Project Scorpio platforms.

“I don’t want to bait any sort of console war, I have a lot of respect for what
Sony <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sony> does, but analytically, I 
think they made some interesting decisions in their product that surprised me,” 
he said. “The lack of a 4K disc player, given Sony’s media background, was a 
surprise. Looking at what they’ve done historically, I don’t think many people 
would have predicted that.”

“It’s interesting to me that [Sony] arrived at a very similar sort of strategy 
to Scorpio – we came to this bold idea independently of each other. Even though 
the tactics are different, the idea, fundamentally, is very similar.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fmicrosoft-xbox-execs-surprised-sony-decision-abandon-4k-blu-ray-support-ps4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8225b52f68e44643cca80e5a13df9fa5590d877d%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Xbox%20execs%20surprised%20by%20Sony's%20decision%20to%20abandon%204K%20Blu-ray%20support%20with%20PS4&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fmicrosoft-xbox-execs-surprised-sony-decision-abandon-4k-blu-ray-support-ps4%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Xbox%20execs%20surprised%20by%20Sony%27s%20decision%20to%20abandon%204K%20Blu-ray%20support%20with%20PS4&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fmicrosoft-xbox-execs-surprised-sony-decision-abandon-4k-blu-ray-support-ps4%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8225b52f68e44643cca80e5a13df9fa5590d877d%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Microsoft Xbox One S and new Wireless Controller Photograph: Microsoft 
Penello said he was pleased with the Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox-one> S, which was launched last 
month offering a slimmer build, as well as support for 4K video and HDR visual 
effects.

“If you step away from the salty internet commentary, we had a group of people 
working on it for a couple of years, and I’m proud of it,” he said. “When we 
did the original Xbox 360 Slim, we added a bunch of new features, we improved 
the quality of the design and I enjoy that process. WithXbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox> One S, we added a ton of value 
into the box while keeping the price the same, we really took a leadership 
position in 4K and HDR, and we made some bold technology decisions with Wi-Fi 
in the box and going to Bluetooth on the controllers.”

He was also keen to explain the company’s strategy for Project Scorpio, the 
more powerful Xbox One derivative arriving next winter.

“We made a pretty bold decision in announcing that as early as we did,” he 
said. “Our reasoning was, when you’re in this new world of iterative consoles, 
you’re going to want to give customers a little bit more of a heads up – we 
wanted people to go into this holiday with their eyes open, knowing that Xbox 
One S was shipping but that Scorpio was coming.

“Frankly it also gave us more time to be open with our development partners so 
we could get better games when Scoprio launched. There were a lot of rumours 
about what Sony was going to ship and when, but it didn’t really factor into 
our decision to announce Scorpio at E3 and it hasn’t really changed our plans. 
We said we were going to build the most powerful console – that’s going to hold 
true.”

When asked if there’s a chance consumers may become alienated by a more 
iterative approach to console development, Penello acknowledged that 
significantly updating hardware during the lifecycle was a risk.


“This is something we thought a lot about as we were going through the plans 
for Scorpio,” he said. “Obviously, we have a lot more details to unveil about 
how that’s going to come to market.

“An analogy with the cellphone market is one way people are reconciling how 
this change is going to happen. I’ve heard other people make analogies with the 
PC market; they’re both logical comparisons, but they immediately take you to 
the pitfalls of those approaches. One of things we have to make sure of is that 
as we go through this transition with customers and developers in a way that 
makes sense for the console market.

“We’ve tried to make it very clear: it’s one family of consoles. All of your 
accessories work, all of your games work. We don’t want customers to feel dumb 
for buying the wrong thing. We’re going to do it in a way that makes sense for 
console players. When Scorpio is out and people realise how easy it is, a lot 
of those fears will be mitigated.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF1dRgWpGePs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF1dRgWpGePs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF1dRgWpGePs&media=>
But a big question is whether consumers actually want 4K resolution 
technology. UHD television sets are only now becoming affordable and there 
remains a lot of confusion over the benefits – and over which TV models support 
which features.

“Naturally technology is going to migrate to 4K,” said Penello. “This is not a 
flash in the pan – it’s not like 3D TV, it’s not like Smart TVs, I think that 
4K is going to be, over the next few years, the predominant screen resolution 
that people are going to buy when they upgrade their sets. There are groups of 
data that have varying market share stats, but they pretty much agree that 4K 
will eventually take over.

“Personally, I think the shift from SD to HD was very meaningful – and I think 
the same about the move from 1080p to 4K. I do believe that, once the content 
starts to show up, people will be like, wow, this is worth the upgrade. When 
you look at a UHD Blu-ray, when you look at a 4K HDR streams from Netflix or 
Amazon, I believe you can really see the difference.”

There have, however, been doubts expressed in the games media that Project 
Scorpio would have the processing power to run games that have been rendered in 
native 4K resolution with HDR effects at 60 frames-per-second. The current Xbox 
One struggles to render 1080p HD resolution games at that frame rate. Penello 
confirmed Microsoft’s claims that “true” 4K gaming on Scorpio is the ambition – 
but stepped away from guaranteeing that this would be achievable at high frame 
rates.

“On the games, we had to give ourselves a goal for what performance level we 
wanted to build in the box – and our goal was to be able to deliver true 4K 
games: the same engines running on Xbox One being about to run in Scoprio on 
4K,” he said. “But we’ve said very clearly that it’s up to the developers how 
they want to take advantage of that power. Some developers focus on effects, 
some on frame rate some on resolution – it’s up to them what they want to do.”


Penello did state, however, that he has faith that developers will be able to 
master 4K graphics rendering. “We don’t tell developers what to do,” he said. 
“But if you go back and look at things like putting a hard drive in a box, 
cloud computing, and the ethernet port that we included in the original xbox, 
and now 4K and HDR – these are all things that developers came to us and asked 
us to support. It’s a dialogue through the product development process – you 
speak to developers, you look at where technology is going and you make a set 
of decisions about the platform, the canvas that they create their art on.

“You’ve got to look to PC games development to understand this. In the last 
five years, there’s been a real renaissance in PC gaming, and that’s happening 
with Nvidia and AMD investing in really high-end performance – to the point 
where PCs have eclipsed consoles much more significantly than ever before. In 
fact consoles used to lead PCs and it would take a while for them to catch up.

“If you look at game engines like Frostbite and Unreal, developers have got 
really good at scaling – they’re excellent at figuring out how to build 
textures at very high resolutions, then being able to optimise that artwork for 
various platforms. With that in consideration, it will be easier to take 
advantage of the performance difference of Scorpio because these guys are 
already building games that far surpass what consoles can do today.”

It’s possible, though, that we may have to wait for developers to gain 
experience with the Scorpio hardware before we seem them pushing the native 4K 
capabilities of the platform. “The developers have to go through a transition, 
just like customers,” said Penello. “We are spending as much time and energy on 
our dev tools as we are on anything customer-facing. Making it easier for 
developers to take advantage of the power, making it easier for developers who 
are working on an Xbox One game to get a great Scorpio game and vice versa – 
we’re developing those tools now.

“It’s a critical part of the work we’re doing to make that transition.” 

 * A buyer’s guide to the new Xbox, PlayStation and Nintendo consoles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/xbox-project-scorpion-playstation-4-pro-nintendo-nx-consoles-beginners-guide>
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football>  