
It makes sense that model and photographer Yazemeenah Rossi’s muse is nature. 
Her sparse Malibu studio is decorated with rocks and crystals. The air is 
filled with meditation music. There is no TV. “We will sit on the floor,” she 
says, inviting me to sit cross-legged and barefoot. She brings some chai in a 
ceramic mug – one she made while taking classes during her New York years. She 
rests it on a round surface that makes a clanging sound. “This is an 
18th-century gong from Cambodia,” she explains. “But who says it can’t be a 
table, too?” Rossi’s company is more like an audience with Yoda than, say, Kate 
Moss. You come away feeling like you’ve been at a yoga retreat. Perhaps she 
lives like a solitary divorcee. Or maybe she lives like a free-spirited 
teenager. It’s all a matter of perspective.

“Every day is a blessing,” she says. “I divorced twice, I’m single, I couldn’t 
imagine 10 years ago I’d be so fulfilled.” She points at her futon, basic and 
unshared. “I’m in love,” she says. “In love without subject. When people see me 
they see that, even if they don’t know my life story. It gives them a desire to 
find a way themselves.”

At 60 years of age, the grandmother of two didn’t think twice about taking her 
own self-portraits in lingerie she received from New York-based designersLand 
of Women <https://landofwomen.com/> earlier this year. She sent the shots 
direct to them, and they were so inspiring in their age-defying honesty that 
the company decided to shoot her – unedited – for their summer 2016 swimwear 
campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9741d6d1305d31d56dc5dfc9536adac0d84b8a34%2F0_790_11164_6700%2F11164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9741d6d1305d31d56dc5dfc9536adac0d84b8a34%2F0_790_11164_6700%2F11164.jpg>
 Yazmeennah wears: top and corset, price on request, bothloewe.com 
<http://loewe.com>; earrings £220, marni.com <http://marni.com>. Photograph: 
Simon Emmett for the Observer 
“One day my Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/yazemeenah/?hl=en> went from 
1,000 to 12,000 followers,” marvels Rossi, in her French accent. “Crazy, 
nonstop.” Rossi now has 26,700 Instagram followers and is renowned for her 
all-white hair and unretouched wrinkles, having spent her adult life 
challenging a youth-obsessed industry via campaigns for Marks & Spencer and JD 
Williams.

I had this young guy in Dubai who said: ‘You’re more alive than my 
ex-girlfriend who is 23'

Her Malibu studio is disrupted by the banging of local construction work, but 
she ignores it, flinging the balcony doors open. “I suntan naked here, nobody 
can see me,” she says. The fact is, Rossi has been ignoring unwanted noise 
forever, whether it be big fashion houses who said she was too old to be “sexy” 
or a US agent who advised she’d never make TV ads here. “Then I made four. I 
hope he saw them, ha!”

Rossi has just begun to make sense of her own nomadic journey. Born in 1955 in 
Corsica, she was raised by her grandparents – their financial situation 
slightly better than her parents’. Her grandparents had no running water or 
electricity, but they ran a restaurant on the beach. “Can you imagine how 
amazing?” she asks. She recalls the river where they washed, her grandfather’s 
garden where he grew fruit and vegetables and her grandmother carrying water in 
a pot on her head. The water inspired her photography. Her first camera was 
gifted to her at the age of 11, when she eventually started to spend more time 
with her parents. “We didn’t have money for film. Even without it I’d click.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e1d6087bc3e0b5023a3c88179d1689cb0d81a7e%2F0_0_6208_8280%2F6208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e1d6087bc3e0b5023a3c88179d1689cb0d81a7e%2F0_0_6208_8280%2F6208.jpg>
 Yazmeennah wears: dress £2,480, Miu Miu (matchesfashion.com 
<http://matchesfashion.com>); earrings £210, marni.com <http://marni.com>. 
Photograph: Simon Emmett for the Observer 
Snapshots of nature were an escape from an estranged relationship with her 
parents, one defined by constant arguing. It worsened when she became pregnant 
at 16. She hid her pregnancy for five months, terrified her father would force 
her to abort. She married the father before the child was born and moved to 
Paris. By the age of 20 she’d had a second child. “For me [it felt like] I was 
in jail. My life was finished. Sometimes I’d say, ‘I would love to not have my 
kids’.” At 28 she began to realise that the pursuit of her own happiness was 
too important. “I couldn’t stay with a man I didn’t love just to pay my bills. 
So I divorced. Work came. When you make the right choice, the universe brings.”

I’ve lost a lot of money because I refuse to do things that aren’t right for me

Soon enough her sister, who worked in fashion retail, invited her to stand in 
as a last-minute model for one of her clients during Paris Fashion Week. “They 
gave me an envelope with my money, but it came up short. Imagine! I went back 
and fought to get my money.” Beginning a career in her forthright way, she 
spent 10 years working as a fittings model for Hermès and YSL. “I stood on high 
heels all day, while they made clothes on me and smoked. It was terrible, but I 
was thankful I could raise my kids.” One job was so awful she tore up a 
contract in front of the client’s face. “I’ve lost a lot of money because I 
refuse to do things that aren’t right for me.” She shrugs.

Today’s fashion industry still glorifies youth, particularly in women, and 
sees them as less distinct when they reach their 40s and 50s. “My work as a 
model is just a part of it,” says Rossi. “I am a role model, I’m in touch with 
my individuality.” Her smooth skin is as vital as any 20-something’s. Her inner 
confidence comes from her celebration of imperfections. She shows off a brace 
she’s been wearing for six months. Her lower teeth have grown wayward. Her 
agents have advised her to break from pursuing work until she’s “better”, of 
course. She rolls her clear brown eyes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9cbff0a1479ac5b652cbf84c2024b8d966c6789%2F0_0_6208_8280%2F6208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9cbff0a1479ac5b652cbf84c2024b8d966c6789%2F0_0_6208_8280%2F6208.jpg>
 Yazmeennah wears: shirt £500, pullover £750, and trousers £1,000, allmarni.com 
<http://marni.com>. Photograph: Simon Emmett for the Observer 
Rossi entered the industry at the age of 30, and her big breaks didn’t come 
until she moved to America. Arriving in New York first in 1999, and represented 
by Ford models, she was hired on print campaigns for US brands such as 
Bloomingdale’s, Barneys, J Crew and Bobbi Brown. This was despite her hair 
having already gone completely white. She unties her wet tresses and shows off 
blue-black roots that remain underneath thick grey. She never thought about 
dying it. “I’m passionate about what I’m doing. I have no time,” she says. 
“It’s beautiful. It’s silver!” Her eyebrows are speckled with white, too. She’s 
refused “a lot of money” to change it.

This is not courage. This is simply who I am. If more models are authentic, it 
will impact people who see them

Such “woman’s work” can be time-consuming, detracting from the pursuit of 
other goals. Rossi has refused plastic surgery, aside from having minor facial 
injections to erase blood vessels. The only thing she’d consider would be a 
neck lift. “Take advantage of how you are,” she says. “Do not destroy your 
capital.” Her secrets are a nutritious diet and daily yoga. She started Bikram 
in her 30s after years of windsurfing. “It gives me a wow feeling!”

Sex, too, keeps her young. In 2007, Rossi left New York for California. Her 
second husband, an Algerian restaurateur, didn’t accompany her. “Life put us 
apart,” she says, lightly. Her sexual freedom is positively progressive. “Women 
feel guilty about masturbating. But if you’re not going outside to get it 
[sexual pleasure], how are you gonna get it?” she laughs. “I remember this 
young guy I had in Dubai who said: ‘You’re more alive than my ex-girlfriend who 
is 23.’ I said: ‘Because I have no inhibition.’ Women have to be comfortable.” 
She believes in having many relationships with men and says each of them has 
“awoken” a part of her. “This makes my relation[ship] very short and very 
empowering,” she laughs. “Men have this aura when they age. But when women have 
a similar power we are treated as cougar!” she says, shocked. “What is the word 
for men?” she asks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b7225646f5dd86f1e9404e7e46b816c1ffcc74%2F0_1659_8280_4968%2F8280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yazemeenah%20Rossi%3A%20%E2%80%98Sexy%20means%20alive.%20I%E2%80%99m%20alive%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fyazemeenah-rossi-sexy-means-alive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b7225646f5dd86f1e9404e7e46b816c1ffcc74%2F0_1659_8280_4968%2F8280.jpg>
 Yazmeennah wears: dress £1,950, and trousers £640, bothceline.com 
<http://celine.com>. Photograph: Simon Emmett for the Observer 
Indeed, there is none. When Rossi’s swimsuit campaign launched, many of her 
model colleagues contacted her to say how “courageous” it was. “I said: ‘This 
is not courage. This is simply who I am.’ If more models are authentic, it will 
impact people who see them.”

To this day she feels frustrated that high fashion houses don’t employ her to 
model to an older demographic of consumers. “I wear Dolce & Gabbana, and all 
that,” she says. “So why don’t they choose me? I’m pissed off, it’s a waste. I 
may be a certain age, but I have a sexy look. Sexy means alive. I’m alive!”

In December, Rossi turns 61. “Life is just beginning and I don’t know what’s 
going to happen.” She has just finished a shoot forthe Bellevue Collection 
<http://fashionweekbellevue.com/> and is headed to Sweden this month to work 
withKappAhl <http://www.kappahl.com/en-US/>. Her major ambition right now, 
however, is acting classes and she hopes to secure on-screen roles so that she 
can show women her age “my truth”, wrinkles and all. “This is not about ego, or 
power,” she says. “It’s about being free.”

Yazmeennah Rossi at Mrs Robinson; fashion editor Jo Jones; photographer’s 
assistant Sam Ford; digital tech by Tom Frimley; hair by Richard Scorer at 
Premier for Haringtons using L’Oréal; make-up by Pablo Rodriguez at CLM Hair 
and Make-Up using MAC Cosmetics; fashion assistant Billie Brand
 