
“We are waiting to see when we will die” – the words of a resident of the 
besieged city of Taiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/28/life-under-siege-inside-taiz-yemen-houthi>
 in Yemen, retold by a British Yemeni at a meeting with cross-party MPs in 
Westminster last week.

Taiz has been under siege by rebels for months, cut off from humanitarian aid, 
with no electricity, no schools, and where the vast majority of health 
facilities have closed.

Britain’s international development committee (IDC) had invited 
representatives of the Yemeni diaspora to contribute to ourinquiry into the 
crisis in Yemen 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/international-development-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/crisis-in-yemen/>
. We were shocked to hear about the desperate situation in Taiz, which bears a 
worrying resemblance toMadaya in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/residents-besieged-syrian-town-madaya-starved-to-death>
. But the world is watching Syria while the crisis in Yemen is largely ignored.

The crisis is having a devastating effect on the whole country. According to 
the UN 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/2016_HNO_English_%20FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf), an astonishing 82% of the population needs humanitarian assistance - 
21.2 million people, compared with 12.2 million in Syria. The food situation is 
particularly concerning, with 14.4 million people struggling to find enough to 
eat, including 1.3 million children who are acutely malnourished. Millions 
cannot access safe water or basic healthcare and 1.8 million children are out 
of school. The Yemeni diaspora described the situation as collective 
punishment, with the population being punished for the actions of the rebels.

But who are the rebels and how did this crisis happen? Yemen has a long 
history of conflict and instability, which had left it the poorest country in 
the Middle East. Thecurrent crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/01/yemen-collapse-the-guardian-briefing-houthi-saudi-arabia-sanaa>
 escalated in March when a Saudi-led coalition launched airstrikes to stop the 
advance of the Houthi rebel group, which had taken control of the capital, 
Sana’a, and forced the government into exile in Saudi Arabia. It was meant to 
be a short sharp campaign by the coalition, yet has now dragged on for 10 
months, leaving the country in tatters.
Yemen map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/yemen_control_jan/giv-27167XOcc3q72Q74s/>
Civilians are paying a high price for this war. The UN high commissioner for 
human rights said on 5 January that there had beenmore than 8,000 civilian 
casualties since March, including 2,795 killed 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=52938#.VqiGaSqLTIU>. Civilians 
account for half the deaths 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=52588#.VqYlocpWLcs> in this 
conflict, many from the reported use of explosive weapons in populated areas 
and attacks onhospitals and schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/19/yemen-msf-bombing-hospitals-schools-cannot-become-the-new-normal>
. The population have been living under the constant bombardment of aerial 
attacks and ground fighting. Reports of violations of international 
humanitarian law have been no less constant.

It has not only been the war that has had such a damaging effect on Yemen’s 
people. As the diaspora told the committee, theblockade on ports has been 
devastating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/05/saudi-led-naval-blockade-worsens-yemen-humanitarian-disaster>
, particularly for a country thatimports 70% of its fuel, 90% of its food and 
all its medical supplies 
<http://%20http//www.keithvazmp.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/APPG-on-Yemen-Report.-The-Forgotten-Crisis.pdf%20p.10>
 (pdf).

In September, fuel imports fell to 1% of the monthly requirements 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/2016_HNO_English_%20FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf). As a result, hospitals are closing at an alarming rate and industry has 
come to a standstill. We heard from Yemeni businessmen that huge numbers of 
businesses have shut down, leading to high unemployment. The black market is 
inflating prices, especially for fuel which costs 286% more than it did before 
the war, according to the UN World Food Programme. Prices are skyrocketing at 
the same time as people are losing their incomes.

Bombing hospitals and schools cannot become the new normal | Vickie Hawkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/19/yemen-msf-bombing-hospitals-schools-cannot-become-the-new-normal>
Peace talks held in Switzerland last month failed when the ceasefire was 
broken repeatedly by both the Houthis and the Saudi-led coalition. The talks 
were described to us as a “bit of theatre” while delegates continued to wage 
war.

On Wednesday, the IDC will hear from key stakeholders, including Unicef and 
Oxfam, and from both the Department for International Development (DfID) and 
the Foreign Office.

DfID has committed £85m to Yemen <http:// 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/greening-new-aid-for-yemen>, making the UK 
the fourth largest donor to the humanitarian crisis. However, theUK is also the 
largest supplier of arms to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/17/uk-yemen-civil-war-arms-sales-saudi-arabia>
 and supports the coalition’s intervention, a position described in evidence to 
the committee as undermining DfID’s humanitarian response and creating a 
paradox of aid and arms.

I hope Wednesday’s meeting will provide an opportunity to draw attention to 
the catastrophic scale of the crisis and what the UK is doing and can do to 
help end the suffering.

 