
Dozens of emaciated children are fighting for their lives in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>’s hospital wards, as fears grow that 
civil war and a sea blockade that has lasted for months are creating famine 
conditions in the Arabian peninsula’s poorest country.

The UN’s humanitarian aid chief, Stephen O’Brien, described a visit to meet 
“very small children affected by malnutrition” in the Red Sea city of Hodeida. 
“It is of course absolutely devastating when you see such terrible 
malnutrition,” he said on Tuesday, warning of “very severe needs”.

What is happening in Yemen and how Saudi Arabia's airstrikes are affecting 
civilians - explainer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/how-saudi-arabias-airstrikes-have-hit-civilian-life-in-yemen>
More than half of Yemen’s 28 million people are already short of food, the UN 
has said, and children are particularly badly hit, with hundreds of thousands 
at risk of starvation.

There are 370,000 children enduring severe malnutrition that weakens their 
immune system, according to Unicef, and 1.5 million are going hungry. Food 
shortages are a long-term problem, but they have got worse in recent months. 
Half of children under five are stunted because of chronic malnutrition.

A sea blockade on rebel-held areas enforced by the Saudi-coalition supporting 
the president, Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi, stops shipments reaching most ports.

Its effects can be seen in centres such as the Thawra hospital, where parents 
cram waiting rooms seeking help for hungry and dying children. In April, 
between 10 and 20 children were brought for treatment, but the centre is now 
struggling with 120 a month, Reuters reported.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fyemen-famine-feared-as-starving-children-fight-for-lives-in-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17238b653d12fb812601a213184f284797b03c29%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yemen%20famine%20feared%20as%20starving%20children%20fight%20for%20lives%20in%20hospital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fyemen-famine-feared-as-starving-children-fight-for-lives-in-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yemen%20famine%20feared%20as%20starving%20children%20fight%20for%20lives%20in%20hospital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fyemen-famine-feared-as-starving-children-fight-for-lives-in-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17238b653d12fb812601a213184f284797b03c29%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A woman waits to weigh her son in an intensive care unit in Sana’a. 
Photograph: Khaled Abdullah/Reuters 
Among them are Salem Issa, a six-year-old so emaciated he looks years younger 
and is now too ill to eat. “I used to feed him biscuits, but he’s sick. He 
won’t eat,” said his mother.

The crisis may get worse after Hadi ordered changes at the central bank. Aimed 
at squeezing the funds of Iranian-backed Houthi rebels, the move could leave 
ordinary Yemenis short of cash and make food shortages worse by depriving 
traders of the financial cover the bank has offered.

Ibrahim Mahmoud, of Yemen’s Social Development Fund, told Reuters only an 
improvement in the country’s financial system and an emergency aid effort could 
prevent the spread of hunger.

 “If there is no direct and immediate intervention on behalf of the 
international community and state organisations, we could be threatened by 
famine and a humanitarian catastrophe,” he said.

Oxfam’s humanitarian policy adviser, Richard Stanforth, said: “Everything is 
stacked against the people on the brink of starvation inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>. The politicisation of the central 
bank and attempts by the parties in the conflict to use it as a tool to hurt 
one another ... threaten to push the poorest over the edge.”

UK supports call for independent UN human rights mission to Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/uk-supports-call-independent-un-human-rights-mission-yemen>
Hadi moved the central bank headquarters from Sana’a, the capital currently 
controlled by Houthi rebels, to the southern port of Aden which his government 
holds. He also appointed a new governor, who said the bank had no money.

“It risks leaving the salaries of more than a million Yemenis unpaid. There 
may be a long-term effect on the Houthis, but the immediate effect will be on 
normal people trying to put food on the table,” the Yemeni economic analyst 
Amal Nasser said.

 The sea blockade and daily airstrikes, which have hit civilian targets 
including hospitals, are part of a campaign to push rebels out of the capital.

There have been widespread calls for an independent inquiry <http://led 
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/renewed-inquiry-alleged-human-rights-violations-yemen-houthi>
 into the conflict, including from senior British MPs.More than a third of 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/third-of-saudi-airstrikes-on-yemen-have-hit-civilian-sites-data-shows>
 Saudi-led bombing raids are thought to have hit civilian sites, and human 
rights groups say violations are also being perpetrated by Houthi rebels.
 