
In one of the last columns Patrick Campbell wrote for the Sunday Times, he 
described how he had gone to a well-known West End store to buy a pair of 
pyjamas, only to be told by the assistant “we no longer do them.” Pyjamas, it 
seems, are not being worn much any more.

Years though it is since I last wore them myself, I had assumed this was a 
minority eccentricity. Not so. A poll of friends and party acquaintances has 
disclosed only a couple of men who admit to wearing them, almost as sheepishly 
as if they were admitting to wearing a night-cap.

One Granada executive claims that he wears a pyjama – improbably, the jacket; 
and even more improbably, only when sleeping with somebody: a paradox explained 
by the fact that when he sleeps alone, he can wrap the bedclothes round his 
neck, making further protection unnecessary. But the general tendency is to 
wear nothing at all in bed.

Can you really wear pyjamas to a party?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/12/fashion-can-you-wear-pyjamas-party-lingerie-jess-cartner-morley>
In the only fashion article I have ever written, in the Guardian a few years 
back, I chronicled the changes that had taken place in men’s clothes, almost 
unperceived. A man dressed in the style of half a century ago would not look 
conspicuous in a London street today; but under the lounge suit, as it was then 
called, there would be differences.

We are no longer afflicted, I noted, by shirts with detachable collars. Vests 
have gone, and sock-suspenders. Braces are for children’s teeth. Waistcoats, 
after a brief resurgence as a decoration, are disposable. The only outward and 
visible sign of the passing years is the now almost defunct trilby hat.

Yet it did not occur to me then that pyjamas were also on the way out. They 
seemed part of the natural order of things, to be purchased even in the days of 
clothes coupons.

George Orwell evidently assumed that they would still be worn in 1984. When 
the two-way TV screen blared forth its morning alarm call, “Winston wrenched 
his body out of bed – naked, for a member of the Outer Parts received only 
3,000 clothes coupons annually, and a suit of pyjamas was 600.”

But Orwell had been at Eton; and the public schools in those days inculcated a 
rigid deference not just to what could be worn, but how it could be worn. To 
wear the pyjama jacket outside the pyjama trousers was Not Done – except for 
chorus girls and Americans. Not to wear pyjamas at all was unthinkable.

Now, the tyranny – particularly of the pyjama cord, hell to re-thread when 
pulled out by the laundry unless you had a safety-pin, and what public 
schoolboy would have had a safety-pin? – is ended. But this poses a problem, as 
Patrick Campbell complained. Except in centrally-heated establishments, getting 
out of bed becomes a trial.


Something more functional than a dressing-gown is needed. And not only for 
crises. The solution, if it can be found, will be a godsend to those of us who 
write for a living, and prefer to write in the morning, but find getting up is 
made more difficult by the fact we have no train to catch, no office to reach 
on time.


The attempt, and not the deed, confounds us, the prospect of getting out of 
bed and putting on shirt, trousers, and the rest. What we would like is a 
garment which can be eased into while we are still in bed; warm and 
all-embracing, a cross between a skin-diver’s suit and one of these tracksuits 
which high jumpers enter in the pauses between their jumps. Or, come to think 
of it, asiren suit <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siren_suit>. I have often 
wondered why Churchill did not make them fashionable.

But the morning-wear I have in mind would require to be of a material which 
would ease the transition from bed to desk, via the kitchen stove and the 
tea-pot, to be wearable all morning, and if need be all day, and be 
sufficiently presentable to be worn on a stroll, or in the pub.

It must, therefore, be made of some material which is not cold to the touch, 
and it must be coinop-wise. So I have asked some friends to have a go at the 
design. It will, I hope, represent the most radical innovation in men’s 
fashions since the Patent Small-Clothes trousers with an inflatable pneumatic 
seat – which Theodore Gumbril dreamed up in Antic Hay.

This is an edited extract, read more 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/07/18/Pyjamas_Guardian_fashion_20_July_1979.jpeg>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fpyjamas-nightwear-sleeping-nude-1979-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F373cba377ebd42187858e2c7a28841de5f4bcdb2%2F434_185_2654_1155%2F2654.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yes%2C%20we%20have%20no%20pyjamas%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%20archive%2C%2020%20July%201979&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fpyjamas-nightwear-sleeping-nude-1979-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yes%2C%20we%20have%20no%20pyjamas%20%E2%80%93%20fashion%20archive%2C%2020%20July%201979&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fpyjamas-nightwear-sleeping-nude-1979-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F373cba377ebd42187858e2c7a28841de5f4bcdb2%2F434_185_2654_1155%2F2654.jpg>
 The Guardian, 20 July 1979.  