
Yorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire> is confident of 
being named host of the 2019 UCI Road World Championships on Wednesday.

The management committee of the UCI, cycling’s world governing body, will meet 
in Doha during the 2016 Road World Championships, where a decision is expected 
on the hosts for the 2019 event.

And Yorkshire is optimistic of success, after in 2014 hosting the Tour de 
France Grand Départ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/17/how-yorkshire-won-the-2014-tour-de-france>
 and subsequently twice holding a three-day stage race in the region.

Cycling Road World Championships 2016: women's time trial - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/11/cycling-road-world-championships-2016-womens-time-trial-live>
Rival bids come from Italy, Colombia, Germany and Canada. Some have not 
specified a year for staging the event – Yorkshire has – and could therefore 
still also be successful even if they miss out on 2019.

The UCI does not discuss the bidding or decision process but would likely be 
keen to capitalise on Yorkshire’s recent successes in the sport.

The 2017 Road World Championships takes place in Bergen, Norway, and the 2018 
event is hosted by Innsbruck-Tirol, Austria, with 2019 the next available event.

Yorkshire’s formal bid – submitted by the national governing body British 
Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> and made in partnership 
with Welcome to Yorkshire, UK Sport and the government – was announced in 
August by the prime minister, Theresa May.

Racing would take place in all four regions of the county, the Welcome to 
Yorkshire chief executive, Sir Gary Verity, has said, with decisions over the 
race routes for the week-long event to be made in conjunction with the UCI, if 
the bid is successful.

The 2014 Tour began in Leeds, with another stage start in York and finishes in 
Harrogate and Sheffield.

Cyclists bemoan extreme heat at Doha Road World Championships
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/doha-road-world-championships-heat-anouska-koster>
British Cycling had long insisted a Road World Championships bid would not 
necessarily mean Yorkshire being hosts as the region is already an established 
cycling hub. But government support, led by the then chancellor George Osborne, 
pushed the bid through.

There would be another reason to celebrate a successful bid to bring the elite 
competition to Yorkshire. British Cycling negotiated a £15m package of 
nationwide investment alongside the bid, to further develop cycling facilities 
and grow participation.

This funding, subject to the bid being won, will provide for 27 purpose-built 
cycle-sport facilities across the disciplines.

Many of these would be closed road circuits but there would also be outdoor 
velodromes, BMX tracks and mountain bike trails.
 