
Yorkshire will host the 2019 Road World Championships, marking the return of 
cycling’s showcase event to Britain after a 37-year gap, with a £27m budget to 
include a £15m “transformational” investment in new facilities across the UK. 
Harrogate is one venue which is in the frame as a possible “hub” for the nine 
days of racing for five categories, junior men and women, elite men and women 
and under-23 men.

La Course expansion in the offing for 2017, event organisers suggest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/la-course-expansion-in-the-offing-for-2017-tour-de-france-cycling>
To celebrate the arrival of what could be an even bigger event than the 2014 
Tour de France start in Leeds, York and Harrogate, the First Direct Arena, the 
Trinity Leeds shopping centre and the Clifford Tower in York were set to be 
illuminated in rainbow stripes on Wednesday night, a nod to the rainbow jerseys 
which will be awarded during the 12 events.

Appropriately the announcement came in the week that Yorkshire’s own world 
champion, Lizzie Deignan (née Armitstead) will defendher title in the women’s 
road race in Doha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/26/lizzie-armitstead-cycling-world-champion-nicole-cooke>
.

“We will use some of the Tour de France and Tour de Yorkshire routes but it 
won’t be possible to go to every town, city and village in the region,” said 
Sir Gary Verity, head of Welcome to Yorkshire. “However, the objective is to 
visit every part of Yorkshire, north, east, west and south.” The region’s 
hosting of the Tour in 2014 has been followed by two successful editions of the 
three-day Tour de Yorkshire run by Amaury Sport Organisation.

The Worlds has an extended format, with team time trials for trade squads on 
the opening weekend, followed by individual time trials until the Wednesday and 
culminating with women’s and men’s elite road races on the final Saturday and 
Sunday. According to Verity, it is likely that the various events will start in 
different parts of Yorkshire, with a fixed finish location for all the races.

Harrogate has made its interest known, after its successful hosting of the 
Tour de France’sfirst stage finish in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/yorkshire-tour-de-france-joy-mark-cavendish-crash>
, when the region was the venue for the Grand Départ of the Tour. “It’s not 
100% confirmed but they have the hotels and the conference centre and they are 
in pole position,” said Verity.

Traditionally, the road races have tended to be on one circuit starting and 
finishing in the host town, but recently there has been a trend for a start a 
long way “off site”, with the circuit featuring later in the race. It seems 
likely that, for the men’s elite event at 260km, the opening half of the race 
could be a lengthy loop showcasing Yorkshire’s scenery and hills before a 
circuit of 16-20km tackled six or seven times.

Tony Martin storms to victory in Road World Championships men’s time trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tony-martin-storms-time-trial-victory-road-world-championships-cycling>
The UK’s Road Worlds bid for central government funding saw some hard talking 
between the Treasury and the governing body, British Cycling, with Whitehall 
favouring a Yorkshire bid as part of the former chancellor George Osborne’s 
Northern Powerhouse, and BritishCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> adamant there should be no 
done deal with other parts of the UK, including Scotland, also expressing 
interest.

One key sticking point was British Cycling’s insistence that there should be a 
legacyfor the whole of the UK from a Worlds bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/05/british-cycling-treasury-fund-world-road-race-championships>
. This figures in the final announcement as a £15m pot of cash to go towards 
the construction of 27 off-road racing venues around the country, “to ensure 
that every part of Britain has close access to a closed road circuit, 
velodrome, BMX track or mountain bike trail,” as the chief executive, Ian 
Drake, said.

The Road World Championships have been held twice in the UK since the second 
world war, at Mallory Park in Leicestershire in 1970 and at Goodwood in Sussex 
in 1982. Back then, however, the event was a different beast, with the track 
championships held in the same fortnight, and only men’s and women’s road races 
on the programme, as the junior events were held elsewhere.

“We’re hoping that this will cement our status as the No1 cycling area in 
Europe,” said Verity, adding that he is looking to get the Tour de France back 
into Yorkshire in the near future and to expand the region’s eponymous Tour to 
a fourth day, with a second day for its accompanying women’s race.
 