
Despair, worries about the future and financial pressures are taking a toll on 
millions ofyoung Britons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
, according to a poll which found young women in particular were suffering.

Low pay and lack of work in today’s Britain are resulting in “suspended 
adulthood”, with many living or moving back in with their parents and putting 
off having children, according to the poll of thousands of 18 to 30-year-olds.

Large numbers describe themselves as worn down (42%), lacking self-confidence 
(47%) and feeling worried about the future (51%).

Is today's generation of young people in crisis? – live debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/sep/22/is-todays-generation-of-young-people-in-crisis-live-debate>
The Young Women’s Trust <http://www.youngwomenstrust.org/>, the charity that 
commissioned the polling by Populus Data Solutions, warned that Britain was 
facing a “generation of young people in crisis” as it called on the government 
to take steps including creating a minister with responsibility for overall 
youth policy.

Young women are being particularly affected. The percentage of women reporting 
that they lacked self-confidence was 54%, compared with 39% of young men.

We millennials need to fight if we’re not to be left behind | Abi Wilkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/millennials-fight-left-behind-young-people-cogent-political-force>
While four in 10 young people said they felt worn down, the percentage for 
young women was 46% compared with 38% of men. One in three said they were 
worried about their mental health, including 38% of young women and 29% of 
young men.

Dr Carole Easton, the chief executive of Young Women’s Trust, which supports 
and represents women aged 16 to 30 struggling to live on low or no pay in 
England and Wales, said it was distressing that so many young people were 
struggling at a time of life traditionally characterised by youthful confidence.

“Make no mistake about it, we’re talking about a generation of young people in 
crisis. And while life is hard for many young people, our survey shows it’s 
likely to be considerably tougher if you are a young woman,” she said.

Housing crisis ‘driving younger and older generations apart’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/17/housing-crisis-driving-younger-older-generations-apart>
“It’s not in any of our interests to write off an entire generation. Much more 
needs to be done to improve young people’s prospects, including through 
creating a minister for young people, extending the National Living Wage to 
under 25s, delivering on government commitments to improve housing options for 
young people and tackling workplace discrimination.”


Of 4,000 18 to 30 year-olds, the No Country for Young Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> study found that 43% of those 
polled still live at home and a quarter had to move back in with their parents 
because they couldn’t afford to live independently. As much as 56% of them said 
they would consider moving abroad for work.

The charity is also calling for a commitment from government to move towards 
extending the National Living Wage to under 25s and a greater focus, including 
through JobCentre Plus, on supporting young adults – especially young women.
 