
Anyone who expects small children to accept unquestioningly the life that is 
planned for them and the things allotted to them is soon convinced that that is 
far from being the case. A mother is not – it becomes clear soon after a child 
is armed with comparisons from school – the only arbiter of the things that are 
done or not done, worn or nor worn; she is, in fact, out of the swim, left 
behind every day at home, in ignorance of the ways of the majority.

She did not seem to realise, for instance, that summer began at the beginning 
of the summer term, although one cold week followed another. Unfortunately she 
had to be obeyed, but the child going out still wearing a jersey, or at best a 
blouse and kilt, could get a certain satisfaction in grumbling, “But absolutely 
everybody is wearing summer frocks.” It was the same with hats. The mother who 
ordained the continued use of dark velours was brought too early, in her own 
judgment, into line with the rest by the persistence of fashion-wise children 
of six and eight who wore down her resistance by stating in unison, twice 
daily, that absolutely everyone had gone into panamas.


The opportunities school children have of becoming so much more worldly wise 
than stay-at-home parents are naturally exploited by young materialists who 
have found this additional means of bringing parents to heel. “I must have a 
fountain-pen, or a box of paints,” a six-year-old says categorically, and only 
when she is reminded of the distance from birthday or Christmas does she add, 
“Well, absolutely everyone else has one.” If she is pressed for details she may 
say that, well, Peggy has one, and Sally says she is getting one next week when 
she is seven. Who would not wish to be in the van of fashion even at the 
expense of absolute truth?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fchildren-young-style-archive-1938%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7709eca4a899e25fabd75a2972275f15132b7159%2F0_0_2696_1653%2F2696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20slaves%20of%20fashion%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%201%20July%201938&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fchildren-young-style-archive-1938%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20slaves%20of%20fashion%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%201%20July%201938&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fchildren-young-style-archive-1938%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7709eca4a899e25fabd75a2972275f15132b7159%2F0_0_2696_1653%2F2696.jpg>
 Shirley Temple, a role model for 1930s children? Photograph: Courtesy Everett 
Collection/REX 
Shirley Temple
It is disclosed at home that absolutely everyone has just been to see (or is 
just about to see) Shirley Temple in a film at a local cinema – “And Miss 
Brookes said we ought to see it for geography” is offered as more worthy bait. 
On a summer afternoon the family accordingly goes to see Shirley Temple and 
finds that, strangely enough, absolutely everyone has that afternoon decided to 
go elsewhere. No one else is in the upstairs seats, which makes it embarrassing 
when the jack-in-the-box organist bows in anticipation of lengthy applause.

The extent to which children are slaves of fashion was never suspected, 
however, until the child of six, given permission at last to wear summer frocks 
outgrown by her sister, criticised the styles of two years ago. “I don’t like 
the sleeves,” she said. “Everyone else, absolutely everyone, has pretty little 
fat sleeves, not these flat ones.”


So far as bathing suits at least were concerned, it seemed that the children 
would not display much interest in the latest thing. The case of last year’s 
holiday garments was taken down and the seasonal research into the matter of 
what would still fit and what must reluctantly be discarded was once again 
undertaken. Apparently this was one of the lucky years when few renewals would 
be required. Three of last year’s suits were still right for the 
eight-year-old, who had begun to attend the swimming baths. But only for a week 
or two. After a few visits she frowned on the hand-knitted suit given to her to 
take to the baths. “Can’t I have one of the crinkly sort?” she asked. “I think 
they’re made of rubber. They have all little blobs all over them and they 
stretch when you put them on. Absolutely everyone has that kind.”


This latest suggestion of her ignorance of modern fashions was a shock to the 
child’s mother, not only because she had been assuming the sufficiency of her 
daughter’s beach wear. Such enlightenment enforced a wider application. What of 
her own swimming suits? If absolutely everyone was wearing those bubbly looking 
garments she had vaguely noticed in shop windows, she supposed she would have 
to do a little more scrapping. One must not disgrace fashion-conscious children.

 