
Children who become addicted to computer games may actually be more 
intelligent than the average and go on to university and higher-ranking jobs, 
according to a Home Office research review published yesterday.

One British study surveyed found that such computer "geeks" who had been 
hooked on games for at least five years were highly intelligent, motivated and 
achieving people, but often misunderstood.

A follow-up study five years later found that they generally had done well 
educationally, gone on to to college and then into better than average jobs.

The review by Home Office researcher, Jessica Harris, of nearly 20 research 
studies into the effects of computer games on children show that many believe 
that playing or watching violent video games leads to a short-term increase in 
agressive behaviour.

But Ms Harris concludes that the lack of any evidence on the long-term effects 
on young children of playing computer games means that it is impossible, on 
present evidence, to say that the "gameboy generation" has suffered any lasting 
damage as a result of the use of video games.

The Home Office report says that originally little research was undertaken 
into the effects of video games, because they were seen as a harmless and 
enjoyable pastime. But as the popularity of the games grew in the 1990s, 
parents started to worry about their effects.

Nearly 20 research studies over the past two decades had come to different 
conclusions about whether the games were harmful.

Some of the research suggested that they caused aggression and low 
self-esteem, were addictive, and could lead to crime.

"Since the late 1970s, when computer game playing joined television as a 
preferred childhood leisure activity, one of the main concerns that has 
constantly been raised is that most games feature some kind of aggression," 
said Ms Harris.

"This has led some to believe that children become more aggressive after 
playing such games."

But she said that one study showed that 40 out the 47 most popular games had 
violence as their major theme.

Their popularity was based on their realistic effects and clever marketing 
strategies.

Her review says that this is not only true for human or fantasy violence games 
but also many sports, such as racing, karate and wrestling, which all focus on 
the player's level of aggression.

Some academic studies suggest that video games are more harmful than 
television because of the obvious point that children are actively involved in 
playing the games.

The research review says that while the majority of studies showed that 
children did become more aggressive after playing or watching a violent 
computer game, other studies found no evidence to this effect.

In fact, one survey had found that heavy game use had a calming effect on the 
grounds that it provided "an outlet for aggression and the open expression of 
competition."

Playing the game

 Children play computer games for an average of 45 minutes a day, according 
to the Department of Trade and Industry.

 The global games market is estimated to be worth more than $17bn. In 
Britain, almost 40m games were sold last year for over £934m.

 The Video Standards Council says that less than 1% of games are classified 
as suitable for over-18s, while 90% are suitable for children under 15.

 The best-selling computer game ever is Myst, in which players solve puzzles 
as they explore an imaginary world. It sold 5.5m copies worldwide.

 More than two-thirds of children prefer playing games with friends to 
playing alone.

 Doctors warned that children were suffering "nintendonitis" - repetitive 
strain injuries brought about by excessive gaming.

 The average age of gamers is 28, but over 40% of all console players are 
under 18.

Tania Branigan
 