
The World Health Organisation has declared the clusters of birth defects 
linked to the Zika virus apublic health emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/zika-virus-world-health-organisation-declares-global-health-emergency>
. At the centre of the crisis is Brazil, where more than 4,000 women have given 
birth to babies with abnormally small heads due to microcephaly, suspected of 
being linked to the virus. Jacqueline Jessica de Oliveira’s daughter was born 
with the condition.We share her story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/jan/29/zika-virus-mother-brazil-i-dont-know-when-my-daughter-will-walk-or-speak-video>
.

Elsewhere on the site

 * Myanmar’s transgender people not just chasing rainbows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/myanmar-transgender-people-lgbt-colors-rainbow-equality>
 * Travel as a ‘celebration of life’ is under threat, says UN tourism head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/28/travel-celebration-life-under-threat-un-tourism-head-militant-attacks-tunisia-kenya>
 * Shine starts to fade on Botswana’s diamond dividend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/28/botswana-diamond-mines-tourism-transport-agriculture-karowe>
 * UN reduces Afghanistan appeal but urges other donors to do more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/27/un-reduces-afghanistan-appeal-but-urges-other-donors-to-do-more>
 * South Sudan ‘should be hit with arms embargo over atrocities’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/26/south-sudan-should-be-hit-with-arms-embargo-over-atrocities-says-un-panel>
Opinion

The UN’s move to enshrine access to a safe, hygienic toilet as a fundamental 
human right is admirable, but it is not enough to make it a reality,argues 
Rosalind Malcolm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/29/bum-deal-sanitation-access-toilet-human-right-privilege>
. “Action will always speak louder than law, and such laws are not worth the 
paper they are written on without a change in regulation, funding and 
attitude,” she writes.

Nigeria is not broke, says ActionAid’s Kenny Oleru. Instead, the country is 
giving away its wealth in harmful tax breaks. Hecalls for Nigeria to review its 
tax policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/29/nigeria-tax-breaks-energy-firms-actionaid-kenny-oleru>
.

Multimedia

Podcast: Kary Stewart reports from Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/jan/30/in-the-eye-of-el-nino-landslides-and-flooding-in-coastal-peru-podcast>
, where the effects of El Niño are causing landslides and flooding in shanty 
towns near the country’s coast.

In pictures: What do women pack in their maternity bags? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/jan/29/what-world-women-pack-maternity-bags-in-pictures>
 Depending on whether they are giving birth in Australia or Zambia, New York or 
Malawi, the items taken might be luxuries or life-savers.

Video: Our video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2015/dec/17/el-salvador-miscarriage-judge-accused-me-murder-anti-abortion-law-video>
 on El Salvador’s draconian abortion laws is now available to watch in Spanish –
El Salvador: ‘Tuve un aborto espontáneo. El juez me acusó de homicidio’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/jan/26/el-salvador-tuve-un-aborto-espontaneo-el-juez-me-acuso-de-homicidio-video>

What you said

On A war on drugs? We’d be better off paying for a war on hunger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/21/war-on-drugs-hunger-deforestation-pain-relief-poverty>
,martindrewry wrote:

Given there’s such agreement among us about the terrible consequences of the 
war on drugs on the poor and poverty reduction, how about a few more 
development organisations speaking out about it? Come on guys!

Highlight from the blogosphere

Why isn’t aid for infrastructure going to the countries that need it most? 
<http://www.odi.org/comment/10277-isnt-aid-infrastructure-going-countries-that-need-most>
 asks the Overseas Development Institute.

And finally …

Poverty matters will return in two weeks with another roundup of the latest 
news and comment. In the meantime, keep up to date on theGlobal development 
website <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development>. Follow @gdndevelopment
 <https://twitter.com/gdndevelopment> and the team – @swajones 
<https://twitter.com/swajones>, @LizFordGuardian 
<https://twitter.com/lizfordguardian>, @clarnic <https://twitter.com/clarnic> 
and@CarlaOkai <https://twitter.com/CarlaOkai> – on Twitter, and join Guardian 
Global development on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardianglobaldevelopment>.
 