
As Zika continues to spread through the western hemisphere, the women’s health 
aspect of the virus has not entered the public conversation. Perhaps more than 
the failure to control mosquito populations, lack of access to widespread, 
effective contraception is the root cause of microcephaly in most of Latin 
America and the Caribbean, and yet remains the least talked about aspect of the 
epidemic.

Ebola, like HIV before it, offered an impetus to improve general healthcare 
infrastructure in west Africa, as international money and political will joined 
the fight against the epidemic. For all its negatives, the Zika outbreak 
similarly provides an opportunity to press strongly for universal access to 
contraception and reproductive services for women in all Zika-affected 
countries, but this opportunity is being largely overlooked.

To prevent babies being born with microcephaly, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC) <https://www.cdc.gov/> and the World Health 
Organisation are choosing to encourage “delaying pregnancy”, as well as to 
recommend mosquito nets and protective spray to those who are already pregnant. 
Without putting any resources behind widespread contraception, this is merely 
lip service and fails to deal effectively with the problem.Only 62.5% of Latin 
American women use some form of contraception 
<http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pdacr581.pdf> [pdf], and in Haiti, only 34% of 
women have access to contraception 
<http://www.unfpa.org/news/improving-access-family-planning-haiti-amidst-threat-Zika-virus>
. In the US, 45% of pregnancies are unintended, and65% in Puerto Rico are as 
well <https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/data_stats/pdfs/puerto-rico.pdf> 
[pdf]. Health authorities in El Salvador estimate that as many as90% of 
pregnancies may be unintended 
<https://www.statnews.com/2016/02/01/Zika-pregnancy-warnings-latin-america/>, 
and Haiti, without an effective public health system or quotable statistics, is 
likely not far off from this figure.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fzika-lets-give-women-the-contraception-they-so-desperately-want%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f626e700065578c1226d07a605c3cd6917b6d1e%2F0_31_822_493%2F822.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zika%3A%20Let's%20give%20women%20the%20contraception%20they%20so%20desperately%20want&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fzika-lets-give-women-the-contraception-they-so-desperately-want%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zika%3A%20Let%27s%20give%20women%20the%20contraception%20they%20so%20desperately%20want&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fzika-lets-give-women-the-contraception-they-so-desperately-want%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f626e700065578c1226d07a605c3cd6917b6d1e%2F0_31_822_493%2F822.jpg>
 Doctors Vince DeGennaro, Jean Renald Cornely and Valery Caleb Suprien with 
nurse Ursilia Saintil in a gynaecology exam room at Hospital Bernatd Mevs in 
Port au Prince, Haiti. Photograph: Grace Tillyard/IHI 
The choice to focus on expectant mothers rather than considering women as a 
whole will be costly, most of all for vulnerable women who are most likely to 
have an unintended pregnancy. In Haiti, where we work in women’s health, the 
cost – both social and economic – could be catastrophically high as the scale 
of the epidemic is probably drastically under-reported to date. In most low- 
and middle-income countries in Latin America, marginalised women’s chances of 
resuming their schooling and work will be decimated when they have to look 
after a severely disabled child.

The CDC’s efforts in Puerto Rico have been limited to handing out 
Zika-prevention kits, including insect repellent, mosquito nets, brochures and 
a condom as a reminder of the possibility of sexual transmission of Zika, and 
not as a form of contraception where no pregnancy is desired. Local authorities 
have also collected 1.2 million discarded tyres, dropped larvicide into 
abandoned pools, educated residents and trained local brigades in fumigation.

Efforts in Puerto Rico have been confounded because the US Congress has been 
unable to pass a Zika funding bill. None of the $250m (£200m) planned for Zika 
in Puerto Rico or the $376m for the Caribbean was earmarked for reproductive 
health services, sending signals to other governments and non-profits where to 
steer their efforts.

Widespread contraception would be one of the cheaper options for dealing with 
the Zika crisis, at only $31 per woman per year, including all the personnel 
costs of healthcare workers. Some have estimated that the cost of one child 
with Zika birth defects in the US is $4m, including extra ultrasounds, 
hospitalisations, surgeries and critical care. The CDCestimates 
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/wr/mm6512e1.htm> that 138,000 women of 
reproductive age in Puerto Rico (19%) do not currently desire pregnancy and are 
not using contraception. At $31 per woman per year, the $4.3m additional cost 
for achieving universal access to contraception is dwarfed by the $250m in the 
US Senate bill allocated for the prevention of Zika infections in pregnant 
women and associated medical costs.

Widespread contraception would be one of the cheaper options for dealing with 
the Zika crisis
Dr Vincent DeGennaro 
Our work in Haiti strives towards empowering women through delivering 
healthcare services. The failure to provide services that help women is in part 
due to the age-old problem of reducing women’s health to simply maternal 
health, and propelling programmes that tell women what to do rather then 
empowering them to make decisions for themselves. Zika, it seems, is no 
different.

Declaring contraception as the cheapest and most effective way to deal with 
the crisis would be a bold step towards lobbying all governments in the region 
to expand these much-needed services. In addition, contraception in low- and 
middle-income countries results in better birth-spacing, reduced maternal 
mortality and infant mortality, and advances in the socio-economic status of 
women.

The Zika crisis, like abstinence-based teachings for HIV prevention, is a 
missed opportunity to invest in women’s health infrastructure, where ideology 
trumps public health and financial logic in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Transnational public health authorities, like the CDC and WHO, are allowing 
politics with antipathy to women’s reproductive health to pollute public health 
logic, forcing countries to commit ineffective funds and set a standard that 
leaves women behind. Will we let yet another crisis go by without addressing 
reproductive health services for half our population?

Grace Tillyard is Director of Communications and Outreach for Innovating Health
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> International in Haiti.

Dr Vincent DeGennaro Jr is President of Innovating Health International in 
Haiti and Assistant Professor in the Division of Infectious Diseases and Global 
Medicine at University of Florida College of Medicine.
 