
Aid agencies have called on President Robert Mugabe’s government to look 
beyond political differences and prioritise humanitarian principles after the 
Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission accused the ruling Zanu-PF party ofpartisan 
food aid distribution 
<http://www.zhrc.org.zw/index.php/2014-07-02-07-41-38/speeches-presentations/156-zhrc-chairperson-commissioner-elasto-hilarious-mugwadi-s-statement-on-reported-food-aid-cases-at-a-press-conference-held-in-the-2nd-floor-boardroom-on-7-september-2016>
.


'It's a disaster': children bear brunt of southern Africa's devastating 
drought | Lucy Lamble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/21/drought-southern-africa-heavy-toll-students-fainting-malawi-zimbabwe>
The commission’s chairman, Elasto Mugwadi, revealed this week that an official 
investigation into reported discrimination in the distribution of food had 
uncovered evidence of political bias and theft of relief items, and reports of 
assault.

The inquiry was prompted by what Mugwadi described as “a flood of complaints” 
from communities grappling withsevere food shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/22/africa-worst-famine-since-1985-looms-for-50-million>
 caused by the country’s worst drought in 35 years.

Responding to reports of discriminatory food circulation, Machinda Marongwe, 
Oxfam’s country director in Zimbabwe, said: “Oxfam is deeply concerned with 
these findings and calls for humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality 
and impartiality, to be upheld in order to effectively deliver much needed 
assistance to the 4.2 million people affected by the drought. Every person has 
a right to receive the help they need, regardless of their political views.”

“The government should empower existing structures in the communities such as 
theDrought <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/drought> Relief Committees 
to better deal with such occurrences and ensure food assistance reaches all who 
need it, in a fair manner.

“At this point in time we should not be dealing with issues to do with the 
selection criteria of beneficiaries, but rather focusing more on short-term 
action to feed the vulnerable.”

Where drought is the new normal: El Niño worsens food shortages in Malawi and 
Zimbabwe – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/audio/2016/mar/30/drought-new-normal-el-nino-worsens-food-shortages-malawi-zimbabwe-africa-podcast>
The need to put philanthropy before politics was also underlined by the World 
Food Programme, a spokesman for whom stressed the importance of close 
coordination between agencies, donors and government. “WFP is providing a wide 
range of food and nutrition assistance in Zimbabwe, though not in any of the 
districts cited in the recently issued ZHRC report,” said the spokesman.

“WFP has in place a range of mechanisms to mitigate against the politicisation 
of food assistance in Zimbabwe … in coordination with the government, donors 
and other partners, we carry out food security assessments, including through 
the Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee, to determine the areas and the 
number of people in need of food or cash assistance.

“Every stage of the process, right up to and including actual distribution, is 
monitored by WFP and cooperating partners to ensure that assistance only 
reaches those entitled to it.”

Others, however, appear to have been less punctilious. Speaking in the 
Zimbabwean capital of Harare on Wednesday, Mugwadi spoke of “unbridled 
maladministration on the part of some officials public officials who were 
allegedly performing their duties partially and with bias against persons of 
particular political affiliations”.

“The ruling party members were the major perpetrators in violations linked to 
distribution of food, agricultural inputs and other forms of aid,” said Mugwadi.

Youths connected with Zanu-PF openly told people affiliated to the opposition 
that they would never get food aid, he added, revealing that the problem 
affected several rural areas across a country already riven by economic crisis.

In February, Mugabe, 92, declared a state of disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/05/zimbabwe-declares-state-of-disaster-drought-robert-mugabe>
 in regions affected by the El Niño-induced drought. The crisis has left 4 
million people severely hungry and in need of humanitarian aid until the next 
harvest season in March 2017.
 