
Zipcar UK <http://www.zipcar.co.uk/>, the pioneering pay-as-you-drive car 
sharing club, which launched in 2000, now has a network of 1,500 vehicles on 
the streets of London, Bristol, Cambridge and Oxford.

Car sharing has come of age and is now helping people get from A to B quickly, 
conveniently, cost-effectively and with a much lighter environmental footprint.

Zipcar's success comes from its focus on urban environments with existing, 
solid public transport infrastructures, giving people who no longer wish to own 
a car an alternative for journeys that involve difficult routes, contingency 
plans or heavy loads.

Cars can be hired by the hour or by the day from locations close to where 
people live and work.

With most cars in large cities sitting idle for the majority of the time, car 
ownership has become increasingly redundant, as well as financially 
prohibitive. Not only that, the concept of sharing goods and services that 
would otherwise be unaffordable or seldom used is a new way of thinking.

What also makes Zipcar attractive to the urban dweller is the extent of its 
fleet and the tools being used to manage the service, day-to-day. Self-service 
mobile technology enables drivers to set up an account, search for a local 
vehicle, book and even unlock their hire car using the Zipcar app.

Behind that interface, a service team supports customers 365 days a year with 
issues such as car location, breakdowns or accidents. A 60-strong management 
team runs the fuel-efficient fleet of cars, all of which are under two years 
old to minimise harmful emissions.

The benefits are significant: 28% of members have reduced the number of cars 
owned since joining; 25% report they have put off buying a car; and 62% say 
they are less likely to purchase one in future.

Car club members in London, for example, say they drive less, use public 
transport more and 33% cycle at least once a week. And while car club vehicles 
emit 20% less CO2 per km than average vehicles, a typical Zipcar member will 
save up to Â£3,000 a year in car running costs.

As well as making a positive impact on the environment, Zipcar expects to see 
a future where car sharing members outnumber car owners in major cities and 
residents all live within a five to 10-minute walk of a self-service car hire 
facility.

Working with urban planning authorities, the company also aims to help create 
communities of well-informed, well-connected people who know how to get around 
in the most sustainable ways.

Zipcar's strategy includes establishing car sharing facilities for all future 
university campuses, urban, residential and commercial developments. It aims to 
offer a service to individuals and businesses that is cost-effective, 
convenient and sustainable.

Ultimately, Zipcar hopes car sharing will support vibrant communities of 
people who enjoy urban life and want sustainable transport options.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks network <http://www.wordworksbysea.co.uk/>

The Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business> Sustainability Case 
Studies contain articles on all the initiatives that met the criteria for the 
GSB Awards, demonstrating elements of genuine innovation and forward thinking.
Become a GSB Member <https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> 
for regular updates from the network
 