
 One thing nobody foresaw in the 50s was the extraordinary omnipresence of the 
screen in modern culture. Some of this ubiquity is more humdrum than dumb: 
consider that what does exist within the computer screen's boundaries is 
perforce arranged in a fantastically bureaucratic pattern. The metaphor of the 
computer "desktop" was useful in that it furnished spatial metaphors with which 
to arrange our work: putting this file over there, or in that folder, helps us 
by replacing the computer's obscure mathematical operations with an 
approximation of how we work with paper in real life. The computer "desktop" is 
an approximation of clerking and filing cabinets; it immediately skews the 
valency of the computer screen away from concepts of leisure or play and 
towards bureaucratic duty.

It is in direct rebellion to such an affront that the rise of the video game 
has deliberately re-engineered the screen as a zone of pure play. Britain saw 
its first video-gaming boom in the 80s, largely among children. In the last ?ve 
years, however, the success of Sony's Play-Station has repositioned the video 
game as a cultural form acceptable to a discriminating adult audience, and 
especially to a new generation of techno-savvy young British adults who are 
rightly sceptical of passive acquiescence to what the television screen 
autocratically delivers. With the advent of the riotously imaginative 
aesthetics of three-dimensional video games such as Tomb Raider or Quake, the 
screen is stripped of its opacity and deceit. The entire screen becomes a fully 
transparent window on to imagined worlds that the player can navigate and 
explore on his or her own terms.

The video game is the cultural form that aims not to transfer some 
pre-existing process on to a screen - as early cinema and early television, for 
instance, both sought merely to furnish a proscenium arch for the transmission 
of theatrical plays - but is designed so as to exploit the virtues of the 
screen's plasticity and infinite representational possibilities, while avoiding 
its vices of partial revelation.

It is the video game, too, that reverses the pernicious, isolating effect of 
screen culture - the dressing-gowned internet addict at 3am, the silent family 
comatised by an evening of soaps - and conceives of the screen as an arena of 
sociable play. For most video-gaming is pursued among groups of friends, who 
gather around the television and console as previous generations gathered 
around the whist table or Monopoly board.

To survive, the old art forms must certainly abandon their hobbling sense of 
paranoid competition with screen-based entertainment. It is them, not video 
games, which seem dumb.

 Steven Poole is the author of Trigger Happy: The Inner Life of Video Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> (Fourth Estate, £12)
 