
The Australian incarnation of Peter Gabriel’s World of Music, Arts and Dance, 
Womadelaide, celebrates its 20th birthday this year, with more than 65 artists 
from over 20 countries playing across four nights and three days. As always, 
the festival will offer up a smorgasbord of genres, cultures and ideas: where 
else could you see Mongolian throat singersTulegar 
<https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/tulegur> on the same bill as Grammy 
award-winning hip-hop veterans De La Soul? Or Spanish flamenco greatDiego el 
Cigala <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/diego-el-cigala> kicking back to 
the smooth sounds of French electro-jazz actSt Germain 
<https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/st-germain>? Or watch Angélique Kidjo 
cook her favourite dish and David Suzuki in conversation with Indira Naidoo, in 
between bouncing on Jeremy Deller’s inflatable life-sizeStonehenge jumping 
castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/jan/19/sydney-festival-sacrilege-video>
?

Here are just 10 of the dozens of acts we’re looking forward to seeing – or 
discovering – this year.

De La Soul <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/de-la-soul>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgC1xuVCBl4o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgC1xuVCBl4o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgC1xuVCBl4o&media=>
Throw your hands in the air, people! Saturday night, Womadelaide’s gonna party 
like it’s 1989. New York alternative hip-hop veterans De La Soul have had more 
than a quarter of a century’s practice at spreading good vibes and good tunes. 
Expect the likes ofMe, Myself and I 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FJEzEDMqXQQ> off their sample-heavy 1989 debut 
3 Feet High and Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/29/how-we-made-3-feet-high-and-rising-de-la-soul>
, 1991 hit Ring Ring Ring (Ha Ha Hey) and their 2005 Gorillaz collaboration,
Feel Good Inc <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QV3sum2-G80>. We’re also curious 
to hear songs from their first album in 12 years – the Kickstarter-funded And 
The Anonymous Nobody is set for an April release.


How Adelaide could become Australia's most exciting city – simply by doubling 
down on culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/04/how-adelaide-could-become-australias-most-exciting-city-simply-by-doubling-down-on-culture>
Angélique Kidjo 
<https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/angelique-kidjo-and-the-adelaide-symphony-orchestra>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdlgESq5FAx4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdlgESq5FAx4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdlgESq5FAx4&media=>
“Africa is on the rise,” declared Angélique Kidjo as she picked up her third 
Grammy award for world music last month. The magnetic Beninese singer, once 
crowned by Time magazine as “Africa’s premier diva”, is the cream of a very 
strong crop of African musicians performing at Womadelaide – a crop that 
includes Seun Kuti (Nigeria), Alsarah (Sudan), Ajak Kwai (Sudan), Lady Black 
Mambazo (South Africa), Sampa the Great (Zambia) and Songhoy Boys (Mali).

Now based in Paris and New York (Kidjo fled her homeland in 1983), the 
fearlessly political, fiercely feminist Unicef goodwill ambassador will be 
making her Womadelaide debut accompanied by theAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> Symphony Orchestra. It’s 
officially a seated event, but given Kidjo’s live reputation, we doubt it’ll 
remain seated for long.


Ibeyi <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/ibeyi>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlHRAPIwsS5I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlHRAPIwsS5I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlHRAPIwsS5I&media=>
Meet Ibeyi: French-Cuban twins with a musical sixth sense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/30/ibeyi-french-cuban-twins-naomi-lisa-kainde-diaz-miguel-anga>
Beyoncé’s a fan; Angélique Kidjo a mentor; they’re descended from musical 
royalty and signed to London’s XL Records (Adele, MIA). But when French-Cuban 
twins Naomi and Lisa-Kaindé Díaz take to the stage, there’s nothing propping 
them up except two tea-light candles. One candle represents their elder sister, 
Yanira, who passed away in 2013; the other their father, Cuban percussionist 
and former Buena Vista Social Club member Miguel “Anga” Diaz, who died 10 years 
ago when the twins were 11.

Death, ancestral spirits and Santería saints permeate the lyrics of their 
hypnotic, soulful songs, which they sing in both English and Yorùbá – the 
language brought to Cuba by their west African slave ancestors. Lisa-Kaindé, 
who rocks a sophisticated blues-diva vibe, is the main vocal force, while Naomi 
contributes hip-hop and cajón-thumping beats.

Asha Bhosle <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/asha-bhosle>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c41336f1e0e6e20af3947557389e705100364b%2F0_181_1135_680%2F1135.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20acts%20to%20see%20at%20Womadelaide%202016%3A%20Ang%C3%A9lique%20Kidjo%20to%20Violent%20Femmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20acts%20to%20see%20at%20Womadelaide%202016%3A%20Ang%C3%A9lique%20Kidjo%20to%20Violent%20Femmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4c41336f1e0e6e20af3947557389e705100364b%2F0_181_1135_680%2F1135.jpg>
 Indian singer Asha Bhosle – the ‘voice of Bollywood’ and a mean cook. 
Photograph: Johansen Krause 
Performances by world-class octogenarians are becoming something of a 
Womadelaide tradition: last year Buena Vista Social Club songstress Omara 
Portuondo stole the show when she defied gravity (and doctor’s orders) and let 
loose some Cuban-style twerking. This year it’ll be India’s 82-year-old “voice 
of Bollywood <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/14/asha-bhosle>”, Asha 
Bhosle – immortalised in the Cornershop hit Brimful of Asha.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D85-vsILZjvw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D85-vsILZjvw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D85-vsILZjvw&media=>
Her stratospheric voice has soundtracked hundreds of Hindi films 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85-vsILZjvw> (she started her career as a 
playback singer at the age of 11) and she has dabbled in everything from 
traditional ghazals, bhajans and Indian pop songs toduets with Michael Stipe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmGoJuUTx1U>, Boy George and Australian 
cricket great Brett Lee <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3S9XjLqRD3A>. Bhosle 
is showing no signs of slowing down – in the past few years the passionate cook 
has expanded into the food business, opening 10 Indian restaurants in six 
countries.


Violent Femmes <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/violent-femmes>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgproa6vzgws&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgproa6vzgws>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgproa6vzgws&media=>
There’s been a mixed reception to the recent release of the US alt-rockers’ 
first full-length album in 15 years. And no doubt frontman Gordon Gano and 
bassist Brian Ritchie will be floggingWe Can Do Anything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/06/violent-femmes-we-can-do-anything-review-back-to-basics>
 to within an inch of its life. But it’ll be songs from the band’s 1983 
self-titled debut that every former and current alienated, hormonal teenager 
will be elbowing their way into the moshpit to belt out their lungs to.Blister 
in the Sun <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blister_in_the_Sun>, Kiss Off, Gone 
Daddy Gone, Add It Up: this is the stuff of music festival dreams.

The Planet Talks  <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/the-planet-talks>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f65c09eb02dfa4bf42901a3d36b4efeaf487a4b%2F0_0_2185_1312%2F2185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20acts%20to%20see%20at%20Womadelaide%202016%3A%20Ang%C3%A9lique%20Kidjo%20to%20Violent%20Femmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20acts%20to%20see%20at%20Womadelaide%202016%3A%20Ang%C3%A9lique%20Kidjo%20to%20Violent%20Femmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f65c09eb02dfa4bf42901a3d36b4efeaf487a4b%2F0_0_2185_1312%2F2185.jpg>
 L-R: Lenore Taylor, David Suzuki and First Dog on the Moon are appearing on 
panels in the Planet Talks section of Womadelaide. 
Environmental activist David Suzuki on Tony Abbott, solar panels and his book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/24/environmental-activist-david-suzuki-on-tony-abbott-solar-panels-and-his-book>
The Planet Talks series of live conversations and panel discussions about the 
environment is a chance to sit in the same tent as some of the world’s leading 
thinkers and creatives. Canadian environmentalist David Suzuki, an ardent 
advocate for action on climate change and just a few weeks’ shy of his 80th 
birthday, is this year’s star guest, returning to Australia for the first time 
since his“prayers” were “answered” by Tony Abbott’s September toppling. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/24/environmental-activist-david-suzuki-on-tony-abbott-solar-panels-and-his-book>

Meanwhile, Guardian Australia’s Walkley-award-winning political editor, Lenore 
Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lenore-taylor>, will host a panel 
comprising Ross Garnaut, Tim Smit and John Hewson, in conversation about 
climate change and economic growth. In addition, Guardian Australia’s beloved 
canine cartoonistFirst Dog on the Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/first-dog-on-the-moon> will be present in 
his rarely seen human form, joining a panel of communications gurus to chew the 
bone about the art of conveying complex environmental problems with maximum 
creative punch.

Djuki Mala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/20/djuki-mala-review-playful-yolngu-dance-numbers-from-cheeky-youtube-stars>

Djuki Mala review – playful Yolngu dance numbers from cheeky YouTube stars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/20/djuki-mala-review-playful-yolngu-dance-numbers-from-cheeky-youtube-stars>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO-MucVWo-Pw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO-MucVWo-Pw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO-MucVWo-Pw&media=>
They rose to YouTube stardom as the Chooky Dancers performing Zorba the Greek 
on a Darwin basketball court. Now going by their Yolgnu name Djuki Mala, this 
six-man Elcho Island troupe tell stories of their Arnhem Land home by fusing 
high-octane Indigenous dance with hip-hop, breakdance, clowning and Bollywood, 
performed to the music of Gene Kelly, Michael Jackson and other pop culture 
heavyweights. It’s performance art, it’s uproarious fun, and they’ve got enough 
costume changes to rival a Madonna show.


Ester Rada <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/ester-rada>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ6fNJseeZAQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ6fNJseeZAQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ6fNJseeZAQ&media=>
Lauded as “the Middle East’s new soul diva”, Israeli-born Ethiopian Ester Rada 
slips seamlessly between western and African influences. On the western front, 
Rada’s English-language music blends blues, R&B, funk and reggae, channelling 
Nina Simone (she has covered four of her songs), Ella Fitzgerald, Aretha 
Franklin, Amy Winehouse, Whitney Houston and Erykah Badu. Her African heritage 
comes through in her nod to Ethio-jazz as well as the Ethiopian songs she sings 
in Amharic.Asked by the UK’s Jewish News 
<http://www.jewishnews.co.uk/israeli-ethiopian-singer-ester-rada-bares-soul/> 
whether she plans to use her position “to take a stance on Israel’s political 
conflict”, Rada replied: “Yes. I believe in love and unity. I don’t believe in 
borders and definitions.”

John Grant  <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/john-grant>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2Ig4sMURdc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2Ig4sMURdc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU2Ig4sMURdc&media=>
How Iceland saved John Grant: 'I feel safe here'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/30/how-iceland-save-john-grant> 
Iceland-based American singer-songwriter John Grant has a history of using 
music festivals as a giant confessional. In 2012, two years after his debut 
solo albumQueen of Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/20/john-grant-queen-of-denmark> was 
voted Mojo’s album of the year, Grant announced on stage at London’s Meltdown 
festival that he had been diagnosed as HIV positive.

These days Grant – who has kicked the booze, the substance abuse and the sex 
addiction – is loved up, quite content and riding high on the success of his 
latest album,Grey Tickles, Black Pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/01/john-grant-grey-tickles-black-pressure-review>
. Instead, expect electro-lush ballads, black humour and a velvety baritone 
exhaled from within the overgrown environs of a Viking-esque beard.

All Our Exes Live in Texas 
<https://www.womadelaide.com.au/program/all-our-exes-live-in-texas>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b53b88cd661a6dde9818e6817a59703ca984c16%2F119_131_759_552%2F759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20acts%20to%20see%20at%20Womadelaide%202016%3A%20Ang%C3%A9lique%20Kidjo%20to%20Violent%20Femmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20acts%20to%20see%20at%20Womadelaide%202016%3A%20Ang%C3%A9lique%20Kidjo%20to%20Violent%20Femmes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2F10-acts-to-see-at-womadelaide-angelique-kidjo-to-violent-femmes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b53b88cd661a6dde9818e6817a59703ca984c16%2F119_131_759_552%2F759.jpg>
 Anti-girl-band All Our Exes Live in Texas come from Sydney – and have no exes 
in Texas. 
Who’d have thunk four sweet-voiced women singing alt-country tunes in 
four-part harmony would have such a knack for stirring up controversy? From 
wading neck-deep into theTriple J Hottest 100 gender imbalance row 
<http://www.thebrag.com/music/triple-j-hottest-100-debate-bringing-out-worst-sexism-heres-why-my-band-will-boycott-perths-biggest>
, to infuriating boy-band fans when they were announced as last year’s 
Backstreet Boys support act (they had only applied as a joke 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/entertainment/sydney-confidential/all-our-exes-live-in-texas-we-put-our-hands-up-for-the-backstreet-boys-as-a-joke-and-we-got-the-gig/news-story/9cf194702887021eaba41186c9c07532>
), Sydney singers-songwriters Elana Stone, Katie Wighton, Hannah Crofts and 
Georgia Mooney are happy to take risks and speak their minds. They’ve been 
steadily winning over Australian festival crowds (and, happily, Backstreet Boys 
fans) with their witty banter, “anti-girl-band” indie charm, and their talent 
with a ukulele, mandolin and accordion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DppCmua8Yl-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DppCmua8Yl-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DppCmua8Yl-4&media=>
 * Womadelaide 2016 <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/> is on at Botanic Park, 
Adelaide from 11-14 March
 