
We're making some changes to our regular Apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apps> Rush post, which is now being 
split by platforms, and run on a weekly or monthly basis.

Here's the first weekly Top 10 for Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, based on the last week's 
releases. An iOS version will be posted later in the day, while BlackBerry and 
Windows Phone will both get monthly posts (although as soon as the flow of 
great apps makes it possible to run weekly posts for them, we'll do that too).

Why no big games? There's a separate weekly post for the best new smartphone 
and tablet games, whichyou can find here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2012/aug/09/best-mobile-games-pitfall-bingo>
. Some – like Noddy in Toyland below – will fall into a grey area between games 
and kid-apps though.

On with this weeks Android apps:

Rumpus 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.livewiremobile.rumpus>

The vast majority of whizzy tablet music-discovery apps launch first for iPad, 
so Rumpus is bucking the trend – good news for music fans who've just bought a 
Nexus 7 tablet, for example. It offers biographies of thousands of artists, 
discographies, music videos, and links to similar acts, as well as a built-in 
downloads store.

Twitpic <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.twitpic>

The "first ever photo sharing site for Twitter" has touched down on Android, 
claiming to be an easier and better way to share photos and videos with 
friends. Quite a claim, given Instagram's presence on Android, not to mention 
Facebook and Twitter's own apps.

Noddy in Toyland 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.avanquest.noddy>

Avanquest reckons its new app is "the first Noddy game for Android 
smartphones", bringing all the stars from his modern TV show (Tessie, Mr Plod, 
Bumpy, Mr Jumbo and The Skittles, etc). The app includes puzzles, pairs, car 
racing and a spot-the-difference game.

Dr Seuss' Sleep Book 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.oceanhouse_media.booksleepbook_app>

More fun for the children of Android-owning parents here, with the latest 
book-app from Oceanhouse Media. It includes the familiar Seuss characters and 
illustrations, following "one small yawn that spreads from bedroom to bedroom 
across the country until finally ninety-nine zillion, nine trillion and three 
Seussian creatures are sound asleep".

Trello <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.trello>

Trello has a snappy slogan: "The easiest way to organise anything". That means 
birthday parties, sales leads, or simple To-Do lists. It's the latest personal 
management app to launch on Android, and is getting some rave reviews from 
early users.

Kiip <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=me.kiip.kiipsake>

Currently a US app, although with Kiip having just launched in the UK too, it 
may well cross the Atlantic sooner rather than later. This is the official app 
of the mobile rewards network, which specialises in offering real-world 
vouchers when you reach achievements in certain mobile games. Its app updates 
users about new rewards and Kiip-enabled games.

Logie T.Rex Augmented Reality 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.logie.promotypes.trex>

A bit of fun here, if you're not an augmented reality sceptic. Launched by 
developer Logie, it's a showcase for how AR could be used in education and 
museums: an animated T-Rex that leaps out from a printable marker when your 
smartphone is pointed at it.

Android HIFI 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.android_hifi.speaker>

The latest sign of some of the creative development that's going on among 
Android developers: this turns your smartphone into a receiver for Apple's 
AirPlay technology – streaming music from AirPlay clients including iTunes. 
It's early days, and heaven knows what Apple will make of it, but one to watch.

BuildApp Pro 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.leonid.myroom.pro>

Popular home-design app BuildApp has been available as a free download on 
Android for a while now, but now it has a separate paid version. The idea: 
model your house in the app, complete with photos used for textures, and get 
automatic calculations of distances and surfaces.

Trainz Driver 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.n3vgames.android.driver>

You might describe this as a game, but I see it more as a fun electronic 
train-set, which qualifies it for more general app status! It's a spin-off from 
tablet app Trainz Simulator, providing a way to ride around tracks created by 
users of that on a variety of locomotives.

That's this week's selection, but what's been hogging a homescreen slot on 
your Android device? Make your recommendations in the comments section.
 