
Anderson Cooper

Six months after the January 2010 earthquake shattered Haiti, the nation’s 
president was not to be found sweltering beneath the fraying tarpaulins that 
still sheltered millions. Instead, he was on a hastily erected podium in front 
of the collapsed presidential palace, conferring a knighthood on CNN anchor
Anderson Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anderson-cooper>.

The network’s star reporter received his white enamel Maltese cross for his 
reporting on the disaster, at that point most memorable for the momenthe 
scooped up an injured Haitian kid <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Unh4v1lFU0>
, realised he had absolutely no idea what to do next and handed him over to 
some other random people. It was one of a series of reports delivered in 
strikingly clean T-shirts.

Cooper later claimed he was accepting the award on behalf of all reporters 
<http://www.tampabay.com/blogs/media/content/cnns-anderson-cooper-accepts-award-haiti-does-it-further-blur-line-between-reporter-and-advo>
 who covered the crisis.

Sean Penn

Sean Penn pitched up in the earliest days of the Haiti response and made 
friends with the US military, mostly because no one else took him seriously. 
Thus started a love-in that has seen him awardedThe Commander’s Award for 
Service <http://lctabus.com/new.asp?sean-penn/> (US Army 82nd Airborne 
Division); 82nd Airborne Award for Meritorious Service; the Operation Unified 
Response JTF Haiti Certificate from Lieutenant General US Army Commander P.K. 
Keen (still paying attention there at the back?), the 1st Recon 73rd Division 
Coin of Excellence; 2nd Brigade Combat Team Coin of Excellence; Commendation of 
Excellence United States Southern Command and the Award of Excellence by the 
Deputy Commander US Southern Command. This was all for setting upa halfway 
decent NGO <http://jphro.org/> and living in a tent 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Making-a-difference/Change-Agent/2012/0423/Actor-activist-Sean-Penn-says-he-s-in-Haiti-for-the-long-haul>
 in Haiti.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4d4000bba11d3864bcedd31ef8689e400a2fd0%2F76_2_2532_1519%2F2532.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20jaw-droppingly%20odd%20humanitarian%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20jaw-droppingly%20odd%20humanitarian%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4d4000bba11d3864bcedd31ef8689e400a2fd0%2F76_2_2532_1519%2F2532.jpg>
 Ban Ki-moon meets with Sean Penn in Haiti. Photograph: Sipa Press / Rex 
Features 
Bill Cosby

It’s a little strange to get an award for being nice and kind, which is what 
we’re all supposed to do with one another
Ellen DeGeneres 
In 2002, the American Television Academy established the Bob Hope humanitarian 
award, retrospectively recasting the king of light entertainment as an advocate 
of in-depth socio-political commentary. If their first recipient (Oprah Winfrey 
<http://www.emmys.com/video/oprah-winfrey-accepts-bob-hope-humanitarian-award>) 
is not known for her work in humanitarian emergencies, their second (Bill 
Cosby, in 2003 
<http://chronicle.augusta.com/stories/2003/09/22/tel_390244.shtml#.VqX4u2ThDAw>
) is now filed firmly under “moving swiftly on”. One of the problems with 
awards is – unlike honorary degrees and the like – they are quite hard to take 
away. Perhaps that’s why the ATA moved to safer ground in 2010 withGeorge 
Clooney 
<http://deadline.com/2010/07/emmys-george-clooney-to-receive-atas-bob-hope-humanitarian-award-55309/>
, a man who has at least actually been in a war zone for over 24 hours, and 
haven’t nominated anyone since.

Ellen DeGeneres

American celebrity award show People’s Choice have an all-American answer to 
the liability issue when issuing humanitarian awards: competitive 
humanitarianism. Sadly, rather than run actual competitions (fastest proposal 
writer, beneficiary wrestling etc) this means the Favourite Humanitarian award 
gets voted for by the American public. It therefore goes to someone for 
basically being likeable/hot/in something everyone quite liked that year (see 
2015’s winnerBen Affleck 
<http://blog.peopleschoice.com/2015/01/07/peoples-choice-awards-2015-ben-affleck-favorite-humanitarian-speech/>
). To her credit,the 2016 winner Ellen DeGeneres 
<http://blog.peopleschoice.com/2016/01/04/peoples-choice-awards-2016-ellen-degeneres-favorite-humanitarian/>
 actually pointed this out inher acceptance speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWtW1DjhO-Q>. “It’s a little strange to get an 
award for being nice and generous and kind, which is what we’re all supposed to 
do with one another,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69ef2c0067b49464e29813c45c3b06af56e31d3b%2F133_301_3061_1836%2F3061.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20jaw-droppingly%20odd%20humanitarian%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20jaw-droppingly%20odd%20humanitarian%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69ef2c0067b49464e29813c45c3b06af56e31d3b%2F133_301_3061_1836%2F3061.jpg>
 Ellen DeGeneres, the people’s “favourite humanitarian”. Photograph: Danny 
Moloshok/Reuters 
George Bush

Times are hard for extravagantly named and expensive academic institutions, so 
they can hardly be blamed for following the age-old strategy of inventing vague 
awards and giving them to very rich famous people at a swankily lucrative 
fundraising dinner. But the Josef Korbel School of International Studies at 
Denver University’sdecision to pick George W Bush 
<http://www.denverpost.com/ci_23921447/no-school-named-josef-korbel-should-not-give>
 for an Improving the Human Condition award succeeded only in uniting current 
students, alumni and staff in protest.

After 2,000 signed a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/dean-christopher-hill-josef-korbel-school-of-international-studies-rescind-george-w-bush-s-improving-the-human-condition-award>
, the dean of Korbel (a former Bush staffer) sent out asquirmingly honest email 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/03/du-george-bush-award_n_3541932.html> 
indirectly confirming that the award was a fundraising wheeze: “To have the 
former president attend is a tremendous opportunity to use the occasion of this 
dinner to raise much needed funds for our school,” he pleaded. Rather than 
cancel, they simply changed the name of gong in question, settling on the “
Global Service award 
<http://www.upi.com/Top_News/US/2013/07/11/George-W-Bush-to-receive-humanitarian-award-despite-protests/85161373551235/>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904aae1843dc8df4931c63cfcc78399a2f7aff07%2F42_70_1914_2872%2F1914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20of%20the%20most%20jaw-droppingly%20odd%20humanitarian%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20of%20the%20most%20jaw-droppingly%20odd%20humanitarian%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2F10-of-the-most-jaw-droppingly-odd-humanitarian-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F904aae1843dc8df4931c63cfcc78399a2f7aff07%2F42_70_1914_2872%2F1914.jpg>
 David Beckham receives his Humanitarian Leadership Award at the Unicef ball. 
Photograph: Jonathan Leibson/Getty Images for U.S. Fund for UNICEF 
David Beckham

Just in case you thought it was just dollar hungry American academics who 
invented spurious awards for fundraising purposes, a few days ago Unicef 
Goodwill Ambassador David Beckhamreceived a Humanitarian Leadership Award 
<http://www.unicef.org.uk/Media-centre/Press-releases/UNICEF-Goodwill-Ambassador-David-Beckham-receives-the-Danny-Kaye-Humanitarian-Leadership-Award-/>
 from Unicef for his work with, er Unicef. At a lovely big ticket glitzy Unicef 
party in New York, naturally.

Tony Blair

Save the Children’s decision to award Tony Blair a Global Legacy award at yet 
another shiny ceremony in New York in 2014 (also attended by Lassie the dog) 
prompted a global protest –led by their own staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/25/save-the-children-furious-charity-global-legacy-tony-blair>
. Insistence from senior management that the award was in recognition solely of 
his work in Africa did nothing to shift the view that Blair’s role in the 2003 
Iraq war disqualified him from humanitarian awards.

A protest petition attracted over 120,000 signatures 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/stop-save-the-children-charity-from-giving-tony-blair-their-annual-global-legacy-award>
 and over 200 staff members circulated a letter declaring the award a betrayal 
of the organisation’s values.Save the Children publicly apologised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/03/save-the-children-head-apologises-for-upset-over-award-to-tony-blair>
 and said that there should have been a better “risk assessment” of the 
decision. Some Save the Children staffers said privately that they’d rather the 
award had gone to Lassie.

Zvonimir Cicak

For more than 20 years the Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights 
<http://www.hho.hr/> has worked fearlessly to champion the cases of the 
powerless downtrodden by the powerful. Among the founding members was the 
indomitable Zvonimir Cicak, tireless advocate for peace and all-round leader of 
the Croatian liberal left. In 2015, his considerable lifelong achievements were 
recognised when he accepted an award for his work from the Croatian president.

In the kind of moment that will have all those who suffer from anxiety dreams 
reaching for the beta blockers, the previously obscure human rights defender’s
trousers completely fell down 
<http://www.joe.co.uk/life/humanitarian-leaders-pants-fall-down-in-mid-photo-with-the-croatian-president-video/30806>
 as he reached out to collect the award. The fact it was a large poster-size 
certificate saved his modesty but not his reputation: after a decades of 
patient campaigning the first four pages of his Google results are now 
exclusively of the “Man Picks Up Award, Loses Trousers” variety. Note to all 
future award attendees: the lifetime of achievement is all very well, but for 
God’s sake don’t forget the belt.

Brits

From The Beatles to Bieber, how pop stars have saved the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/09/from-the-beatles-to-bieber-how-pop-stars-have-saved-the-world-one-direction>
When the tide began to turn in Sierra Leone early 2015, British prime minister 
David Cameron wanted high profile ways to take the credit, and some sharp-eyed 
Westminster spin doctor saw the glint of PR gold – literally. Cameron announced 
the invention of the Ebola Medal, tastefully embossed with the outline of the 
virus,to be awarded in recognition of the bravery of responders 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/434355/Command_paper_Ebola_Medal_for_Service_in_West_Africa.pdf>
 (pdf) – responders, that is, who were Brits. The decision left NGOs in the 
awkward position of formally recognising exclusively the British members of 
their team, with the criteria even excluding those of dual UK Sierra Leonean 
nationality resident in country. And no actual Sierra Leoneans.

… You?

Feeling a little left out in all this award schmaltz? Furious that celebs who 
wouldn’t know what an IDP was if they were asked to adopt one are getting all 
these shiny mantelpiece enhancers while you, the real humanitarian, are 
sweating it out in your Juba shipping container? Well, calm down – because 
there’s an award just for you. TheWorld Humanitarian awards 
<http://worldhumanitarianawards.org/> are looking for nominees for their 2016 
Man and Woman of the year. Just email your CV to
worldhumanitarianawards@gmail.com <mailto:worldhumanitarianawards@gmail.com>, 
impress their board of “seasons artists, entrepreneurs, film makers and notable 
politicians” and you could join the likes ofDennis Rodman and Pearl Jam 
<http://worldhumanitarianawards.org/wha_winners.htm> in perfecting the art of 
glistening tears of thanks and humility on the podium next August.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 