
Visit Mirehouse, Keswick

Take spare clothes on a visit to this 17th-century manor house on the shores 
of Bassenthwaite Lake. There are so many natural play areas concealed within 
its wooded grounds that children will slip from one messy adventure into 
another. From the walled Bee Garden, with its heather maze and sheltered dens 
(perfect for picnics), you can hear shrieks coming from the adventure 
playground, where a zip-wire, rope climbers and balance bridges crisscross a 
gushing stream. The rhododendron-lined footpath passes a play fort and 
steeplechase, before crossing woods and fields to reach the lake shore. Leave 
time to explore the biking and walking trails in adjacentDodd Wood 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/website/recreation.nsf/LUWebDocsByKey/EnglandCumbriaNoForestDoddWood>
, where telescopes are trained on Bassenthwaite's nesting ospreys between April 
and August.
• 017687 72287, mirehouse.com <http://www.mirehouse.com/>.House and garden: 
adults £7, children £3, family (2 adults and up to 4 children) £18; garden, 
playground and lakeside walk: adults £3.50, children £1.50. House opens 
April-October on Wednesday and Sunday (plus Friday in August), 2pm-5pm; garden 
and playground open daily from March-October from 10am to 5pm

Cruise Derwentwater
 Photograph: Alamy 
Compared with some of the pleasure boats that ply Lakeland's bigger waterways, 
the Keswick Launch on Derwentwater is affordable and flexible. Its wooden boats 
zip frequently between seven jetties, so you can stay on for a 50-minute 
circuit or hop off to explore pebble beaches and lakeside footpaths. A good 
starting point is the marina at Nichol End, where the dog-friendly cafe serves 
homemade pizzas and tables overlook the slopes of Skiddaw. An easy stroll takes 
you to the next jetty at Hawes End to catch a boat back. Or you can join the 
walkers heading for High Brandelhow via the 451m peak of Catbells – you need 
five hours, agile children andOS Explorer Map OL4 
<http://www.shop.ordnancesurveyleisure.co.uk/products/paper-maps/paper-maps-ordnance-survey-great-britain/paper-maps-ordnance-survey-great-britain-os-explorer-map/the-lake-district-nw-area/pid-9780319240212>
 – for views across the Northern fells.
• 29 Manor Park, Keswick, 017687 72263, keswick-launch.co.uk 
<http://www.keswick-launch.co.uk/>. Hop-on/hop-off day tickets: family £23, 
adults £9.25, children £4.50; single trips from £2-£7.90 (children half price). 
Open 9am year-round, closing time varies

Aira Force waterfall, Ullswater valley
 Aira Beck, just above Aira Force. Photograph: Alamy 
After jostling for space in the car park, most visitors to this National Trust 
site walk up to the waterfall, take a few photos, then walk back down. Better 
to come at it from above, by parking near the village of Dockray and following 
Aira Beck downstream. Ullswater twinkles in the distance as you descend into 
ancient woodlands with fells rising on either side. The beck tumbles over 
boulders and stepping stones, creating a series of natural pools where hours 
disappear in building dams, paddling and picnicking. The waterfall, once you 
reach it, is awesome: a 20m drop that can be viewed from above and below. The 
only downside is the walk back, but you could always hang out in the tea room 
while a kindly partner sprints back for the car.
• 017684 82067, nationaltrust.org.uk/ullswater-and-aira-force 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/ullswater-and-aira-force/>

Visit the owls at Muncaster Castle
 Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
From the terminus of the scenic Laal Ratty railway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/interactive/2008/nov/14/ravenglass-eskdale-railway-lake-district>
 line that descends from the foothills of Scafell to the coastal village of 
Ravenglass (ravenglass-railway.co.uk <http://www.ravenglass-railway.co.uk/>), 
it is a mile's walk to Muncaster Castle, the home of the World Owl Trust. The 
aviaries in the walled garden are home to more than 49 species of owl, 
including unusual and endangered birds, such as the Ethiopian eagle owl and 
Haitian ashy-faced owl. There are 70 acres of grounds to explore – visit in May 
to see bluebells and rhododendrons in dazzling bloom – as well as the castle 
itself, said to be one of the most haunted buildings in England.
• 01229 717614, muncaster.co.uk <http://www.muncaster.co.uk/>. Adults £13 
(£7.50 owl centre and grounds only), children £7.50 (£6), under fives free. 
10.30am-5pm daily, 25 March-October, castle closed Saturdays

Walk a Wainwright: Loughrigg Fell
 Photograph: Alamy 
"No ascent is more repaying for the small labour involved" wrote Alfred 
Wainwright ofLoughrigg Fell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loughrigg_Fell>. At 
335m, Loughrigg is one of the smallest of theWainwright Fells 
<http://www.thewainwrightfells.co.uk/>, but its isolated position offers 
panoramic views across the central Lake District. With its easy-to-follow path 
and gentle contours, it is also a good choice for walkers with children. From 
Rydal – where you can visit Rydal Mount Wordsworth's home (rydalmount.co.uk 
<http://www.rydalmount.co.uk/>) – a tranquil path follows the shore of Rydal 
Water past the gaping Rydal Cave framed by jutting, angular rocks. The route 
then follows Loughrigg Terrace, a delightful traverse overlooking Grasmere, 
before climbing to a rocky but undulating summit that is scattered with streams 
and tarns. Remember that a family-friendly fell is still a fell – and always 
take a map (OS Explorer Map OL7 
<http://www.shop.ordnancesurveyleisure.co.uk/products/paper-maps/paper-maps-ordnance-survey-great-britain/paper-maps-ordnance-survey-great-britain-os-explorer-map/the-english-lake-district-se-area/pid-9780319240243>
).  

Cycling in Whinlatter Forest
 Cyclewise, Cumbria 
England's only mountain forest  
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/whinlatterforestpark> is a playground for trail 
bikers, and you do not need finely honed skills to enjoy the thrill of a 
two-wheeled descent. The 8kmQuercus Trail 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-7u2at7> is suitable for anyone who is 
reasonably confident on a bike (although you might have to get off and push in 
places). It meanders up, over and around the lower section of the forest, and 
while it does not scale the heights of the more advancedAltura Trail 
<http://www.visitcumbria.com/kes/whinlatter-forest-park-altura-mountain-bike-trail.htm>
, it still rises far enough to provide views across Blencathra, Skiddaw and the 
other northern fells. If you don't have your own mountain bikes you can hire 
them at Cyclewise (minimum 14in wheel, minimum height about 4ft 8inches), which 
also runs family mountain-bike skills sessions during school holidays.
• 017687 78711, cyclewise.co.uk <http://www.cyclewise.co.uk/>. Bike hire 
£22.50 per day (£17.50 children); three-hour skills course £105 for family of 
four (booking essential). Open every day, 10am-5pm

Boating on Ullswater
 Photograph: Alamy 
There is no better way to experience the majesty of Ullswater than under sail 
or oar. The Glenridding Sailing Centre offers family taster sessions from its 
base at the foot of Helvellyn. In a red-sailed wooden boat your children will 
feel like Arthur Ransome's swallows and amazons as they take turns at the 
tiller under the supervision of an instructor. Alternatively you can hire 
kayaks, take a picnic and explore the inlets and islands at the south end of 
Ullswater, which despite being Cumbria's second-biggest lake, is also one of 
its quietest.
• The Spit, Glenridding, 017684 82541, glenriddingsailingcentre.co.uk 
<http://www.glenriddingsailingcentre.co.uk/>. Taster sessions from £40 for one 
person per hour to £400 for four people all day (under sixes free). Kayaks from 
£10 per hour to £45 per day

A walk round Buttermere
 Photograph: Alamy 
Buttermere has no jetties, no motor boats, no picnic tables … just a 1¼-mile 
stretch of shimmering water surrounded by steep-sided fells and farmland. 
Walking around Buttermere takes two to three hours with children; the path is 
bumpy in places but manageable by all-terrain buggy (although you'll need to 
lift it over the kissing gates). The shoreline is dotted with mini beaches, 
some sheltered and mossy, others wide and pebbly: children may become so 
absorbed in pebble-skimming and paddling that they forget to ask when it's time 
for ice-cream. A kiosk lurks in the car park halfway round, or wait until you 
return to Buttermere village, where the tea room atSyke Farm 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2007/may/12/camping.uk8> sells ice-cream made 
with milk from its own Ayrshire herd.
• Syke Farm (017687 70277) is open from February half term until 
October/November, weather depending

Cookery school, Staveley
 Lucy Cooks cookery school 
A family session at Lucy Cooks is more than a good day out. It promotes the 
pleasure of cooking while teaching basic skills to encourage children's 
independence in the kitchen. Adults and children (aged 4-15) work together to 
produce a three-course meal, enough for a communal lunch with some leftovers to 
take home. In a six-hour session you might bake your own bread and whip up a 
red-onion relish to go with hand-made cheeseburgers. The cookery school, which 
is in a local-food hotspot next to the excellentMore? The Artisan Bakery 
<http://www.moreartisan.co.uk/> and the Hawkshead Brewery, will launch half-day 
children's courses in August (age 6 upwards), where adults supervise but can't 
join in.
• 015394 32288, lucycooks.co.uk <http://www.lucycooks.co.uk/>. Sunday fundays 
take place once a month, £125 per adult/child team (extra children £62); 
children's courses £70

Orienteering in Grizedale Forest
 Photograph: Alamy 
Grizedale Forest near Hawkshead is known for its graded mountain-bike trails 
andGo Ape! treetop adventure course <http://goape.co.uk/days-out/grizedale>. 
But if you want to engage your brains as well as your muscles you could have a 
go at orienteering. This "thought sport" can be as competitive or communal as 
you like: the idea is to use clues in the landscape to navigate your way 
between set points or "controls". You can buy orienteering maps in the visitor 
centre (£1.50 each) and there are seven possible routes, from an easy-to-follow 
one-mile trail to a challenging four-mile course; there is also an orienteering 
trail for mountain bikers. Look out for views across Coniston Water through the 
clearings and for some of the 60-plus sculptures hidden among the trees.
• 01229 860010, visitlakelandforests.co.uk <http://visitlakelandforests.co.uk/>

Know of any other brilliant family days out in the Lake District? Add your 
recommendation in the comments below
 