
Arrested Development make great lasagne 

 The Taste the World tent featured artists discussing their careers while 
preparing their favourite dishes.Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/arrested-development-review-cooking-up-a-storm>
, the frontman of the evangelical 1990s hip-hoppers, mucked in sporting mirror 
shades, natty dreads and a fetching Womad apron.


 Neko is back on the Case 

Neko Case  <http://nekocase.com/>has been out of the action for most of the 
past four years, after the death of her parents and her grandmother. Her set, 
mostly drawn from the sterling comeback albumThe Worse Things Get the Harder I 
Fight, the Harder I Fight the More I Love You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/29/neko-case-worse-things-review>, 
was painfully raw and effortlessly cool, although her flaming red hair makes 
her look uncannily like an alt countryRebekah Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade>. 


 Frontless, studded leather jerkins may hit the catwalks next year 

 OKk, maybe not. But the Mongolian biker chic sported by Hanggai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/womadelaide-hanggai-and-neko-case-review>
’s frontman suggested that it is possible to get away with this look without 
spending too much time in the gym.


 Pokey LaFarge wants a world with Billy Bragg 

 A pity these two weren’t playing on the same day, as this would have been a 
backstage spat worth seeking out.Pokey <http://www.pokeylafarge.net>, the king 
of dustbowl swing, took exception to Bragg’s claim in the Guardian that
Americana is an English invention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/sep/20/billy-bragg-americana-british-teenagers>
. “I just want to put this on record,” he told the crowd, “Billy – I’m on your 
side but brother, you crossed a line.”


 Emel Mathlouthi relents 

 Having penned Kelmti Horra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rKNGG4UFgJk&feature=youtu.be> (My Word Is 
Free) , the protest song that became the theme tune on the streets throughout 
the Arab spring, Tunisian singer-songwriterEmel Mathlouthi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-emel-mathlouthi-and-rachid-taha-review-rocking-the-arab-world>
 demurred when asked if she would be including it at her debut performance in 
Australian. Her set previewed the sultry, electronic feel of a forthcoming 
album, but she ditched the laptop to perform her signature song as a second 
encore, gently strumming an electric guitar.


 The Celtic twilight rules

Adelaide is a long way to go to listen to British folk music, but Sam Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/28/sam-lee-gypsy-folk-music> 
enchanted the crowd with ancient songs about the pox whileBreabach 
<http://breabach.com>’s twin bagpipe assault made one quite wistful for 
Edinburgh at festival time.


 You can make guitars from cigar boxes


 As crafted by Brisbane bluesman Nigel McTrusty 
<http://www.cigarboxnation.com/profile/NigelMcTrustry>: three strings, a pickup 
and a house key for a bridge. You can have any key you want, as long as it’s G. 
To witness your correspondent’s attempt at playing one, see below.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F09%2Fan-evening-at-womadelaide-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F9%2F1394340213881%2FAlfred-Hickling-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Womadelaide%202014%3A%20an%20eclectic%20symphony%20of%20folk%2C%20funk%20and%20home%20cooking%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F09%2Fan-evening-at-womadelaide-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Womadelaide%202014%3A%20an%20eclectic%20symphony%20of%20folk%2C%20funk%20and%20home%20cooking%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F09%2Fan-evening-at-womadelaide-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F9%2F1394340213881%2FAlfred-Hickling-001.jpg>
 Alfred Hickling at Womadelaide 2014 
The Chinese for ‘cheers!’ 

 The traditional drinking song Jiu Ge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I3vMzEWw3qo> was a highlight of Hanggai’s set 
and was played again a couple of days later by the up-and-coming indie rockers 
from Yunnan province,Shanren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/23/shanren-left-foot-dance-of-the-yi-review>
. The unofficial anthem of Womadelaide 2014.


 How to make an Aussie self-cooling system 

 If you’re attending a festival in close to 40C heat, you bring a hat. If 
you’re down at the front, you pour a bottle of water into it first.


 Even festivals aren’t safe from fire


 Within hours of Femi Kuti’s incendiary closing set, one of the three main 
stageswent up in flames 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-03-11/womadelaide-stage-damaged-by-fire/5311670>
. The cause is unknown and no one was injured, though an innocent grand piano 
is thought to have been among the victims.
 