
When watching the entire series of 11.22.63 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2879552/>, I thought less about executive producer 
JJ Abrams’s other TV shows such as Lost, other Stephen King adaptations such as 
Under the Dome, other period pieces such as Mad Men, or other time-travel yarns 
such as Outlander. Instead, I thought about Glee – the musical comedy from Fox 
that became more tedious and ludicrous as time went on. It is not that this 
series about a teacher from Maine who goes back in time to prevent the 
assassination of John Fitzgerald Kennedy is nearly as campy as Glee; it’s that 
they both had absolutely perfect pilots, then failed to live up to them.

When I saw the premiere of 11.22.63 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/112263-review-hulu-stephen-king-books-jfk-assassination>
 last month, I was blown away. The story was original, the action was suitably 
creepy and non-stop, and the production design absolutely gorgeous. Throughout 
the course of the eight-episode “event series” (what we call a miniseries these 
days), which debuts on Hulu on 15 February, the story remains original but the 
action and the creepiness sag considerably.

Based on a Stephen King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> novel 
of the same name, we see Jake Amberson (James Franco, as fine as he’s ever 
been) travel back to 1960 through a magical closet in his local diner. Just 
stick with me on this one ... The owner of the diner, Jake’s friend Al (Chris 
Cooper), convinces Jake to go through the wormhole and live in the past for 
three years to stop the assassination of JFK, because he feels like it will 
make the present that much better, preventing all social ills, from the war in 
Vietnam and tragedy of 9/11 to the shocking popularity of Adam Sandler.

 The problem is that the past fights back against being changed, so whenever 
Jake tries to take the road less travelled (or never travelled at all), 
something prevents him, like a house fire or an attack by sadistic cockroaches. 
This makes his first few days in the past wonderfully intoxicating, as we are 
displaced into this strange landscape that could turn sinister at any moment.

But then Jake settles into life in the 60s, gets a job as a teacher and waits 
for the assassination to roll around. He meets Bill (British actor George 
MacKay) who becomes his accomplice, and falls in love with Sadie, a fellow 
teacher (the talented Sarah Gadon). That’s when the show hits the skids.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2F112263-james-franco-stephen-king-adaptation-time-traveller-jfk-assassination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048ce1a4c10078faadbc4ef80b964ddf0bfbee40%2F0_158_2400_1442%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=11.22.63%3A%20James%20Franco's%20creepy%20date%20with%20American%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2F112263-james-franco-stephen-king-adaptation-time-traveller-jfk-assassination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=11.22.63%3A%20James%20Franco%27s%20creepy%20date%20with%20American%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2F112263-james-franco-stephen-king-adaptation-time-traveller-jfk-assassination%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048ce1a4c10078faadbc4ef80b964ddf0bfbee40%2F0_158_2400_1442%2F2400.jpg>
 James Franco and Sarah Gadon in 11.23.63. Photograph: PR 
Even worse, the eeriness of the past fighting back all but disappears once 
Jake really starts playing fast and loose with history. It becomes unclear 
which events are caused by this temporal backlash and which are natural 
consequences of Jake’s bad decisions. Without the supernatural undercurrent, 
the adrenaline drops considerably.

King wrote more than 800 pages of source material about Jake and Bill’s 
surveillance of Lee Harvey Oswald (Daniel Webber), but did it all need to make 
it to screen? The middle episodes are a slog, especially the rambling subplot 
about Sadie’s ex-husband (TR Knight) who is into some creepy sexual stuff and 
likes to threaten everyone around him. Let’s not even discuss Bill’s attraction 
to Oswald’s wife, Marina (Lucy Fry), which is so preposterous that its 
importance to the narrative is particularly annoying. And did I mention that 
there’s amnesia, too? Not even the soaptastic Melrose Place and Empire managed 
to squeeze amnesia into their first eight episodes.

Thankfully, the plot picks up steam again as Jake’s date with American history 
approaches. The drop in energy would be a huge problem for 11.22.63 if Hulu 
were rolling it out like Netflix or Amazon, dumping all the episodes at once. 
Most viewers would probably forego the rest of the series when they started to 
get bored. But Hulu will debut a new episode each week, and the pull of the 
main mystery should be enough to keep viewers tuning in.

 And they should: 11.22.63 is an enjoyable watch, even if – like most of us 
over 30 – it gets a little fat in the mid-section. In the end, what is great 
about the show is that while it takes place in the past, it doesn’t dwell in 
it. Jake falls in love with a bygone age, but finally learns that nostalgia is 
a kind of quicksand that anyone can get caught in. It’s an especially modern 
message considering how many shows today (yes, I’m talking to you,Vinyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/10/vinyl-hbo-martin-scorsese-mick-jagger>
) do exactly that.
 