
1| Tax Wall Street


Hundreds of billions of dollars could be made available for climate finance by 
placing a small tax on financial transactions such as the trading of stocks and 
bonds. There’s a bigRobin Hood Tax movement  <http://www.robinhoodtax.org.uk/>
behind this, with a group of European countries already on the cusp of 
establishing the world’s first regional financial transaction tax.Karen 
Orenstein, senior analyst, Friends of the Earth US <http://www.foe.org/>, 
Washington DC, USA@KarenOrenstein <https://twitter.com/KarenOrenstein> @foe_us 
<https://twitter.com/foe_us>

2| Remind politicians that where there’s a will, there’s a way

Sometimes the needs of a vulnerable community won’t line up with the interests 
of an external invester, and public money is the only thing that will get the 
job done. For adaptation, being able to mobilise sufficient funds without the 
private sector is an imperative and the inability to generate the necessary 
funds is purely a political problem. The money is there, it’s just being spent 
on the wrong things.Brandon Wu, senior policy analyst, ActionAid 
<http://www.actionaid.org>, Washington DC, USA @brandoncwu 
<https://twitter.com/brandoncwu>

3| Make existing pots of money go further

The $100bn developed countries signed up at Paris to raise each year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/11/100bn-a-drop-in-the-ocean-says-climate-campaigner-amina-mohammed>
 needs to be deployed in a way that leverages at least another $900bn a year 
from the private sector. It could be best spent reducing investment risks and 
demonstrating the financial rewards associated with switching to cleaner energy 
solutions.Anthony Hobley, CEO, Carbon Tracker Initiative 
<http://www.carbontracker.org/>, London, UK @arhobley 
<https://twitter.com/arhobley> @CarbonBubble <https://twitter.com/CarbonBubble>

Ugandan mayor: My district will be 100% renewable by 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/20/ugandan-mayor-my-district-will-be-100-renewable-by-2020>
4| Revisit individual country contributions

One of the first steps has to be going back to countries’ Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDCs) <http://www.wri.org/indc-definition> that they 
agreed in Paris and developing clear strategies for investment priorities, as 
there is a huge amount of work to do to match different countries’ needs with 
the financial resources available. Coming up with more specific strategies will 
help to direct public and private finance to priority programmes, policy and 
capacity needs.
Tim Ash Vie, head of climate change, Adam Smith International 
<http://www.adamsmithinternational.com/>, London, UK @AdamSmithInt 
<https://twitter.com/AdamSmithInt>

5| Don’t overlook challenges in developing countries

If you look at most INDCs from developing countries their emission reduction 
targets are subject to international climate finance, technology development 
and capacity building. What would happen if the means of implementation does 
not flow to developing countries?George Wamukoya, member of the African Group 
of Negotiators, Nairobi, Kenya

6| Look at Uruguay

Uruguay is a great example of how domestic policy has led to a transformation 
in its energy sector. They used a fairly small grant from theGlobal Environment 
Facility <https://www.thegef.org/gef/> to draw up an ambitious renewable energy 
law including training for national electricity utility staff on how to 
integrate renewable energy into the grid. Uruguay is now a double world record 
holder: installing the most wind per capita and receiving the largest share of 
clean energy investment as a percentage of GDP.Joe Thwaites, research analyst, 
World Resources Institute <http://www.wri.org/>, Washington DC, USA @WRIFinance 
<https://twitter.com/WRIFinance>

11 routes to universal energy access in Africa by 2030
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/29/11-routes-to-universal-energy-access-in-africa-by-2030>
7| Offer incentives to switch to clean energy


Currently governments around the world subsidise fossil fuel exploration and 
production 
<http://www.odi.org/publications/10058-production-subsidies-oil-gas-coal-fossil-fuels-g20-broken-promises>
 on a huge scale. Therefore a large onus is on governments to change and set up 
the right policies and regulations to drive investment in the direction of 
green energy rather than brown. Policymakers need to send clear signals to the 
private sector on where to invest their money.Sam Barnard, research officer, 
Overseas Development Institute <http://www.odi.org/>, London, UK @samuelmarch 
<https://twitter.com/samuelmarch>

8| And tighten regulations on dirty energy

Regulators need to take a carrot-and-stick approach, incentivising finance for 
green energy while placing sanctions on finance for fossil fuels. Carbon 
pricing would send a significant message. There should also be manatory 
disclosure schemes where companies are expected to provide comprehensive 
reporting on all their energy investments, green and brown.Remco Fischer, 
programme officer,UNEP Finance Initiative <http://www.unepfi.org>, Geneva, 
Switzerland@UNEP_FI <https://twitter.com/UNEP_FI>

9| Think long-term

 Project-based, short-term, supply-driven funding is not very powerful in 
driving long term transformation. Some early feedback from applicants to the 
recentGreen Climate Fund <http://www.greenclimate.fund/home> (GCF) funding 
round late last year had applicants reporting that accessing funding from the 
GCF is very demanding and costly. The GCF board itself seems to be also taking 
a narrow definition of what “climate finance” should be spent on – all of this 
is unhelpful from the perspective of developing countries trying to prepare for 
climate change.Aaron Atteridge, research fellow, Stockholm Environment Institute
 <http://www.sei-international.org/>, Stockholm, Sweden @SEIclimate 
<https://twitter.com/SEIclimate>

10| Stimulate the energy market in developing countries


Looking long term, we also need to invest in creating a private sector in 
developing countries that can provide its own climate smart products and 
services. This involves creating the right incentives through fiscal and 
regulatory policies, subsidies or finance, as well as providing business 
support services in the right sectors, such as climate smart insurance.Tim Ash 
Vie

Smart solutions put energy efficiency in the spotlight in Latin America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/28/smart-solutions-put-energy-efficiency-in-the-spotlight-in-latin-america>
11| Balance climate finance flows

Most global climate-related finance is skewed toward mitigation rather than 
adaptation. But adaption money is needed to cover stronger early warning 
systems, address treatment of environmental refugees, and provide extreme 
weather insurance to 400 million more people in vulnerable countries by 2020.
Virginie Fayolle, senior economist,Acclimatise <http://www.acclimatise.uk.com/>
, London, UK@VirginieFayolle <https://twitter.com/VirginieFayolle>

12| Remember raising the money is just half the battle

The other half is ensuring the money is channeled to the right recipients for 
the right activities. For climate finance to truly benefit impacted 
communities, we need to have community engagement at all levels of the process: 
policy, project design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation. The GCF 
makes some steps in the right direction, at least on paper, including by being 
the first fund to have a gender policy and action plan in place in advance of 
disbursing any money – but there’s room for improvement as always.Aaron 
Atteridge

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/28/live-qa-financing-paris-agreement-climate-change>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 