
Arguably the biggest story of 2013 was wildlife crime, which escalated from a 
conservation issue to an international security threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/18/demand-ivory-destabilising-central-africa>
. Driven by rising demand for ivory from east Asia, it has doubled over the 
past five years into aglobal trade worth $10bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/14/blood-ivory-stock-crush-us>
, threatening political and economic stability in central Africa.

This month there were warnings that Africa could lose one-fifth of its 
elephants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/02/african-elephant-numbers-fall-poaching>
 in the next decade if the continent's poaching crisis is not stopped. By the 
end of September, a record704 rhinos had been killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/01/rhino-horn-poaching-south-africa>
 by poachers in South Africa and 47 in Kenya this year. Figures showed
two-thirds of forest elephants had been killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/05/two-thirds-forest-elephants-killed>
 by ivory poachers in past decade.

Some high-profile massacres hit the headlines, with 86 elephants – including 
33 pregnant females– 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/19/86-elephants-chad-poaching-massacre>
 killed in less than a week in Chad,26 elephants slaughtered at a 
wildlife-viewing site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/10/poachers-kill-elephants-central-africa>
 in the Central African Republic and80 poisoned 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/africaandindianocean/zimbabwe/10390634/Poachers-kill-300-Zimbabwe-elephants-with-cyanide.html>
 at a water hole in Zimbabwe.

While conservation groups looked to technology such as surveillance drones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/07/wwf-wildlife-drones-illegal-trade>
 and GPS trackers to aid their efforts,park rangers lost lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/jun/15/poachers-africa-thin-green-line>
 andfaced corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/27/ranger-corruption-impeding-fight-poaching>
 fighting a one-sided war against increasingly militarised and organised gangs 
of poachers sometimeslinked to terrorist groups like Al-Shabaab 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/illegal-ivory-trade-funds-alshabaabs-terrorist-attacks-8861315.html>
.

With Prince Charles and his son the Duke of Cambridge calling for a "war on 
poachers" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/21/prince-charles-war-animal-poachers>
,UK prime minister David Cameron announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/26/david-cameron-illegal-trade-global-summit>
 he would host the highest level global summit to date on combating the illegal 
wildlife trade. In the US,the Obama administration said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/09/us-ivory-stocks-illegal-elephant-poaching>
 it would destroy all 6m tonnes of its ivory stocks and thePhilippines crushed 
5m tonnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/21/philippines-destroys-elephant-tusks-ivory>
 of seized ivory beneath industrial rollers.
 Hedgehogs struggled to emerge from hibernation. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
In 2013 the weather played a big part for British wildlife, with a wet winter, 
a "delayed spring" and hot summeraffecting both flora and fauna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/28/wildlife-nature-weather-summer-gardens>
. As cold spell continued into April,conservationists warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/30/wildlife-suffering-freezing-weather>
 hedgehogs,birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2013/mar/14/summer-early-birds-wintering-grounds>
, insects, reptiles and frogs were all struggling.

In May, the National Trust embarked on a census to discover whether puffin 
numbers had plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/17/conservationists-count-breeding-birds-puffin-wreck>
 after a year of extreme weather, and the UKbarn owl population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/01/barn-owls-threat-extreme-weather>
 was reported to have suffered its worst breeding season for more than 30 years 
after a run of extreme weather events. The erratic weather had a knock-on 
effect later in the year with species likewasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2013/sep/05/threatened-plauges-wasps-summer>
 andbutterflies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/oct/30/nature-spotting-britain-waterways-in-pictures#/?picture=421113651&index=6>
 being seen a month later than usual.
 Of the 17 species of butterflies found in Europe, eight have declined, 
including the common blue. Photograph: Alan Mather/Alamy 
Decline was a word used frequently throughout 2013 when it came to talking 
about wildlife in the UK and around the world. The significantState of Nature 
report,published in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/21/uk-species-struggling-wildlife>
, found that more than half of UK wildlife species are in decline. In Octoberan 
audit of more than 200 native UK species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/24/figures-worrying-decline-uk-wildlife>
 – including birds, bats, moths, butterflies, hares and doormice – showed that 
priority species have declined on average by 58% since 1970.

Europe's grassland butterfly population has plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/23/grassland-butterflies-europe-population>
 in the past two decades, new research published in 2013 showed, with a near 
halving in the numbers of key species since 1990. And after the miserable 
summer of 2012, there werefewer butterflies in British skies in 2013 than for 
thousands of years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/26/british-butterflies-devastating-wet-summer>
, leaving several species in danger of extinction from parts of the country. 
Britishmoths are also in calamitous decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/01/british-moths-calamitous-decline>
, a major report showed in February, declining in southern Britain by 40% over 
40 years.

In British waterways, a new five-year survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/06/water-vole-population-slump>
 found that thewater vole – the creature immortalised as Ratty in The Wind in 
the Willows – is vanishing from the British countryside, with the population 
slumping by more than one–fifth.

More than 4,000 birds of at least 18 species washed up dead or were affected 
by a sticky substance covering beaches from Cornwall to Dorset in twoseparate 
incidents in January and April <http:> this year.
 Some of Britain's most familiar countryside birds like the turtle dove have 
plummeted in numbers since the 1990s. Photograph: Andrew Darrington/Alamy 
There were mixed fortunes for bird populations in 2013. In December, the 
authoritativeState of the UK's Birds report concluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/09/decline-uk-countryside-birds>
 that some of Britain's most familiar countryside birds have plummeted in 
numbers since the 1990s, with some species disappearing altogether from parts 
of the UK. The report drew heavily on the British Trust for Ornithology's 
mammoth volunteer-led projectthe Bird Atlas 2007-11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/nov/21/atlas-changes-britain-ireland-birds-in-pictures>
, published a month earlier. The new atlas of 1,300 maps shows the patterns of 
distribution, abundance and change among 296 bird species in Britain and 
Ireland.

In October, statistics showed the number of wild birds in the UK was still 
falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/17/wild-birds-uk-decline>, 
and among garden birds, starlings, house sparrows and other threatened species
suffered further declines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/28/rsbp-garden-birdwatch-survey>
.

The decline in birds of prey continued, with the hen harrier failing to breed 
in England this summer for the first time since the 1960s. The species now
stands on the brink of extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/09/hen-harrier-extinction-england>
, with rogue grouse moor gamekeepers blamed for their decline.

Cases of the illegal persecution of British birds is continuing to rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/13/illegal-bird-deaths-rspb>, 
a December report from the RSPB showed, with 208 reports of the shooting and 
destruction of birds of prey in 2012. It is hoped legal changes that will be 
debated in parliament next year will introduce stricter penalties for wildlife 
crimes.

The fortunes of the house sparrow seemed to be changing in 2012, however, with 
figures in September showing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/23/house-sparrow-decline-stabilises>
 that the decline in their numbers appears to have levelled off.
 Three bee-harming pesticides were banned in Europe this year. Photograph: 
Arnd Wiegmann/Reuters 
In April, the European Union suspended the use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 of three neonicotinoid pesticides linked to serious harm inbees, despite the 
opposition of the UK ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/28/europe-insecticides-ban-save-bees?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. In June the UK governmentlaunched an "urgent" review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/28/bee-crisis-urgent-review> 
of the crisis facing bees and other pollinators in the UK and pledged to 
introduce a national pollinator strategy.
 Posters protesting against the badger cull. Photograph: Alamy 
In August, the controversial badger cull went ahead  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/27/badger-cull-gloucestershire-somerset-nfu>
 – amid protests – in Gloucestershire and west Somerset, in two pilot schemes 
attempting to stop the spread of bovine tuberculosis in cattle. Despite the 
cull being extended,it failed to reach its target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/05/badger-cull-somerset-fail-target-government>
, meaning it was "very likely" that the risk of tuberculosis in cattle had gone 
up, not down,according to an expert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/02/failed-gloucestershire-badger-cull-tb-risk-cattle>
.
 Oak processionary moth caterpillars cover a tree trunk. Photograph: Patrick 
Pleul/Alamy 
British trees were under attack in 2013 from a variety of threats including 
sweet chestnut blight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/shortcuts/2013/may/21/sweet-chestnut-blight-threat-trees>
, theoak processionary moth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/03/oak-trees-caterpillar-england>
 caterpillar, and one year after it broke out in the UK,ash dieback disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback>. Britain's 80 million ash 
trees remain at deadly risk from ash dieback caused byChalara fraxinea, a 
virulent fungal disease that has swept across Europe.Latest figures from the 
Forestry Commission <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/chalara> reported a total of 
613 sightings in nurseries, plantations and established woodland around the UK.

In October the St Jude storm that swept across England was estimated to have 
killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/29/st-jude-storm-killed-10-million-trees-forestry-commission>
 around 10 million trees.

Internationally, destruction of the Amazon rainforest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/15/amazon-deforestation-increased-one-third>
 increased by almost one-third in the past year, reversing a decade-long trend 
of better protection for the world's greatest rainforest.

But almost 200,000 hectares of Tasmania's old growth forest were world 
heritage-listed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/24/tasmania-forests-environmental-protection-heritage>
 in 2013, bringing hope that a three-decade fight between environmentalists, 
politicians and loggers is over.

Internationally, the Cites international wildlife summit in Bangkok awarded 
protection against the finning trade tofive shark species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/11/shark-species-greater-protection-finning>
, but failed tohalt the polar bear trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/07/halt-polar-bear-trade-fails>
. Icelandresumed its commercial hunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/19/iceland-fin-whale-hunting-greenpeace>
 of fin whales after a two-year suspension.

In November, the IUCN published its annual "red list" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/nov/26/red-list-endangered-species-in-pictures>
. The latest update of endangered species showed worrying declines for the 
okapi, the white-winged flufftail, the red belly toad, Caribbean skinks and the 
martial eagle.Another study published by the IUCN this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/15/reptile-species-face-extinction>
 showed that nearly one in five of the world's estimated 10,000 species of 
lizards, snakes, turtles, crocodiles and other reptiles are threatened with 
extinction.
 Emperor penguins in Antarctica. Photograph: Frans Lanting/Corbis 
Talks to create the world's two largest marine reserves in the Antarctic broke 
down in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/01/antarctic-marine-reserve-talks-fail>
 for the third time in a year, with conservationists branding Russia a "repeat 
offender" for blocking an international agreement. In the UK, ministersnamed 27 
new marine conservation zones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/21/england-27-new-marine-conservation-zones>
 in November to protect seahorses, coral reefs, oyster beds and other marine 
life – four less than ministers proposed and far short of the 127 zones 
recommended by the government's own consultation.

A hard-fought battle over European Union fisheries policy saw the ending of 
the wasteful practice of fish discards,with an agreement signed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/13/fishing-discards-ban-eu> 
to gradually phase out the practice – where unwanted fish is thrown back into 
the sea – from 2015 to 2019.The Fish Fight campaign <http://www.fishfight.net/> 
by Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, the chef and Guardian food writer, was cited by 
the European commission as a key factor in winning the battle.
 The Cape Melville leaf-tailed gecko was among three new species discovered in 
a 'lost world' in northern Queensland. Photograph: Conrad Hoskin/AFP/Getty 
Images 
The discovery of new species made for some welcome respite from the bad news. 
In October, a leaf-tail gecko, a golden-coloured skink and a boulder-dwelling 
frog werethree new species discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/28/gecko-leaf-new-species-australia-skink-frog-queensland>
 in a "lost world" in northern Queensland, Australia. InSuriname, scientists 
discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/03/new-species-suriname-frog> 
60 species new to science, including a chocolate-coloured frog and a tiny dung 
beetle less than 3mm long. A purring monkey, a vegetarian piranha and a 
flame-patterned lizard were among more than400 new species of animals and plants
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/23/purring-monkey-vegetarian-piranha-amazon-species>
 that have been discovered in the past four years in the Amazon rainforest, 
conservationists say.

And there were other good news stories. Sightings of the variable harlequin 
toad (Atelopus varius) – thought to be extinct in Costa Rica – led researchers 
to believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/06/harlequin-toad-costa-rica> 
other isolated fragments of Central America's disappearing amphibians may 
survive in regions scourged by the deadly chytrid fungus disease.

One of the world's most elusive wild cats, the Bornean bay cat (Pardofelis 
badia) was captured on camera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/04/borneo-bay-cat-heavily-logged>
 in a heavily logged area of Borneo rainforest together with four other 
endangered species, suggesting that some wildlife can survive in highly 
disturbed forests.

In September, a landmark project to reintroduce the extinct short-haired 
bumblebee (Bombus subterraneus) to the UK celebrated its first milestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/16/short-haired-bumblebee-comeback>
 after experts confirmed that queens had nested and produced young.

Spain's endangered Iberian lynx was brought back from brink of extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/14/spain-iberian-lynx-extinction>
 thanks to an imaginative conservation programme that has brought hunters, 
farmers and the tourist industry under its wing.

And beaver, bison and eagles were named among the species that have made a 
successful comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/26/beaver-bison-european-species-comeback>
 in Europe in the past 50 years, according to a major survey published in 
September.
 