
The Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> Biennial of 
Australian Art begins before you enter the main gallery space. Nests of rods 
wrapped in colourful yarn and embellished with hacky sacks, bells and pompoms 
are tangled together in an amorphous mass, which drips from the bannisters and 
wraps around the standing posts as you walk down the stairs.

Everything happens in Adelaide in March – our picks of the festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/23/everything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival>
When you arrive in the gallery these curios are everywhere: hanging from the 
ceiling and rising from the floor, creeping into corners and growing from the 
walls. At the Art Gallery ofSouth Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> (AGSA) media 
preview, artist Hiromi Tango completes the work in full costume and makeup: a 
bright orange lizard stalking among the orange mass, which represents her 
ever-growing tail. The audience are invited to contribute too, donating 
messages of wellbeing and rejuvenation, wrapped in plastic, woven into new 
tails and added to the piece.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1d4dc88df143a550509fc8193265d12543cc288%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1d4dc88df143a550509fc8193265d12543cc288%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Hiromi Tango’s ever-morphing Breaking Cycle (Lizard Tail). Photograph: Saul 
Steed/Adelaide Biennial 
Tango’s work, Breaking Cycle (Lizard Tail), is representative of the colour, 
playfulness, magic and materiality that dominates the 14th Adelaide Biennial. 
Since 1990, the Biennial has aimed to survey the landscape of contemporary art 
in Australia, and this year’s theme, Magic Object, was chosen by first-time 
Biennial curator Lisa Slade.

Slade, who managed the previous two iterations of the event, took as her 
inspiration the notion of theWunderkammer – “cabinets of curiosities” that 
originated in Renaissance Europe. The patrons of these museums would collect 
unusual natural history, geology, art and science artefacts – dappled, of 
course, with a few fakes – in an attempt to better understand the world, or at 
least communicate one version of it.

Slade’s version is a fun and wondrous place to be. At the public launch on 
Friday, Adelaide festival’s ebullient outgoing artistic director David Sefton 
contrasted it with the 2014 Biennale, themed Dark Heart: “It might be 
simplistic to say that if we got the dark-hearted two years ago, we’ve got the 
light-hearted this time – but I’m going to say it anyway.”

Slade doesn’t balk at the comparison. “I feel absolutely fine about that,” she 
says when we meet outside the Samstag Museum, which is hosting a portion of 
this year’s exhibition. “Each Biennial, each major exhibition, does become kind 
of a response to the last.”

This is, above all, an accessible collection, as filled with humour as it is 
with high concepts. Pop culture references abound: Mumford & Sons lyrics 
sprinkle the large scale and brightly coloured abstract works of Gareth Sansom; 
Heather B Swann’s towering, sinister Banksia Men reference the villains of May 
Gibbs’s Snugglepot and Cuddlepie; Tiger Yaltangki’s figurative canvasses bring 
together personal history, Indigenous spirituality and characters from Doctor 
Who and The Mighty Boosh; and one of Michael Zavros’s pieces – meticulously 
detailed paintings rendered from photographs of bouquets – is called, and looks 
like, Sideshow Bob from The Simpsons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f6884705d0fb76911931bab6684211b563290c%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57f6884705d0fb76911931bab6684211b563290c%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘Meticulously detailed’: Sideshow Bob, Brontosaurus and Octopus by Michael 
Zavros. Photograph: Saul Steed/Adelaide Biennial 
Clay makes up a big part of the exhibition: the pottery of Glenn Barkley, 
contained within his own custom-madeWunderkammer; the totemic ceramic 
sculptures of Ramesh Mario Nithiyendran, which merge his Hindu heritage with 
icons of gay male culture; the anthropomorphic clay figures that comprise 
Nell’s The Wake; and Juz Kitson’s extraordinary bulbous collections of bone, 
hair, porcelain and teeth, which seem to drip from the ceiling and walls, 
begging to be touched.

A crash course in creative thinking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses-australia/2015/dec/08/a-crash-course-in-creative-thinking-masterclasses>
Last year, the Biennial claimed attendance figures of 110,000 – up 10% from 
2014 – and this is the first year it has expanded beyond the confines of the 
AGSA, taking in four other venues. It prides itself on being the only survey of 
Australian contemporary art in the country, but this presents its own dilemma: 
how do you stick to a curatorial theme while representing the full, broad 
landscape of Australian art?

Slade says it’s about staying flexible. “You have to have a theme that’s 
generous enough that you can drive anything through it. Magic Object and the
Wunderkammer premise worked for that. Obviously there’s a really strong slant 
towards materiality here, but it’s not exclusive.

“Artists aren’t the cyphers for a curatorial vision; it’s the other way 
around,” she says. “But it’s a very good question, and I think it’s a question, 
it’s a problem that all curatorial practice faces.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fa817cbd642dfe5ad845cf491c3a34ed79a3b15%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fa817cbd642dfe5ad845cf491c3a34ed79a3b15%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Spirit creatures abound in The Wake by Sydney artist Nell. Photograph: Saul 
Steed/Adelaide Biennial 
Slade says it’s “uncanny” how many of the artists she had been watching 
already shared her interest in theWunderkammer. “The Wunderkammer is a kind of 
shared obsession … There’s nothing esoteric about it – it’s the foundation of, 
in some ways, collecting practices and museum practice. How can younot have a 
fascination with puffer fish and coco de mer?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7fb0ee87f5943a738f71ec722c76895e6ecbbc3%2F4_0_1429_2106%2F1429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7fb0ee87f5943a738f71ec722c76895e6ecbbc3%2F4_0_1429_2106%2F1429.jpg>
 Glass figurines by Tom Moore. Photograph: Steph Harmon for the Guardian 
Australia’s most celebrated glass artist, Tom Moore, describes it as a 
“fascination with fascination itself”. His whimsical glass sculptures are 
zoological hybrids of familiar objects and animals, which become fantastical, 
funny new beings under his hand. A teapot with wheels and a carrot for his nose 
has a turd-filled trailer in tow; a potato that’s a fish but is also a face 
smiles vacantly at itself; birds whose bodies are somehow also their beaks look 
at each other through their many human eyes.

The majority are held at AGSA, in a room you could spend hours in. 
Unsurprisingly, theWunderkammer has been a driver of his work for years. “It’s 
all about curiosity and discovery, and it’s also about trickery: that whole 
history [of theWunderkammer] is just riddled with fakes as well,” he says. 
“There was so much that was so alien, and it did lead to this kind of culture 
of very imaginative and fanciful things.”

Meticulously planned on paper in full size, each of the hundreds of pieces 
comprising Moore’s collection has then been blown and hot-worked in glass, with 
a craftsmanship that’s as admirable for its technical skill as it is for its 
creativity. “I’m more satisfied making something that is sort of a little bit 
troubling than just beautiful and cute,” Moore says. “It is, I guess, trying to 
shock – just a little, like a pleasant cognitive shift that makes you think a 
bit differently about stuff … Anything that makes your mind stand on its own 
head I think is very satisfying.”

Anything that makes your mind stand on its own head I think is very satisfying
Glass artist Tom Moore 
The Biennial is rounded out by a hefty representation from Indigenous 
Australia: work from Tiger Yaltangki, Bluey Roberts, Pepai Jangala Carroll, 
Danie Mellor, and the bold and beautiful “ilma” or dancing rods from Bardi 
elder Roy Wiggan, who passed away late last year.

“You can’t survey contemporary Australian art without looking at Aboriginal 
art,” Slade says. She recalls Uncle Stevie Goldsmith’s welcome to country at 
the public Biennial launch on Friday, in which he spoke about how, for 
Aboriginal Australians, most objects are imbued with magic. He asked the 
audience to consider the question: is the magic in the artist, in the object, 
or in the relationship between the audience and the art?

“I thought, ‘Oh, we can all go home now’,” Slade laughs. “When an Aboriginal 
elder can articulate the premise of the exhibition in so few words, you can see 
why [Aboriginal art] was totally necessary to the exhibition.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facafc5d7f1a78c762644c4b8c672b4a5808fce1d%2F0_0_2000_1255%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20Adelaide%20Biennial%20of%20Australian%20Art%3A%20colour%2C%20wonder%2C%20materialism%20and%20magic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2F2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facafc5d7f1a78c762644c4b8c672b4a5808fce1d%2F0_0_2000_1255%2F2000.jpg>
 Paintings by 105-year-old Nyikina artist Loongkoonan. Photograph: Saul 
Steed/Adelaide Biennial 
Unsound Adelaide review – breaking ground with unorthodox live sounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/29/unsound-adelaide-review-breaking-ground-with-unorthodox-live-sounds>
The most talked about Biennial artist is Loongkoonan, who began painting 10 
years ago when she was 95 years old. She made the trip from her Western 
Australia community to Adelaide for the launch, where she was swamped by media 
and grabbed for enough selfies that she was trending on Twitter by the evening. 
Art Gallery of SA (@artgalleryofsa) 
A magic moment. Youngest & oldest Adelaide Biennial artists unite - 
Nithiyendran, 27 & Loongkoonan, 105@Mitzevich <https://twitter.com/mitzevich> 
pic.twitter.com/rcHNAnsQre <https://t.co/rcHNAnsQre>
 <https://twitter.com/artgalleryofsa/status/703788660315951105> February 28, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/artgalleryofsa/status/703788660315951105> 
Her intricate paintings chart the Nyikina country she has travelled – 
articulating nature, land and spirituality, as part of a larger project about 
remembering culture. Her work adds crucial weight to the Adelaide Biennial. 
“She paints up country in a way that we see that country is magical,” Slade 
says. “If we can learn a little bit from that perspective, I think the world 
will be a much better place.”

 * The Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art <http://adelaidebiennial.com.au/> 
runs at the Art Gallery of South Australia, the Anne & Gordon Samstag Museum of 
Art, and select other venues in Adelaide, until 15 May. Guardian Australia 
travelled to Adelaide as a guest of Adelaide festival  