



Apple Music <http://www.apple.com/uk/music/>

iOS 
(freemium)
Apple’s rival to Spotify is finally available to try: a mix of on-demand 
music, curated playlists and the live Beats 1 radio station fronted by Zane 
Lowe. The music picks are very good, but the app could be easier to get to 
grips with.

Medium <https://medium.com/m/app>

iOS/Android 
(free)
Initially a website, Medium has built up quite a collection of longform 
articles on everything from music to politics. Its app makes it simple to find 
things to read from writers you follow, or the wider Medium community.

BuzzFeed News <http://www.buzzfeed.com/about/news-app>

iOS 
(free)
If shorter news stories are your bag, BuzzFeed’s new app is worth a look. It’s 
not just for reading BuzzFeed’s website: its editors gather stories from 
elsewhere on the web, and sort them into easily explorable categories.

BitTorrent Shoot <https://www.getsync.com/shoot>

iOS/Android 
(freemium)
You may know BitTorrent best for illicit filesharing, with Shoot showcasing a 
new use for it: quickly sharing lots of photos or videos with friends from your 
smartphone.
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2015/newsbeat-new-app>

BBC Newsbeat 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2015/newsbeat-new-app>

iOS/Android 
(free)
More news for millennials from the team at the BBC’s Radio 1 and 1Xtra 
stations. It’s a quick way to browse the day’s stories in music, entertainment, 
technology and other categories, with video and tweets baked in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2F20-apps-games-july%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435857892423%2F0564a091-1e86-4f25-a095-9b8c613b9838-1020x1020.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=20%20apps%20and%20games%20for%20July&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2F20-apps-games-july%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=20%20apps%20and%20games%20for%20July&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2F20-apps-games-july%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F2%2F1435857892423%2F0564a091-1e86-4f25-a095-9b8c613b9838-1020x1020.png>
Lumo Lift <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/lumo-lift/id884303137?mt=8>

iOS/Android 
(free)
This app is the companion for a physical tracking device that you wear, with 
both helping you improve your posture. The idea: you get vibrational alerts if 
you start to slouch, with the app/device also tracking steps.

Loopimal <http://www.yatatoy.com/loopimal/>

iOS 
(£2.49)
If you’re looking for a bright to introduce your children to music-making, 
this is one of the best apps available. It’s an animated sequencer where they 
create tunes by tapping on dancing animals: accessible, but clever too.

Minds.com <https://www.minds.com/>

iOS / Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> 
(free)
The app stores are packed with messaging apps, so who needs a new one? 
Minds.com is hoping that its promise of private, encrypted chatting will 
attract security-conscious smartphone owners. A curious points system is built 
in too, rewarding more use.

Kamcord – Game Screen Recorder 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.kamcord.app&hl=en>

Android 
(free)
Fancy broadcasting your mobile gaming skills to the wider world? Kamcord is 
hoping to do for mobile what popular service Twitch has done for console and PC 
gaming, recording your gameplay sessions, then airing them online – including 
on YouTube.

Lulu – Dating Intelligence 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.luluvise.android&hl=en_GB>

iOS/Android 
(free)
Some men complain about an app that gets women to rate their skills including 
humour and “sex moves”. Lulu makes its money by charging men a subscription to 
see their scores.

GAMING APPS


 Angry Birds Fight! <http://fight.angrybirds.com/>

iOS / Android 
(freemium)
Those Angry Birds are trying a new genre: match-three puzzling, albeit of the 
kind in Puzzle and Dragons where your matching fuels fighting, rather than the 
Candy Crush kind. It may feel an obvious move, but it’s done with plenty of 
character.

Her Story <http://www.herstorygame.com/>

iOS 
(£3.99)
Her Story is a collection of video clips of police interviews with a 
(fictional) woman involved in a murder case, with your job being to work out 
what’s going on.

Tiki Taka Soccer <http://panicbarn.com/>

 iOS/Android 
(freemium)
Gamers of a certain age who lost weeks of playtime to the Sensible Soccer 
games will perk up at the sight of Tiki Taka Soccer, whose look is heavily 
influenced by Sensi. It has modern twists too: a neat touchscreen control 
system to string together slick football moves.

You Must Build A Boat 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.eightyeightgames.ymbab&hl=en>

iOS/Android 
(freemium)
Yes, this game is about building a boat – but there’s so much more to it. 
Battling monsters, recruiting a crew, and casting spells by matching tiles in 
this action/puzzler that sounds complex, but is actually glorious fun.

Lego Minifigures Online
 <https://www.playminifigures.com/en>

iOS/Android 
(£3.99 + IAP)
Lego may have been caught on the hop by Minecraft’s popularity, but now it’s 
fighting back with a massively multiplayer game that works across computer and 
mobile devices.Kids can go on adventures with a host of mini-figure characters, 
unlocking more when they get them in the real world.

Fallout Shelter 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/fallout-shelter/id991153141?mt=8>

iOS 
(freemium)
Console franchise Fallout is getting an eagerly anticipated fourth game later 
this year, but this mobile taster is fine in the meantime. You have to build an 
underground vault and keep its dwellers happy with jobs and activities: a Tiny 
Tower-style slice of strategy fun.

Vainglory <http://www.vainglorygame.com/>

iOS/Android 
(freemium)
Released last year for iOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios>, 
Vainglory is now available on Android too. It’s a polished, hardcore 
multiplayer online battle arena game where you lead heroes into three-on-three 
battles, with bags of strategic tricks to learn.


Dragon Quest VI 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.square_enix.android_googleplay.dq6>

iOS / Android 
(£10.99)
Square Enix’s Dragon Quest roleplaying game franchise has plenty of fans, so 
while this may seem expensive, many will be happy to pay the price to revisit 
this venerable RPG. A rich cast of heroes (with a choice of vocations) and a 
logical battling system make this a hit.

Freak Circus Racing <http://www.freakcircus.net/>

iOS/Android 
(freemium)
Realistic racing games can be fun, but they often skimp on the big-headed 
circus cartoon characters. As you may have guessed from the title, this 
doesn’t. It’s a very playable sideways-scrolling racer with a big dollop of 
ridiculousness.

 Hexderity <http://www.mimicwing.com/press/sheet.php?p=hexderity>

iOS/Android 
(£1.20)
Finally, an inventive indie game that aims to test both your reflexes and 
memory skills. You have to match hexagons against the clock, with eye-popping 
sounds and visuals keeping you wide awake, and quick game sessions maintaining 
the interest.
 