
GOOGLE PHOTOS <https://www.google.com/photos/about/>


iOS/Android

If you’re looking for a new way to store and access your photos in the cloud, 
Google’s new service is worth a look. You won’t run out of space easily and it 
has clever search, editing and sharing features for your collection.

MIXRADIO <http://www.mixradiomusic.com/>


iOS/Android

This streaming radio service started on Windows Phone smartphones, but is now 
widely available. It focuses on curated playlists of themes and genres, as well 
as whipping up playlists if you tell it which artists you like.

INBOX BY GMAIL <http://www.google.co.uk/inbox/>

iOS/Android

Email overload is a 21st-century problem. Apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apps> such as Gmail offshoot Inbox are 
trying to solve it with filters and gestural controls to ensure you don’t miss 
important emails – and delete irrelevant ones.

CAMERA51 <http://www.camera51.com/>

iOS/Android

Available for some time on Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, this is now on Apple devices: 
a photography app that promises to help you take better shots. That includes 
detecting faces in your shots and helping you frame the best snaps.

FROZEN: EARLY DAYS IN SCIENCE 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/frozen-early-science-cooking/id976351888?mt=8>

iOS

Frozen fever shows no signs of abating among children and this latest app from 
Disney looks set to capitalise on all the hullabaloo. What’s more, it gets kids 
learning about cookery and reindeer care: one of which is likely to be more 
useful than the other in their day-to-day lives.

MAKE MY DAY <http://www.lonelyplanet.com/makemyday>

iOS/Android

This is a travel app from Lonely Planet, initially focusing on six 
cities:London, Paris, Barcelona, New York, San Francisco and Tokyo. It plans 
your holiday with suggestions for morning, afternoon and evening activities and 
venues.

VIMO FITNESS <http://www.vimofit.com/>

iOS/Android

Smartwatches are giving health and fitness apps a new lease of life with the 
release of Apple and Android smartwatches. Vimo Fitness uses those devices to 
guide your workouts in the gym, communicating with its parent app on your 
smartphone to track everything.

MOLESKINE  <http://www.moleskine.com/en/news/timepage-iphone-apple-watch>
TIMEPAGE <http://www.moleskine.com/en/news/timepage-iphone-apple-watch>

iOS/Android

Moleskine is best known for its luxury notebooks, but the company is also 
moving into apps. This is a stylish calendar app that keeps track of your diary 
dates, pulling in travel times and weatherforecasts and directions plus an 
Apple Watch version.

SAGO MINI <http://www.sagosago.com/app/sago_mini_monsters> MONSTERS 
<http://www.sagosago.com/app/sago_mini_monsters>

iOS/Android

Sago makes delightful children’s apps, usually only for Apple devices. It’s 
just started porting them to Android though: Sago Mini Monsters is a good 
introduction: a colourful, creative app for kids to create their own monsters.

DEEME <http://www.deemeapp.com/>


iOS/Android

You might think that WhatsApp, Instagram and Snapchat have got photo-sharing 
and messaging tied up between them. DeeMe hopes not: it’s a fun instant 
messaging app that gets people adding text to their photos before sending them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fapps-for-june%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434120843574%2Fff81dbdd-6e11-4034-9364-c1b08a5262ee-1020x574.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=20%20apps%20and%20games%20to%20download%20this%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fapps-for-june%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=20%20apps%20and%20games%20to%20download%20this%20month&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjun%2F15%2Fapps-for-june%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434120843574%2Fff81dbdd-6e11-4034-9364-c1b08a5262ee-1020x574.png>
 Knights of Pen and Paper. 
GAMES

KNIGHTS OF <http://beholdstudios.com.br/games/knights-of-pen-paper/> PEN & 
PAPER 2 <http://beholdstudios.com.br/games/knights-of-pen-paper/>


iOS/Android

 * The original Knights of Pen & Paper was an entertaining RPG that played 
with the genre’s conventions – including spoofing tabletop role-playing. This 
sequel follows that pattern but expands on everything, with a welcome dash of 
humour. 
 * 

 * 
FRUIT NINJA: <http://fruitninja.com/academy/> MATH MASTER 
<http://fruitninja.com/academy/>

 * iOS/Android 
 * 
Fruit Ninja was a big hit as a mobile game for grownups – and a fair few 
children. This spinoff is just for the kids: still about slashing fruit in 
half, but teaching addition, subtraction, multiplication and other maths skills 
too. 
 * 

 * 
CAPITALS 
<http://appadvice.com/appnn/2015/05/capitals-a-word-game-with-a-strategic-twist-lands-on-the-app-store>

iOS 
 * 
Multiplayer word games such as Words With Friends have been popular on 
smartphones and Capitals fits neatly into the genre. You have to pick words out 
of a grid of letters, with the aim of defending your own base and attacking 
your opponent’s. 
 * 

 * 
SEABEARD <http://www.handcircus.com/seabeard/>

 * iOS/Android 
 * 
One of the best games for Nintendo 3DS is Animal Crossing, but it’s not 
available on smartphones or tablets. Seabeard is the best attempt yet to 
recapture its charms. 
 * 

 * 
MARVEL <http://marvel.com/games/172/marvel_future_fight> FUTURE FIGHT 
<http://marvel.com/games/172/marvel_future_fight>
iOS/Android 
 * 
If you’re a fan of the Marvel universe, this is an essential download: an 
impressive fighting game with pretty much all the key superheroes and villains. 
It’s got brains as well as brawn. 
 * 

 * 
SKIING YETI <http://www.featherweightgames.com/skiing/> MOUNTAIN 
<http://www.featherweightgames.com/skiing/>
iOS/Android 
 * 
In this marvellously fun action game, you swoop down the slopes searching for 
abominable snowmen, with controls that get the momentum of skiing just right. 
 * 

 * 
GOATZ <http://www.vg247.com/2015/05/05/goat-simulator-goatz-dlc-dayz/>
iOS/Android

 * 

 * Goat Simulator was a ridiculous animal game that went viral. Now it has a 
follow-up that gets more ridiculous through the addition of zombies – but 
thankfully it’s also really fun. Fire-breathing elephants are thrown in for 
good measure. 
 * 

 * 
LARA CROFT:  
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2015-05-28-lara-croft-relic-run-is-out-now-on-mobile-devices>
RELIC RUN 
<http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2015-05-28-lara-croft-relic-run-is-out-now-on-mobile-devices>
iOS/Android 
 * 
There was more than a touch of Tomb Raider in mobile hit Temple Run. Now the 
favour is being returned, as the former’s star Lara Croft gets her own 
endless-runner game. It’s polished and accessible, with vehicles adding a twist 
of originality. 
 * 

 * 
GEOMETRY WARS 3:  <http://www.sierra.com/geometrywars>DIMENSIONS  
<http://www.sierra.com/geometrywars>

 * iOS (£3.99) 
 * 

 * The Geometry Wars games are eye-popping shoot-‘em ups that have translated 
beautifully to touchscreen devices in this new game. You have to blast through 
50 levels, with lots of separate battle modes to give the action variety. 
 * 

 * 
DESKTOP DUNGEONS <http://www.desktopdungeons.net/>

 * iOS / Android 
 * 
The “roguelike” genre of RPGs can seem daunting to newcomers, but they’re a 
lot of fun once you dive into their procedurally-generated dungeons to fight 
and loot. Desktop Dungeons is one of the best: designed to suit quick mobile 
sessions. 
 * 
 