
This is the latest version of our now-weekly Android apps roundup, 
spotlighting the best new apps from the last seven days. It doesn't include 
games – they geta separate roundup 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/gamesblog/2012/aug/30/best-mobile-games-bastion-heroes-call>
. Meanwhile, the weekly iOS apps roundupcan be found here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/appsblog/2012/aug/31/best-ios-apps-paralympics-itunes>
.

Here's this week's Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> 
selection:

Amazon Appstore <https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/feature.html?docId=1000644603>

Amazon's Android app store, er, app has been out for some time in the US. Now 
it'savailable in the UK and other European countries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/appsblog/2012/aug/30/amazon-appstore-android-europe>
 too, via a download link on the Amazon website. The app enables you to browse 
apps, get recommendations and download them to the device, while also offering 
Amazon's daily free app deal.

SkyDrive <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.microsoft.skydrive>

Microsoft's SkyDrive cloud service has made its way onto Android. The app 
helps people access the files they've stored in their SkyDrive locker 
– including opening them in other apps – upload photos and videos from their 
smartphones, and send links to those files to others.

C4 Paralympics 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=deltatre.c4.shell>

As on iOS, Channel 4's official Paralympic Games app offers live text 
commentary, video highlights, schedules, results and news on smartphones, with 
added livestreaming video forthe tablet version 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.deltatre.c4>.

Hooha for App.net 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.themodernink.hooha>

US entrepreneur Dalton Caldwell sailed past his $500k crowdfunding goal to 
build a "real-time social feed" as a more-open alternative to Twitter, and the 
service is already up and running in alpha. Now a developer has made its first 
mobile app for Android. Hooha is equally "raw alpha" in its nature, helping 
users view their streams, mentions and global posts, while composing and 
replying.

Magisto <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.magisto>

Video-editing app Magisto has been a hit on iOS, and now it's available for 
Android too. The twist is that the actual video-editing process is automated: 
users upload footage from their phones and choose soundtracks, before Magisto's 
software handles the splicing part. Facebook, Twitter and YouTube sharing are 
all included.

CNN / Time Convention Floorpass 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.floorpass.android>

This roundup is a little late for the Republican convention, but CNN and 
Time's joint app was available beforehand – and is still good for the 
Democrats' event. The app offers news and analysis fromCNN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/cnn> and Time's political journalists, while 
tying in Twitter, Foursquare and CNN's own iReport citizen journalism service.

Nothing Ever Happens at the South Pole 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.oceanhouse_media.bookhcnothingeverhappens_app>

Oceanhouse Media has released dozens of apps based on different Dr. Seuss 
books. This uses a different source: an unpublished 1960s book by Berenstain 
Bears authors Stan and Jan Berenstain about the South Pole. Aimed at children, 
it follows the journey of a penguin looking for icy excitement.

Intro <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.intro>

Intro is a social location app designed for business rather than personal use, 
helping people meet potential work contacts when in the same area. It also sims 
to match freelancers to projects that suit their skills, cutting out the 
recruitment agency middlemen.
 Stereomood provides mood-based music playlists 
Stereomood 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.mutado.android.stereomood>

Stereomood made our iOS roundup this week thanks to its iPhone version being 
upgraded to iPad. The same thing has happened on Android, with the app now 
native for tablets. It's all about mood-music: providing more than 100 
playlists for moods and activities including calm, working, cooking, chill and 
optimistic.

LooxcieLive 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.looxcie.live.android>

This livestreaming app just graduated from beta on the Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Play store. It's for 
broadcasting live video from an Android device over 3G, 4G or Wi-Fi, while 
inviting friends to watch and text-chat. It works on an individual device, but 
can also be paired with one of Looxcie's standalone video cameras.

Washington Post Social Reader 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=wapo.wpsr>

US newspaper the Washington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post> has launched its Social 
Reader app for Android, as part of the wider trend for newspapers (yes, this 
one included) to build Facebook into their digital offerings. In this case, the 
app pulls in news from the Post's own site as well as Slate, the Daily Beast, 
Mashable and others, while sharing details of articles read on the social 
network.

Shape Be Your Best You 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.hipzone.blinkify.android>

US magazine Shape wants to help Android users "look and feel amazing on the 
beach this summer". Yes, it's a bit late. This is a digital edition of the 
magazine offering workout plans, cardio routines and case studies.

Chair <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.furnichair.chair>

Paging Clint Eastwood... Chair is a prototype app, interesting as much for the 
way it shows some of augmented reality technology's potential as for its one 
use: visualising what a room would look like with a chair in it. Its developer 
is using Qualcomm's Vuforia AR platform, which is picking up a head of steam in 
2012.

AudioPlayce 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.audioplayce.android>

Get beyond the mobile 2.0-speak ("the social marketplace for geolocalized 
audioguides") and AudioPlayce is interesting: an app for recording your own 
audio-guides to cities around the world, and for accessing those recorded by 
other users. Badges and social features are included.

Dan Deacon <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.dandeacon>

Also included in this week's iOS roundup, musician Dan Deacon's official app 
is designed to be used mainly during his live gigs. It "synchronizes all the 
phones in the room, turning you and the rest of the audience into the light 
show and sound system for the concert". Elsewhere, it provides a virtual 
synthesizer instrument, and news about Deacon's activities.
 PlayTo: Samsung TV transmits media to connected TVs 
PlayTo: Samsung TV 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.dayglows.vivid.lite.samsung>

Looking to wirelessly pipe photos, videos and music from an Android device to 
a TV? There are numerous ways, depending on device and TV manufacturer. 
Dayglows' new app focuses on Samsung TVs, and is able to play from websites 
including YouTube and Vevo, as well as tying into a number of on-demand TV 
services.

InstaTalks 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.natrobit.instatalks>

Photo-sharing app Instagram is, obviously, about pictures rather than words. 
InstaTalks wants to provide a layer of words – messages – on top of all those 
filtered snaps though. Claiming to be "the easiest and fastest way to chat with 
all your Instagram friends", it's a private messaging system forInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>, with added location 
features to connect with nearby strangers.

Flimby <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.optinillc.flimby>

Plenty of apps have tried to be, in Flimby's words, an "all-in-one social 
toolbox". The idea: a way to post to Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, Flickr and 
Yammer from within one app. It also offers a "Live Blast" feature that promises 
shared web browsing with other people – something that may well prove to be 
Flimby's trump card as it evolves, rather than the personal side of things.

Teatime <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.vibedigital.teatime>

Another app to make both our iOS and Android roundups this week, the UK Tea 
Council's new app aims to solve office tea-making disputes. It creates "tea 
groups", stores everyone's cuppa preferences, and then at pre-determined 
intervals picks a colleague at random to make the next round.

Holo Music Player 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.jack.music>

One of the interesting things about the Google Play store is the ability to 
dig deep and find some new and interesting betas. Holo Music Player is one of 
those: a Holo-themed music-player app with a heavy emphasis on swipe gestures 
to navigate around your music collection.

That's our selection, now tell us yours. What Android apps have impressed you 
this week, and what do you think of those above? Post a comment and make your 
thoughts known.
 