
When Armando Iannucci delivers the 40th MacTaggart lecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/12/armando-iannucci-mactaggart-lecture-bbc>
 in Edinburgh on Wednesday evening, he will be joining a long list of UK 
broadcasting luminaries given an agenda-setting platform. Dennis Potter, John 
Birt, Jeremy Paxman and no less than three members of the Murdoch family are 
among those who have used the speech to set out their views on the future of TV 
in search of headlines and influence.

It is why the Guardian Edinburgh International TV Festival 
<http://www.thetvfestival.com/>, which grew up around the lecture, retains its 
place as UK broadcasting’s leading annual event. It offers the festival’s 1,700 
delegates something different from more mundane industry conferences, despite 
its growing appeal to commission-hunting independent producers and, 
increasingly, international delegates.

The migration from the venue for the first MacTaggart, held in the Royal 
College of Surgeons (audience 200), followed by austere churches and the 
cathedral-like McEwan Hall, to a huge new subterranean space in its current 
location at the Edinburgh International Conference Centre (EICC) is a graphic 
illustration of its evolution.

Although a writer will again be behind the lectern, Wednesday’s proceedings 
will offer a marked contrast to the makeshift but high-minded backdrop to the 
inaugural James MacTaggart lecture on 25 August, 1976. Radical playwright and 
director John McGrath delivered the talk as part of a film festival 
retrospective celebrating the work of therecently deceased Scottish television 
producer and director James MacTaggart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/aug/22/broadcasting.mondaymediasection>.

McGrath asked why there was so much critical debate about film but so little 
about what the medium of television could do. He called TV drama “impotent - 
[its] style a matter of pretty pictures”, and provoked an immediate protest. 
The following year an advisory committee chaired by the once radical 
broadcaster Gus (now Lord) Macdonald, with the heads of Scottish Television and
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Scotland, organised the first 
Edinburgh Television festival. Macdonald identified the reasons it was needed. 
“Britain had the best television in the world but no television festival. What 
better place than Edinburgh,” he said at the time.

In an era of the BBC/ITV duopoly, the first festival’s leisurely “discussion 
programme” ran for five days from Monday 29 August to Friday 2 September.

Melvyn Bragg chaired a session on television drama, framed by a paper from 
Dennis Potter, with panellists David Hare, James Cellan-Jones and McGrath.

“I vividly remember the atmosphere of that first festival, exciting, vivid and 
argumentative, and we did feel that at last those of us in the engine room 
could drive the ship,” says Bragg. “We were very determined to make it the 
place where producers and programme-makers had their public say.

“The panel is a very good representative of what we wanted to do. We firmly 
believed producers who made programmes should have a determining voice in the 
content and direction of those programmes. “We were also, looking back, 
idealists … I have no doubt we thought television could change society for the 
better and bring people outside the various tight circles of British culture 
into the ring.”

David Elstein gave the 1991 MacTaggart lecture on Margaret Thatcher’s 
market-oriented legacy. “The debates in the 70s and 80s were hot and heavy, 
despite wandering between strange venues,” he recalls. “Really big issues were 
argued – much more intimate than the current set pieces with minimal audience 
participation.

“Discussion continued well into the night at the George Hotel bar [the central 
meeting point of the early festival] or invitation-only dinners.”

Jeremy Isaacs launched his vision for Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> in his 1979 MacTaggart, offering 
to cater for minorities and proclaiming that “everyone will watch some of the 
time”. During the 1980s the nascent independent sector harried old guard 
executives for guaranteed access to BBC and ITV airtime. Their success fuelled 
the festival.

The 1982 MacTaggart marked the introduction of corporate movers and shakers as 
speakers, when Ted Turner, the founder of CNN, rambled his way through an 
off-the-cuff speech.Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> in 1989 was different. In 
the year he had launched Sky Television and the multichannel revolution, he 
tore into the ethos of public service broadcasting, denouncing the narrow 
television elite at his feet.

His son James Murdoch followed much the same line in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/aug/28/james-murdoch-bbc-mactaggart-edinburgh-tv-festival>
, opining that “the only reliable and perpetual guarantor of independence is 
profit”, only to be followed by a conciliatory Elisabeth Murdoch three years 
later in 2012. “Profit without purpose is a recipe for disaster,” she reproved.

The BBC has often been centre-stage. In 1992 Michael Grade, then the chief 
executive of Channel 4, used his MacTaggart to address the future and 
importance of the corporation. “It’s the BBC that keeps us honest,” he said. 
Greg Dyke in 1994 attacked the culture of broadcasting’s dependency on 
government decisions. In his second speech in 2000, as newly appointed director 
general, he outlined a vision for the BBC in the digital age which included 
shifting the main BBC1 news to 10pm. In between, in 1996, John Birt argued 
successfully as director general for a generous increase in the licence fee to 
counter subscription TV.

Looking back, there are obvious MacTaggart blind spots, a failure to select 
more women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2009/aug/25/edinburgh-tv-festival-mactaggart-women>
 while completely ignoring ethnic-minority achievers. Only four women have 
given the lectures, includingElisabeth Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2012/aug/23/elisabeth-murdoch-mactaggart-lecture>
, Christine Ockrent, head of French network TF1 (in 1988), and Verity Lambert 
(1990). The last before Murdoch was Janet Street-Porter, who in her 1995 
MacTaggart attacked the “male, middle-class, middle-aged and mediocre” cadre 
running television and managed to infuriate and hit a nerve.

So did Dennis Potter, who, though in eccentric decline in 1993, landed a few 
blows by describing Birt and governors’ chairman Marmaduke Hussey as a pair of 
“croak-faced Daleks” for their stewardship of the BBC.

The modern GEITF markets itself as an accessible “must-attend event for 
producers who want to meet UK commissioners”. But the atmosphere is always 
heightened when a groundbreaking MacTaggart blazes out of the conference hall 
and on to the wider public agenda. Call it Iannucci’s challenge.
 