
An Australian human rights group, founded by billionaire business magnate 
Andrew Forrest <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-forrest> and 
backed by Hollywood actor Russell Crowe, has released research estimating that 
almost 46 million people are living as slaves.

The 2016 global slavery index <http://www.globalslaveryindex.org/>, funded by 
Forrest’sWalk Free Foundation <http://www.walkfreefoundation.org/>, says 45.8 
million people are trappedin some form of slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/apr/03/modern-day-slavery-explainer>
.

 The report ranks incidences of slavery in 167 countries, with India having 
the highest number of slaves while North Korea has the highest percentage of 
slaves per capita. This year’s estimates are nearly 30% higher than in the 
previous report, which estimated 35.8 million people living in slavery in 2014.

 Forrest says the rise is partially due to more accurate methodology but he 
also believes the number of people trapped in slavery is increasing year on 
year.

 “It is time to draw a line and say, no more,” he said. “This isn’t Aids or 
malaria, it is a man-made problem that can be solved, and it’s time to take 
real action to free the world from slavery once and for all.”

The index was launched in 2013 after Bill Gates, another billionaire 
philanthropist, challenged Forrest to quantify the scale of modern slavery. 
This year’s index was launched in London on Tuesday by Crowe with video 
messages of support from Tony Blair, Bono, supermodel Karlie Kloss and Richard 
Branson.

Forrest, who says he found and addressed slavery in his own supply chains, 
warned businesses that they must step up their efforts to address slavery or 
face the consequences. He also called on consumers to question their buying 
habits.

“At one point, it was common to see Australian truck drivers throwing litter 
out of the windows of their cars because everyone else was doing it. Now, there 
has been a huge public outcry against this behaviour and it has stopped. The 
same can be done for slavery,” he said.

“We need to make it unacceptable for people to buy something without asking 
the company where it was made and who made it and if they can’t answer that 
question clearly then the next question must be ‘how do you know it wasn’t made 
with slave labour?’”

Walk Free said slavery is found in all 167 countries in the index, with India 
home to 18.4 million slaves. This year’s index also claims that over half of 
the 45.8 million people living in modern slavery are in five countries: India, 
China, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Uzbekistan.

It calculated that more than 4% of North Korea’s population is enslaved, with 
Uzbekistan and Qatar the other countries with the highest prevalence of modern 
slavery per capita.

The index has faced criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/nov/28/global-slavery-index-walk-free-human-trafficking-anne-gallagher>
 for its methodology and rankings system since it launched. Despite naming 167 
countries, this year’s index was based on interviews conducted by pollster 
Gallup with more than 42,000 people in 25 countries. In some cases, rankings 
and prevalence estimates are calculated using data from surveys conducted in 
other countries deemed to have an equivalent “risk profile”.

 Kevin Bales, an anti-slavery campaigner who worked on collecting data for 
this year’s report, said he is “very confident” the estimations were an 
accurate reflection.

 “Over the last few years we have really honed our methodology and have build 
a solid framework to build on year on year,” he said. “Measuring the problem is 
a hugely important factor in beginning to effectively tackle this enormous 
problem.”

Although modern slavery constitutes a huge illegal industry, deemed the third 
most profitable criminal industry behind drug and arms trafficking by the UN, 
data remains patchy.

The International Labour Organisation 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/lang--en/index.htm> (ILO) estimates 
that21 million people are trapped in forced labour 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_181961/lang--en/index.htm>
 and other forms of modern slavery. The index says it hopes to work with the 
ILO to provide a single set of global estimates.
 