
At the Venice film festival <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/venicefilmfestival>
 last week, George Clooney unveiled his new backstairs political drama,The Ides 
of March <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142808/ides-of-march>, about a 
Democratic presidential candidate getting bogged down in compromise, 
backstabbing and the dark political arts. Clooney said that he could 
conceivably have completed the film before now,but President Obama had been 
doing too well, and therefore the time wasn't right 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/aug/31/venice-film-festival-president-clooney>
.

Perhaps Clooney was being serious and perhaps he wasn't. But the remark 
typifies the dwindling of the memory of 9/11 in Hollywood cinema. The Obama 
presidency, ushered in by the catastrophe of the Bush reign, is now perceived 
to be in trouble, and this enables a prominent Hollywood liberal to make the 
kind of savvy, ahistorically pessimistic political movie that could have been 
produced at any time in the last 40 years – not too far away fromRobert Redford 
in The Candidate (1972) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2010/apr/21/robert-redford-candidate-nick-clegg>
. The convulsions and aftershocks of the World Trade Centre attacks seem to be 
a very distant memory, and the consequent extraordinary military adventures, 
now in their endgame, are invisibly absorbed as a fact of life.

Perhaps the whole point of 9/11 was that it could never be represented on the 
cinema screen. The diabolic, situationist genius of the kamikaze attacks was 
that they were themselves a kind of counter-cinema, a spectacle very possibly 
inspired by the art-form, but rendering obsolete any comparable fictions it had 
to offer. The 9/11 attacks smashed Hollywood's monopoly on myth-making and 
image production, and inspiring as they did only horror and revenge, aimed a 
devastating blow at imagination, and maybe for a while enfeebled the reputation 
of cinema and all the arts. (Hal Foster, in his LRB essay on the 9/11 museum 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v33/n17/hal-foster/the-last-column> , has some 
interesting thoughts on the damage to constructive thinkability at Ground Zero).
 James Marsh's Man On Wire (2008): 'Is it not a turning away, an aversion of 
our collective gaze, shielding our eyes from reality and looking instead 
backwards at something uplifting and happy from the past?' 
 For years after the attacks, a kind of willed blindness set in. Due to an 
unacknowledged understanding among broadcasters, only the most distant shots of 
the plane's impacts were shown on TV screens. It wasn't until I saw Denys 
Arcand's coolly anti-American satire,The Barbarian Invasions 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0338135/> (2003), which used a close-up clip  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4q5nE-k0tUQ> of the second plane hitting the 
towers that I even realised that far more explicit material existed, broadcast 
live at the time, but rarely if ever repeated. It wasn't until YouTube was 
launched two years afterwards that people could see these blackly horrifying 
images.

There's a weird footnote to this. Johan Grimonprez 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1431615/>'s Double Take (2009) is a surreal mashup, 
imagining the older Alfred Hitchcock visiting his younger self in 1962, 
cleverly splicing together clips of Hitchcock clowning around for his TV show: 
the whole thing is a tissue of fictions, half-memories, dreams. One 
black-and-white sequence is about a B-25 bomber getting lost in heavy fog in 
July 1945 and crashing into the 79th floor of the Empire State Building. When I 
saw this, I assumed it was a spoof, some kind of retro-futurist fantasy, in 
questionable taste, on the theme of 9/11. But no.This actually happened 
<http://history1900s.about.com/od/1940s/a/empirecrash.htm>.

It seems like a bad dream. There must be a new generation of teens and 
twentysomethings, the people now fighting in the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, 
for whom the 9/11 attacks are a distant, nightmarish fable. Perhaps there is 
also a new generation of jihadis who assume that the 9/11 attacks were a 
response, and not a prelude to the Afghan and Iraq wars?

How could cinema respond to 9/11? It seemed for a while as if Hollywood 
considered silence the only patriotically supportive response: this was 
thoughtful and reasonable on one level, and yet also indicative of being 
unwilling to acknowledge or mythologise the attacks.

In the absence of this, 11' 09" 01  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2002/dec/27/1> was a decently conceived 
portmanteau film from the French producer Alain Brigand, composed of short 
pieces on the theme of September 11, each lasting 11 minutes, nine seconds and 
one frame, made by an international array of directors, including Samira 
Makhmalbaf, Sean Penn and Idrissa Ouedraogo.

For all its flaws, this was a film with a globalist view – it grasped the 
essential fact that 9/11 was not merely an American tragedy. When I saw this, I 
think I assumed that it would be the foundation stone for a new kind of 
multinational, questioning, experimental cinema tackling the 9/11 epoch. But 
this was really not forthcoming. There were no more startling collaborations of 
this sort.

The history of 9/11 in the cinema in the last decade is a history of evasion 
in one sense, and in another sense, a history of indirect intuition, the idea 
that cinema could feel and transmit the anxieties of 9/11 in situations which 
did not appear to be explicitly about the attacks. Is this a tribute to 
cinema's capacity for subtlety and complexity? Or a failure of will?

For example: James Marsh's wonderful 2008 documentary Man on Wire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125351/man.on.wire>, about Philippe 
Petit's daring wire-walk across the WTC towers in 1974, is often said to be 
"about" 9/11 in a redemptive, transformative, healing sense. And so it is. But 
is it not also a turning away, an aversion of our collective gaze, shielding 
our eyes from reality and looking instead backwards at something uplifting and 
happy from the past? Perhaps. Did cinema simply fail after 9/11? Even after 10 
years, I'm still not sure.
 Oliver Stone on the set of World Trade Center (2006), which was 'sentimental, 
mawkish and dewy-eyed' 
 This is not to say that Hollywood did not finally make up its mind to try 
tackling the events head-on.Oliver Stone's World Trade Center 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/113817/world.trade.center> and Paul 
Greengrass's United 93 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/111619/united.93> 
both appeared in 2006 – one a true-life drama about the rescue mission in New 
York and the other about the passengers' famous uprising on one of the hijacked 
flights.

As a critic, I have to say, I am always dismayed to see these films bracketed 
together as if they are comparable. They are not. Greengrass's film is a bold 
and brilliant drama which attempts to think the unthinkable and put us inside 
one of the planes. Stone's movie is sentimental, mawkish and dewy-eyed, whose 
excruciatingly self-conscious patriotism results in a funereal and treacly 
slowness of pace which misrepresents the meaning of September 11. Later, Stone 
would makeW <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126059/w> (2008), a similarly 
lenient and supportive film about George W Bush, a biopic which managed to miss 
out the events of September 11 altogether. In my view, no single film-maker 
suffered more of a reputation loss after 9/11 as Oliver Stone.

The challenge was to put us inside the terrorists' minds. Greengrass did it to 
some degree, in simply showing us their strategy in action, but Antonia Bird's 
stunningThe Hamburg Cell  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2004/aug/20/edinburghfilmfestival2004.edinburghfilmfestival>
 about the conspiracy itself, made for TV but shown at film festivals, is one 
of the most masterly 9/11 movies.

One of the most depressing symptoms of 9/11 was the appearance of a kind of 
film which I have written about many times before: the liberal fence-sitter. 
Agonised, conscience-stricken films about the war on terror appeared, often 
with an ensemble-mosaic cast, and multinational locations, wishing to express a 
slowly awakening sense that everyone has been duped by the Bush presidency, but 
still unwilling to risk being disloyal in any way.Robert Redford's Lions for 
Lambs <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/120864/lions.for.lambs> (2007), 
Gavin Hood's Rendition <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/oct/19/thriller> 
(2007),Michael Winterbottom's A Mighty Heart 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/sep/21/angelinajolie.drama> (2007) and 
Stephen Gaghan's Syriana <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/110037/syriana> 
(2005) were all like this – this last movie offering the bizarre and 
politically obtuse spectacle of a CIA man being tortured by an Arab. These 
movies tied themselves in knots.

When Kathryn Bigelow's The Hurt Locker 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/130570/hurt-locker> (2008) about the 
suicidal task of bomb disposal came out, I praised its power and its simple 
clarity.John Pilger attacked the movie 
<http://johnpilger.com/articles/why-the-oscars-are-a-con>, and attacked me for 
praising it on the grounds that it is just another propagandist piece of 
militarist violence porn. I disagree, and I think that the "liberal 
fence-sitter" genre deserves John Pilger's scorn much more.

Documentarists fared far better, and 9/11 triggered a revival in the genre. 
Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 9/11 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/100742> 
(2004) got it broadly right about the mendacity of the Anglo-American wars, at 
a time when mainstream media kept nervously silent, and tried to patronise his 
film. In some ways, this was Moore's finest hour, and the new documentary wave 
showed that cinema was willing to confront the most important things happening 
on our doorstep, and others' doorsteps around the world. Due praise has to be 
given, also, to Errol Morris's horrifyingStandard Operating Procedure 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122926/standard.operating.procedure> 
(2008), which told the brutal truth about torture at Abu Ghraib prison.

When I try to locate or define the 9/11 factor in the movies, it is 
frustratingly elusive. But there are three films which are now very interesting 
test-cases.
 At Five In The Afternoon (2003): 'Dramatises a deeply ambiguous attitude to 
the Taliban and theocratic power in Afghanistan' 
Samira Makhmalbaf's At Five in the Afternoon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2003/may/19/cannes2003.cannesfilmfestival> 
(2003), set in Afghanistan after the invasion, is in many ways a perplexing 
movie, a movie which I still find mysterious. It dramatises a deeply ambiguous 
attitude to the Taliban and theocratic power in Afghanistan. After the 
post-9/11 US attack, the Taliban are in retreat. Women's rights are being 
asserted once again, and Nogreh, a young Afghani woman, dreams of becoming 
president of the nation. But at a certain stage in the movie, these dreams and 
ambitions are abandoned, when her father forces her to come with him in the 
search for her brother. The attack from America and its allies is the greater 
evil, and whatever advantage it appears to have in terms of feminist liberation 
just seems to weigh very little in the balance. Makhmalbaf's film is often 
described as if this final repudiation of western gender liberation does not 
occur: but it does. The film embodies a painful scepticism. Women in the Muslim 
world may indeed wish to challenge the status quo, but if this liberation is to 
be imposed from without, as a western-liberal pretext for aggression, if it is 
a "freedom" which comes from the barrel of an American gun, and involves an 
attack on their menfolk, then Muslim women of Afghanistan might well find it a 
"freedom" fraught with compromise and dishonesty and humiliation. At Five in 
the Afternoon is a complex and difficult film, a film which does not take 
obvious sides, and a film drenched in the debate about whether and how freedom 
can be promoted in the Muslim world after 9/11 by the counter-insurgent west.
 Hidden (2005): 'Not specifically about 9/11, but nonetheless spoke 
brilliantly about the new anxieties and nightmares that 9/11 conjured up' 
Michael Haneke's Hidden <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/108597/hidden> 
(2005) is a brilliant 9/11 film. Perhaps this director's fascination with 
visiting a terrible revenge on the placid and conceited western middle classes 
found its greatest expression in a surveillance nightmare that was not 
specifically about 9/11, but nonetheless spoke brilliantly about the new 
anxieties and nightmares that 9/11 conjured up. Daniel Auteuil is a famous 
television presenter in Paris, fronting an arts review programme, who finds 
that someone is spying on him with a hidden video camera, and sending him the 
tapes. He suspects that it is an Algerian, who as a boy was fostered with his 
family but then cruelly sent away, and whose countrymen were brutally beaten 
and killed by police during "la nuit noire" in 1961, a notorious night of 
violence in which a demonstration was brutally suppressed. Clearly, Hidden is 
about the confrontation of the west and the Muslim world, and about a terrorist 
asymmetrical warfare: sending these anonymous surveillance tapes is a way of 
hitting back at those who are rich, protected and prosperous. But the essence 
of 9/11 is about more than this: it is about watching television. Some of the 
most uncomfortable and scary parts of Hidden come when Auteuil simply has to 
watch the tapes on his television screen: horrified, transfixed. The act of 
watching TV puts him one down: as a television presenter, he is used to the 
high status of appearing on screen. On September 11 2001, America and the world 
had no choice but to watch the disaster on live television, watch the towers 
burn and then collapse – just helplessly sit there and watch.
 Four Lions (2010): 'Treats the Islamist suicide bombers of Britain not as 
terrifying warriors but a movement of berks and prats' 
 The third film is one which I think can only grow in reputation; it is Chris 
Morris's Four Lions <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/134441/four-lions> 
(2010). Here is a film which is a brutal and fearless black comedy – about 7/7 
and the subsequent bungled UK plots, as much as 9/11 – which treats the 
Islamist suicide bombers of Britain not as terrifying warriors but a movement 
of berks and prats. Morris is a film-maker who is trying to do something which 
most directors in these 10 years have not done: that is, attempt to get inside 
the mind of the suicide bombers. He found a black-comic, satirical register for 
this, but it is convincing nonetheless. And the absurdity and farce in Four 
Lions hints at something almost unsayable: that the 9/11 plotters got very, 
very lucky with a bizarre plan which they probably did not expect to work.

Here are ways in which 9/11 entered, perhaps briefly, the movie bloodstream. 
As to whether this catastrophic event will engender some further developments 
in cinema, inspire new dramas of confrontation or even catharsis, it is still 
too early to say.
 