
More than $70bn has been wiped from the Australian share market as fears about 
China’s economy sparked its heaviest fall in six-and-a-half years and prompted 
warnings that the rout could continue.

A disastrous day on China’s main share market – dubbed “Black Monday” by the 
state news agency Xinhua – has added to fears that Australia’s top trading 
partner is faltering.

FTSE plunges as China sparks global markets crisis - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/aug/24/global-stocks-sell-off-deepens-as-panic-grips-markets-live>
European markets also plunged on Monday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/24/black-monday-chinese-stock-market-loses-all-gains-since-start-of-year>
 as the global sell-off which started whenChina devalued the yuan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/12/china-yuan-slips-again-after-devaluation>
 two weeks ago accelerated in China with the Shanghai composite index shedding 
8.5%.

The benchmark S&P/ASX 200 and All Ordinaries indices fell more than 4% – their 
largest one-day drop since January 2009.

They are now clinging to 5,000 points, levels not seen since July 2013. The 
indices had been close to breaching 6,000 pointsjust four months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/03/rate-cut-speculation-pushes-australian-stock-market-close-to-seven-year-high>
.

With more losses expected on Wall Street overnight, investors were braced for 
more heavy selling in the days to come.

The Australian dollar also hit a fresh six-year low of US72.01c as the 
continued fall in the price of key industrial commodities darkened the outlook 
for the resource-ledAustralian economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy>.


A barrel of US crude oil now costs just $39.33 per barrel, the cheapest since 
early 2009 while copper and aluminium were also testing the lows last reached 
in the tailend of global financial crisis in June/July 2009.

Australian Stock Report head of research Chris Conway warned that the stock 
market falls could continue if it drops below 5,000 points.

“Right now, there is clearly some panic selling occurring and there is little 
in the way of technical support below the current market price,” he said.

IG market analyst Angus Nicholson says this is now a key moment for China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> – its equity markets are in free 
fall, its banking system is short of liquidity and forecasts of 7% economic 
growth are now looking ambitious.

“The most sensible way forward would seemingly involve further currency 
devaluation ... and stepped up fiscal stimulus,” he said.

The Australian market’s losses were felt across the board – the energy sector 
dropped 6.2%, financials fell 4.6% and retailers shed 3.5%.

But the respected Australian economist Saul Eslake said the concerns about 
China were overdone.

The country’s growing service industry was gradually overtaking the 
manufacturing sector as a share of GDP, he told Guardian Australia. The 
property market in the biggest cities was “stabilising”, he said, although the 
smaller cities were “still weak”.

And he believed that the recent devaluation of the yuan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/12/china-yuan-slips-again-after-devaluation>
 was not an attempt to stimulate flagging exports but was a genuine effort to 
reform the currency regime and to try to get ahead of any possible rate cut by 
the US Fed.

“It’s a move to be more flexible ahead of a Fed rate cut. The yuan is up 20% 
in trade-weighted terms so they wanted wriggle room if the Fed cuts rates and 
the US dollar rises.

Despite attracting a lot of criticism for their handling of the crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/aug/24/global-stocks-sell-off-deepens-as-panic-grips-markets-live#block-55dad103e4b084894f222a0d>
, the Chinese authorities might still have some policy levers left to pull.

Any stimulus from Beijing would be a huge boost for Australian companies 
buffetted by the headwinds from the China slowdown.

Andrew Forrest’s Fortescue Metals group was one of the biggest fallers on the 
ASX200 on Monday, with its shares plunging 14.62% after it announced annual 
profits were down 88%.

However, chief executive Nev Power was counting on the Chinese government’s 
stimulus measures to boost demand for iron ore.


He said China still had a lot of growth ahead and the central government’s 
efforts to stimulate the economy would boost demand for steel.


“There are about 300 million people still to urbanise and China’s economy is 
probably back where the US economy was back in the early 1900s or 1920s so to 
bring it up to 75% or 80% urbanised is going to take a lot of steel yet to 
come,” he said.


“We’re seeing a lot of signs of stimulus coming into the market. I think there 
is a recognition that they need to stimulate the economy and that will flow 
through to steel demand.”

 