
The political year for the Belarusian opposition begins today, on Freedom Day, 
with a state-sanctioned rally.


The day, which marks the foundation of the Belarusian People’s Republic in 
1918, used to bring thousands to the streets of Minsk to oppose the government 
ofAlexander Lukashenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko> 
– who has been in power since 1994.

Not anymore. The political opposition is suffering from years of exclusion 
from public sphere; they have not held a seat in parliament since 1996, they 
are virtually ignored by state-affiliated media and the government have 
restricted their right to protest.

Belarus is no longer 'Europe's last dictatorship'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/12/belarus-no-longer-europe-last-dictatorship>
The appetite for a revolution has also been quelled by events in neighbouring 
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>. Belarusians are cautious. 
The risk of the state collapse, civil strife and Russian interference seems too 
high. The west, particularly the US, take the same line. Preserving Belarusian 
independence, not democratisation, has become the highest priority.




‘No conditions for a revolution’

Earlier this month Lukashenko told police there would be no “maidan” style 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/21/-sp-ukraine-maidan-protest-kiev> 
in Belarus, referring to the protests in Ukraine that unseated a government. 
Two days later, the opposition Belarusian People’s Front Party proposed 
abandoning plans for street protests after the presidential election in 
November.

Alyaksei Yanukevich, the chairman of the party, argued that few Belarusians 
would participate.

Indeed, even before the conflict broke out in eastern Ukraine, 78% of 
respondents told theIndependent Institute for Socio-Economic and Political 
Research <http://www.eldis.org/go/home&id=4383&type=Organisation#.VRKMMDusWJc> 
that a better future was “not worth people’s blood”. Seventy percent said they 
did not want a Ukrainian-style revolution.

The lack of a revolutionary appetite is not just about Ukraine. Belarusian 
circumstances were, and are, very different to those countries where the 
so-called colour revolutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/mar/16/world.russia> have taken 
hold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fbelarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427280202963%2F20af7753-ed2b-434c-b446-4721c8d05ab1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20revolution%20is%20impossible%20in%20Belarus'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fbelarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20revolution%20is%20impossible%20in%20Belarus%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fbelarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427280202963%2F20af7753-ed2b-434c-b446-4721c8d05ab1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Aerial view of the anti-government protest in Kiev, Ukraine, Feb 2014. 
Photograph: Emeric Fohlen/NurPhoto/REX 
 Lincoln Mitchell, who previously worked with the National Democratic 
Institute in a number of post-Soviet nations, has recently published acritical 
analysis 
<http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/138648/lincoln-a-mitchell/the-color-revolutions>
 of the so-calledcolour revolutions 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/commentisfree/2006/mar/16/world.russia> in 
countries such as Ukraine, Georgia and Serbia.

He lists four main premises that lead to their success. First, people should 
have opportunity to effectively participate in an election and be able to 
challenge the result.

Second, the media should be able to anticipate election fraud, be able to 
inform people about fraud, and cover the ensuing protests. Third, the 
population should not be intimidated by the state. Fourth, in cases where 
colour revolutions were successful, foreign and international donors and 
democratisation-oriented NGOs have “a degree of political access and 
involvement”.


None of these conditions apply in Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>.


‘Europe’s last dictatorship’ 

The external environment has also changed. According to Mitchell, by the 
spring of 2006 Belarus was one of the few countries in the world, and the only 
one in the former Soviet Union, where the US administration was looking for 
regime change.

Belarus once was branded Europe’s “last dictatorship 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/world/2014/sep/12/belarus-no-longer-europe-last-dictatorship>
” by US secretary of state Condoleezza Rice, despite post-Soviet regimes such 
as Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan raising much greater concerns about 
human rights and democracy.

There were geopolitics at play. As US interests focused on the Middle East, 
Minsk aroused suspicion over its active engagement with radical governments, 
including its cooperation with Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq. In 2002 
Washington organised a conference onBelarus as a “missing link in the axis of 
evil” <http://www.rferl.org/content/article/1101393.html>, which was attended 
by such political heavyweights including US senator John McCain and Polish 
politician Radek Sikorski.

Belarus possessed little strategic value to the US – it was often dismissed as 
a murky eastern European state under Russian control – but the country was 
thought of as the place to showcase western commitment to human rights, 
democratic freedoms, and nuclear non-proliferation.

The west’s change of heart

As of 2015, the geopolitical situation has changed and, as Lukashenko 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/world/alexander-lukashenko> is happy to boast 
<http://naviny.by/rubrics/politic/2014/10/17/ic_news_112_447099/>, the west has 
started to view Belarus in a different light.

Lukashenko recently played peacemaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/12/belarus-no-longer-europe-last-dictatorship>
 by hosting Ukraine ceasefire talks and, according to Yanukevich of the BNF 
party, western governments are nowtelling Belarus 
<http://news.tut.by/politics/438685.html> that independence should come before 
democracy. Their new priority is to avoid a Russian takeover.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fbelarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427280392533%2Fa3893a26-413b-4c58-8dda-23765afb2532-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20revolution%20is%20impossible%20in%20Belarus'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fbelarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20revolution%20is%20impossible%20in%20Belarus%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F25%2Fbelarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427280392533%2Fa3893a26-413b-4c58-8dda-23765afb2532-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko plays peacemaker at the Minsk talks 
in February. Photograph: Alexei Druzhinin/AP 
Another important detail: Belarus relation to the Middle East have become less 
of a problem. The country is pursuing a more cautious foreign policy, for 
example in the early 2010s Minsk minimised its contact with Iran and Syria as 
they faced increased international isolation.





The west is no longer interested in a Belarusian revolution.

The rise of radical activism 

Whilst a colour revolution is impossible in Belarus, there is some probability 
of clashes with radical clashes around November’s elections.

The Belarusian left-wing website Prasvet recently said 
<http://prasvet.com/2031> that election fraud has led the opposition to lose 
interest in campaigning with the public. Their logic is clear: if votes aren’t 
counted there is no point in campaigning, it’s better find groups prepared to
come to the square and confront the police 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-13789683>.

The appearance of radical nationalist initiatives such as 1863x.com 
<http://1863x.com/> suggests that such a scenario may not be so far-fetched. 
Belarusian opposition insiders told the Belarus Digest that whilst they had 
received no foreign money to mount a presidential campaign, extreme radical 
groups do have sources of funding.


Simultaneously, the Belarusian law enforcement bodies and security services 
are monitoring events in Ukraine, meaning they may now be more willing than 
ever before to resort to extreme measures to defend the government.

Were the radical groups to clash with the government, ordinary Belarusians are 
likely to lose out. The political regime would become more brutal, its politics 
more radical, and Belarus’ relations with the west could deteriorate again.

Siarhei Bohdan is a senior analyst at the Ostrogorski Centre and a PhD 
candidate at Freie Universität Berlin. He is an alumnus of the Belarus State 
University and European Humanities University in Lithuania.

A version of this article first appeared on Belarus Digest 
<http://belarusdigest.com/story/belarus-no-appetite-revolution-21880>
 