
British musical theatre is facing a diversity crisis and must act now to 
provide more opportunities for young black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) 
performers, according toAndrew Lloyd Webber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber>.

The multi-award winning composer of hits including Evita, Cats and Jesus 
Christ Superstar told the Guardian that he is “deeply concerned” about a lack 
of non-white performers in UK productions, adding that his philanthropic Andrew 
Lloyd Webber Foundation is commissioning a report in an attempt to address to 
issue.

“I’m deeply concerned about the problems we face in recruiting trained BAME 
young talent into musical theatre,” Lord Lloyd-Webber said.

Oldham Coliseum’s efforts on racial diversity in theatre | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/18/oldham-coliseum-efforts-on-racial-diversity-in-theatre>
“The foundation has commissioned this research to see how a potential crisis 
can be avoided. The stage needs to reflect the diversity of the UK population 
or it risks becoming marginalised. The arts are for everyone.”

New figures from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport show that the 
number of BAMEperforming arts workers 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/439714/Annex_C_-_Creative_Industries_Focus_on_Employment_2015.pdf>
 has risen by 60% over the past five years. About 19,000 BAME workers were 
employed in music, the performing and visual arts in 2015, compared with 12,000 
in 2011.

But the BAME figures still represent just 6.6% of the 286,000 people – 
including actors, dancers and musicians – who are employed in those industries.

Although Lloyd Webber says he is encouraged by the latest figures from the 
culture department, he believes that far more needs to be done to encourage 
more people from different backgrounds on to the stage.

David Grindrod, a leading casting director who has worked on Lloyd Webber’s 
musicals since the early 1990s, said that “a vast majority” of young people who 
audition for roles in UK productions are still “white middle-class”.

“We need to dig down and find those other talents,” he said.

He believes BAME role models have a noticeable impact on young people, 
singling out Cynthia Erivo, who recentlywon the Tony award for best leading 
actress in a musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/27/cynthia-erivo-the-color-purple-broadway-production>
 for her performance in a stage version of The Color Purple.

Despite the recent success of the US musical Hamilton – a smash hit on 
Broadway that is set to transfer to the West End next year, created and 
performed by an almost entirely non-white company – itremains an exception in 
theatreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/24/cynthia-erivo-british-producers-restrict-roles-for-black-women>
.

Leslie Odom Jr, who won a Tony award for his starring role in Hamilton, 
recently told the Hollywood Reporter “there are no shows for me to do, there 
are just no roles”.

The Andrew Lloyd Webber Foundation study is headed by Danuta Kean, who edited 
last year’s report for the writer development agencySpread the Word 
<https://www.spreadtheword.org.uk/>, which found that the “best chance of 
publication” for a BAME writer was to write literary fiction conforming to a 
stereotypical view of their communities.

Kean’s research will examine theatre and musical theatre productions. It is 
looking at “the pipeline to talent” and trying to pinpoint weaknesses and 
“unconscious bias” in the casting of performers, she said. Backstage crews are 
also uniformly white, according to Kean.

“It’s very much tied in with socio-economic opportunities early on,” she said. 
“We’re also finding that, with the changes being brought into the school 
curriculum, drama is being pushed off the table.

“The end of the requirement that students have to go and see live performances 
of set texts is having an impact. We’re talking about people who would not 
necessarily be introduced to the theatre by their own families … especially 
kids from poorer backgrounds where there’s a disproportionate number of black 
and Asian kids.”

Kean warns of long-term repercussions unless actions are taken, including an 
impact on future audiences.

“If you’re not actually starting to attract people from ethnic minority 
backgrounds, you’re going to end up with very marginalised theatre audiences – 
white, elderly people.”

The repertoire also needs to include “a broader spectrum of writers from 
diverse backgrounds rather than dead white men – who dominate.”

Her findings, which will be presented in the autumn, have highlighted a need 
for colour-blind casting.

“Lead roles, even when they’re not specified by race or by ethnicity … still 
automatically go to white actors,” she said. “That’s something that needs to 
change.”
 