
So what if Gordon Brown shouts too much 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-abusive-treatment-staff>
? And sometimes stabs the back of his car seat with a big black pen? If the 
Conservatives ever hoped that they could win the election by sitting back and 
letting Labour lose then yesterday's papers should have given them a shock. The 
prime minister is not going to fall apart, despite the bizarre news that his 
staff have been calling an anti-bullying helpline. There is no killer blow in 
Andrew Rawnsley's book. Brown is still there fighting, the immovable force in 
the ­unstormable bunker. Tomorrow's Guardian/ICM poll may confirm others 
suggesting that the contest is narrowing. The election could be upon us soon. 
And the Conservatives have work to do.

At candidate selection meetings hopefuls are sometimes asked to complete a 
sentence as they might on the doorstep: "Britain needs a Conservative 
government because …" So let's setDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> the same test. What would 
he say? Even his friends don't know for sure, which is rather extraordinary, so 
close to polling day. It's no good being certain that you are winning the 
battle of ideas, as the Tories are, if you can't explain them – as they can't.

Almost five years as leader has left Cameron with a brainstorm of 
possibilities. The trouble is that part one of the Conservative reinvention, 
which came before the economic crash, seems on the face of it to have little to 
do with part two, which came after. A leader who set up his stall selling 
expensive pears – organic, homegrown and ­charmingly misshapen – suddenly 
switched in late 2008 to insisting we need cheap apples – intensively grown on 
some cruel and cost-cutting ­agro-industrial farm. Now he is trying to 
sell both products side by side. No wonder some customers are shuffling out of 
the shop. It is public sector ­co-ops one day and swingeing cuts the next; 
Tesco Value and Duchy Originals mixed together. Britain must drink from the 
poisoned wells of Labour's debt crisis,Hague claimed yesterday 
<http://news.sky.com/skynews/Home/Politics/William-Hague-Accuses-Gordon-Brown-Of-Poisoning-The-Wells-For-Any-Incoming-Tory-Government/Article/201002315555204?lpos=Politics_Second_UK_News_Article_Teaser_Region_1&lid=ARTICLE_15555204_William_Hague_Accuses_Gordon_Brown_Of_Poisoning_The_Wells_For_Any_Incoming_Tory_Government>
 – but ­Cameron still wants to worry about ­general wellbeing, too.

This is why he finds completing that short slogan so awkward. He could keep 
things simple and hammer out the words "to stop Britain going bankrupt". That's 
sharp and pertinent and obviously Conservative. No one wants to live in the 
next Greece. Lots of people in his party would like him to keep saying it. Lots 
of voters might agree. Except Cameron doesn't feel happy with this line on its 
own. All that stuff from him about climate change and caring really was more 
than marketing. He wants to reach back to the sunshine days but he knows that 
the old lines don't sing as they did.

He could promise to "fix the broken society" again, but it's the broken 
economy that worries voters now. He could offer to"create social 
responsibility, not state control" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/oct/01/davidcameron.toryconference>, 
but that's way too wonky. Even worse, there is the ambition "to build the 
post-bureaucratic age". Better, some might argue, to keep things simple and 
scrawl "because anyone could do a better job than Gordon Brown" in large angry 
letters on every poster. It's what most voters – and large parts of the cabinet 
– think. But as the tightening race shows, this line isn't going to be an 
election winner on its own. People know what's wrong with Labour and its 
leader. It's the Tory alternative that leaves them confused. One minute Cameron 
seems cuddly, the next he seems cruel. The clarity of his early days has been 
lost.

Those around Cameron know this is the case. As late as spring 2008 the 
Tory leader wascontrasting his task with Margaret Thatcher's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/oct/01/davidcameron.toryconference1>
. Just as she fixed the economy, so Cameron wanted to fix society. Then the 
Tory bet on the economy failed as surely as the Labour one. The opposition 
rebuilt itself with a campaign on government debt which was almost too 
successful. The more everyone talked about cuts, the more outdated Cameron's 
early agenda appeared.

Next weekend, at the Conservative spring conference, he will make a speech 
that ought to ring in everyone's ears as a description of why he wants power – 
his final entry, if you like, in that search for a selection meeting slogan. He 
could decide that the economy is going to be the crux on which the election 
turns – Labour's debt crisis versus the Tory threat to recovery – and simply 
hammer home the message on borrowing. It has the merit of being easy and in 
tune with the moment. But anyone who wants cuts will already be voting Tory. 
It's the worried middle Cameron needs to keep happy.

So he should rise above the economic crisis to describe yet again the new 
society he wants to build – reassuring people once more that he is not, as he 
put it last year, a flint-faced, turbo-charged accountant. That's what the 
party has spent the last week doing; Cameron's interview inAttitude magazine 
<http://www.attitude.co.uk/> and George Osborne's offer of cheap public shares 
in banks are all part of the same thing. But as anyone can spot, giving people 
discounts on bank ownership is not the same thing as paying off the national 
debt fast. Cameron needs to explain how these two halves of modern Conservatism 
add up.

The hinge between them must be the Conservative attitude to the state. In his 
conference speech last year Cameron talked about poverty and he talked about 
smaller government and listeners only saw the contradictions and not the 
connections. Next Sunday he had better be clearer. He must explain that smaller 
government would be cheaper government, but it might not necessarily be worse 
government. More money does not always bring improved services. Cuts can force 
reform. Last summer Osborne gave a speech making this point. He was right.

Labour would like, if it can, to spend the whole campaign talking about 
fairness, as if that could disguise the fact that the government has run out of 
money. But whichever party wins, spending will fall. What matters is how the 
process is managed. On that, Labour is silent. On that, theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> could have much to say. 
Cameron's ­Conservatives are often charged with choosing slogans over 
substance. Perhaps that attack is the wrong way around. They believe they have 
an idea of the future. They think they have good plans to get there. Now they 
need to sell the journey to voters.
 