
My children are enthusiastic about food, it's great when you see them with 
girlfriends or boyfriends and they talk about food in a knowledgable way.

I got them involved in cooking from a very young age, got them stirring, 
dropping a bit of pancake mixture in the pan, or watching the food cook in the 
oven, cakes rising, or cheese bubbling up. I just wanted them to feel 
comfortable in the kitchen. It should be a domain where you feel very much at 
ease. After all, sitting round a table, sharing your food, that is at the heart 
of how human beings live. One of the nicest things about taking your kids to a 
restaurant - Thai or Chinese for example - is having all the dishes in the 
middle of the table so that you can try a little bit of everything. And I try - 
not for every meal, but pretty often - to get that feeling at home, to put the 
food out in serving dishes on the table so that everyone can help themselves, 
because I think that's what makes children feel comfortable.

I get loads of letters from desperate parents whose kids won't eat this and 
that, and I always say, just give it time, think back to what you were like as 
a kid. I've got one friend, I've known him since we were boys, and he gets 
furious when his kids put ketchup all over their dinner, and I had to remind 
him that as a kid he used to absolutely bury his mum's cooking in ketchup and 
then mash it into everything. He was like: "Oh yeah, I'd forgotten about that". 
Children's tastebuds are still developing: what they like one week they won't 
like the next, and the important thing is not to get too upset about it.

We do have an obesity problem in this country. I think part of the problem is 
that some people just can't be bothered and plonk down cheap fatty food in 
front of their children every night.

Planning meals is key: don't just grab something off the shelf, or pick up the 
first two-for-one offer you see, without some idea of what you're going to do 
with it. If you buy two heads of broccoli, for example, it will start to yellow 
very quickly, so you need to make one of those heads into a lovely soup, maybe 
with some blue cheese or a bit of chorizo, straightaway which you can freeze 
and have another day.

My family is now in a slightly awkward phase, we quite often seem to have 
meals at different times because, for example, my son Jimmy is off playing golf 
or footie, or my daughter Maddy is just hanging out with her friends. There's 
no doubt that Clare, my wife, would like us to eat together every day, but we 
usually only manage it a couple of times a week.

It's all really about spending some time with them. Cooking is about love, 
really, and cooking for your children is all about caring for them, building 
relationships. If you can't cook every day, perhaps you can have a couple of 
cooking days a week, where you make some fresh food and freeze portions of it 
for the other days. In our house caring about food is pretty instinctive. Of 
course I'm off travelling a lot, but when I'm home then we'll say, all right, 
let's make muffins, let's make gingerbread, lets just make some time in these 
hectic lifestyles to be together in the kitchen.

And it's worth it. When I see my boy making scrambled eggs - he makes wicked 
scrambled eggs, tipping the pan to check their consistency - I get a feeling: 
that's what I've done. It's what it's all about.

â€¢ A new series of Ready Steady Cook will begin later this autumn
 