
‘Great convo w studio execs in LA. Good to hear their perspectives & ideas of 
how to counter #Daesh narrative,”tweeted John Kerry 
<https://twitter.com/johnkerry/status/699746890271715328> on 16 February, along 
with a photo of himself in a Hollywood meeting lounge with executives from 
Universal, Warner, Fox, Disney, Sony, Dreamworks and other big players – 
overwhelmingly middle-aged white men in suits.

One can’t help imagining there were some awkward moments to this “great convo” 
<http://variety.com/2016/biz/news/john-kerry-hollywood-studio-chiefs-isis-1201707652/>
, though. Especially if Kerry queried what Hollywood had done to counter the 
“#Daesh narrative” so far. Even more so, if he asked what juicy 
counter-terrorism stories they had coming down the pipeline. Looking at the 
current output, such as Whiskey Tango Foxtrot, Rock the Kasbah andLondon Has 
Fallen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/02/london-has-fallen-review-gerard-butler-bromance-brews-as-big-ben-blows>
, you could easily get the impression that Hollywood is part of the problem, 
rather than a potential solution.

If you accept the notion of a “war of narratives”, it’s an area where the 
extremists have done most of the running. Still ringing in Washington’s ears 
and heading its PowerPoint presentations is the declaration the al-Qaida leader
Ayman al-Zawahiri made in 2005 
<http://www.globalsecurity.org/security/library/report/2005/zawahiri-zarqawi-letter_9jul2005.htm>
: “We are in a battle, and more than half of this battle is taking place in the 
battlefield of the media.” Isis/Daesh has been sending a steady stream of video 
content on to that media battlefield, the relative sophistication of which has 
filled western commentators with a mix of horror, concern and admiration. The 
US and its coalition partners have floundered over how to respond.

Kerry’s visit to Hollywood comes a month after the State Department revamped 
its Countering Violent Extremism programme. Since 2010, that role had been 
performed by theCenter for Strategic Counterterrorism Communications (CSCC) 
<http://www.state.gov/r/cscc/index.htm>; its counter-messaging often leaned 
towards counter-productive messaging. One of its strategies, for example, was 
to engage directly with Isis jihadists on Twitter, but that only served to 
legitimise their voices. The CSCC also put out a parody recruitment video, 
repurposing Isis’s violent propaganda footage and broadcasting it under the 
seal of the State Department. “Run, do not walk to Isis land,” ran the text of 
the ad. “Travel is inexpensive because you won’t need a return ticket!” Asthe 
TV satirist John Oliver remarked <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o3VDDbh5dXw>: 
“You are banking a lot on any potential militants understanding that that is 
sarcasm.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F799cef3d9b75c01d17a0d2ff10c1528058e99692%2F0_0_2898_1739%2F2898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels!%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels%21%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F799cef3d9b75c01d17a0d2ff10c1528058e99692%2F0_0_2898_1739%2F2898.jpg>
 Evil Arab ... Arnold Schwarzenegger, Art Malik and Jamie Lee Curtis in True 
Lies. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
“If our message is that Daesh is a criminal organisation that represents a 
distorted view ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, the US 
government is not the best conveyor of that message,” says Richard Stengel, 
undersecretary for public diplomacy and public affairs in the State Department. 
“The best conveyors are local people and Muslims and clerics and NGOs. So, 
rather than be in the business of doing tit-for-tat tweets with Daesh, we 
realised that we have an expertise in funding and messaging. What can we do to 
empower, amplify, optimise the messaging that’s out there already? That’s the 
central paradigm shift.”

The Isis propaganda war: a hi-tech media jihad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/07/isis-media-machine-propaganda-war>
This is by no means the first time in the 21st century that the White House 
has turned to Tinseltown. Just a month after 9/11, George W Bush’s top adviser, 
Karl Rove, convened a similar council of movie execs for a counter-terrorist 
pitching session, although it apparently came to nothing. There was no 
discussion of putting government propaganda into movies, it was reported.
“Content was off the table,” said Jack Valenti 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2001/US/11/11/rec.hollywood.terror/>, then head of the 
Motion Pictures Association of America.

Content was also off the table at Kerry’s Hollywood trip, it appears. “It 
wasn’t about asking them to make an Islamic Harry Potter,” says Stengel. “It’s 
not like the cold war, trying to insert positive narratives into movies. It’s 
connected in the largest possible way to defeating Daesh. It was an opportunity 
to talk to these people who shape content around the world, who shape the 
American brand around the world. An opportunity to go to them and say: ‘What 
can you do to help?’ in what [Kerry] has called the generational struggle of 
our time.”

But if Hollywood has any meaningful role to play here, content is arguably 
exactly what should be on the table. Throughout its history, American cinema 
has employed a lamentably narrow set of stereotypes about Arabs and Muslims. 
“They’ve been the most vilified group in the history of Hollywood,” says the 
academic and author Jack Shaheen. His book Reel Bad Arabs surveys some1,200 
depictions of Arabs and Muslims in the movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jan/12/worlddispatch.race>. By his 
estimation, roughly 97% are unfavourable, coloured by orientalist myths, racist 
demonising and xenophobic paranoia. “At most, three dozen or so had balance, or 
what I would call positive images. In the rest of them, Arabs are either 
terrorists or shady sheikhs or people you would not want to associate with. 
Those images continue to pervade our psyches.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3e6bbd2990b5d4d96de0dd4895280b0f47d7ac3%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels!%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels%21%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3e6bbd2990b5d4d96de0dd4895280b0f47d7ac3%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Concubine ... Goldie Hawn in Protocol. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
There are too many egregious examples to list. Selected highlights would 
include True Lies (Arnold Schwarzenegger versus fanatical yet incompetent 
Palestinian terrorists, who detonate a nuclear device in Florida), Protocol 
(Goldie Hawn becomes concubine to a lecherous oil-rich sheikh, so that the US 
can build a military base in his country), Network (“The Arabs are simply 
buying us,” rails Peter Finch’s rebel presenter), and1998 thriller The Siege 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/frompost/nov98/arab06.htm> (in 
which Arab-Americans are rounded up after a New York terrorist attack.The 
critic Roger Ebert wrote <http://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/the-siege-1998>: 
“The prejudicial attitudes embodied in the film are insidious, like the 
antisemitism that infected fiction and journalism in the 1930s”). And special 
mention must go toWilliam Friedkin’s 2000 thriller Rules of Engagement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/aug/11/2>, in which Samuel L Jackson’s 
marine goes on trial for massacring a crowd of Yemenis, but is exonerated when 
it turns out they were all gun-toting evildoers, even the women and children.

Rules of Engagement was “probably the most racist film ever made against Arabs 
by Hollywood”, protested the Arab-American Anti-Discrimination Committee at the 
time. But then 9/11 happened and things became even worse. Old-fashioned 
Islamophobia is still thriving, as demonstrated by current releaseLondon Has 
Fallen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/london-has-fallen>, in which Gerard 
Butler saves the world from yet another brown-skinned, detonator-happy 
terrorist with an Arab-sounding name, and dispatches evildoers with lines such 
as: “Get back to Fuckheadistan, or wherever you’re from.” Meanwhile, 
counter-terrorism-themed TV series such as 24, Homeland, Sleeper Cell and NCIS 
reiterate the “all Muslims are potential terrorists” notion, with the added 
point that they’re on American soil now. “Hollywood and television have created 
an even more dangerous precedent by vilifying American Arabs and American 
Muslims in particular,” says Shaheen. “They’ve blended the old stereotypes from 
‘over there’ with new stereotypes from ‘over here’.”

When Hollywood has made attempts to address the Iraq and Afghanistan conflicts 
directly, the casualty list has been high: Lions for Lambs, The Messenger, Stop 
Loss, Green Zone, In the Valley of Elah, Grace Is Gone, Redacted – all of them 
flopped at the box office. Even The Hurt Locker, with its Oscars and all-round 
acclaim, was greeted with widespread indifference by the American public, 
taking just $17m (£12m).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dfc245de2e7d8fe20f8a1c15669e1b53d00d34b%2F0_71_1712_1027%2F1712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels!%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels%21%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dfc245de2e7d8fe20f8a1c15669e1b53d00d34b%2F0_71_1712_1027%2F1712.jpg>
 Numan Acar as terrorist Haissam Haqqani in Homeland. Photograph: 
Cour/Rex/Shutterstock 
Only a handful of Afghanistan/Iraq films have struck a chord with US 
audiences: Zero Dark Thirty, detailing the hunt for Osama Bin Laden, made $95m 
domestically; Afghanistan action thriller Lone Survivor made $125m; and 
overshadowing them all is Clint Eastwood’sAmerican Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, based on the real-life Navy 
Seal Chris Kyle, who holds the record for the most kills in US military 
history. It took more than $350m, making it the highest grossing movie of 2014 
in the US.

When viewed through the prism of “countering the #Daesh narrative”, these 
movies make uncomfortable viewing. Zero Dark Thirty took a relatively nuanced 
approach to the war on terror, but controversially depicted Arabs being 
tortured. Both American Sniper and Lone Survivor narrowly focus on US military 
personnel and their efforts to kill nameless, faceless “bad guys”. Wider 
questions about American foreign policy, or how ordinary Afghanis and Iraqis 
felt about being invaded, are sidestepped in favour of heat-of-the-battle 
immediacy. In its opening minutes, American Sniper gets in the “all Muslims are 
potential terrorists” trope, as Kyle guns down a woman and a child who both try 
to attack US troops (the attack did not happen in real life). It gets worse 
from there on in.Not that the reality was much better. 
<https://storify.com/RaniaKhalek/american-sniper-chris-kyle-in-his-own-words> 
In his autobiography, Kyle wrote: “I only wish I had killed more. Not for 
bragging rights but because I believe the world is a better place without 
savages out there taking American lives.”

These are the narratives the US has been sending out on to this ideological 
battlefield. Shaheen is not alone in wondering what role they have played, not 
just in the rise of Isis, but in the decisions to invade Iraq and Afghanistan 
in the first place, not to mention the manner in which those wars were 
conducted, from the high levels of civilian casualties to atrocities such as 
those at Abu Ghraib. And how can these mythologies not play into the
increasingly Islamophobic climate back home 
<http://www.islamophobia.org/15-reports/164-islamophobia-in-the-2016-presidential-election.html>
? Republican presidential nominees are presently engaged in an arms race of 
anti-Muslim rhetoric, against a background of vandalised mosques, threats, 
shootings and general discrimination. Isis’s own atrocities have contributed to 
this climate, of course, but homespun narratives seem to be fanning the flames. 
The release of American Sniper triggered a reportedthree-fold increase in 
anti-Muslim and anti-Arab threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/24/american-sniper-anti-muslim-threats-skyrocket>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5de340fb99654b4554f3aa9bc72269d1b752ef11%2F0_78_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels!%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels%21%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5de340fb99654b4554f3aa9bc72269d1b752ef11%2F0_78_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Gerard Butler as Mike Banning in London Has Fallen. Photograph: 
Allstar/Millennium Films 
“When you create this fear and it manifests itself in hate crimes, bias and 
bullying, then it alienates people,” saysHumera Khan 
<http://sources.npr.org/humera-khan/>, the founder and executive director of 
Muflehun, acounter-violent-extremism thinktank <http://muflehun.org>. “Society 
is telling you: ‘You don’t belong.’ It is reinforcing what Isis is telling 
them.” Islamic extremists represent, at best, 100,000 people out of a worldwide 
Muslim population of 1.6 billion, Khan points out, but with the exception of 
the occasional token “good Muslim”, these are overwhelmingly the ones we see on 
our screens. She offers an analogy: “Imagine if you introduced someone to white 
people only by way of the Ku Klux Klan, but then said afterwards, ‘Oh, by way, 
there are some good white people out there, too.’”

In stereotyping Arabs and Muslims, the US also reinforces stereotypes about 
itself, Khan adds. Muslims around the world watch Hollywood movies, too – in 
greater numbers than Americans. “When these movies play in majority Muslim 
countries, the assumption is, ‘Look: they’re misrepresenting us again.’ So for 
the average person who’s not interested in Isis, the impression is: ‘America 
doesn’t like us.’ When you think about Isis’s message, that this is ‘a war 
against Muslims’, that’s exactly what they’re showing.”

Mirroring Washington’s recent shift in counter-messaging, Hollywood also seems 
to be taking a different tack: it is now coming at the Afghanistan/Iraq wars by 
way of comedy. Perhaps the studio bosses looked at their casualty list of 
box-office bombs and wondered if all that death, torture and moral complexity 
wasn’t putting people off. Having repeated the history as tragedy, Hollywood is 
repackaging it as farce.

Rock the Kasbah is an all-too-literal example of this 
<http://rockthekasbahmovie.com>. The movie, which is released in the UK this 
week, draws on the true story of Setara Hussainzada, a Pashtun teenager who 
bravely tested post-invasion waters by entering Afghanistan’s new X Factor/Pop 
Idol equivalent, Afghan Star (women singing or dancing was strictly forbidden 
under Taliban rule). Hussainzada was already the subject ofa 2009 documentary, 
also titled Afghan Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/18/afghan-star-documentary-music>, 
but in Rock the Kasbah, she’s discovered in a cave by Bill Murray’s jaded rock 
promoter. He puts her into the spotlight with the aid of some fellow Americans: 
a twitchy soldier, two corrupt arms dealers and a sympathetic prostitute, who 
operates out of a trailer on the edge of town. From a “#Daesh narrative” 
perspective, they could represent the horsemen of the apocalypse, but the comic 
tone places the gruesome realities of war well in the background.As one review 
put it <http://www.slantmagazine.com/film/review/rock-the-kasbah>: “Rock the 
Kasbah gives the impression that the nation’s ideological rebirth would have 
been impossible without the gumption of a hasbeen music manager learning to 
shed his cynicism.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc14dcc9a5c9767d980c4325cdbdbfc2ad00b7a5%2F0_8_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels!%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Death%20to%20the%20infidels%21%E2%80%99%20Why%20it%E2%80%99s%20time%20to%20fix%20Hollywood%E2%80%99s%20problem%20with%20Muslims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F08%2Fdeath-to-infidels-time-to-fix-hollywoods-problem-muslims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc14dcc9a5c9767d980c4325cdbdbfc2ad00b7a5%2F0_8_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 ‘The most American-white-lady story I’ve ever heard’ ... Evan Jonigkeit and 
Tina Fey in Whiskey Tango Foxtrot. Photograph: Allstar/Paramount Pictures 
It’s a similar story with Whiskey Tango Foxtrot, which opened in the US this 
weekend. Again, the plight of war-ravaged Afghanistan is largely 
window-dressing forthe journey of our war-reporter heroine, Tina Fey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/03/whiskey-tango-foxtrot-review-tina-fey-afghanistan-war-reporting>
, a fortysomething singleton who is pitched into the battlefield and the 
hard-partying expat “Kabubble”. One character lets the cat out of the bag by 
describing it as “the most American-white-lady story I’ve ever heard”. A few 
Afghani characters do get speaking parts in Whiskey Tango Foxtrot. One is a 
clownish local politician, basically a standard-issue “lecherous Arab”, played 
by the British actor Alfred Molina. The other, Fey’s Afghani helper, Fahim, is 
that rarest of things: a male Muslim movie character who is intelligent, 
educated, empathetic and not the slightest bit lecherous. That bad news is he’s 
played by an American actor, Christopher Abbott, best known as Charlie out of 
Girls.

‘I am a radicalised goat hell-bent on jihad’ – the FBI’s new anti-Isis video 
game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2016/feb/10/radicalised-goat-hell-bent-on-jihad-fbi-new-anti-isis-video-game>
There’s more of this to come. Such as War Dogs, formerly titled Arms and the 
Dudes, about two real-life Miami stoners who made afortune illegally exporting 
arms to Afghanistan with US approval 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/the-stoner-arms-dealers-20110316> – 
directed by the guy who made The Hangover. It sounds like a cross between The 
Wolf of Wall Street and Pineapple Express. Then there’s War Machine, in which 
Brad Pitt plays General Stanley McChrystal, the former commander of US forces 
in Afghanistan,who famously talked himself out of a job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/23/barack-obama-stanley-mcchrystal-afghanistan>
 in a profile for Rolling Stone magazine, by expressing his contempt for Barack 
Obama and his administration. It could be a great satire – and there is 
certainly a place for those in cinema, when you think back to movies such as 
Catch-22, M*A*S*H, Dr Strangelove, or even Three Kings or Team America. There 
have been a plethora of fine American documentaries chronicling this era, too. 
But again, what does it mean for the battle of narratives?

For Hollywood, it can look like a case of “damned if we do, damned if we 
don’t”. Either they take a purely US-centric point of view and dehumanise Arabs 
and Muslims – which plays right into the #Daesh narrative. Or they take a 
critical look at the US’s military and foreign policy failings – which also 
plays into the #Daesh narrative. What are they supposed to do?

A good start, says Shaheen, would be to stop perpetuating the same blinkered, 
divisive rhetoric as our enemies. It wouldn’t take much. “There really needs to 
be a couple of blockbuster films that squash these stereotypes, as well as some 
responsibility on the part of our political leaders, who are encouraging voters 
to hate their fellow Americans. It has to come from the top.” He cites the way 
Hollywood cleaned up its act with regard to racist depictions of 
African-Americans, Jews and LGBT characters.

Khan agrees: “If they were just more responsible in their portrayal of Arabs 
and Muslims, that would actually help the environment on the ground.” What 
happens on the ground, in Syria and Iraq especially, is obviously paramount if 
anything is to change, but movies absolutely have a role to play. “Is any 
narrative going to be sufficient? No. Is this a necessary part of this 
landscape of needs? Yes.”

Just as the US likes to think of itself as the world’s policeman, it is also 
unquestionably the world’s storyteller. That narrative supremacy comes with 
certain responsibilities, now more so than ever.

In the meantime, we can take comfort from the fact that even jihadis can’t 
resist a good movie. On the day of Robin Williams’s death in August 2014, a 
self-professed online “diplomat for Isis” named Abdullah (AKA @Mujahid4Life), 
tweeted:“#RobinWilliams is dead? Weird. Grew up watching his movies.” 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/variety/2014/08/13/Star-struck-ISIS-Fighters-mourn-Robin-Williams.html>

Another user replied that he liked Jumanji.

“Good movie,” Abdullah replied. “Loved it as a kid.”
 