
I was shocked when I heard that Simon Relph had died unexpectedly at the 
weekend 
<http://www.screendaily.com/news/respected-uk-producer-simon-relph-dies-aged-76/5110814.article?blocktitle=Most-commented&contentID=-1>
. He was a colossal influence on many of us breaking through in the British 
film industry in the 1980s and 90s. He was also a terrific man who supported 
young writers, directors and producers throughout his career. I first met Simon 
when I was buying films for my distribution company Palace; having just 
finished makingThe Company of Wolves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
 I had ambitions to produce more films. Simon was a big bear of a man with a 
huge ornamental chain around his neck and a booming voice to match: 
old-fashioned and posh but with a twinkling eye, like a benign lord mayor from 
thefree state of Pimlico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2012/may/28/passport-to-pimlico-in-pictures>
. (It’s entirely typical that his only directorial credit was the 1984 
documentary How to Enjoy Wine, featuring wine writer Hugh Johnson.) He wanted 
us to release his production of David Hare’s Wetherby, and I wanted him to 
produce Mona Lisa with me as I was embroiled in Absolute Beginners. Although he 
couldn’t work on Mona Lisa, it was the start of a great relationship that Simon 
shared with many of my generation, exchanging and pooling ideas and contacts. 
It is no exaggeration to say that Simon was in the vanguard of the revival of 
British cinema after its nadir in the 1970s.

Little did I know that Simon had seen the glory days in the 40s and 50s, 
albeit from a child’s perspective:his father Michael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/08/guardianobituaries.film> was 
immersed in the Ealing universe producing, directing, designing and writing 
some seminal British films, includingDead of Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/dead-night-crichton-horror>, Kind 
Hearts and Coronets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/favourite-film-kind-hearts-coronets>
 andThe Blue Lamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/11/british-cinema-portrayal-of-police>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fstephen-woolley-remembers-film-producer-simon-relph%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ac2c69177d921f586f3d272befb03e4b621827%2F0_0_2985_2328%2F2985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Dignified%2C%20principled%20and%20selfless'%3A%20Stephen%20Woolley%20remembers%20film%20producer%20Simon%20Relph&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fstephen-woolley-remembers-film-producer-simon-relph%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Dignified%2C%20principled%20and%20selfless%27%3A%20Stephen%20Woolley%20remembers%20film%20producer%20Simon%20Relph&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fstephen-woolley-remembers-film-producer-simon-relph%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ac2c69177d921f586f3d272befb03e4b621827%2F0_0_2985_2328%2F2985.jpg>
 A test of mettle … Jon Finch in Roman Polanski’s Macbeth. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/Columbia 
Simon’s first proper job was as a menial third assistant director on Carry On 
Cruising and Doctor in Distress in the early 60s, rising to first AD on Roman 
Polanski’s troubled 1971 adaptation ofMacbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/may/05/roman-polanski-macbeth-clip-gory-1971-shakespeare-video>
. He needed a cool head to balance the production: Playboy owner Hugh Hefner 
would helicopter in bags of cash to finance the film when they ran out of money.

He became Warren Beatty’s rock and confidant on the epic communist saga Reds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/02/reds-votes-left-warren-beatty> 
(1982) as first assistant director and executive producer: while Beatty won an 
Oscar for best director, Simon miraculously held together a production that 
ballooned well beyond its original schedule, with the film eventually being 
edited down from two and a half million feet of footage – probably a world 
record. Simon’s patience was, apparently, bottomless. As was his friendship and 
devotion toBeatty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/warren-beatty>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUg-xgWXHNyo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUg-xgWXHNyo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUg-xgWXHNyo&media=>
 Watch a trailer forThe Ploughman’s Lunch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ug-xgWXHNyo> 
His producing career took off with another politically themed, 
smaller-budgeted but no less significant movie: The Ploughman’s Lunch. Created 
by the team of director Richard Eyre, writer Ian McEwan and producer Ann Scott 
alongside Simon, its slyly intelligent view of Thatcher’s Britain during the 
Falklands crisis was a critical success and a small box-office splash in UK and 
internationally. Alongside early films fromStephen Frears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears>, Neil Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/neil-jordan> and Peter Greenaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/14/film-director-calls-for-image-based-cinema>
, it persuaded Channel Four to seriously invest in British production by 
affirming their commitment to the continuation and expansion of Film4.


Simon was appointed as the CEO of British Screen Finance in 1985 (one of the 
few times before or since that a nuts-and-bolts film-maker was given a pivotal 
role in funding); and he remained there for five years during which he 
co-financed more than 50 films. Many of them were with first-time directors, 
all the the while fighting tooth and nail for proper government finance for 
lower budget British films.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fstephen-woolley-remembers-film-producer-simon-relph%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff552226b3b97f6c3a6e7c887eef3cc03b50c25dc%2F0_27_2544_1614%2F2544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Dignified%2C%20principled%20and%20selfless'%3A%20Stephen%20Woolley%20remembers%20film%20producer%20Simon%20Relph&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fstephen-woolley-remembers-film-producer-simon-relph%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Dignified%2C%20principled%20and%20selfless%27%3A%20Stephen%20Woolley%20remembers%20film%20producer%20Simon%20Relph&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fstephen-woolley-remembers-film-producer-simon-relph%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff552226b3b97f6c3a6e7c887eef3cc03b50c25dc%2F0_27_2544_1614%2F2544.jpg>
 Political implications … Joanne Whalley and John Hurt in Scandal, 1989. 
Photograph: Everett Collection / Rex Features 
He was the godfather to a whole generation of aspiring film-makers, sticking 
his neck out when needed

He also brought his unique experience and bountiful optimism to the ears of 
any young film-maker lucky enough to be in his orbit. After The Company of 
Wolves, I regularly called on Simon for recommendations and advice: with every 
penny he invested came a million pounds-worth of knowledge and wisdom, 
charmingly and eruditely bestowed. He was the godfather to a whole generation 
of aspiring film-makers, sticking his neck out when needed. I had personal 
experience of this in 1988 when he backed Palace’s productionScandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/11/scandal-keeler-profumo>, the 
story of Christine Keeler and the Profumo affair. At the time, the BBC and 
Channel Four were frightened of the political implications of upsetting the 
Thatcher regime, and without his backing it would never have been made, Simon 
was seemingly imbued with that British humanitarian sense of fairness, fair 
play – and fearlessness. Along with Film4 we combined often in an unspoken 
conspiracy to bring new British cinema – including films byMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/mike-leigh-interview>, Derek 
Jarman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/24/celebrating-derek-jarman-20-years-death>
 andKen Loach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/15/ken-laoch-film-i-daniel-blake-kes-cathy-come-home-interview-simon-hattenstone>
 – to the attention of critics and public alike.

In the 1990s Simon bought his gifts – not least of all his old-school 
diplomacy – to makingBafta <http://www.bafta.org/> a home for film-makers, 
shaking up the awards so that they represented modern cinema both British and 
international. Reflecting the desires of film-makers themselves, he was again 
standing in the vanguard of change to transform what many considered a 
backward-looking organisation. For a decade, Simon and I worked together as 
co-chairs of the film committee: his honest, forthright views and his innate 
sense of justice for the industry and its practitioners helped put Bafta where 
it is today, as second only to America’sAcademy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> in profile and importance in the 
awards calendar.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIp0ukkY4KkU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIp0ukkY4KkU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIp0ukkY4KkU&media=>
His influence as one of the few honest, clear and resonant voices in our often 
muddled and hypocritical industry will be felt for decades to come. He was a 
dignified, principled and selfless film-maker in an often undignified and 
confused industry. He will be missed by many of us and we would do well to try 
to emulate his kindness, passion and dedication to the art of cinema.
 