
When her 22-year-old husband was killed by roadside bombs while serving in 
Iraq in 2007, Taryn Davis searched the internet for help.

“I Googled ‘widow’ and got the response: ‘Do you mean window?’” she said. 
“That really was a huge catalyst to me, to think that there were other women 
possibly out there that had Googled ‘widow’ too and either got that response or 
lots of pictures of spiders.”

Nearly 7,000 US service members have been killed since the “war on terror” 
began in 2001, creating thousands of bereaved young spouses like Davis, who was 
21 when corporal Michael Davis died in Baghdad. Half those killed were aged 
under 25. More than half of active duty members are married.

Google “military widow” today and one of the first results is the Texas-based 
non-profit organisation Davis founded after her husband’s death,the American 
Widow Project <http://americanwidowproject.org/stories/>. It provides 
nationwide support services and its website has collected hundreds of stories 
of grief, loss and love.

Taya Kyle is about to shine a spotlight on life as a military widow, with the 
publication in May of American Wife: A Memoir of Love, War, Faith and Renewal, 
anda carefully coordinated publicity campaign 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/headlines/2015/03/abc-news-exclusive-robin-roberts-to-interview-taya-kyle-wife-of-american-sniper-chris-kyle-for-her-memoir-american-wife-a-memoir-of-love-war-faith-and-renewal/>
.

It will detail her life before and after the death of Chris Kyle, the subject 
of the book and blockbuster filmAmerican Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>. Considered the deadliest 
sniper in US military history, Kyle left the US navy in 2009 and was murdered 
on a Texas gun range in 2013 by Eddie Ray Routh, a troubled former Marine who 
last month was sentenced to life in prison for the crime.

'American Sniper' killer Eddie Ray Routh found guilty and sentenced to life in 
prison without parole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/american-sniper-trial-eddie-ray-routh-found-guilty-and-sentenced-to-life-in-prison-without-parole>
Taya Kyle, 40, provided emotional testimony in court about her family life, is 
a regular guest speaker on military issues and has given interviews to help 
promote the film. In the middle of the trial she flew to Los Angeles to attend
the Academy Awards 
<http://www.people.com/article/american-sniper-chris-kyle-widow-taya-kyle-copinghttp://www.harpercollinsspeakersbureau.com/speaker/taya-kyle/>
, walking the red carpet with her late husband’s dog tags. Clint Eastwood’s 
film was nominated for six Oscars, including best picture, winning one, for 
best sound editing.

“The story she’s sharing is one of thousands that haven’t really been told, 
and for her to bring light to her strife and her pain in hopes that someone 
else knows they’re not alone and that they can get through it and their grief 
is normal – whatever normal is – I commend that,” said Davis.

“When I saw American Sniper came out, for me I personally thought: ‘That’s 
something I don’t want to see because it might bring back images of what 
happened to my husband,’” she said. “For some people, reading the book might 
bring them back to a place that they don’t want to go back to. For others it 
might take them to a place where they realise how far they’ve come.”

Joanne Steen’s husband, Ken, was killed in 1992 along with six others when 
their navy helicopter exploded in mid-air during a training exercise in 
Virginia. She is now an advisor on line-of-duty loss and a co-author of 
Military Widow: A Survival Guide. The book was published 14 years after Ken’s 
death.

“It was difficult for me to write it because I had to ‘resurrect’ my late 
husband,” Steen said. “Most people write about their experiences, what losing a 
service member means to them, but few write about what military widowhood is 
like.

“What happens is that you end up with a public identity – hey, I’m a military 
widow – that’s recognised in society. And then you also have the private 
identity of losing a spouse. [Attention] helps to keep your husband’s memory 
out there because a big fear of survivors is that our loved ones will be 
forgotten.”

Steen said she admired Kyle’s decision to attend the Oscars. “I personally was 
happy to see her there, as another widow. She was dealt an incredibly tough 
blow; all widows are, but she was dealt an incredibly tough blow. I expect it 
has not been easy with all that publicity.”

Kyle has also, largely behind the scenes, had to handle disputes related to 
the profits from the film and book, as well asa defamation lawsuit 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/american-sniper-chris-kyles-widow-773524>
 brought by the former Minnesota governor and ex-professional wrestler Jesse 
Ventura.

The government provides potentially significant levels of financial assistance 
<http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.specialops.org/resource/resmgr/survivors_guidelr.pdf>
 to bereaved spouses, although the bureaucracycan be hard to navigate 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/06/27/us/27benefits.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0> for 
some.

Steen and Davis said military widowhood presents specific emotional challenges 
because such women are usually very young and the armed forces can represent a 
painful reminder of the tragedy as well as being a possible support network. 
Something as simple as seeing the American flag is capable of sparking painful 
memories while knowledge that the partner is in a dangerous job is no 
preparation for the shock of a loss.

“These service members usually die suddenly and they’re often catastrophic 
deaths, often traumatic deaths,” Steen said. “So as a widow you’re at a time 
when you’re beginning life and you’re creating life – marriage, babies, things 
like that.

“You don’t have very often the experience or the maturity to deal with a 
traumatic death … My husband and I had ‘the talk’ about what would happen 
should he crash. Did I think it would happen? Heck no. Did I worry? Heck yes. 
You may worry that it’s going to happen but you don’t necessarily expect it to 
happen.”

Like Kyle, many are widowed after their partner has left the military. The 
suicide rate among veterans is far higher than in the general population, with
an estimated 8,000 killing themselves 
<http://www.politifact.com/georgia/statements/2015/feb/27/johnny-isakson/rate-not-just-number-helps-explain-vet-suicide-ris/>
 annually.

“A lot of the military widows we serve come to our events and share that they 
walked upstairs to find a note on the door saying ‘call 9-1-1’ and opened the 
door to see their spouse had [hanged] themselves or wrapped themselves in a 
sheet and shot himself in the head, or their kids found them in the basement,” 
said Davis.

She was 21 when her husband died and said she created the Project to fill a 
gap. “I was provided with leaflets that the military recommended, was reached 
out to by other organisations, but when I researched them I either saw the 
images I expected to see of what a widow is or I saw organisations that seemed 
to be based around which politician supported their cause or which major 
sponsor just funded their yearly budget.

“And at that point I was at an all-time low. I think people thought that 
because I was so young it would be easy to just recuperate and sweep it under 
the rug and in all honesty it was more difficult than anything I could have 
fathomed.

“You’re kind of like a zombie. You’re going through these motions and you’re 
putting on a smile outwards to make other people feel comfortable. When people 
ask how you’re doing you just say: ‘I’m fine,’ but in reality you think ‘I want 
to kill myself, I feel desperate, I feel lonely; the person I talked to for 
everything is gone.’”

Even widespread sympathy can be hard to handle. “There were almost 1,000 
people at his funeral. So every time I went to the grocery store I’d see people 
come up and say: ‘We’re thinking of you, we’re sorry,’” Davis said.

“I was afraid to laugh in public for over a year after Michael’s death because 
I was in such a small town and I thought ‘OK, the first time somebody sees me 
laugh, they’re going to think I’m over Michael, that I’m not hurting, that I’m 
not in pain.’

“I want people to know that grief is a lifetime process. If 50 years from now 
I’m remarried with three kids and 12 grandkids, what happened to Michael and 
what happened to me because of his sacrifice is something that I will struggle 
with at all times, and that awareness and acceptance is what makes it easier 
for me. And so we want to create an environment for that.”
 