
I bought a £40 coat from Asos using PayPal. The money was taken out of my 
PayPal <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/paypal> account, but within 
minutes Asos emailed saying the order was unsuccessful.

I contacted Asos, which said it would take 10 working days for the money to 
reappear in my PayPal account. It has now been a month and dealing with Asos 
has been frustrating. It has no helpline number on its website and I have to 
keep emailing through a “help form” on the site or posting on its social media 
outlets, which it rarely responds to. The order still says “pending” on my 
PayPal account, butAsos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> insists it 
has cancelled it and there is nothing more it can do. I have repeatedly 
contacted them showing them proof the order still says pending but again, that 
is ignored. NW, London

Asos does indeed wish to keep customers at bay for there is no telephone 
number on its website, only web forms which might – or might not – elicit a 
response. My email to its press office meets the same fate; only after three 
weeks and a chaser does Asos bestir itself to blame Paypal.

With far more promptness, Paypal accepts responsibility. “Unfortunately an 
error on PayPal’s behalf meant that the customer’s order wasn’t cancelled as it 
should have been, and this then delayed the refund. We have since corrected 
this mistake, and are also putting a new process in place to prevent this 
happening again,” says a spokesperson. You have received an apology and an 
extra £40 in goodwill.

If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk <mailto: 
your.problems@observer.co.uk> or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
 