
Strumming his guitar in a forest clearing in Poland, Belarusian rocker Lavon 
Volski <https://www.facebook.com/Volski.Lavon> sings into the microphone: 
“Break everything, break the system”.

As he criticises the authoritarian regime of Belarusian president Alexander 
Lukashenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko>, the crowd 
chants “Long live Belarus”, waving the white and red flag of the opposition.

Banned from giving concerts in his homeland, Volski and fellow musicians 
crossed over into neighbouring Poland this weekend toplay at the annual 
Basowiszcza festival <https://www.facebook.com/Basowiszcza>, held in the border 
town of Gródek.


“I can’t sing in Belarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> because 
my lyrics are too strong. The regime doesn’t like these kinds of songs,” said 
the 49-year-old Volski.


Thousands of young Belarusians have descended upon the festival for years, to 
see their favourite underground bands play free from the fear of arrest.

'A revolution is impossible in Belarus'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/25/belarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko>

‘A window onto a free Belarus’


Since Lukashenko came to power in 1994, his government has routinely faced 
international criticism over its human rights record.

In 2010, tens of thousands of people protested against what they said were 
unfair presidential elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/21/600-charged-belarus-protests-lukashenko>
 that gave Lukashenko another landslide victory. Following the protests, the 
strongman unleashed a crackdown on the opposition,imprisoning some of his most 
prominent critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/dec/22/belarus-lukashenko-europe-last-dictator>
 andmuzzling independent media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/sep/04/journalist-safety-belarus>
.

Lukashenko is running for re-election in October 
<http://eng.belta.by/presidential_election/Parliament-approves-11-October-2015-as-Belarus-president-election-date_i_82887.html>
, but festival goers voicedwidespread pessimism  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/25/belarus-revolution-impossible-alexander-lukashenko>
regarding the possibility of a regime change.

“There’s no way you could hold this kind of festival in Belarus. Here the rock 
bands say what they can’t over there,” said Ruslan, a 24-year-old Belarusian 
living inPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> who declined to 
provide a second name for fear of compromising the safety of his family back 
home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjSwmW3OxquY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjSwmW3OxquY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjSwmW3OxquY&media=>
Dressed in a black t-shirt, he came out to hear punk-rocker Brutto 
<http://euroradio.fm/en/belarusian-band-brutto> frontman Siarhei Mikhalok, 
whose songDon’t Be Cattle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jSwmW3OxquY> has 
become something of an anthem for the opposition movement.

“If I wore this shirt out on the streets of Belarus, I’d have a 95% chance of 
getting arrested,” Ruslan said.

The festival dates back to 1990, just after the fall of communism in Poland, 
when students from the Belarusian minority in the eastern province of Podlasie 
racked their brains for a way to attract young people to a place where politics 
could be openly discussed.

Poland had not yet then joined Europe’s visa-free Schengen zone, so 
Belarusians were free to come and go. Now, visitors need to obtain a visa for 
£40.

Belarus: 20 years under dictatorship and a revolution behind the rest of Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-belarus-remains-revolution-behind>
Most of the performers are from Belarus – including many who steer clear of 
politics and are allowed to perform at home – but there were also two from 
Poland’s Belarusian minority, and two other Polish bands.

Whereas in the early days the crowd numbered no more than 100, this year the 
audience was 4,000 strong.

“Here we breathe the air of freedom for three days,” said Nikolai Lemianouski, 
a 49-year-old Belarusian and festival regular from the western city of Grodno.

“This festival is like a window onto a free Belarus.”

• This article was amended on 21 July 2015. An earlier version incorrectly 
referred to the region of Podlasie as a town.


 