
Long tucked away behind the mountains of northwest Iran, Lake Urmia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/sep/02/iran-lake-urmia-in-pictures>
 is becoming a national symbol of environmental degradation that is eliciting 
public sensitivity and awareness. Launched at the end of August, the ‘I am Lake 
Urmia’ campaign is a grassroots effort to collecta million signatures 
<https://www.change.org/p/to-the-people-who-care-urmia-lake-which-is-located-inside-iran-is-one-of-the-biggest-environmental-issues-that-face-region-and-even-beyond-the-borders-we-ask-for-emergency-attention-to-this-lake-and-rehabilitation-of-it?recruiter=589538633&utm_source=petitions_show_components_action_panel_wrapper&utm_medium=copylink>
 to push the United Nations to discuss ways to revive this salt lake, which has 
lost 90% of its surface area since the 1970s.


The “I am Lake Urmia” hashtag (من_دریاچه_ارومیه_هستم# 
<https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/%D9%85%D9%86_%D8%AF%D8%B1%DB%8C%D8%A7%DA%86%D9%87_%D8%A7%D8%B1%D9%88%D9%85%DB%8C%D9%87_%D9%87%D8%B3%D8%AA%D9%85/>
) is slowly trending across social media platforms. Actor Reza Kianian was one 
of the first to take up the call, usingInstagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BJw4MrnAFDl/?taken-by=reza_kianian_official> to 
ask fellow Iranians to take responsibility for the lake. In his post Kianian 
stressed,“If we save our lake, we will save ourselves” 
<http://www.yjc.ir/fa/news/5764013/%25D9%2587%25D8%25B4%25D8%25AA%25DA%25AF-%25D9%2585%25D9%2586-%25D8%25AF%25D8%25B1%25DB%258C%25D8%25A7%25DA%2586%25D9%2587-%25D8%25A7%25D8%25B1%25D9%2588%25D9%2585%25DB%258C%25D9%2587-%25D9%2587%25D8%25B3%25D8%25AA%25D9%2585-%25D8%25A7%25DB%258C%25D8%25AC%25D8%25A7%25D8%25AF-%25D8%25B4%25D8%25AF-%25D8%25A7%25DB%258C%25D9%2586%25D8%25B3%25D8%25AA%25D8%25A7%25D9%25BE%25D8%25B3%25D8%25AA%25E2%2580%258C%25D9%2587%25D8%25A7>
, reminding Iranians of their social responsibility for creating a more 
sustainable future. Kianian’s plea has echoed across popular apps likeInstagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/%25D9%2585%25D9%2586_%25D8%25AF%25D8%25B1%25D9%258A%25D8%25A7%25DA%2586%25D9%2587_%25D8%25A7%25D8%25B1%25D9%2588%25D9%2585%25D9%258A%25D9%2587_%25D9%2587%25D8%25B3%25D8%25AA%25D9%2585/>
 and on the newly formed “I am Lake Urmia”Telegram channel 
<https://telegram.me/urmulake>. 

This is not the first effort to bring national and international attention to 
Lake Urmia. Iranian politicians including President Hassan Rouhani, Iranian 
parliamentary deputies, and even Hollywood star Leonardo DiCaprio have made 
Lake Urmia part of their public advocacy. DiCaprio’s Instagrampost 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFAZvGAKxHi/> on the lake in May resulted in 
328,000 likes and made him anovernight superhero among Iranians 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/05/leonardo-dicaprio-instagram-lake-urmia-raise-awareness.html>
, illustrating the way social media can help collaboration on topics that defy 
borders.

Travel to the basin of Lake Urmia and you will find an area facing a high risk 
of salt storms. The shrinking of the lake has diminished a fragile ecosystem, 
with the gradual disappearance of native wildlife including the brine shrimp 
Artemia and migratory birds like flamingos and pelicans.

Such degradation threatens dire economic consequences. A once flourishing 
tourism industry, where visitors bathed in salty water rather like the Dead 
Sea, is curtailed. Many people living near the lake fear they may be forced to 
leave due to eye problems, respiratory diseases and other health problems 
caused by dust and salt particles blowing in the air.

Twenty years ago, some local farmers referred to the lake as a tumour, viewing 
the seeping of its uniquely saline water as a threat to their farmlands. Today, 
their wish is to revitalise this desiccating lake and prevent salt storms that 
are diminishing soil fertility and threatening their livelihoods. The shift in 
perspective highlights the co-dependency we all share with our environment, and 
shows all too clearly the repercussions of environmental neglect.

Iran suffers from “hydraulic mission” 
<http://ulrp.sharif.ir/en/news/news-1655-solve-water-crisis-iran-we-have-develop-both-mitigation-and-adaptation-measures>
 syndrome, a state of mind in which a country tries to manipulate domestic 
water resources to meet demand through short-sighted measures based on 
technology and large-scale engineering. The dream of human dominance over 
nature has led to a nightmare of unforeseen consequences, reminding us that we 
must learn to live in tune with nature to sustain ourselves.

Dams, in particular, have become idolised as symbols of development, political 
strength and international prowess. One of the main factors contributing to the 
state of Lake Urmia is the interference in the natural flow of water into the 
lake by over 50 dams. The damage has been compounded by unregulated withdrawal 
of water, water-intensive irrigation and the unsustainable use of fertilisers.

President Rouhani made promises about restoring Lake Urmia during his election 
campaign, and his administration has allocated$5 billion 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/07/07/aperture-troubled-waters-iran-lake-urmia-environment-draught-water-preservation/>
 to improve infrastructure and water conservation in the area. Nevertheless, 
the major proposals under consideration are still structural. While dam 
construction is now prohibited, the government’s restoration task force has 
shown interest in transferring water from other river basins, upstream 
dredging, and connecting inflowing rivers to maximise the inflow. But without 
policy reforms and institutional changes - including phasing outwater intensive 
crops 
<http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/guest-blog/saving-iran-s-precious-lake-urmia/>
, conservation methods in irrigation and wider changes in the behaviour of 
farmers and other water consumers - restoration efforts will be successful only 
with an unusually wet period in the years to come.

Collaborations with international partners to restore water levels in Lake 
Urmia are limited but underway. Most notably, theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> Development Programme, Iran’s 
Department of Environment and the Japanese government have established joint 
projects that involve educating local farmers on sustainable agriculture 
practices and reducing water consumption through improved efficiency; and 
supplying improved, safer fertilisers and pesticides. Over the past few months, 
the lake has shown some signs of recovery, but this is due more to more 
frequent rainfall rather than the restoration efforts.

Lake Urmia’s grim destiny unfortunately reflects a wider trend. Several bodies 
of water inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> (including Gav-Khuni 
wetland near Isfahan, the Hamoun wetlands near Afghanistan, Bakhtegan lake in 
Fars province, and the Shadegan wetland and Hour-Al-Azim in Khuzestan) have 
been heavily impacted or dried up entirely in light of weak infrastructure, 
over-reliance on dams, extreme weather patterns, climatic changes, poor 
irrigation practices and unregulated use of water.

In the story of Lake Urmia lie invaluable lessons. Iranians have paid for 
their unsustainable development and have lost many invaluable ecosystems. On 
the positive side, however, awareness of our interdependence with nature has 
been sharpened by air pollution in major cities, dust storms, soil erosion, 
desertification and land subsidence due to extraction of groundwater.

Iran may now be reaching a tipping point. With the better understanding of our 
interconnectivity worldwide today, preserving the environment is a collective 
goal that everyone irrespective of age, race, or background can share. No 
matter where we are, or who we are, we can’t save ourselves if we don’t care 
for our environment. We are all Lake Urmia.

Shirin Hakim is a doctoral researcher at the Centre for Environmental Policy 
of Imperial College, London, working on environmental issues in Iran. Kaveh 
Madani is a water management expert and reader of systems analysis and policy 
at the Centre for Environmental Policy of Imperial College, London
 