
It is just past noon and the more sedate among us are still drinking coffee. 
Aki Kaurismaki <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aki-kaurismaki> tuts 
derisively. "Coffee? I don't want coffee. To talk about my lousy films I need 
more than coffee." So a beer is ordered, soon joined by a bottle of white wine. 
Meanwhile, a surreptitious measure of whisky is pulled from his pocket for a 
crafty nip, a cigarette lit and smoked to the butt. The greatest director in 
the (slim, granted) history of Finnish cinema hunches in his seat; a large, 
pasty man in his mid-40s with the sagging demeanour of a weary shrug made flesh.

Anything else would be a disappointment. After all, in the two decades he has 
been making films, Kaurismaki's name has become a byword for the dry and 
deadpan: a perennial eccentric whose characters might battle unemployment in 
the restaurant business (Drifting Clouds), embark on a one-woman revolution 
(The Match Factory Girl), or lacquer up gargantuan quiffs in the hope of making 
it in rock'n'roll (Leningrad Cowboys Go America), but who never cracks anything 
resembling a smile in the process. So it is with the man himself: an essential 
sweetness of nature pickled in a brine of gloomy despondency. Which could also 
describe his latest project, The Man Without a Past, in which an anonymous Finn 
is mugged in a Helsinki park in the film's opening seconds to be left with 
amnesia among the homeless community gathered on the city's shoreline. The film 
is rendered hugely entertaining by Kaurismaki's wry humanism and sure-fire 
comic instincts.

The director, however, has reservations. "I would like to explain the violence 
in this film," he says, finishing his beer and switching to wine. "Because it 
makes me uncomfortable. The problem is this story had to start with violence. 
So I wanted to at least make it honest. Because if people want to see violence 
looking good, there is something wrong with their heads. So I make it look as 
it really is, fast and ugly. This is my rule and my explanation."

He looks genuinely concerned. I tell him the mugging scene is hardly excessive 
and he frowns (or frowns deeper). "Ah, but that is what is wrong. Hollywood has 
melted everyone's brains. In the old days you had one murder and that was 
enough for a story. Now you have to kill 300,000 people just to get the 
audience's attention. And in Helsinki the violence is not glamorous. It is 
nameless. There, someone hits you just because they are in a bad mood." Has he 
ever been attacked? "Many times. But I'm quite big and I will hit back. So none 
of them lived afterward." A mighty fug of cigarette smoke has already built up. 
"That is a joke, by the way."

For Kaurismaki, you feel, in person and on screen, brevity is a virtue: he 
pretty much clams up at the mention of his years sleeping rough in the 1970s 
and their possible bearing on The Man Without a Past. "Things were different 
then. You could be a bum and find a job later. Now you just die in the cold."

Instead of giving in to over-analysis, he puts his faith in certain iron laws 
of creativity - the same ones he has been following since he and his elder 
brother Mika (himself the director of 21 features) began making films in the 
early 1980s. Budgets are kept low, crews small and actors restricted to a 
single rehearsal before the camera rolls. "My relationship with them never 
changes," he says, refilling his glass. "I hold my finger up when I want them 
to say the line. They say it, and I say, 'Thank you very much.'" And if they 
want more detailed direction? "In that case there is always the door."

The fruit of such economy is a cinematic identity as clear as any film-maker 
working today. If plots amble - events are routinely undercut with a muted 
surrealism - if the one-liners come tart as vinegar and 1960s rock'n'roll fills 
the soundtrack, you can be sure you're watching Kaurismaki. Some strictures can 
be tinkered with (at 97 minutes, The Man Without a Past is an epic by his 
standards); others remain untouchable. Take his subject matter: the Finnish 
working class.

"Yes," he says. "The people who are hidden. The ugly people, as some critics 
have called them. But then who is good- looking? Bruce Willis? I think he is 
ugly. Horribly ugly. Totally unable to act, and totally ugly. So I will stick 
with my ugly people." You can't help but think of how people have reputedly 
walked out of his films after paying to see a comedy and assuming they are in 
the wrong cinema. Asked if he minds, he (naturally) shrugs.

"Tell me, who wrote the book called High Fidelity? Nicholas someone? Hornby? 
Well, it is the most boring book I ever read. I hated every line because it was 
just what you are talking about. Every joke, ha ha ha " - he clutches his sides 
for effect - "every joke so obvious. And now it is the same in films. It is 
Hollywood's fault. Hollywood is the reason I make the films I do. Because I 
hate it. And I would never go there or waste my time watching their films 
because . . . well, I am a lousy film-maker, this I admit. But I refuse to make 
shit. Bad films I can make. Shit, no."

Success may have escaped him in his homeland ("in Finland they prefer the 
television to me"); elsewhere, his films are seen as the work of a true 
maverick talent, a fixture at the more prestigious stopovers of the festival 
circuit. Last year's Cannes saw The Man Without a Past win the unofficial 
"second prize", the Grand Prix, beaten to the Palme d'Or - controversially - by 
Roman Polanski's The Pianist. Last October, however, his gilded tour of the 
festivals came to a halt immediately before New York. Waiting for his flight, 
the director learned that his acclaimed Iranian counterpart Abbas Kiarostami 
had been refused a visa. Outraged, Kaurismaki abandoned his own travel plans, 
issuing a statement in which he denounced US foreign policy and invited defence 
secretary Donald Rumsfeld to go mushroom-picking with him. "I must make clear 
that I didn't boycott the New York film festival," he says now. "I like the New 
York film festival very much. I boycotted the US government. I was at the 
airport with my ticket in my hand and I heard Abbas wasn't being let in, and I 
thought, OK, if the US government doesn't want an Iranian film-maker then they 
won't want a Finn either. And I will not go where I am not wanted."

With his bemoaning of American imperialism, it comes as no surprise to hear 
him describe the current crisis in the Middle East as "what happens when Yankee 
idiots want to make more money from oil". All the same, with his fondness for 
greasy rock'n'rollers and old westerns, you wonder if there's ambivalence in 
his loathing of America? "Yes, but the America I like is the America of 
Roosevelt. Not that led by the clown George Bush, with the boy scout Tony Blair 
beside him. Because I think with these maniacs we don't have a lot of hope. Can 
you print that? You can? Well, good. Print that." I ask how he sees the 
situation developing. "To be honest, I think the clown and the boy scout will 
bring us the end of the world. Goodbye."

For a moment, silence falls over the table. The wine is almost finished. I 
change the subject, enquire after his next film. He explains that The Man 
Without a Past is the second part of a trilogy of movies concerning social 
hardship (the first being Drifting Clouds), so whatever he comes up with must 
be the final part. Except he has no ideas. "When I was young," he sighs, "I 
would sit in the bath and ideas would come to me. But I'm not young any more, 
so now I just sit in the bath."

At least he has got his love of films to keep him going. You'll never find a 
more ardent movie buff than Kaurismaki, a man who admits he once regularly 
watched six films a day and who later opened a chain of cinemas in Finland. So, 
what new films have excited him lately? "Nothing. I don't watch new films 
anymore. The last new film I saw was . . . where is my memory? Who made Riff 
Raff? Ken Loach? Yes, that was it [Riff Raff, incidentally, was made in 1990]. 
To be very honest, I don't want to waste my time watching 15 lousy films just 
so I can find one that is more or less OK. The really good films, I've seen 
them all a hundred times before. I come to London and all you have is James 
Bond, Harry Potter or The Lord of the Rings. So I think no, I will just walk to 
Oxford Street and go to His Master's Voice and buy some DVDs of Laurel and 
Hardy. And that will have to be enough for me."

He sounds pretty contented. In fact, it's only when I ask for another coffee 
that he complains, his voice pitched somewhere between disgust and 
incomprehension. And he orders a Bloody Mary, takes another furtive slug of 
whisky, gazes around the room seemingly unmoved by the quantity of liquor he's 
knocked back. And I ask him why, if he generally feels so glum, his films 
always have a low-key but insistent optimistic streak?

"Well... I think the more pessimistic I feel about life, the more optimistic 
the films should be." He leans forward, play-punches my shoulder and, for the 
first time all day, breaks into a grin. "This is the way I think about it. Life 
is too sad to bear and there is no hope for anyone. So now, let us drink to 
happy endings."

Â· The Man Without a Past is released next Friday.
 