
On 28 November 1919, Nancy Astor was elected to represent the constituency of 
Plymouth Sutton in the House of Commons. She was the first woman to take her 
seat as an MP and she held it for almost 26 years, when she was replaced by 
another woman, Lucy Middleton. We asked six sitting (and one retired) female 
MPs what it means to be a woman in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>.

Sarah Wollaston
(Conservative MP for Totnes)

The total number of women MPs, since Nancy Astor took her seat, is smaller 
than the number of men sitting on the green benches today. I’m one of just 370 
to have had that opportunity and I know that’s because other women fought so 
hard for the right to be there. That fight continues for fairer representation 
and, beyond the parliamentary arithmetic, for women to be in all the rooms 
where decisions are made. The focus is on selection bias for winnable seats, 
but it’s also about the low number of women putting themselves forward. 
It’s time for women to stop worrying about whether they have the qualifications 
for the role, and, instead, storm the barricades with applications and 
real-life experience. It’s no picnic; it can be hostile, intrusive and hard to 
be separated from family but it is undoubtedly the most challenging job of my 
career.

Chloe Smith
(Conservative MP for Norwich North)

I very rarely describe myself first and foremost as a “female MP”. That’s a 
sign of my feminism: I don’t worry much about my chromosomes and, instead, 
relish getting on with the brilliantly varied job of being a good MP. However, 
I do describe myself often as one of the youngest MPs. Having been elected at 
27, this marks me out more than my gender. In fact, I have been one of the 
youngest ministers in British history. We have so much to do to engage young 
people with parliament that this is my passion in life. What does it mean to be 
a MP today? It means to be in your community, working hard, getting results 
locally and nationally, applying yourself on behalf of your constituents to the 
technicalities of parliament and communicating back constantly, and 
demonstrating your vision of how Britain could be better. It means being an 
ambassador for politics itself.

Caroline Lucas
(Green MP for Brighton Pavilion)

Ours is supposed to be the mother of all parliaments. But just daring to be a 
woman in PMQs can still draw an audible mutter. We’ve moved a long way since 
Astor walked these halls, but not far enough. Westminster is in dire need of 
reform and as a starting point, it could take a lead from the far more 
gender-balanced, family-friendly European parliament. We have some fantastic 
female voices here, we just need more. And the conviction of the women who led 
us to Westminster should serve as daily inspiration to us all. They taught us 
how to find our voice, and use it well. Walking in their footsteps humbles me 
still. This isn’t a job. It’s an immense privilege, a chance to make a 
difference. Pioneering women such as Astor paved the way for me to do this. 
And, for all the foibles and failings of parliament, I am eternally grateful.

Jo Swinson

My favourite part of the House of Commons is a statue of Viscount Falkland 
just off Central Lobby. It’s not remarkable for the gentleman it commemorates, 
but for the damage visible on the spur of his boot. On 27 April 1909, Marjory 
Hume chained herself to the statue in a suffragette protest, shouting: “Deeds 
not words.” As the security guards removed her, part of his spur broke off. 
Even though the statue was later restored, history had left an indelible mark. 
When I pass the statue, I reflect on the changes in the rights of women in the 
past century, and thank the women such as Marjory, who made it possible for 
women in my generation to be able to vote, and stand for parliament to become 
MPs and ministers. But with women making up fewer than one in four MPs, there 
is still a long way to go. I particularly enjoy telling the story of the statue 
to schoolgirls visiting parliament – and encourage them to consider one day 
returning to the building as an MP themselves.
 Chloe Smith, Ann Widdecombe, Margaret Hodge and Jo Swinson. Photograph: 
Graham Turner for the Guardian; Graeme Robertson for the Guardian; Reuters; Rex 
Features 
Rushanara Ali
(Labour MP for Bethnal Green and Bow)

I was selected in 2010, one of three Muslim women to have ever got elected 
into parliament, and I’m the first person of Bangladeshi origin. For a lot of 
women, it’s still the experience of being “the first”, or among the few. It 
shouldn’t be, but it still is of huge significance that women are in parliament 
– but only 22% of MPs are women, when we represent more than 50% of the 
population. That is an improvement from the 1980s; I remember when I was 
appointed the shadow minister for international development and Harriet Harman 
told me stories of what it was like in the 80s when it was only 3%. There has 
been progress, but progress has been slow. Although there are over 40% women in 
my party’s shadow cabinet, gender representation is still not good enough. All 
the parties recognise the problem, but you have to keep the pressure on; never 
take your eye off the ball. For young women, particularly, when they see a 
woman from their area in parliament (I grew up in my constituency and I went to 
local schools), that makes a big difference, because they can identify with 
you. It makes the idea that this is a career they could go into much more 
realistic and possible. And to me that’s really important – if they want a 
career in politics, then why not? “Why not” is what I say when people say they 
can’t, or it’s too difficult.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> being visible in national 
political life, working on issues that not only affect women but society at 
large, is a really important message. Parliament still doesn’t look like 
society in terms of gender and ethnicity – that needs to change.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-mps-parliament-chloe-smith-margaret-hodge-rushanara-ali-caroline-lucas-house-of-commons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416849621596%2F67a1b7a4-8cab-4475-84de-2e6f61de2dbb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20worry%20much%20about%20my%20chromosomes%E2%80%99%3A%20female%20MPs%20talk%20about%20life%20in%20parliament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-mps-parliament-chloe-smith-margaret-hodge-rushanara-ali-caroline-lucas-house-of-commons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20don%E2%80%99t%20worry%20much%20about%20my%20chromosomes%E2%80%99%3A%20female%20MPs%20talk%20about%20life%20in%20parliament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-mps-parliament-chloe-smith-margaret-hodge-rushanara-ali-caroline-lucas-house-of-commons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F24%2F1416849621596%2F67a1b7a4-8cab-4475-84de-2e6f61de2dbb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nancy Astor in Plymouth in 1923. Photograph: Hulton Archive 
Margaret Hodge
Labour MP for Barking

I still feel we’re trailblazing as women MPs. I know there aren’t enough of 
us and we’ve got a battle to get proper representation. I tend to work very 
closely across political parties with the women MPs. I think you’ve got an 
affinity of purpose, and working together makes you stronger and helps you 
promote the cause of equality.

I’m absolutely certain that having positive action to encourage the selection 
of women candidates is crucial. When I stood for parliament, we just were 
beginning to have all-women shortlists (I wasn’t on one). What we have shown 
over time is that just leaving it to people of good nature doesn’t work. The 
quality of women who have come through as candidates is incredibly high and it 
certainly outstrips many of the men who come in through the traditional route.

The culture of politics is still anathema to many women; they don’t feel 
comfortable in yah-boo politics. The nature of the job, the expectations of how 
we work and the way we do our politics are such that it’s really hard to become 
an MP with all your caring responsibilities, whether it’s children or elderly 
relatives. I always say the the most important thing we can do to help women 
have a more equal life is to look at how you can improve flexible working 
practices, and high-quality childcare to enable people to balance their lives 
between their work and care responsibilities. It has been the challenge for 
years and it remains the key challenge. I chose not to come into parliament 
until my youngest was a teenager. But I dont regret taking that decision. And I 
say to many of my younger women colleagues who I spend a lot of time mentoring: 
“Don’t put off the rest of your life just because of politics. Don’t allow it 
to stop you having your babies and a family.” I was the only candidate who was 
asked about my childcare arrangements. You expect that sort of thing to 
have got better.

Ann Widdecombe

An MP is an MP whether male or female.
 