
When the marketing team behind Me Before You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/02/me-before-you-review-emilia-clarke-sam-claflin-thea-sharrock>
 came up with the hashtag #LiveBoldly to promote this story of a young disabled 
man considering assisted dying, they could scarcely have predicted that it 
would be used to expose the movie’s problematic message. “Do you really want us 
to #LiveBoldly or do you just want us to #diequickly?” asked one commenter 
during a TwitterQ&A 
<https://storify.com/catbean/disabled-people-reject-me-before-you-film-s-messag>
 session last week with the film’s star,Sam Claflin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/25/sam-claflin-interview-i-hate-being-offered-heart-throb-roles>
. He plays Will, a wealthy former playboy who becomes involved with Lou (Emilia 
Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/emilia-clarke-game-of-thrones-interview>
), a kooky misfit in thrift-shop chic. It’s rather as if Thomas Crown had 
fallen for Amélie.

The film, adapted by Jojo Moyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/21/jojo-moyes-interview-me-before-you-puccini-fiction>
 from her own best-selling novel, portrays the burgeoning romance between these 
two apparently mismatched souls. But their differences are not simply 
sartorial. Lou has full use of her body. Will has been quadriplegic since a 
road accident several years earlier. Before Lou became his carer, Will decided 
he wanted to kill himself. Now the Dignitas paperwork is in the post and it 
seems that Lou’s chipper disposition can do nothing to change his mind. A 
spoiler alert will be necessary for anyone who hasn’t read the book and so 
won’t know that he goes ahead with his plan.

Me Before You director defends film against disability campaigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/06/me-before-you-director-thea-sharrock-disability-campaigners>
The full meaning of the name “Will” becomes clear only after he dies and 
leaves Lou more money than she has ever seen. It will be enough cash, he says, 
for her to swap her timid life for adventure. The problem, according to 
activists who picketed the film’s premiere last week, is this motto applies in 
this context only to the able-bodied – and comes at the cost of a disabled 
man’s life. Many of those same activists also used Twitter to take issue with 
the film. The hashtag#MeBeforeEuthanasia 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23mebeforeeuthanasia&src=typd> was used by 
@grindmastrgrant, who tweeted: “I’m not your inspiration porn and I’m not a 
thing to be pitied or killed off to make the audience cry,” while 
@JohnBrianKelly wrote: “I have Will’s disability. Stop killing me on film! 
#liveboldly, fight cripple snuff films.”

The idea that it is better to be dead than disabled has been seen many times 
before. InMillion Dollar Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1389589,00.html>
, it is expressed in a mercy killing. InWhose Life Is It Anyway? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOJLi6_aBUo> and The Sea Inside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1409960,.html>
, it takes the form of a quadriplegic man fighting the medical establishment 
for his right to die. The familiar spectre of the worthless disabled body is 
hidden behind the apparently valiant struggle of an individual against the 
state.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf5864e51e1147f1677ad4132fff69fa01b0f52e%2F0_59_2848_1709%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20thing%20to%20be%20pitied%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20disability%20backlash%20against%20Me%20Before%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20thing%20to%20be%20pitied%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20disability%20backlash%20against%20Me%20Before%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf5864e51e1147f1677ad4132fff69fa01b0f52e%2F0_59_2848_1709%2F2848.jpg>
 The Sea Inside. Photograph: c.Fine Line/Everett / Rex Features 
Of course, it would be wrong to pretend that suicide and disability are 
mutually exclusive. The Sea Inside is based on Ramón Sampedro’s life, while Me 
Before You is partly inspired by the 23-year-old rugby player Daniel James, who 
chose to kill himself after a severe spinal injury. (His parents said  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/oct/18/11>he was “not prepared to live 
what he felt was a second-class existence”.) But the screen-time granted to 
these stories, to the exclusion of more diverse representations of disability, 
has helped plant in the public consciousness the notion that life is worth less 
when it resides in a disabled body.

We long to watch disabled characters like us. Instead we get Me Before You | 
Penny Pepper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/me-before-you-suggests-better-dead-than-disabled>
“We have so few opportunities in the media to explore disability,” says the 
actor and activist Liz Carr, who participated in the protest. “But there is a 
disproportionate number of stories which relate to the ‘problem’ of disability 
being solved by death. Television and film seem to love those individuals who 
want to die. They’re less keen to cover the rest of us who might want to live 
but are struggling to get the health and social care resources to do so.”

The screenplay offers one pre-emptive riposte to the charge that it is 
speaking for all disabled people. “I get that this could be a good life,” says 
Will. “But it’s not my life. I can’t be the sort of man who accepts this.” 
Since Will is shown to be strong, determined and uncompromising, it seems clear 
that the “sort of man” who would put up with a paralysed body and its demands 
could only be inferior to him. This problem could be tempered, if not solved, 
by the presence of just one disabled character to provide some contrast and 
show that suicide isn’t the only option. But there isn’t one. The film isolates 
Will entirely, stacking the odds so that the choice to take his own life is 
made to seem like the logical one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74862ac5d91ab3cde4bcfebe95c2879fbf944d12%2F0_137_3248_1949%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20thing%20to%20be%20pitied%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20disability%20backlash%20against%20Me%20Before%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20thing%20to%20be%20pitied%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20disability%20backlash%20against%20Me%20Before%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74862ac5d91ab3cde4bcfebe95c2879fbf944d12%2F0_137_3248_1949%2F3248.jpg>
 Betty Blue. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
“When non-disabled people talk of suicide, they’re discouraged and offered 
prevention,” she says. “Even though it’s legal, it’s not seen as desirable. 
When a disabled person talks of it, though, suddenly the conversation is 
overtaken with words like ‘choice’ and ‘autonomy’ and people are rushing to 
uphold these prized principles whilst talk of prevention and mental health 
support are rare. Will is not offered any psychiatric support. What kind of 
message is this that we’re giving disabled people and the non-disabled 
audiences?”

Only in its acknowledgement of economic disparity does Me Before You come 
close to being honest. Accompanying Will to a glitzy wedding, Lou puts it to 
him that he would not even be talking to her were she not his carer. In fact, 
she would most likely be serving the drinks at such a function. A working-class 
woman like her would be as invisible socially to him and his friends as the 
disabled are to the rest of society.

Disability in popular culture often exists to allow the able-bodied to unlock 
their potential. Lou is a beneficiary of Will’s death, not unlike the 
struggling novelist inBetty Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89122/betty.blue-review>, who is 
inspired to write his next book only once he has smothered his hospitalised 
girlfriend. But Lou’s story also plays like a chaste, romantic ideal dreamed up 
by the abstinence lobby. Will won’t be making any sexual demands on Lou. And, 
like the perfect terminally ill boyfriend inThe Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
, he won’t stick around to get old and wrinkly: Lou can treasure the image of 
her handsome billionaire forever. As love stories go, it’s every bit as creepy 
as Ghost, which suggested that the perfect relationship was exclusively 
spiritual, or Pretty Woman, which proposed the idea of prostitution as a 
short-cut to true love.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd094a2b99ae9dd85fe8109f5fa576850271e9f2%2F0_218_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20thing%20to%20be%20pitied%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20disability%20backlash%20against%20Me%20Before%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20not%20a%20thing%20to%20be%20pitied%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20disability%20backlash%20against%20Me%20Before%20You&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fme-before-you-disabled-backlash-not-pitied%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd094a2b99ae9dd85fe8109f5fa576850271e9f2%2F0_218_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 The Fault in Our Stars. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox/Sportsphoto Ltd. 
One of the improvements that Will makes in Lou’s life is to open her eyes to 
foreign-language films. This he does by showing herOf Gods and Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/02/of-gods-and-men-review>, Xavier 
Beauvois’s 2010 drama inspired by the French Cistercian monks in Tibhirine, 
Algeria, who refused to flee in 1996 despite violence from Islamic extremists. 
The monks made themselves martyrs rather than forsake the area and its people. 
Will’s choice is entirely symbolic: it prepares Lou, and the audience, for the 
idea of self-sacrifice. Somehow this manages to feel like an insult both to 
disabled people in general and those monks in particular. If their murder is 
analogous to Will’s choice to kill himself so that Lou can have a buffer of 
wealth, then the stock-price of martyrdom has plummeted since the days of Joan 
of Arc.

It’s typical of the soft-pedalling tendency found in Me Before You that it 
borrows the most evasive element of Beauvois’s film. When the monks trudge off 
to meet their terrible fate, it is in a blizzard; they fade from view prettily, 
in contrast to other characters seen having their throats slit. They get a 
send-off every bit as euphemistic as Thelma and Louise, or Butch Cassidy and 
the Sundance Kid. Me Before You does the same for Will. One minute he’s lying 
fetchingly in his bed at Dignitas, the next we dissolve to Lou receiving news 
of her windfall in a Parisian cafe. This movie which has stood proudly behind 
Will’s decision to die seems in an awful hurry to conceal what that might 
entail. Death, like disabled people who choose to live boldly, is nowhere to be 
seen.

In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 