
Tony O'Reilly has lost his legal attempt to delay a court order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jun/24/anthony-o-reilly-independent-news-and-media>
 demanding that he pay £18m to Allied Irish Banks (AIB).

The former media tycoon, who is now insolvent, faces a forced sale of assets 
in order to satisfy the Dublin commercial court judgment,reports RTE 
<http://www.rte.ie/news/business/2014/0627/626953-oreilly-case/>. 

The judge, Mr Justice Peter Kelly, said O'Reilly was insolvent and the 
probability was that the sale of his unencumbered assets would not cover the 
sum owed to AIB.

Kelly said AIB had the right to be first in the queue of creditors having 
secured the judgment and it would be prejudicial to the bank to prevent it from 
exercising its legal rights.

O'Reilly had asked for a six-month stay on the judgment to facilitate an 
orderly sale of assets.

This is the worst possible outcome for O'Reilly, the former owner of The 
Independent <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> in the UK 
through his company, Independent News & Media (INM).

O'Reilly, 78, who was once Ireland's richest man, lost control of INM to 
business rivalDenis O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>, 
who is now reputed to be the country's richest man.

A lengthy Irish Times profile, Ignominious end to career of Ireland's first 
business superstar 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/media-and-marketing/ignominious-end-to-career-of-ireland-s-first-business-superstar-1.1846807>
, charts O'Reilly's rise and fall.

It states: "The two biggest financial bets of O'Reilly's career – INM and 
Waterford Wedgwood <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waterford-wedgwood> – 
proved the catalysts for his downfall."

The article tells how O'Reilly, in company with his brother-in-law, Peter 
Goulandris, lost more than €400m (£320m) trying to save Waterford before it 
collapsed into receivership in 2009.

It also says he "wasted €350m buying shares in INM prior to its restructuring, 
in a vain attempt to ward off the advances of Denis O'Brien."

Ciarán Hancock, the Irish Times's finance correspondent, argues that O'Reilly 
relied on INM's dividend to maintain his lavish lifestyle, "which was worth an 
average of €14m annually to him in the decade until the economy crashed."

In 2007 alone, he drew almost €30m from the company and his stake was valued 
at close to €1bn. But O'Brien squeezed O'Reilly out of INM and cancelled its 
dividend. O'Reilly found himself without income and no way to service his loans.

Ever since then, O'Reilly has been seeking to cut a deal with his lenders by 
selling off various assets.

One asset he still has is a stake in the oil exploration firm Providence 
Resources, which is chaired by his son, Tony Jr. But the Irish Independent (one 
of O'Reilly's former papers)reports today 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/providence-resources-post-loss-of-72m-in-2013-30388958.html>
 that the company suffered an operating loss in 2013 of €7.2m, up from €5.4m 
the previous year.

Sources: RTE <http://www.rte.ie/news/business/2014/0627/626953-oreilly-case/>/
Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/sectors/media-and-marketing/ignominious-end-to-career-of-ireland-s-first-business-superstar-1.1846807>
/Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/providence-resources-post-loss-of-72m-in-2013-30388958.html>
 