
Serious discussion of guns and gun control took center stage in a presidential 
debate on Tuesday for the first time in 15 years, breaking one of the great 
taboos of American politics.

“This was unthinkable just four years ago,” said Dan Gross, president of the 
Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, in a statement that described the 
Democratic debate as “evidence we have reached a tipping point in this 
movement”.

Other advocates said that the discussion, on national television and between 
figures as prominent as former secretary of stateHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Vermont senator 
Bernie Sanders, was a victory in itself.

“The myth that addressing gun violence is a political third rail is now in the 
past,” said Shannon Watts, the founder of gun control group Moms Demand Action, 
alluding to the common mantra around Washington that to broach gun control is 
tantamount to ending a political career.

“This is a marked change from 2008, when gun safety was largely avoided during 
the presidential campaign,” John Feinblatt, the president of Everytown for Gun 
Safety, said in a statement. “Candidates are now running on gun safety.”

 Clinton made gun control a key point of attack against Sanders, her main 
rival, by criticizing hisrecord of votes against gun control laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/11/bernie-sanders-democrat-gun-control-record>
.

Asked if Sanders was tough enough on guns, she bluntly said, “no, not at all” 
and then criticized his claim that a law to protect gunmakers from litigation 
was “complicated”.

“It was pretty straightforward to me,” she said. “This has gone on too long and
it’s time the entire country stood up against the NRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/oct/13/hillary-clinton-guns-nra-video>
.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fhillary-clinton-guns-nra-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20'It's%20time%20the%20entire%20country%20stood%20up%20to%20the%20NRA'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fhillary-clinton-guns-nra-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%27It%27s%20time%20the%20entire%20country%20stood%20up%20to%20the%20NRA%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fhillary-clinton-guns-nra-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: It’s time the entire country stood up to the NRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/oct/13/hillary-clinton-guns-nra-video>
. 
Third-place challenger Martin O’Malley also jumped in, boasting about his own 
gun control record and saying that Sanders was “backing down” from the gun 
lobby.

Sanders defended himself by saying, as a point of pride, that the National 
Rifle Association graded him “a D-minus” on gun rights.

The Democratic candidates’ scrambling to polish their gun control credentials 
underscores the change since the 2012 and 2008 elections. In 91 primary and 
general electiondebates since 1999 <http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/debates.php>
, candidates have discussed gun control as an issue in only 30, transcripts 
show. Democrats were more willing to broach the issue than Republicans, who in 
several instances spoke of gun control only to defend their conservative 
credentials from accusations of being “anti-gun”, as Mitt Romney did in 2012.

Serious discussion of gun control last took place during the 2000 election 
campaign, when the 13 people killed during the 1999 Columbine high school 
shooting were still strong in the memory of the candidates and media.

Oregon shooting: eight ideas to help stop gun violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/03/oregon-shooting-aftermath-eight-ways-to-stop-gun-massacres-in-the-us>
And despite Feinblatt’s assertion that “the political calculus has changed”, 
the ideas put forward by thengovernor George W Bush and Vice-PresidentAl Gore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> are in many cases identical to 
proposals made 15 years later.

Gore argued for waiting periods for purchases, and Bush for mandatory trigger 
locks <http://debates.org/index.php?page=october-17-2000-debate-transcript>and 
greater prosecution of illegal sales, three proposals still being pushed by 
reform advocates. Both supported gun-free schools and closing  
<http://www.debates.org/?page=october-11-2000-debate-transcript>the 
background-check loophole at gun shows – the latter proposal embraced by 
Clinton on Tuesday night.

Four years after Bush won his first term, he continued to espouse instant 
background checks but also let the national ban on assault weapons expire 
without protest, a sign that the tenor of the conversation had changed. His 
opponent in 2004, then senator John Kerry, criticized Bush on gunsonly with a 
quick assurance 
<http://www.debates.org/index.php?page=october-13-2004-debate-transcript> to 
the public: “I’m a gun owner. I’ve been a hunter since I was a kid.”

In 2007, the year a gunman shot 32 people dead at Virginia Tech, Republican 
candidates discussed whether, had students been allowed to carry guns, “the 
tragedy might have been lessened”, as a moderatorput it 
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=75680>. Democrats broached the 
issue only four times in 19 debates, largely to discuss tracing illegal sales 
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=76237> and, again, the gun 
show loophole.

A year later, neither of the senators running for president, Barack Obama and 
John McCain, mentioned gun control in their presidential debates.

By the 2012 election, debate over guns was relegated to one side in favor of 
discussions about jobs, inequality and the economy. Obama and former governor 
Mitt Romney discussed the issue inone debate 
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=102343>, in which they both 
carefully stepped away from gun control and toward other subjects – the 
president talked about education in poor urban areas; Romney about the 
administration’slackluster operation to track weapons smuggling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/21/bohener-ramps-up-holder-row-white-house>
.

A few months later, a gunman killed 26 people at Sandy Hook elementary school 
in Connecticut, returning national attention to gun control and prompting 
legislation on background checks thatultimately failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/17/senate-debates-gun-control-package-live>
.


The new generation of advocates for gun control hope the tide has at last 
turned, despite the fact that gun control proposals have made no progress in 
Washington after a decade andmore than 1,000 mass shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/mass-shooting-florida-1000th-sandy-hook>
.

Hayley Zachary, the executive director of Americans for Responsible Solutions, 
the gun control group founded by former congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords after 
she recovered from a 2011 shooting that killed six people, said in a statement 
that enough voters now “expect to hear the candidates’ plans for making our 
country safer from gun violence”.


“That’s what we got tonight,” she said of Tuesday’s debate. “It’s about time.”
 