
How are creative writing courses changing literary culture? It’s the kind of 
imponderable, unanswerable question that setswriter against writer 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/culturebox/2010/11/mfa_vs_nyc.html>, critic 
against critic 
<http://www.salon.com/2011/10/22/why_critics_of_mfa_programs_have_it_wrong/>, 
withlittle sign of any resolution 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/12/education/edlife/12edl-12mfa.html?_r=0>. But 
what if you could just measure it?

That’s the promise of cultural analytics – computer-powered criticism 
currently on the rise across the humanities. The growing push of big data into 
English departments can traced in headlines; this year alone we’ve seen 
scientists findevidence of mathematical structures in classic books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/scientists-reveal-multifractal-structure-of-finnegans-wake-james-joyce>
, researchers claiming that complex narratives areformed from just six “core 
trajectories” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/13/three-six-or-36-how-many-basic-plots-are-there-in-all-stories-ever-written>
 and a study suggesting MFA programmes have hadlittle effect on the 
contemporary novel 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/03/mfa-creative-writing/462483/>
 (apart from MFA writers preferring names such as Ruth, Pete, Bobby, Charlotte, 
and Pearl).

The results may be very different, but the basic strategy is just the same: 
take hundreds or thousands of books, feed the text into a computer and subject 
it to statistical analysis.

But why is this method on the rise? What are researchers hoping to achieve? 
And can computers tell us anything valuable about what we read?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwhat-is-the-point-of-cultural-analytics-computers-big-data-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe96fb93eb6beed4ff21c8a08050ada567dd3d43e%2F0_0_672_530%2F672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20like%20hitting%20a%20painting%20with%20a%20fish'%3A%20can%20computer%20analysis%20tell%20us%20anything%20new%20about%20literature%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwhat-is-the-point-of-cultural-analytics-computers-big-data-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20like%20hitting%20a%20painting%20with%20a%20fish%27%3A%20can%20computer%20analysis%20tell%20us%20anything%20new%20about%20literature%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwhat-is-the-point-of-cultural-analytics-computers-big-data-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe96fb93eb6beed4ff21c8a08050ada567dd3d43e%2F0_0_672_530%2F672.jpg>
A cultural analysis study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/scientists-reveal-multifractal-structure-of-finnegans-wake-james-joyce>
 that found James Joyce’s novel Finnegans Wake followed the structure of purely 
mathematical multifractals. The horizontal axis represents the degree of 
singularity, and the vertical axis shows the spectrum of singularity. 
Photograph: IFJ PAN 
According to Andrew Piper, one of the authors on that study of MFA programmes 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2016/03/mfa-creative-writing/462483/>
, the growth in cultural analytics isn’t only down to better tech and our 
ability to handle bigger datasets. “There is a major flaw to all methodologies 
in the humanities,” he says. “Traditional methods are not able to generalise in 
legitimate and transparent ways – though we have tried.”

Think of the critic who reads a few poets and generalises about “modernity”, 
or the anthropologist who studies a few actors in a specific place and 
generalises a region, where the area considered is “always larger than the 
space actually observed”, Piper says. Cultural analytics can do the heavy 
lifting humans can’t (or won’t) do. “Traditional scholars who work at small 
scale never like to admit they may have a sample bias or a problem of 
generalisation,” he says. “That’s what is changing.”

Piper, who runs a digital humanities lab at McGill University 
<http://txtlab.org/>, in Montreal, expands on this argument in the introduction 
to his new journal, Cultural Analytics 
<http://culturalanalytics.org/2016/05/there-will-be-numbers/>. He begins by 
considering Erich Auerbach’s monumental study of western literature, Mimesis, 
published in 1953 and hailed as one of the landmark works in 20th-century 
criticism. It delivered categorical judgments on works from Homer through to 
Virginia Woolf. “Who would ever presume to have read more than Auerbach?” Piper 
writes. “But what if he actually hadn’t read enough?”

An individual scholar can only consider or read a certain number of books in a 
lifetime, so how can anyone hope to truly grasp a phenomenon as broad and 
varied as modernism, let alone place it in a historical context? It is only by 
analysing a large number of texts and by clearly specifying which ones we have 
studied that we earn the right to draw general conclusions – and the loss of 
detail that comes from considering literature in bulk is the price we must pay 
if we want to generalise. “We can’t know something at the general level as 
complexly as we can at the local level,” Piper says. “There is an inverse 
relationship between the number of things considered and the complexity of what 
can be known about them.”

The process by which certain texts gain cultural privilege is screened out as 
though it didn’t matter
Josh Cohen 
But for Josh Cohen, professor of modern literary theory at Goldsmiths, 
University of London, Piper’s solution risks erasing the very differences that 
make culture worth studying in the first place. English departments have 
attempted to address the problem of small sample size for years – interrogating 
the canon of dead, white males by examining works by women and minorities, for 
example – but Cohen says: “I don’t believe analytics is the answer to the 
problem.”

Some books have always been more important than others in shaping literary 
culture, Cohen continues, emerging through processes influenced by class, race 
and gender, as well as aesthetic quality. Traditional critics have taken this 
as a given, and so have focused on studying those works more closely. “But is 
this such a bad thing?” Cohen says. “The alternative is that we analyse culture 
as if this process of transmission hadn’t occurred, which as far as I’m 
concerned is to travesty culture itself. The process by which certain texts 
gain cultural privilege is screened out as though it didn’t matter – there’s 
something unwittingly distorting, even dishonest, about that.”


Compare Francis Ford Coppola’s Oscar-winning 1972 masterpiece The Godfather 
withThe Don is Dead 
<http://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9405E5DA1731E63BBC4D52DFB7678388669EDE>
, a lesser-known mafia drama by Richard Fleischer that was released a year 
later. “From the perspective of analytics … [they] are both early 1970s 
gangster movies. Treat them as part of the same, undifferentiated cultural soup 
and, as far as I’m concerned, you’ve lost everything about them – either of 
them – that makes them interesting,” Cohen says.

Computers simply cannot account for human experience; no matter how much data 
you have, “[it] will yield no insight into the way texts and cultural phenomena 
of any kind become the object of love, hate, indifference, disgust … culture is 
an irreducibly and intrinsically subjective phenomenon. This subjectivity isn’t 
an inconvenience that can be discretely brushed aside or bracketed off.”

The rise of computing in the humanities is testament to the “increasing 
prestige of metrics”, Cohen continues, methods that come from science and which 
discount individual experience as “hopelessly subjective and parochial”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwhat-is-the-point-of-cultural-analytics-computers-big-data-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe04703d81cf6e1cb24fc3c714812354815cba468%2F60_597_3604_4505%2F3604.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20like%20hitting%20a%20painting%20with%20a%20fish'%3A%20can%20computer%20analysis%20tell%20us%20anything%20new%20about%20literature%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwhat-is-the-point-of-cultural-analytics-computers-big-data-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20like%20hitting%20a%20painting%20with%20a%20fish%27%3A%20can%20computer%20analysis%20tell%20us%20anything%20new%20about%20literature%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fwhat-is-the-point-of-cultural-analytics-computers-big-data-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe04703d81cf6e1cb24fc3c714812354815cba468%2F60_597_3604_4505%2F3604.jpg>
 ‘The research culture has run out of anything sane to say about literature’ … 
writer AL Kennedy. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
According to the Booker-longlisted novelist AL Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alkennedy>, the rise of cultural analytics 
stems from “a university mindset that doesn’t trust the arts and that does 
trust something to do with figures and computers – while not understanding 
them”, part of a culture that “likes tick boxes and learning outcomes”, but 
with “no space for teaching and no space for learning”.

“The research culture has run out of anything sane to say about literature and 
is now groping around for further ways to not really analyse anything,” says 
Kennedy. “It’s like hitting a painting with a fish – why would you?

“Academia slowly decided – faster in the 1980s – that there was no way of 
judging artistic merit and that it might not even exist. So I suppose you have 
to find some other scale. The one they’ve picked is bizarrely inappropriate.”

Kennedy is unconvinced by Piper’s argument that small samples are a fatal flaw 
in traditional criticism. “I’m really not sure the samples are that small,” she 
says, “and it depends what it is you’re trying to find out. This seems to be a 
tool that has no purpose, designed by people who don’t understand something, on 
behalf of some other people whose lack of understanding is different but 
equally profound.”

Analysis produced by cultural analytics, such as a study where University of 
Vermont attempted to identify core components in storytelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jul/13/three-six-or-36-how-many-basic-plots-are-there-in-all-stories-ever-written>
, is completely useless to writers, Kennedy says: “Breaking storylines into 
component parts is meaningless and unhelpful unless you want to write bad 
screenplays of market methods of writing badly.”

Anything that’s purely based on number crunching would give you the narrative 
equivalent of sausage stuffing.
AL Kennedy 
Piper is equally critical of the Vermont study, dismissing it along with 
others as “examples of why we can’t leave the computational study of culture to 
the computer scientists.” He adds: “They are going to be important partners for 
sure, but their ability to talk about literature and culture in meaningful ways 
is pretty limited – the results are awfully reductive, or opaque,” he says.

But framing cultural analytics as a battle between science v not-science 
misses the point, Piper believes. “Literary and cultural studies … have always 
thought about themselves as a ‘science’ in the more general sense ofwissenschaft
 – a form of knowledge with methodological norms, expectations, and so on.” A 
dissertation has always been defended with evidence, even in the humanities. 
“It’s just that now we’re adding in new kinds of evidence and new kinds of 
methods.”

Instead of acting as a barrier, Piper believes these new methods are putting 
researchers into closer engagement with the text. “There is a myth that when 
you read something with a computer, you aren’t reading,” he says. “That is a 
misunderstanding. I read more closely now than I ever have. In order to 
understand how to model a problem I need a very clear understanding of what I 
am talking about … For me to understand nostalgia, I need to clearly define it 
and collect examples of it. This is the closest kind of reading.”

Could cultural analytics reveal patterns unavailable to human readers? Can 
computers uncover literary truths that might inspire the contemporary novelist? 
Kennedy remains a sceptic: “Anything that’s purely based on number crunching 
would give you the narrative equivalent of sausage stuffing.”

 