
On the other end of the telephone, legendary TV producer Malcolm Gerrie is 
offering me an assessment of the state of British music television. "I think 
we're living in an amazing time," he enthuses. "There's some amazing stuff out 
there, as groundbreaking and exciting as it ever was." He pauses. "But it's 
happening on the web and on mobile phones. The most fertile and exciting stuff 
is on non-traditional platforms. If I wanted to see something really fresh and 
groundbreaking, I wouldn't look on MTV or ITV or any of those traditional 
broadcasters. I'd look on YouTube or any of the millions of music websites out 
there."

I struggle to stifle a groan. That isn't what I want to hear. I've spent the 
past seven days watching nothing but music television in an attempt to survey 
what's out there. And the word "ordeal" is not too strong to describe what I've 
been through. I have been exposed to the spectacularly disingenuous and 
irritating video for Pink's So What? - in which Pink once again shakes 
bourgeois morality to its very foundations through the noted insurrectionary 
medium of radio-friendly pop-rock - at least four times a day.

That is bad enough, but far from the worst of it. A lot of video channels have 
bought into the concept of Guilty Pleasures in a big way: you wouldn't believe 
the number of opportunities the British public is offered to enjoy Mr Mister's 
Broken Wings over the course of a week.

Elsewhere, I have seen endless chart shows, all of which seem to have been 
compiled in the most arbitrary manner imaginable. I have watched, 
horror-struck, Luke's Parental Advisory, an MTV Base reality show that, as the 
enticing description has it, follows former 2 Live Crew frontman Luke 
Campbell's "struggle to balance being a dad with running his adult 
entertainment business" - after all, nothing says "hilarity ensues" quite like 
the combination of children and hardcore pornography. And I have seen an 
"erotic" hip-hop video featuring Tim Westwood.

I've put myself through all this, and now perhaps the most famous music TV 
producer in the country - the man behind The Tube, The White Room and a host of 
other shows - seems to be suggesting I shouldn't have bothered. "For me," he 
concludes sadly, "the music on traditional TV is probably going through one of 
those pretty arid times."

Nevertheless, it seems worthwhile to try to take the temperature of British 
music television in 2008. Music TV, like children's TV, brings out the 
nostalgic in people: we decry what's on offer these days and hymn a golden age 
of Top of the Pops, The Tube and The Old Grey Whistle Test. And yet there has 
never been so much music on television, and in such variety. My Sky+ programme 
guide shows 29 dedicated music channels, covering everything from grime to G4. 
Vast expanses of gospel are shown on the God-bothering stations; there are 
hours of videos broadcast on The Africa Channel and a generous scattering of 
music shows elsewhere. If you can't find anything you like among all that, it 
seems a fairly safe bet that you don't really like music.

Nevertheless, music television is haunted by the question of whether anybody 
is actually watching it. We live in a YouTube world: every video that has 
become well known in recent years, from Feist's 1-2-3-4 to OK Go's 
Grammy-winning Here It Goes Again, has achieved fame not on television, but via 
the internet. The viewing figures published by the Broadcasters' Audience 
Research Board make for sobering reading. In August, the most successful music 
channel was 4Music, with an average daily reach of 801,000 viewers, but that 
was perhaps linked to the fact it screened live coverage from Big Brother amid 
the videos. Most music channels struggle to get a quarter or even an eighth of 
that. Some just scrape an average reach in five figures.

I speak to Judd Lander, who is also something of a music business legend: he 
has been a TV plugger for so long that one of his anecdotes involves taking 
Abba to perform on the Mike Yarwood show. "I used to take an artist to TV 
Centre and do three shows with them, then I'd move to ITV and do a couple of 
shows there," he says. "I could clean up in about three or four days. Now, 
because there's such a host of smaller shows, hitting a smaller audience, it's 
like that old adage: if you can collect all the crumbs you can end up getting a 
loaf. But you've really got to work to make any impact through TV."

Perhaps more people would tune in if they knew exactly what was out there. As 
I settle down in front of the screen, I am buoyed by thoughts that my TV 
marathon might act as a public service, alerting grateful viewers to a treasure 
trove of televisual gems. But my buoyancy gets deflated pretty quickly. 
Navigating the far reaches of music TV occasionally delivers unexpected 
pleasures - not least the videos on The Africa Channel, which can be amazing: 
ferociously politicised hip-hop from Zambia, and berserk, funky Ugandan pop. 
But it can also deliver a nasty shock.

The first thing I see, at 8am, is Death Disco on Rockworld TV. This offers 
grainy footage from Alan McGee's London nightclub, which includes a lot of 
shots of the club's founder, gurning and throwing shapes at the camera while 
wearing a trilby. And I can tell you, there are better things for a chap with a 
morning head than the sight ofAlan McGee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> gurning and throwing shapes in a 
trilby.

I switch over to something called O Music, which is presumably named after the 
disappointed sound viewers make when they discover it deals exclusively in 
light classical of the Il Divo variety. "When your joy is the joy of music," 
bellows a spiky-haired tenor, "it's the best day of the year!" There speaks a 
man who hasn't been confronted with Alan McGee gurning in a trilby at eight in 
the morning.

It's not long before I discover there are more subtle problems to contend with 
when you're exploring music telly's outer limits. What music TV used to be 
great at was creating a sense of community, of shared experience. As a kid, I 
watched Top of the Pops in the steadfast belief that everybody else in Britain 
was doing exactly the same thing. Of course, they weren't, but I wasn't the 
only one who thought so: one of the things that turned many of its presenters 
into the egotistical monsters depicted in Simon Garfield's history of Radio 1, 
The Nation's Favourite, was the belief they had the whole country rapt. Even 
when the viewing figures for music TV were comparatively paltry - and Malcolm 
Gerrie is quick to point out that Top of the Pops' peak of 15m viewers was an 
anomaly, and that "pure music TV has never got a big audience" - it carried on 
as if it were addressing the nation as one: The Weekend Starts Here.

But here, at the bottom end of the Sky+ programme guide, there is no point in 
pretending that a music programme is a mass experience. Indeed, the feeling I 
most frequently experience is loneliness. It first strikes at 4pm on Tuesday 
afternoon, when I find myself watching an early 1990s concert by Space Ritual, 
the band fronted by former Hawkwind saxophonist Nik Turner. There he is, 
honking his way through Silver Machine, but I struggle to pay attention, 
gripped as I am by the certainty that I am literally the only person in the 
world watching it.

The sensation becomes disconcertingly familiar over the following days. The 
video for the Knife's Marble House is brilliant, a hugely creepy bit of Jan 
Å vankmajer-influenced animation, but is anyone else up at 3am on Monday to see 
it shown as part of MTV Dance's chillout show, The Sunset Sessions?

I even feel alone watching channels that encourage a sense of community by 
running viewers' text messages on screen. One evening, I flick to Channel U, 
famed as the televisual home of British urban music's bleeding edge. The music 
is suitably edgy, but the only person texting in is someone who calls himself 
CHOONAGE. I fancy I can sense a certain crushing desperation in his failed 
attempts to provoke dialogue. Did evry1 hav a gd weekend? No response. Who's 
guna win da Premiership? No response. Fearful that CHOONAGE is about to ask if 
any1 hav da number 4 da Samaritans, I head over to the terrestrial channels.

There's a commonly held belief that terrestrial TV doesn't bother with music 
any more, that digital has taken over - but it's not true. During my seven-day 
vigil, terrestrial TV shows nine and a half hours of music programming, not 
counting The X Factor. Most of it's on Channel 4, a fact of which the station's 
head of music, Neil McCallum, is justifiably proud: "Channel 4 is doing more 
music programming now than we've ever done. We've got more returning series 
this year in the Channel 4 schedule than we've ever had."

It's just that most of it is shown in the middle of the night or first thing 
in the morning. During my week, the only bit of terrestrial music programming 
that happens at a reasonable hour is a video premiere of Alicia Keys and Jack 
White's theme to Quantum of Solace.

Perhaps it doesn't matter in a world of hard-disc recorders, but it is still 
testament to music's inability to pull a crowd. As Gerrie notes, music TV's 
traditional audience, aged 18-24, just don't sit in front of the telly any 
more: "My 18-year-old son - if you look at his leisure time, he sits in front 
of his PC. It's where he gets his music from: he's got his iTunes, his iPod, 
his mobile and that's basically his world. He'll only come and watch TV if 
there's a live football match on. If he wants to watch a video, he'll dump it 
down on to his iPod or phone and watch it when he wants."

And, because music television is famously expensive to make, almost all of it 
is either corporate-sponsored or funded by record companies. Whether that's a 
problem or not is a thorny question. I watch a record-company-funded Channel 4 
programme about Seasick Steve. It's not going to win any awards for editorial 
impartiality - in fact, it's like a moving press release - but you can't argue 
with the electrifying live footage, which would never have been broadcast had 
Warner Brothers not stumped up the cash.

Wanting something untainted by the hand of the multinational corporation, I 
return to Channel U. Alas, it's 10pm, and Channel U has forgone urban music in 
favour of the FHM High Street Honeys' cover of the Divinyls' I Touch Myself. 
It's part of a risquÃ© programme called Channel U XXX, which features plush US 
videos alongside British efforts with a Readers' Wives feel. The video for a 
track off Lethal Bizzle's first album features bare breasts and the rapper 
treated with the same special effect that made Marlon Wayans look like a dwarf 
in the film Little Man -plus, for some reason, Tim Westwood looking on 
furtively. This certainly has an effect on the libido: watching it, it's hard 
to imagine ever feeling sexually aroused again.

Horrified, I scramble for the remote. I've never been so pleased to see Jools 
Holland in my life. I welcome him, his boogie-woogie piano and his ghastly, 
obsequious interview technique like a cross between a long-lost friend and the 
emergency services. TV On the Radio come on. They sound impossibly adventurous 
and thrilling. I can't help thinking that if their performance was shown on 
prime-time TV, it would be one of those famous music television moments, when 
the sense of an exciting artist suddenly barging into the nation's living rooms 
makes the hairs on the back of your neck stand up.

But then I remember Malcolm Gerrie explaining that music television doesn't 
really do that any more: "The audience has fractured, music itself has 
fractured into a million different genres. It's all about niche programming 
now, being bespoke, catering for a minority group." You have to be content with 
smaller thrills, but at least it's still capable of delivering them. On that 
note, I head to bed.
 