
“Believe me, however shocked you are that I am standing here doing this job, 
you will never be as shocked as I am,” quippedJames Corden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden> as he made his debut as host 
of the Late Late Show on Monday.

And the British star – largely unknown in the US 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/02/james-corden-famous-britain.html> before being 
announced as host of the late night CBS chatshow – may also have shocked those 
who doubted his ability to pull it off, as audiences and critics warmed to his 
performance.

James Corden's Late, Late Show: winning debut with room for improvement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2015/mar/24/james-cordens-late-late-show-debut-witty-inspired-and-horrendously-charming>
“He’s a very funny guy and an especially likeable guy – and I think that’s 
sort of the the key,” former Tonight Show host Jay Leno toldRadio 4 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02mnps2> after the broadcast, explaining the 
Gavin and Stacey actor’s appeal. “I think the era of ironic snarkiness and 
sarcastic-ness is over in America. It’s just nice to see a person who you 
really like and would like to know as a friend.”

Leno was one of an army of celebrities who appeared in sketches on the show, 
dusting Corden, and his relative obscurity, with A-list sparkle. Eddie 
Redmayne, Lena Dunham, Meryl Streep, Chris Rock and Shia La Beouf were among 
those who recorded skits with the presenter.

There was a galaxy of star quality, too, on the sofa, upon which guests perch 
together for the duration of the show, rather than plugging their product and 
making a swift exit. British audiences have long enjoyed Graham Norton making 
full use of the situation’s potential for awkwardness and interaction but, in 
the US, the approach remains novel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRnF3GJShhWM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRnF3GJShhWM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRnF3GJShhWM&media=>
 Mila Kunis reveals she is married to Ashton Kutcher. 
And, in another break from seating tradition, Tom Hanks and Mila Kunis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mila-kunis> were treated to an informal chat 
as Corden wheeled his office chair from behind the desk to sit alongside them 
and gently – or not entirely – press Kunis as to her marital status. 
(Eventually she flashed a wedding ring, giving the host his scoop.)

The result was “a home run”, according to CNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/03/24/entertainment/james-corden-late-late-show-premiere-feat/>
, which described Corden’s debut as “one of the smoothest first episodes of any 
new talk show hosts in recent memory”. After a warm response from viewers on 
Twitter, Corden responded: “Well, so many truly lovely messages about the show 
tonight. I’m blown away, thank you.”

How James Corden tore up the talk show rule book with a sofa shuffle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shortcuts/2015/mar/24/how-james-corden-tore-up-the-talk-show-rule-book-with-a-sofa-shuffle>
Other reviews were more measured, noting Corden’s tendency to laugh at his own 
jokes and questioning his ability to maintain the magic long term but, in 
general, critical opinion was that he had charmed with his warm approach. “He 
comes without almost any snark,” noted Tim Goodmanin the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/bastard-machine/james-cordens-late-late-show-783872>
. “Corden doesn’t put a layer of cool between him and the viewer (or his 
guests) – he’s as affable and sincere as [Jimmy] Fallon, with just a little 
less goofiness. It’s a welcome trait.”

Corden eschewed the format’s traditional opening monologue in favour of an 
introduction that set the laid-back tone. “I’m from a place called High Wycombe 
in Great Britain, which you almost certainly will never have heard of because 
most people in Great Britain haven’t heard of it, so I don’t expect you to,” he 
said.

Thanking his parents for visiting Los Angeles for the first time in order to 
watch his debut, he joked: “They are eating kale every day. My mum is getting a 
boob job next week.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZWLWxpBv5g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZWLWxpBv5g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZWLWxpBv5g&media=>
 Tom Hanks and James Corden perform a skit celebrating Hanks’ film career. 
Having Hanks on the sofa – and in a much-applauded sketch in which the pair 
celebrated the movie star’s career by running through all of his movies in 
quick, winning and occasionally bonkers succession – helped Corden to get off 
to a strong start.

“CBS deserves credit for taking a flyer on a promising if unorthodox choice,” 
wrote Brian Lowry in Variety 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/reviews/tv-review-the-late-late-show-with-james-corden-1201454657/>
, who viewed the premiere as being “slightly uneven with moments of inspired 
lunacy and some clear areas for the newbie host to work on”.

While there was room for improvement when it came to interacting with guests, 
Corden oozed sincerity, Lowry said, praising the English host as “natural and 
likeable”, a performer who was “clearly multitalented and “exhibited bright 
flashes”.

The 36-year-old will be learning on the job. He is best known as an actor – in 
2012he won a best actor Tony award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/11/james-corden-tony-award-deserved>
 for his performance in One Man, Two Guvnors – with little experience of talk 
shows. He has taken over the Late Late Showfrom Glasgow-born comedian Craig 
Ferguson <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-30562709>, who had been 
its host for a decade. It was a privilege to do so, Corden told his first-night 
audience. “I really will do my best not to let any of you down.”

This low-key, non-showbiz approach drew praise from the New York Daily News 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv/james-corden-late-late-show-show-premieres-review-article-1.2160174>
, with critic David Hinkley seeing Corden as “from the school that feels it’s 
better to close the day with a good glass of wine than tequila shots”.


US actors Chris Pine and Will Ferrell visit his Late Late Show sofa later this 
week.
 