
China is the future – in cinema terms at least. As Hollywood expansionist 
strategy makes clear, most film-industry insiders believe that China is where 
the money is, and will be. Despite a recent dip in takings, the Chinese box 
office is expected to outgross the US’s in 2017 for the first time: projections 
suggest that Chinese cinemas will earn $10.4bn, as opposed to $10.2bn in the 
US. In February, the huge totals for the Stephen Chow filmThe Mermaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/global-box-office-the-mermaid-china-record-zootopia-how-to-be-single>
 helped China’s monthly gross – $1.05bn – surpass that of all of North America 
(including Canada), which was $790m for the same period.


China is moving towards Hollywood, too. In an effort spearheaded by billionaire
Wang Jianlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/chairman-wang-jianlin-process-of-pursuing-wealth>
, the Dalian Wanda Group has been investing in anything that is for sale in 
Tinseltown, including Batman producers Legendary Entertainment and the cinema 
chain AMC, and is currently angling to acquire Paramount. Meanwhile, Hollywood 
increasingly has to comply with China’s written and unwritten regulations, and 
make countless compromises, to produce audience-pleasing blockbusters that 
satisfy the censors. And in order to bypass the quota that China sets for 
foreign movies (34 a year), US studios have started to make co-productions with 
Chinese ones – adapting further to China’s requests, censorship and regulations 
in order to do so.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUvMk7Z0Sp7E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUvMk7Z0Sp7E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUvMk7Z0Sp7E&media=>
 Trailer for the box office record-breaking Stephen Chow film The Mermaid. 
It is an exercise fraught with unexpected consequences, as the Hong Kong film 
industry – until recently one of the most productive and vibrant in the world – 
knows only too well. If Hong Kong’s experience is anything to go by, it will 
mean that, according to the director Johnnie To, “the type of films that the 
public will be able to see will shrink”. To, one of Hong Kong’s most famous and 
established film-makers, who is best known in the west for hisElection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/jun/09/4> series, adds: “Everyone who 
makes expensive films will have to make compromises, because China is where the 
money is. It’s that simple.”

Ten Years – the terrifying vision of Hong Kong that Beijing wants obscured
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/ten-years-the-terrifying-vision-of-hong-kong-that-beijing-wants-obscured>
Hong Kong’s pre-eminent position in the Chinese-language film industry dates 
back to China’s civil war in the 1930s and 40s, between Mao Zedong’s communist 
forces and Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalists. Whole studios emigrated from 
Shanghai (formerly China’s film-making centre) and settled in what was then a 
British colony. Hong Kong produced Mandarin- and Cantonese-language movies 
until the 1960s; gradually thereafter, Cantonese began to dominate. But 
language seemed almost irrelevant: Hong Kong cinema had entered its golden era, 
and, as Shu Kei, film critic and professor at the Academy of Performing Arts in
Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong>, recalls, “actors would 
be busy on nearly 10 sets in a single day”.

“The golden era had an output of up to 250 films a year, and the slowdown only 
started in the 90s,” says Kei. “Quality was problematic, but the craze was such 
that cinemas were screening movies at a slightly faster pace, in order to 
squeeze in one extra show, while film directors and actors just improvised with 
no script.” Profits were so high that organised crime became an active part of 
the industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Ftales-of-film-making-in-china-hollywood-hong-kong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9de903f4604016bf7f18afd0e8a921ff942c9464%2F48_0_1576_1968%2F1576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20ghosts.%20No%20gay%20love%20stories.%20No%20nudity'%3A%20tales%20of%20film-making%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Ftales-of-film-making-in-china-hollywood-hong-kong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20ghosts.%20No%20gay%20love%20stories.%20No%20nudity%27%3A%20tales%20of%20film-making%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Ftales-of-film-making-in-china-hollywood-hong-kong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9de903f4604016bf7f18afd0e8a921ff942c9464%2F48_0_1576_1968%2F1576.jpg>
 Brigitte Lin in Chungking Express (1994) Photograph: Ronald Grant 
But in the late 90s, just at the point at which audiences became more 
discriminating and DVDs started to eat into profits, China began opening up, 
changing the game entirely. Hong Kong’s movie stars were highly attractive and 
recognisable, but to remain relevant, Hong Kong cinema had to shift its 
attention to mainland audiences, and cut back on some of its more eccentric 
traits. “When Wong Kar Wai shotChungking Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1995/sep/14/1> in 1994, Brigitte Lin was 
dressed up in a wig, sunglasses and a raincoat because she was busy on a period 
movie set, and had no time to go through makeup and costume again. But it 
worked!” says Shu Kei with a giggle. That era was soon over.

“The first movie I shot in China was in the 80s, and I required no permits to 
film there. I didn’t need to submit my script either,” recalls Mabel Cheung, 
another of Hong Kong’s most important auteur film makers. “I needed to shoot in 
China for my trilogy on illegal migrants, and the only issue was people 
crowding the set as they were so excited to see Hong Kong film stars.Sammo Hung 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zja-rkeXUxk> was the male lead, and that meant 
we were followed around all the way into the hotel, and filming was a 
challenge.”

Some years later, Cheung was back in China filming a major historical drama, 
The Soong Sisters (1997), based on thereal-life story 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-19910975> of three sisters married to three 
of the most important men in modern Chinese history – the Nationalist leader 
Chiang Kai-shek, China’s first president Sun Yat-sen, and HH Kung, China’s 
first finance minister. It was a co-production with the Beijing Film Studio. “I 
had to submit the script and get permission, but the Chinese film industry at 
the time was not strong: money had to be entirely provided by us, and they 
supplied the crew and the film studio. But when we submitted the film to the 
censorship bureau, we were told we had to go to the Important Affairs 
Commission, since it was a historical movie.”

It ended up with Cheung losing the last 18 minutes of her movie, in spite of 
her long pleadings with the censors’ office: “I never got my ending back. I had 
to reconstruct an ending I could live with from leftover material they agreed 
to return. They said it was not possible for Soong Mei-ling and Soong Ai-ling 
to hug, because one was married to a nationalist and the other to the father of 
the nation; so we had an argument about history. But I managed to get my film, 
and [Chinese] mainland distribution.” While waiting however, Cheung filmed 
Beijing Rocks (2001), about the Chinese capital’s boomingunderground music scene
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/mar/11/popandrock.chinaarts2008>. 
“That got banned,” she says, “but I could take it to Hong Kong, and after that 
I could go back to China. At the time they banned the movie, not the person.”

A bigger splash: how did The Mermaid become China's biggest ever film?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/global-box-office-the-mermaid-china-record-zootopia-how-to-be-single>
Like any foreign territory, Hong Kong was also subject to a yearly quota. 
Then, while the former colony was recovering from the devastating economic 
effects of theSars epidemic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sars> in 2003, 
Beijing announced the establishment of the Closer Economic Partnership 
Arrangement, or CEPA, a free-trade agreement which granted preferential access 
for Hong Kong films to the Chinese market. It proved a watershed moment for 
Hong Kong cinema.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS4R3nHkqyfM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS4R3nHkqyfM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS4R3nHkqyfM&media=>
 Infernal Affairs (2002), directed by Andrew Lau and Alan Mak. 
However, as China’s economic clout grew, the censors got more confident. In 
2002, Hong Kong’s filmgoers were queuing up to seeInfernal Affairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/feb/27/dvdreviews.shopping1>, 
co-directed by Andrew Lau and Alan Mak – the beginning of a double-agent cop 
trilogy in the greatest tradition, with an exhilarating succession of twists. 
To break into the mainland market, it had three different endings for the 
censors to choose from. “In a mainland China movie, you cannot have a bad guy 
who gets away with his crimes,” explains film-maker Jevons Au. “Multiple 
endings to suit the mainland market used to be OK. No more. Now, if you want to 
distribute in China, you must have only one approved ending worldwide. You can 
step on the line. But you cannot cross it.”

Au knows all about being banned: he is one of the five co-directors of Ten 
Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/11/ten-years-the-terrifying-vision-of-hong-kong-that-beijing-wants-obscured>
, a politically uncompromising dystopian tale which imagines Hong Kong under an 
ever-more repressive regime. All five have been banned from China, despite Ten 
Years winning best film at the Hong Kong film awards and being feted in 
critics’ circles as the harbinger of a local renaissance in small-budget 
productions that talk to local audiences, and are not geared to grossing 
millions in China.

“For us, it is complicated,” says Au. “The uniqueness of Hong Kong is our 
freedom of speech, of creativity, of expression. You can do and say anything 
you want. To make a co-production withChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, you have to follow ever stricter 
rules: half of the cast and crew has to be Chinese. The censors have the last 
word. Crime stories cannot have too many details. Stories of corruption must 
end with the bad guy behind bars. No ghosts. No gay love stories. No religion. 
No nudity. No politics…” He counts on his fingers. “It’s kind of a trap. The 
moment you fall into it, you change. You hurt your creativity.”

Other films suggest, however, that obstacles can stimulate creativity, and not 
necessarily crush it. Director Stephen Chow shifted his operation to China, and 
had enormous box office success. The Mermaid became the highest-grossing 
Chinese film of all time. And it got around the prohibition of films about the 
supernatural by reclassifying itself as a science-fiction movie. Likewise, 
Barbara Wong Chun-Chun, who started her career as an independent film-maker 
with thought-provoking movies such as Women’s Private Parts (2000), a 
documentary discussion of female sexuality, has now abandoned small-budget 
productions to make some of the most successful Chinese movies. Her film The 
Secret (2016) is a love story among what seem to be ghosts, but could get into 
theatres thanks to its final line: when one of the characters wakes up from a 
coma, she asks if she dreamed it all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrVxwLy8t21s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrVxwLy8t21s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrVxwLy8t21s&media=>
 Was it all just a dream? … The Secret (2016), directed by Barbara Wong 
Chun-Chun. 
“You have to try to understand China’s censorship,” says Wong. “In Hong Kong 
you have category I, II and III movies. In China, there is no such system. So 
you must make movies that a five year old can watch without feeling scared. Can 
you make a movie with a bad cop in it in China? Of course. But then he has to 
end up in jail. Can you have much blood? No. A kid is going to see it. 
Foreigners who want to make movies in China need to understand the country 
first.”

“Say you want to make a film about corruption,” Wong continues. “It’s a 
sensitive theme. But the regulations are blurry, you can tackle things in a 
different way: shoot a film where the corruption is in America, not in China. 
Then it’s OK. As an artist, you must find ways of getting around it.”

Another limitation is established by Chinese moviegoers’ own tastes. Roger 
Garcia, executive director of the Hong Kong film festival, says: “In China, you 
are making either a romance or a big special-effects movie. If you want to do 
horror, or other genres, you cannot be in China. You can make a budget sci-fi 
movie in Hollywood, but Chinese audiences will not like that. They like huge, 
costly productions. So I think that China should not be the total sum of 
everything, it is a mistake. It is limiting. For Hong Kong, it was a mistake to 
obsess about China. And things are changing now that Hollywood is doing the 
same.”

Johnnie To agrees that film-makers are presented with a difficult choice: “You 
have to recognise that China is way more open now. The first film I shot there 
was in 1978 – the change is obvious, very big.” Milkyway Image, his production 
company in Kwun Tong, the movie district of Hong Kong, has produced films that 
have been allowed into the mainland, as well as others that were banned – like 
the recent Trivisa (2016), co-directed by Ten Years’ Jevons Au.

“First of all,” says To, “you must ask yourself: can China accept this movie? 
We are different in Hong Kong, we are free, we can do and say what we want. Not 
them. So, you must be prepared to accept their point of view. But you cannot 
escape this fact: today, if you want to make a big budget movie, you can no 
longer make it only for Hong Kong.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCqChehmFdqs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCqChehmFdqs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCqChehmFdqs&media=>
 Trivisia (2016), directed by Johnny To and Jevons Au, has been banned in China.
“Does it mean compromises? Yes, very many. But the alternative is no movie in 
China. There are many political issues that China is still stuck with, because 
it has an old-fashioned system of government, and even if there is more freedom 
than there used to be, the Communist party is unable to relax. Yet you see it 
very clearly – everybody is ready to shut up to make money.”

Despite To’s high profile, some of his films were denied a release in China. 
Neither Election (2005) nor Election 2 (2006), which deal with power struggles 
in a triad gang, made it. “I am going to wait until I am 65 to make Election 
3,” says To, now 61, “as I already know that, after that, I will be banned from 
China. But it will be OK: I’ll be able to really describe the rot in our 
government through that film.”

While film industries from Hollywood and Italy to the UK and India continue to 
court this booming source of revenue, To is not optimistic about cinema. “To 
make it really big, a film has to be one the Chinese censors can approve,” he 
says. “The range of films that the world will get to see will be restricted.”
 