 Alan McGee, the chairman of Creation Records who propelled Oasis to superstar 
status gaining the ear of the prime minister along the way, yesterday announced 
that he would be leaving the label he founded next year to pursue other 
projects.
The announcement led to immediate speculation that Oasis would leave the label 
to establish their own company, and that Creation's future would be threatened.

Sony paid £3.5m for a minority share in the label in 1992 and McGee is due to 
renegotiate the deal next summer.

But a spokesman for Oasis described the rumours as "complete rubbish", while 
Creation said: "Oasis are contracted to Sony and licensed to Creation Records 
for the UK and until we hear otherwise - it's business as usual."

However, 39-year-old McGee predicted that the role of record labels would be 
fundamentally changed by new technology and that he was re signed to losing 
Oasis after their present deal expired. He said he hoped to establish a film 
production company next year financing 10 films for £100,000 each, as well as 
investing in an internet start-up.

Earlier this year, McGee offered to buy ailing London music radio station GLR 
after it emerged the BBC were considering turning it into a speech-based 
station. BBC chairman Christopher Bland is rumoured to have invited him in for 
talks, though a sale is thought unlikely.

Creation's success was founded on McGee's talent for discovering bands such as 
the Jesus and Mary Chain, Primal Scream, Super Furry Animals and Oasis. The 
label was founded 17 years ago with McGee and his partner Dick Green, who will 
also be leaving, to promote unknown bands.

By the late 90s, McGee's reputation as an opinion former led New Labour to 
court his approval, which he readily gave along with a donation of £50,000. 
Riding the wave of Cool Britannia that accompa nied Labour's election win in 
1997, McGee was invited to Downing Street with his star turns, moving the Daily 
Mail to condemn Mr Blair for mixing with a confessed drug-user. In 1994 he was 
admitted to a Los Angeles detox clinic.

Since those heady days, however, McGee has relinquished drugs and the Blair 
project, describing the latter as "Orwellian", blighted by cronyism, and 
claiming the New Deal initiative stifles creativity.

Serious doubts must now surround the long-term future of the label, founded 
with a £1,000 bank loan in 1983.

McGee has always been a hands-on chairman at a company that has managed to 
retain an independent spirit. But without McGee as a buffer between the bands 
and Sony, Oasis may take matters into their own hands. Other groups on the 
roster, some of whom have resented the time and effort which has been lavished 
on the Gallagher brothers, may also be minded to look elsewhere.
 