
Refugees in Tanzania face many difficulties, but perhaps the most concerning 
is violence against women in communities where access to the outside world is 
forbidden. In the Nyaragusu camp there has been 10 cases of rape so far this 
year, and for women it is the essential tasks that present the most risk. The 
supply of wood in the surrounding forests has dwindled and women have to travel 
further to gather firewood, risking their own security and arrest for leaving 
camp. "My daughter went to collect firewood with a group of other women," says 
Stephanie Miburo, 49. "But they were confronted by a group of men who chased 
them. My daughter was small and they caught and raped her."

This harrowing case is by no means unique. A Gender-Based Violence (GBV) unit 
has been established to tackle this problem, along with the alarmingly high 
incidence of domestic violence, sexual harassment and forced marriage. "These 
are only the cases that we hear about," says Sela Chabumbwa, the camp's GBV 
office supervisor. "The main problem is that women are ashamed to come forward 
and report cases of violence against them."

But progress is being made. From the GBV office a team of volunteer refugees 
are sent into the camp to promote the channels by which women can access 
justice. For those who wish to take their case to the police, the volunteers 
act as advocates. This approach has already brought some success. There have 
been three successful prosecutions for rape in the past two years, each for 
30-year life sentences, and the number of new cases, while still worryingly 
high, is in decline. "People seem to be learning that they will be punished for 
rape," says Sela. "For us it's a step forward."
 