
When writing your CV, the words you omit can be just as important as those you 
include. Some candidates cram their CV with popular buzzwords in an attempt to 
impress employers, but often this has the reverse effect and leaves recruiters 
unimpressed.

If you want to get shortlisted by employers then your CV needs to prove the 
value that you can provide them with. Buzzwords tend to be vague, 
non-descriptive and sometimes even irritating, so they rarely provide 
recruiters with an accurate depiction of an applicant. Keep the following 
buzzwords out of your CV to improve your chances of landing an interview.

Hard working

It’s understandable that candidates want to prove their work ethic to 
potential employers, but simply stating that you work hard is not enough. 
Instead of writing this overused phrase, give some examples of when you have 
gone the extra mile for a previous employer, such as taking on additional 
projects or earning promotions. This way you prove that you’re willing to roll 
your sleeves up and get stuck in without making a hollow claim.

Thought leader 

The term thought leader is used to describe innovative, inspirational people 
and is usually associated with captains of industry like Steve Jobs and Richard 
Branson. So to use the term on your own CV could be perceived as slightly 
egotistical, which is not an attractive trait for a potential new hire. Instead 
of using the term thought leader, try toning it down slightly by explaining 
your expertise in your field of work through your achievements and relevant 
qualifications.

Strong communication skills 

Strong communication skills is a bad phrase to use on your CV for two reasons. 
First, strong communication is a prerequisite for almost every role and not 
really something worth highlighting. Second, if you have strong communication 
skills, you shouldn’t need to state that you do, you can simply prove it 
through the way your CV is written. If your CV is well structured with clear 
headings and the text is broken up for ease of reading with perfect grammar and 
spelling, then you’ve already proven yourself as a strong written communicator.

Works well in a team or individually 

This phrase features in a lot of CV profiles but unfortunately it doesn’t tell 
recruiters much about the candidate and takes up quite a lot of valuable space. 
Essentially this phrase tells us that the candidate works well which isn’t a 
major accolade by any employer’s standards. If you want to demonstrate your 
ability to contribute to a team, use the introduction of your role descriptions 
to show where you sit within an organisation and how your work feeds into their 
overall functioning. When writing your role responsibilities, ensure that you 
include details of people you interact with including colleagues, external 
contacts, customers and stakeholders.

The best CV writing tips of 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/dec/29/the-best-cv-writing-tips-of-2015>
Results driven

Many candidates claim to be results driven in their CVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> but few back the claim up with facts. 
Recruiters have seen the phrase “results-driven professional” thousands of 
times so don’t bore them with it. Show the results you have achieved in your 
roles with tangible facts and figures to quantify them. Achievements will vary 
between roles and industry but some good examples to include are: revenue 
generated, spending reduced, major projects delivered etc. Ideally use numbers 
to demonstrate the impact of your results on your employer where possible.

Socialising with friends

This phrase can be found in the interests section of many CVs but holds no 
value whatsoever. The vast majority of the population enjoy socialising with 
their friends, so it’s unlikely that you will impress a recruiter with this 
fact. If you’re going to include an interests section then it should ideally 
show off some extracurricular skills or at least convey you as interesting 
person. Use activities such as sports teams, volunteering, travel or 
work-related interests to demonstrate traits like organisation, leadership and 
a touch of personality.

Filling your CV with buzzwords may seem like a good way to make it stand out, 
but they have become so overused that they won’t set you apart from other 
candidates. Use the limited space on your CV wisely by demonstrating the 
benefits you can bring to an employer with factual evidence of your previous 
work.

Andrew Fennell is director of CV writing service StandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/>

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 