
As South African satirist Tom Eaton put it on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/TomEatonSA/status/717400381769261056?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Etweet>
, asking parliament to impeach the president was like asking hyenas if they 
wanted to stay huddled round the carcass. There was only ever one possible 
answer, and the National Assembly duly delivered it on Tuesday,comprehensively 
rejecting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/firms-cut-ties-jacob-zuma-allies-before-impeachment-vote>
 the opposition’s motion to remove Jacob Zuma.

South African president Jacob Zuma survives impeachment vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/firms-cut-ties-jacob-zuma-allies-before-impeachment-vote>
Just 143 of the total 400 MPs voted in favour of the motion to impeach, with 
the African National Congress (ANC) closing ranks to protect its embattled 
leader. Even thenewly-reappointed finance minister Pravin Gordhan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/south-africa-markets-rally-jacob-zuma-appoints-pravin-gordhan-finance-minister>
, thought to be a key figure in the ruling party’s anti-Zuma camp, cast his 
vote in support of the president.

The impeachment motion was tabled following last week’s groundbreaking 
constitutional court ruling which found that Zuma had failed to uphold the 
constitution over expensive upgrades made using public money to his private 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/jacob-zuma-ordered-repay-upgrades-nkandla-home-south-african-state-funds>
 home in Nkandla.

While Zuma apologised for acting unconstitutionally, he maintained that he had 
done so “in good faith” and promised to pay back the cash. He also ignored 
calls for his resignation.

That the ANC accepted this line, and defended Zuma so vociferously in 
parliament, should come as no surprise given that the president has hand-picked 
many of the ruling party MPs. But it is also a reflection of the party’s 
longstanding emphasis on displays of public unity, even when there are serious 
divisions behind the scenes.
Tom Eaton (@TomEatonSA) 
What?! The hyenas all voted to stay huddled around the carcass?! I'm shocked, 
I tell you, SHOCKED!#ImpeachZuma 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ImpeachZuma?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/TomEatonSA/status/717400381769261056> April 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TomEatonSA/status/717400381769261056> 
“There are members of the ANC who no doubt hate Zuma, but they hate the 
opposition more. They cannot be seen to be collaborating with the opposition, 
irrespective of the principle at stake,” said political analyst Ralph Mathekga.

Mathekga argued the vote in parliament should be interpreted as the ANC 
uniting against the opposition rather than behind their leader, and that it 
doesn’t mean Zuma is now guaranteed to see out his term, which expires in 2019.

“I think for the short term, it means that this is not the type of exit that 
the ANC would like to see him undergo. It does not necessarily mean he is safe 
altogether,” Mathekga added.

Stephen Grootes, a journalist who has interviewed many of the key players in 
the Nkandla scandal, agrees that Zuma has been strengthened by the defeat of 
the impeachment motion – but only for now. “It looks like Zuma is safe for the 
short to the medium term, for the next six months or so, but at the same time 
the ANC is going to come under more pressure than ever before, particularly at 
local government elections,” he said.

United opposition

At the conclusion of parliament on Tuesday, the major opposition leaders – 
including the Democratic Alliance’s Mmusi Maimane, the Economic Freedom 
Fighters’ Julius Malema and the United Democratic Movement’s Bantu Holomisa – 
gave an unprecedented joint press conference in which they promised to work 
together to remove Zuma from power.


It’s clear that as the ANC puts on a united front the opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/anc-veteran-ahmed-kathrada-calls-for-jacob-zuma-resignation>
 has responded in kind, collaborating to become a formidable force ahead of 
upcoming local elections, scheduled for between May and August this year.

Jacob Zuma breached constitution over home upgrades, South African court rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/jacob-zuma-ordered-repay-upgrades-nkandla-home-south-african-state-funds>
A successful opposition campaign could also strengthen the hand of the 
anti-Zuma faction within ANC. “At this point Zuma’s camp is still in charge. He 
has appropriated the internal processes of the party to the point where there 
is little recourse against him. His detractors must do sufficient political 
work on the ground and stage a mutiny within the branches at the lower levels 
of the party.

“If the ANC performs very badly at local elections they have a strong case to 
make at the lower levels,” said Mathekga.


Zuma has been nicknamed “the Teflon president” in recognition of his ability 
to withstand scandal after scandal. While last week’s constitutional court 
ruling has provided him his greatest hurdle to date, so far his reputation as a 
political survivor remains intact, and even enhanced by the ANC’s latest show 
of parliamentary support. But he’s not out of the woods yet.

Facing a united, invigorated opposition, and heading towards crucial local 
elections, he’s still got plenty of work to do if he is going to remain in 
power.
 