
One month ago, in a federal courthouse in downtown Manhattan, in the imaginary 
shadow of the World Trade Center, a seasoned defense attorney asked a jury of 
American citizens to place several accusations of terrorism against his client,
Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> al-Masri, in their 
proper legal context. As in, to disassociate this alleged terrorism from the 
terrorism of 11 September 2001.

This case is about what happened in the world before 9/11, which is a very 
different place, with a lot of different views, things that may have changed 
radically from 9/11. But you have to put yourself back, to the extent you can, 
in a pre-9/11 context.

The questions Joshua Dratel was asking were simple: could average Americans 
decide a case stemming from a 1998 kidnapping, and separate that decision from 
the still-burning desire for retribution stemming from a 2001 bombing? Could 
they overcome their inherent fear and confusion over a crime for which this man 
was not even tangentially charged?

Well, no. Of course not. With only a few hours of deliberation, the jury – 
eight men, four women, multi-racial, multi-aged –found Hamza guilty on Tuesday, 
on all 11 counts of supporting terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/19/abu-hamza-found-guilty-terrorism-charges>
.

It was not an unexpected verdict. I have attended numerous terrorism 
prosecutions, and my research, documented in a comprehensive database of such 
trials in the United States, shows that nearly all accused foreign terrorists 
tried in US courts are found guilty. In the Hamza case, the evidence was scant, 
the words were many, the direct association with al-Qaida andOsama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> was non-existent.

But throughout the trial, as in so many other cases, the subconscious shadow 
of 9/11 loomed too large. The Hamza proceedings, and the rhetoric therein, 
reiterates a lasting reality: those attacks, more than 4,600 days later, still 
amount to a slam-dunk for juries, rendering terrorism suspects guilty by 
association. Until America has its real 9/11 trial, every terror crime – 
whether before or after that day – will be tried in American courts as a 9/11 
crime.

In trial after trial, prosecutors often open up and/or close with references 
to bin Laden, whether or not the defendant had any direct connection to his 
operations, as if to try them for the al-Qaida problem, not their specific 
crimes:

 * "He told us in this courtroom that he still loved Osama bin Laden," New 
York assistant district attorney Ian McGinleysaid of Abu Hamza on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/14/abu-hamza-life-violent-jihad-court-hears>
. 
 * Tarek Mehanna was tried in part in a Boston courtroom for the larger crime 
of suicide bombing among al-Qaida-style terrorists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2012/apr/16/tarek-mehanna-punished-speaking-truth>
. 
 * The convicted embassy bombing conspirator Ahmed Ghailani was tried by 
suggestionfor the full spectrum of crimes committed by bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/18/guantanamo-detainee-ahmed-khalfan-ghailani>
, evoking 9/11, which occurred three years after the crimes for which he was 
accused. 
 * Abu Ghaith, bin Laden's spokesperson, was convicted just last month for 
using his sermons as if to create another 9/11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/26/osama-bin-laden-son-in-law-found-guilty>
. 
Many, like Hamza's defense attorneys, reason that fear motivates a juror's 
inability to separate fact from accusation, ideology from criminal activity. 
But it seems that all American terror trials have become surrogate trials – 
surrogates for the 9/11 co-conspirator trial that still hasn't happened. It may 
yet: Khaled Sheikh Mohahammed and his accused accomplices sit in wait at 
Guantánamo for their military commissions to begin. But that trial has been 
delayed month after month, year after year.

Indeed, as several prominent prosecutors have said, the evidence for the 
actual 9/11 case – that against the hijackers of the four planes – was built 
conclusively in the days and weeks following 9/11. Prosecutors knew who the 
terrorists were, where they had stayed, who they had communicated with, what 
their plans were, and more. It was a perfect case. Only there was no one to 
try; they were suicide bombers.

This impact of this reality – that the United States has yet to try anyone for 
a crime that dominates the national consciousness and the legal 
subconsciousness – is, I suspect, incalculable. Trials are important for many 
reasons, but chief among them is the importance of a sense of closure: justice 
has been served, passions are reduced to rationale discussions of right and 
wrong, of guilt and innocence. But without closure, justice doesn't rule – 
passion does.

It would be foolish to argue that alleged terrorists being prosecuted for 
serious crimes are totally innocent; each and every one of them has some 
evidence against them. But with an inflated sense of conspiracy, this is not 
justice so much as a plea from the entire system – of jurors, prosecutors, 
defense attorneys and judges – for justice to be delivered for the crimes of 
9/11. The co-conspirators for the attacks of that day need to be tried, whether 
in a military commission or, if that continues to stall,in federal courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/13/terrorists-us-civilian-courts-guantanamo-bay-prison>
.

Until that happens, until closure is brought to the earth-shattering and 
mind-altering crime of 9/11, terrorism defendants will not get true justice – 
based on their crimes and their crimes alone - anywhere in America.
 