
Youth annoyance and anti-social behaviour has increased in Adamsdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/adamsdown> according to the local 
community, who are preparing for this year's Halloween and bonfire nights.

Reported via the Guardian Cardiff Fix My Street section here, 
<http://guardian.co.uk/cardiff> one resident said gangs of young people had 
been 'terrorising' older people in the area.You can read their report online 
here. <http://www.fixmystreet.com/report/137648>

Communities First Coordinator Su West said youth annoyance had been on the 
rise in Adamsdown. She said:

"There has been an increase of complaints about anti-social behaviour in 
certain areas of Adamsdown.

"We have enjoyed a quiet couple of years but there do seem to be some issues 
at the moment.

"There's usually a bit of an increase in the summer months but as it gets 
colder and darker this drops, hopefully it will naturally quieten down in the 
next few weeks."

West said areas around Cemetery park had been raised at the last partnerships 
and communities together (PACT) meetings, but the current complaints come from 
Pearl Street andSplott <https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/splott> Road.

A resident in Topaz Street, not far from Pearl Street, brought up the issue of 
youth annoyance at the last PACT meeting according to the police report. 
<http://ourbobby.com/EN/PACT/Default.aspx?n1=1&n2=8&n3=117&n4=169&id=64> 

Gangs of youths were also reported in neighbouring ward Splott at the last 
PACT meeting (the next meeting is tonight). A police report said 
<http://ourbobby.com/EN/PACT/Summary.aspx?pid=4486&n1=1&n2=8&n3=117&n4=170&id=90>
:

"Residents and police continue to be concerned about the scale of anti-social 
behaviour in Splott. The usual culprits are gangs of young boys typically 
riding bicycles often until late in the evening."

Adamsdown PCSO Paul Baker said there had been problems in the area but the 
police were trying to increase their presence and patrols.

He said:

"There has been an increase of youth annoyance in the area but we are speaking 
to the youths and we've set it as a PACT priority to tackle in the next two 
months to get more of a police presence.

"We do have problems in the location outside the rugby club, but they are not 
always reported."

PCSO Baker said the team were planning on increasing patrols in the area for 
Halloween and bonfire nights, with officers working until 2am on these nights.

South Wales Police <https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/south-wales-police> 
confirmed an incident of youth annoyance had been reported over the weekend, 
with a gang of youths outside the chip shop causing noise and intimidating 
people. A spokesperson said:

"We will be looking into it and the local neighbourhood team will be making 
inquiries."

Communities First tackling local issues

Adamsdown Communities First has been running a number of local projects 
targeting young people in the area. There will also be a firework show in 
Splott Park to discourage young people from putting on their own event.

At the Adamsdown play centre they provide youth evenings two nights a week and 
West said this had a direct affect on the number of incidents in the evenings. 
She said:

"If things the evenings are provided we see a marked improvement on those 
nights.

"The role Communities First can play in terms of bringing the different 
service providers together, levering in additional force funds, is over 
over-looked."

Last week we asked you 'Should Communities First be cut' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/cardiff/poll/2010/oct/06/poll-cardiff-communities-first-scheme-public-spending-cuts?CMP=twt_gu>
 and the resounding response was the scheme should extend beyond the 2012 
expiry date.

Out of 134 of you who voted over two days, 121 said Communities First should 
continue, that's 90%.
 