
Stik, the once-homeless street artist whose large stick-figure murals pepper 
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, has unveiled his latest work, 
one that has raised £50,000 for the building it’s painted on – Homerton 
hospital in Hackney.

Sleeping Baby now adorns the outside of the hospital, and 100 silkscreen 
prints of the image, retailing at £500 each, have raised money for theRegional 
Neurological Rehabilitation Unit 
<http://www.homerton.nhs.uk/our-services/services-a-z/r/rnru-(regional-neurological-rehabilitation-unit)/>
 which works with Alzheimer’s sufferers and those with serious brain injuries. 
“They’re given this chance to recontact those parts of their mind which were 
lost, and regain a kind of inner life,” Stik says of the unit’s patients, who 
take art classes as part of their therapy. “Otherwise they would be just 
sitting in a bed somewhere, waiting for their brain to heal: this is an active 
healing process.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-london-homerton-hospital-nhs-sleeping-baby-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20street%20artist%20Stik%20is%20raising%20money%20for%20a%20London%20hospital%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-london-homerton-hospital-nhs-sleeping-baby-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20street%20artist%20Stik%20is%20raising%20money%20for%20a%20London%20hospital%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-london-homerton-hospital-nhs-sleeping-baby-video&media=>
 Watch Stik and Homerton hospital staff discuss the project 
Stik says the image – painted in his usual style of thick black lines and 
block colour – represents the NHS itself: “The NHS is our baby. It is very 
vulnerable, and we the people need to take care of it. We’ve created it, by the 
people for the people. We can’t let it be cut up and sold off, that would be 
barbaric. Privatising theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is an 
abominable idea – suffering is not a commodity to be bought and sold.”

He visited the hospital himself regularly during a period when he was living 
rough in abandoned buildings. “You often come into unfortunate accidents when 
you’re homeless, so it was a very important place to me,” he says. “I’ve had my 
fair share of knocks and grazes; I’ve been in the A&E department a few times.” 
He also recently underwent a cancer screening at the hospital, from which he 
got the all-clear.

Stik, who keeps his real identity a secret, has become one of Britain’s 
best-known street artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/11/street-artist-stik-interview>
; his mural Big Mother, a 125ft image of a mother and baby painted on an Ealing 
towerblock, is the UK’s largest. He has painted work in New York, Jordan and 
Norway as well as his main east London stomping ground, and a coffee-table book 
of his work was published earlier this year.

Privatising the NHS is an abominable idea – suffering is not a commodity to be 
bought and sold
Stik 
His popularity is such that people arrived from all over Britain to queue up 
for thescreenprints of Sleeping Baby <http://stik.org/news.html>, some of them 
camping overnight. Stik hailed them for their support. “Bear in mind this is an 
NHS department that’s dealt withMRSA <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mrsa>
, the Olympics andthe riots <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-riots> – and 
even they were caught out by the response!” he laughs. “The people who queued 
through the night to buy the print, and the people who came down to support the 
event and volunteered to help, are all responding to something they believe in 
that I’ve just shone a light on. Our society is deeply worried about losing the 
NHS. People feel powerless about it, and I’ve had so many people thanking me 
for doing this project – but really I haven’t done anything. All I’ve done is 
painted a picture. As an artist I’m acting as a representative of my community, 
showing fondness and love for an institution we all need, and expressing its 
vulnerability – and strength also.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-nhs-sleeping-baby-mural-homerton-hospital-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaf055ebdbca1c69fa01acfbd3c19d3439f7498b%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20NHS%20is%20our%20baby%2C%20it's%20very%20vulnerable'%3A%20street%20art%20superstar%20Stik's%20hospital%20takeover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-nhs-sleeping-baby-mural-homerton-hospital-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20NHS%20is%20our%20baby%2C%20it%27s%20very%20vulnerable%27%3A%20street%20art%20superstar%20Stik%27s%20hospital%20takeover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fstik-nhs-sleeping-baby-mural-homerton-hospital-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaf055ebdbca1c69fa01acfbd3c19d3439f7498b%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Stik in his Hoxton studio. Photograph: Antonio Zazueta Olmos for the Guardian 
He’s careful to assert that in raising money for the unit, he’s not suggesting 
it can sustain itself without state support. “This is not private funding – 
this is public money, from the public who chose to donate,” he says. “And I’m 
merely repaying what I’ve been given by society.” As well as Homerton hospital, 
he namechecks homeless charitySt Mungo’s <http://www.mungosbroadway.org.uk/>, 
whose hostel he stayed in round the corner on Mare Street, andMind 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/>, the mental health charity he has been helped by, 
which has an office next to the hospital. “Through the help of these services, 
I was able to grow as a person and artist, and now through my art I’m no longer 
bound to expressing my own struggle – I’m expressing the struggle of 
marginalised communities, and groups like the NHS. I’m a child of the 80s, I 
was born under Thatcher, and I was led to believe that society does not exist. 
I reject that wholeheartedly – society does exist, and in reclaiming society 
we’re rediscovering it.”
 