
Bronwyn Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bronwyn-bishop> is 
resisting growing pressure for her resignation over travel claims despite deep 
concern within the government at the escalating political damage from the 
expenses scandal.

Bronwyn Bishop under scrutiny over expenses for flight to another wedding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/29/bronwyn-bishop-scrutiny-expenses-flight-another-wedding>
Christopher Pyne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>
, leader of the government in the House of Representatives, warned his worried 
colleagues to fall in line and support the embattled Speaker.


Despite a looming no-confidence motion when parliament resumes and criticism 
from Labor that her position as Speaker of the House of Representatives is no 
longer tenable followingquestion marks over the use of travel entitlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/29/bronwyn-bishop-scrutiny-expenses-flight-another-wedding>
, Bishop is not budging.

“The Speaker is not resigning,” a spokesman said.

On Wednesday it emerged that Bishop had claimed $288 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/29/bronwyn-bishop-scrutiny-expenses-flight-another-wedding>
 of taxpayer dollars to stay in Brisbane the night of Liberal backbencher 
Teresa Gambaro’s wedding in April 2007.


The Speaker’s office said Bishop met an unnamed source the morning after the 
wedding in relation to her role as chair of the house standing committee on 
families and human services.

Bronwyn Bishop's fate determined by media more than parliamentary scrutiny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/29/bronwyn-bishops-fate-determined-by-media-more-than-parliamentary-scrutiny>
In June 2006, Bishop claimed back $600 for flights and transport to attend the 
wedding of then Liberal shadow minister Sophie Mirabella, also justified with 
an unspecified meeting with an unnamed person.

Pyne defended the Speaker in the face of the allegations. “She retains my full 
support,” Pyne told Sky News on Wednesday afternoon.

He told parliamentary colleagues not to “jump on the bandwagon” against 
Bishop, who he said was doing a “superb” job.

“I’m standing strongly behind Bronwyn Bishop as the Speaker and I would call 
on all my colleagues whether they’re in the cabinet or on the backbench to 
stand firm against the demands by theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> to remove the 
Speaker,” Pyne said.

“Let’s not repeat the mistakes of our opponents, that we’ll jump at the first 
whiff of grapeshot,” he said, referring to Labor’s decision to axe Harry 
Jenkins to install Peter Slipper.

Bronwyn Bishop has never welcomed the kind of scrutiny she applies to others | 
David Leser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/bronwyn-bishop-has-never-welcomed-the-kind-of-scrutiny-she-applies-to-others>
One colleague distanced himself from the Speaker. “Bronwyn is accountable for 
her own actions; it is really up to her to explain them in a way that satisfies 
the public,” Liberal senatorArthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/arthur-sinodinos> told Sky News on 
Wednesday night.

“I think it is worth us asking more questions about how entitlements are 
administered because there are grey areas which puts parliamentarians in a 
difficult position where they have to [decide] about how those grey areas are 
administered.”

He said if Bishop was considering her future, he was confident she would do 
what was best for the Liberal party.

“I think it would be true to say this has been a distraction now for a couple 
weeks,” Sinodinos said. “The sooner it is either resolved or blows over the 
better, so we can get back to sending out our messages on economic security and 
national security.”


Bishop will face a no-confidence motion when parliament resumes in August, 
brought forward by crossbenchers Clive Palmer andAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>.


“My hope is that Mrs Bishop will do the honourable thing and resign,’’ Palmer 
said.

“Bronwyn Bishop is not a fit person to occupy the highest position in the 
House of Representatives,’’ Wilkie said. “The member for Mackellar has abused 
parliamentary entitlements and treats public expectations with contempt. No 
wonder many members of the community question her integrity.”

The Speaker can only be removed by a no-confidence motion, and cannot be 
sacked by the prime minister.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, has not ruled out a similar motion, and 
said he expects that the “soap opera” would be over before parliament starts 
again.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fbronwyn-bishop-bill-shorten-speaker-expenses-helicopter-labor-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438141673785%2FShorten-Labor-Bishop-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronwyn%20Bishop%20has%20to%20vacate%20Speaker%E2%80%99s%20chair%2C%20Bill%20Shorten%20says%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fbronwyn-bishop-bill-shorten-speaker-expenses-helicopter-labor-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronwyn%20Bishop%20has%20to%20vacate%20Speaker%E2%80%99s%20chair%2C%20Bill%20Shorten%20says%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F29%2Fbronwyn-bishop-bill-shorten-speaker-expenses-helicopter-labor-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438141673785%2FShorten-Labor-Bishop-001.jpg>
 Bill Shorten says Bronwyn Bishop ‘has to go’ and Tony Abbott should make it 
happen.Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jul/29/bronwyn-bishop-bill-shorten-speaker-expenses-helicopter-labor-video>
Committee member Kate Ellis, who is shadow education minister, expressed 
surprise at the justification.


“It seems that none of our committee members were aware of just how busy our 
chair Bronwyn Bishop was on our behalf with a variety of secret, confidential 
and anonymous meetings,” Ellis said. “At the end of the day, it’s up to Bronwyn 
Bishop to demonstrate to Australians that she was on committee business.”

Senior frontbenchers offered muted support for the Speaker early on Wednesday.


The public has “justifiable angst” on the issue of parliamentary expenses, 
social services ministerScott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> admitted, adding 
that “the Speaker is consulting with her colleagues and I think that’s the 
appropriate place for those discussions to take place”.

The foreign minister, Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, also implied that 
the Speaker was contemplating her future.

“I understand that the Labor party will seek to use this to destabilise 
question time, for example, and I’m sure Speaker Bishop will take that into 
account as she considers her position,” Julie Bishop told Channel Nine on 
Wednesday morning.


“But I believe it’s important that the Department of Finance be able to carry 
out an investigation. That’s what has happened in the past and that should 
happen in this case.”

The prime minister, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, put Bishop on 
“probation” after she was forced to pay back more than $5,000 of taxpayer money 
for taking a helicopter to travel between Melbourne and Geelong for a Liberal 
party fundraiser.
 