
At the British Legion hall, the volunteers of Inverurie and Garioch Flood 
Support are looking for someone to foster a cat. In between jazzercise classes, 
the hall has become a community hub for the recovery process since the river 
Don overtopped its banks on 7 January - just a few days afterStorm Frank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-frank> caused so much damage across 
Scotland and northern England.

The group is staffed by locals who are still signing up for shifts several 
weeks after the initial emergency mobilisation. It has been distributing 
cleaning products, towels and heaters donated by local businesses, making up 
food parcels, and arranging for pets to be fostered, as 92 families in 
Inverurie remain unable to return to their sodden homes. Nearly as many 
families again in the surrounding villages north ofAberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> are in a similar position.


“Initially people were coping well because they had so much to do,” says 
volunteer coordinator Fiona Cooper, “but once that initial period is over 
that’s when the trauma really hits and they realise this is not going to away.”

“Then the insurance company is slow or workmen are taking their belongings out 
of homes with no sensitivity and that’s the catalyst for tears.”

Steve Russell, whose cottage in nearby Port Elphinstone filled with three feet 
of flood water, admits that he finds it hard to talk about anything else. 
Russell was insured, but is still struggling to get clear timescales for 
assessment of damage, repair work and reimbursement. “I understand that they 
don’t want to over-commit because of the sheer volume of what they are dealing 
with, but I just get more and more frustrated.”

Scotland hit by further flooding and travel disruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/08/scotland-flooding-travel-disruption-aberdeen>
Like all flood victims the Guardian spoke to, he is also fearful of the river 
rising again. “My concern is that the ground is sodden and it wouldn’t take 
much for it to happen again. I understand that local government consultations 
take time but I’d like to see more defences and more communication rather than 
relying on the goodwill of the community.”


In Kemnay, to the west of Inverurie, Alan Davies and his wife, Estelle, have 
been camping on the upper floor of the home they have lived in for 36 years. 
Plastic sheeting blocks the stairs to keep fungus spores from spreading from 
their gutted living room. They had no warning from the council on the night 
they were flooded, and were only alerted by neighbours at 11pm.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fthis-is-not-going-to-go-away-what-happens-when-the-flood-waters-recede%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c268993655730b4de9265e7823edad10337d784%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20not%20going%20to%20go%20away'%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20the%20flood%20waters%20recede%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fthis-is-not-going-to-go-away-what-happens-when-the-flood-waters-recede%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20not%20going%20to%20go%20away%27%3A%20what%20happens%20when%20the%20flood%20waters%20recede%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fthis-is-not-going-to-go-away-what-happens-when-the-flood-waters-recede%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c268993655730b4de9265e7823edad10337d784%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Houses are reflected in flood water at dawn in Port Elphinstone, near Aberdeen 
on 8 January. Photograph: Danny Lawson/PA 
They are frustrated with the council. Alan said: “What action is Aberdeenshire 
council taking to be better prepared, will they put up temporary flood 
defences? Their attitude seems to be that it’s not their responsibility.”

Yet evidence of council work is all around: repairs to Invercauld Bridge, 
which left the village of Braemar isolated when flood damage forced its 
closure, were completed within days. A temporary carriageway through adjacent 
fields to replace part of the A93 which collapsed into the river Dee was built 
within a fortnight.

George Eckton, chief sustainability officer for Cosla, Scotland’s local 
government association, says: “People are working incredibly hard, … but these 
are highly complex infrastructure schemes, over a wide catchment and requiring 
a lot of community consultation. Delivery takes time.”

Then there is the question of where the money comes from. 

The distribution of an immediate support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/07/scotland-floods-msp-greater-assistance-besieged-communities>
 package of over £16m from the Scottish government to local authorities seems 
to have been fuss-free, and both Russell and Davies paused to specifically 
thank the first minister of Scotland, Nicola Sturgeon, for their householder 
grant, which had recently been paid.

While the political aftermath in England has focused on central government 
cuts to flood defence funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/03/scottish-flood-defence-cuts-criticised-as-sepa-warns-of-more-flooding>
, responsibility for such investment north of the border was transferred back 
to Scotland’s 32 local authorities by the SNP in 2007. At the time, Scottish 
Labour warned against the removal of ringfencing for flood defence budgets, as 
councils struggled with underfunding following the SNP’s council tax freeze. 
But environmental experts welcomed the move as making the defences more locally 
attuned.

Alongside this transfer, the Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (Sepa) 
was tasked with producing flood risk management strategies around the country, 
and out of those there are now 42 flood protection schemes proposed over the 
period of 2016 to 2021, costing an estimated £235m.

Scottish flood defence cuts criticised as Sepa warns of more flooding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/03/scottish-flood-defence-cuts-criticised-as-sepa-warns-of-more-flooding>
At the height of the new year floods, the Scottish government’s finance 
secretary, John Swinney, assured the public that there would be funding within 
the local government settlement to provide for all of those schemes. Cosla 
immediately declared itself “baffled” as to where that money was coming from, 
given that local councils only have notification of their funding for the 
coming year, which includes a £350m cut, according to December’s draft Scottish 
budget.

With Cosla and Swinney in a standoff over those cuts it is difficult for 
flood-stricken councils to plan ahead. Residents hit by flooding argue that it 
is hard to know what councils should be funding after the recent devastation 
fundamentally altered some parts of river catchments.

Elliot Robertson, flood-risk planning manager at Sepa, says: “No amount of 
funding can entirely remove the risk.” He is proud of the strategies that were 
taken up by local councils before the new year floods. “The most significant 
thing is that for the first time we know the order in which we should address 
the problem, so the money councils do have they can spend most wisely.”

But some communities are concerned that these Sepa plans are already out of 
date because the rivers have changed shape so dramatically during the floods. 
In Ballater, to the west of Aberdeen, the Rev David Barr points out the high 
tide marks on windows and front doors, as dehumidifier pipes poke through 
letter boxes into the street.

“We need Sepa to come and survey the river again because it has changed so 
much,” he says, pointing out where the force of the “mini-tsunami” has altered 
the banks by Ballatar’s still devastated riverside caravan park. “We need to 
have Sepa working with us, not against us.”

One solution, says Marc Stutter, of Aberdeen’s environmental research centre 
the James Hutton Institute, is to consider managing the Dee “almost like a new 
river”.

“It’s about making the landscape more like a sponge, so you can knock the head 
off the flood peak next time. Everyone can have a part to play in flood 
management, whether its putting a flower pot at the end of a drainpipe to slow 
the run off from gutters in urban areas to managing farmland better in rural 
areas.”

But this also means working against decades of received wisdom about how to 
deal with flooding. “River dredging has been brought up a lot lately, but 
that’s just pushing the problem further down the catchment. Likewise, tree 
planting can be great but its not appropriate everywhere.”

Eckton agrees: “We need a whole systems approach: to promote peat bogs 
upstream, anything that would allow the environment to store water more 
efficiently, and in towns promoting more sustainable urban drainage, rather 
than large amounts of concrete that doesn’t allow water anywhere to go.

“Our members are also saying that they have to adapt to climate change and a 
shorter return period to peak water. But this is a strategy change that will 
take years, but we need hard defences in the short term too.”

Both Stutter and Eckton raise the possibility of compensating farmers with 
riverside land for allowing their fields to flood deliberately. But this is a 
decision that needs to be taken swiftly, before farmers go to the expense of 
clearing debris.

Scotland floods: MSP demands greater assistance for 'besieged' communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/07/scotland-floods-msp-greater-assistance-besieged-communities>
 While public sympathy may converge on those who lost their homes to the 
rising waters, Aberdeenshire farmers are also counting the cost of broken 
fencing, drowned livestock and waterlogged ground.

Further down the Dee from Ballater, at East Cairnton farm, Drumoak, Lewis 
Anderson wonders how he can meet the cost of removing the thousand tonnes of 
shingle he estimates the river spewed across his fields. His insurance company 
has told him that it cannot offer compensation because there has been no actual 
damage to property.

Yet walking across the land is like traversing a rocky riverbed: unless the 
thick layer of sand is removed, nothing will grow through it, and until every 
single stone has gone he runs the risk of breaking machinery.

Anderson is pragmatic about future flood management. He knows this river well: 
in the two years that he has been a tenant farmer here the Dee has overtopped 
12 times.

“It’s happening more frequently, and even if you have barriers you are just 
pushing the problem further upstream,” he says. “I could leave the land to 
flood if it was for the greater good, to save houses further down stream then 
yes, but we would have to be compensated.”

A journey round the north-east of Scotland reveals stories of extraordinary 
and ongoing local effort: the Facebook news groupFubar News 
<https://www.facebook.com/FubarNews/>, whose anonymous editors worked 
throughout the night to share essential and potentially life-saving detail of 
rising flood waters and routes to safety, the Ballater charity groupThe 
Charitable Chiels <http://www.distillery.freeserve.co.uk/> which paid out to 
cover the excess on residents’ insurance - as well as a uniform and profound 
gratitude to all the emergency services.

The floods brought out a tremendous community ethic support – And that 
community ethic – and it is ongoing. Clare Bond, a Deeside resident and earth 
scientist at Aberdeen University, has just launched the Aboyne Bridge Project 
<http://www.abdn.ac.uk/research/deeflood>, which is crowdsourcing photography 
of the flood and its aftermath to build a detailed minute-by-minute map of 
water level and debris. Researchers hope that the project could result in an 
app to assess realtime flood hazard from bystanders’ photos.

Meanwhile, Bond and her four-year-old daughter are managing one of the many 
undramatic disruptions of the Aberdeenshire floods. With Aboyne’s only nursery 
flooded out, and no registered child minder in the village, many working 
parents are struggling. “I have linked up with other mothers for a temporary 
fix, but that can’t last for six months.”.


Now that the initial adrenalin has subsided, there is a sense of uncertainty 
locally, says Bond. “My daughter keeps asking me ‘When is your office going to 
get flooded?’”.
 