
When Shilpa Bhandarkar forgot to give her child a pound to exchange for a 
charity cupcake at school, her daughter was incensed. How could her mother do 
such a thing? Sharing parenting fails with her friend Amit Rai, Bhandarkar 
discovered that he had once forgotten to take his son to a birthday party – and 
an idea was born.

“We talked about the difficulties of managing school and family life when you 
work full-time,” says Bhandarkar. “We did a quick calculation around the number 
of events you need to keep track of. When we got to around 600 school, 
extra-curricular and social children’s events per year, we stopped and said: 
OK, that’s a lot. What can we do about it?”


How being a parent and an entrepreneur can be good for business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/10/parent-entrepreneur-good-for-business>
Bhandarkar and Rai, who went to Harvard Business School together, came up with 
an app,Let’s Coo <http://letscoo.com/>, which allows parents to organise all 
the scheduling and paperwork around their kids’ various activities in one 
place. They self-funded the pilot, then left their jobs and raised between 
£150,000 and £200,000 to fund the next stage. Let’s Coo launched in September 
and now has “a few thousand” users, says Bhandarkar, using the app an average 
of five times a day.


Of course, using technology to bring parents together isn’t new. Mumsnet 
launched in 2002 and Netmums in 2000. But now there’s a new wave of tech-savvy, 
Uber-era parents, who already use apps in their professional lives, and believe 
they can also solve their parenting problems.


It’s an enormous market opportunity, says Hina Zaman, founder of child health 
specialist access appWellVine <https://www.wellvine.co.uk/> and ParentTech, a 
new platform for those working on tech to make parent’s lives easier. “There 
are eight million families in the UK, spending £160bn each year. It’s a huge 
space. Within a few weeks of announcing ParentTech, 200 startup founders had 
signed up.”


So how can apps help parents connect? Managing a child’s school life is a lot 
easier when you can communicate with fellow parents, for example. Yet Classlist 
founders Clare Wright and Susan Burton found that when their children started 
new schools, many schools wouldn’t give out parents’ contact details – and they 
didn’t have time to hang around in the playground collecting them.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftinder-meets-nct-apps-targeting-parents-babysitters-startups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff451ef10016b803cc873a414c5105e20bf7ec30e%2F0_309_2469_3083%2F2469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Tinder%20meets%20NCT'%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20other%20apps%20targeting%20parent%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftinder-meets-nct-apps-targeting-parents-babysitters-startups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Tinder%20meets%20NCT%27%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20other%20apps%20targeting%20parent%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftinder-meets-nct-apps-targeting-parents-babysitters-startups%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff451ef10016b803cc873a414c5105e20bf7ec30e%2F0_309_2469_3083%2F2469.jpg>
 Classlist founders Clare Wright and Susan Burton. Photograph: Stacey Mutkin 
Their solution was Classlist <https://www.schoolclasslist.com/>, a private 
communications app which allows parents with children in the same class to stay 
in touch. Parents enter their own details and create their own lists. The data 
is private – it’s not shared with anyone, and the app is registered with the 
Information Commissioner’s office. These lists can then be used from everything 
to sending birthday party invites to finding someone who lives near you to pick 
up your child in an emergency.


Wright and Burton, who both have backgrounds in consultancy work, built the 
prototype of Classlist themselves and rolled out a pilot to parents in 70 
schools. In May this year, they launched a crowdfunding campaign to raise 
£550,000 to build the next version and ended up with £900,000. It launched in 
September, has parents from 500 schools, with an average of five to seven new 
signups every day, and is funded by advertising.


“We think every school needs us,” says Wright. “There are 25,000 schools in 
the UK, so we have a lot of room for expansion. Without any marketing 
internationally, we now also have schools signed up from the US, Australia, New 
Zealand, Canada, Hong Kong and mainland Europe. They all have exactly the same 
problem.”


Finding a good babysitter is another big issue. When Ari Last became a father, 
he was shocked how tricky it was. His wife didn’t want to use an agency – she 
wanted someone who came recommended by someone she trusted.


“I thought: in this day and age it’s crazy that this kind of issue is still as 
difficult as it’s ever been,” says Last, formerly head of commercial 
partnerships at peer-to-peer lending platform MarketInvoice. Together with 
fellow father Adrian Murdock, previously head of new markets at 
notonthehighstreet.com, they left their jobs and foundedBubble 
<http://joinbubble.com/>, an app which allows parents to recommend babysitters 
to their friends (and pay the babysitter at the end of the night, avoiding the 
inevitable cash-machine stop). They raised an initial £100,000 from investors 
and launched in July. There are currently around 2,500 people on the app, which 
is initially focusing on London.


And as society changes, so does parenting: new parents are now far less likely 
to live near their own parents, leading to increased isolation. A 2015 survey 
of 2,000 parents by the charity Action for Children found thatalmost a quarter 
said they ‘always or often’ felt lonely 
<http://www.netmums.com/support/a-quarter-of-mums-feel-cut-off-and-lonely>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftinder-meets-nct-apps-targeting-parents-babysitters-startups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bf0fd3a36c1d9aa4a164fb9dd5ade42a2a13ebc%2F807_80_2694_3368%2F2694.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Tinder%20meets%20NCT'%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20other%20apps%20targeting%20parent%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftinder-meets-nct-apps-targeting-parents-babysitters-startups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Tinder%20meets%20NCT%27%20%E2%80%A6%20and%20other%20apps%20targeting%20parent%20problems&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ftinder-meets-nct-apps-targeting-parents-babysitters-startups%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bf0fd3a36c1d9aa4a164fb9dd5ade42a2a13ebc%2F807_80_2694_3368%2F2694.jpg>
 Ari Last, co-founder of Bubble, an app for parents to find and book 
babysitters. Photograph: Paul Grant, for bubble 
Marketing consultant Sarah Hesz knows how that feels. She met Katie 
Massie-Taylor in a cold playground. “I went up to Katie and asked for her 
number, which was the cringiest moment of my life and totally unlike me,” says 
Hesz. “We became friends, and we talked a lot about how it shouldn’t be so hard 
to make mum friends.”

The result was Mush <http://www.letsmush.com/>, ‘Tinder meets NCT’ – an app 
which helps likeminded mums meet. Following the success of a local pilot, Hesz 
and Massie-Taylor, whose career background is in the City, raised £250,000 to 
build it. £150,000 came from Mustard Seed Impact, which focuses on businesses 
with social impact, and the rest from numerous supporters, family and friends. 
Funded by commercial partnerships – the first is with Johnson & Johnson – the 
site went live in April and now has 30,000 completed profiles with 55,000 
connections made. The site is now crowdfunding with a target of £650,000. At 
the time of writing, £445,160 had been raised.


Like any market, there are pitfalls. “As we look at investing in this space, 
we look at companies who are working towards [providing apps for parents] and 
there is nothing of scale today,” says Abhi Arya, a partner at Sandbox & Co, 
which provides operational and scaling expertise to businesses aimed at 
improving education for both children and their parents. “Everyone is 
struggling for scale.” Many parents, he says, are suffering from too much tech, 
rather than not enough. “There are so many parenting apps, like health apps: 
which one should you go for? If you’re already on Facebook, you might think: 
why do I need another mum’s social network?”


His advice: look at the content that millennials – the next generation of 
parents – are consuming, and what platforms they’re consuming it on: Buzzfeed, 
Pinterest or Instagram? “How do you use new media, like videos, virtual reality 
or the internet of things? How do you build trust with parents – why should 
they follow your advice?” Zaman says the key is to do your research. “Talk to 
other entrepreneurs and founders who have taken the leap as well as your 
primary market research. Is there a real market opportunity around the idea 
that you believe in?”


But the new parenting entrepreneurs are determined to make a breakthrough. “I 
think the challenge for any app or service provider is that a new way of doing 
things is always a harder sell,” points out Last. “We are asking people to 
start booking babysitters in a very different way. So it’s about educating 
people.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 