
Teodora Cauna de Quispe hasn’t had water at her house in Bolivia’s capital, La 
Paz, for two weeks. “We can’t wash ourselves or our clothes,” she said. “Every 
so often there is a bit of muddy water that spurts out of the tap on my patio.”

A tanker has delivered water only once, and Teodora – who, like many of her 
neighbors, works as a maid in a wealthy neighborhood nearby – has been forced 
to buy expensive bottled water for her family to drink.

Bolivian water rationing – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/nov/23/bolivian-water-rationing-in-pictures>
This week, President Evo Morales declared a national emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/bolivia-drought-state-of-emergency-water-shortages>
, after the combined impact of the El Niño weather cycle, poor water management 
and climate change helped cause the country’s worst drought in 25 years. Water 
rationing is in effect for the first time ever in La Paz, where the three main 
reservoirs that provide the city’s water are almost dry. The semi-arid 
highlands surrounding the capital rely almost entirely on replenishment by 
rainfall.

Five other cities face severe water shortages. Bread, a key staple here, is 
increasingly scarce and many hospitals are working at half capacity, suspending 
non-emergency surgeries and dialysis. In the poor neighborhoods of southern 
Sucre, taps have run dry for three weeks.

The drought has hit rural areas hard as reservoirs and lakes dry up, crops 
wither and animals die. Indigenous rituals beseeching the gods for rain have 
taken on a particular urgency this year and last, when the drought began.

In the southern highlands, where most of Bolivia’s quinoa is grown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/14/quinoa-andes-bolivia-peru-crop>, 
drought has slashed the 2016 crop by as much as half. Coriaco Mamani, a 
schoolteacher, helps his elderly parents with the harvest every year. “There’s 
almost no quinoa this year,” he said. “My parents depend on the harvest for 
their survival. I’m not sure what they will do.”

Such anxiety is widespread. “We are in a state of shock,” said La Paz water 
specialist Monica Ayala. Frustration over the lack of water is often directed 
at the state company Epsas, created in 2007 after a campaign against water 
privatization by Aguas de Illimani, the local subsidiary of the French 
conglomerate Suez. The demonstrations mirrored theCochabamba “water war” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jul/19/comment.guardiansocietysupplement>
 in 2000 against turning water distribution to a multinational consortium.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fbolivia-drought-water-rationing-crops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29db17a213f9c5f3610fde2997f98017e9bd660c%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20in%20shock'%3A%20historic%20Bolivia%20drought%20hammers%20homes%20and%20crops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fbolivia-drought-water-rationing-crops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20in%20shock%27%3A%20historic%20Bolivia%20drought%20hammers%20homes%20and%20crops&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fbolivia-drought-water-rationing-crops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29db17a213f9c5f3610fde2997f98017e9bd660c%2F0_0_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 Bolivian citizens stand in line to get water. Photograph: Martin Alipaz/EPA 
Protesters in El Alto were infuriated by Suez’s refusal to expand services to 
poor neighborhoods that were deemed unprofitable, and water privatization was 
reversed. The newly formed Epsas undertook an extension of services to outlying 
areas.


“Thanks to Epsas efforts, we have 84% potable water coverage, which of course 
means increased consumption,“ said Ayala. “But tariffs haven’t risen in nine 
years, so Epsas didn’t have the income to develop new water sources.”

The last reservoir built for La Paz and El Alto was constructed 23 years ago 
when the cities were almost 40% smaller than they are today. The next reservoir 
is expected to come on line next July.


Global warming spells disaster for tropical Andes glaciers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/27/global-warming-glacier-depletion-andes>
Meanwhile, existing infrastructure is crumbling, and public water companies 
are plagued by corruption and incompetence, said Ayala. “As much as half of all 
water is lost to leaky pipes and illegal connections.”

The current shortage is exacerbated by the rapid retreat of Bolivia’s 
glaciers. The Rutgers University climate scientist Jim Miller has found that 
temperatures at altitudes such as El Alto’s, which lies above 13,000 feet, have 
risen 75% faster than in lower regions over the past 20 years. “You hear people 
everywhere complaining how hot it is,” said Limber Sánchez, director of the 
not-for-profit groupCEPA <http://www.cepaoruro.org/> in high-altitude Oruro. 
“Our average temperature has risen by 2C (3.6F) in just a few years.”

Vice-President Álvaro García Linera has announced government plans to build 
“dozens and hundreds of reservoirs”. But Epsas’s new adminstrator, Humberto 
Claure, has urged caution. “This is not going to be fixed quickly,” he told a 
state television program. “It will take at least a year.”

He then announced that water would be available for three hours rather than 
the previous eight every three days, and that rationing would be extended to 
parts of El Alto.

“What can we do?” asked 24-year-old Viviana Ticona Mamani in response to the 
news. Surveying the dusty brown field behind her house, she said: “Without 
water, there is no life.”
 