
The term “loyalty in culture bill” sounds like something out of Nineteen 
Eighty-Four <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/10/1984-george-orwell>. 
However, last month, Israel’s minister for culture and sport introduced just 
that to a parliamentary committee, which responded with a mixture of rightwing 
approval and leftwing condemnation. Many of Israel’s newspapers are now happy 
to mentionMiri Regev <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miri_Regev> in the same 
breath asJoe McCarthy 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/h/herman-mccarthy.html>.

In her short time as minister, the former army brigadier-general responsible 
for the military’s media relations has been criticised for her attacks on 
artists’ freedom of speech, the latest being her proposal to give government 
funding only to art loyal toIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.

“What is happening in Israel now is fascism,” says David Tartakover 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/artsandculture/article/21806/1/david-tartakover-peace-now-and-peace-then>
, a graphic artist famous for designing politically inspired work, including 
the logo for thePeace Now campaign in 1978 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peace_Now>. He believes this is the culmination 
of a slow creep of limitations that began after the assassination of Prime 
Minister Yitzhak Rabin in 1995. Over the last year, he says, things have 
visibly worsened.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56de8fa27ef10cc7131e991a01c5ed91ec6165d9%2F0_0_5557_3664%2F5557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='What's%20happening%20is%20fascism'%3A%20artists%20respond%20to%20Israel's%20'war%20on%20culture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27What%27s%20happening%20is%20fascism%27%3A%20artists%20respond%20to%20Israel%27s%20%27war%20on%20culture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56de8fa27ef10cc7131e991a01c5ed91ec6165d9%2F0_0_5557_3664%2F5557.jpg>
 Comparisons with Joe McCarthy … Miri Regev, the minister for culture and 
sport. Photograph: Reuters 
A snapshot of what Tartakover is referring to would include Naftali Bennett, 
the minister of education,banning Dorit Rabinyan’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/novel-about-jewish-palestinian-love-affair-is-barred-from-israeli-curriculum>
 novel Borderlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/novel-about-jewish-palestinian-love-affair-is-barred-from-israeli-curriculum>
, about a relationship between a Jewish woman and Palestinian man, from school 
reading lists because it promoted “assimilation”; and the rightwing 
extra-parliamentary political group Im Tirtzu denouncing two of Israel’s most 
internationally recognised writers,Amos Oz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/feb/14/amos-oz-interview> and David 
Grossman <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-grossman>, as being 
“infiltrators inside [Israeli] culture”.

Novel about Jewish-Palestinian love affair is barred from Israeli curriculum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/novel-about-jewish-palestinian-love-affair-is-barred-from-israeli-curriculum>
While the attorney general scaled back Regev’s powers last Wednesday, only 
allowing her to retrospectively “defund” artists who had received grants, the 
bill is still symbolic of her willingness to insert her politics into the art 
world. In her short tenure, Regev has threatened to fine theatre groups who 
refuse to perform in the West Bank, and attempted to vet the army radio 
station’s playlist to ensure it included more songs by Israeli and Mizrahi 
artists.

Tartakover, who has been at the forefront of politically inspired art in 
Israel for over 40 years, sees this as “a culture war” rather than a series of 
unrelated events, one that has its origins in the “48 years of occupation of 
the territories, where there’s no democracy. Being the ruling power of two 
million Palestinians without any rights affects the whole country.”

The bill defines disloyal art as follows: “Denying the existence of the state 
of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state; incitement to racism, violence and 
terror; support for an armed struggle or terror act by a hostile country or 
terror organisation against the state of Israel; marking Independence Day as a 
day of mourning; an act of vandalism or physical degradation that dishonours 
the country’s flag or state emblem.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ffaae0a4bf5bcc19feb7851d2264aba00f755ba%2F488_916_3256_3968%2F3256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='What's%20happening%20is%20fascism'%3A%20artists%20respond%20to%20Israel's%20'war%20on%20culture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27What%27s%20happening%20is%20fascism%27%3A%20artists%20respond%20to%20Israel%27s%20%27war%20on%20culture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ffaae0a4bf5bcc19feb7851d2264aba00f755ba%2F488_916_3256_3968%2F3256.jpg>
 ‘This is a culture war’ … graphic artist David Tartakover 
Craig Dershowitz, executive director of New York-based organisation 
Artists4Israel <http://www.artists4israel.org/index2.php#/home/>, is more 
defensive. He believes that an awareness of the “various anti-Israel forces at 
play in the cultural dialogue” is crucial to understanding why the bill has 
been introduced.


Dershowitz, a street artist who leads educational tours of Israel for other 
graffiti artists, says: “I applaud a country that wrestles with so much 
adversity to have any – much more such a robust – cultural concern in 
government.” He says the international community “sometimes forgets that Israel 
is a country at war – and, at other times, forgets it is a country that exists 
outside of that war”.

He adds: “All art exists within society and, as such, is part of a social 
contract.Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> has obligations to 
society even if that obligation is to be radical, rebellious and fighting 
against social norms. In Israel, those social contracts have always been quite 
different to how we imagine them in our privileged western liberal communities.”

In this politically charged country, frequently the focus of the world’s 
attention, it can be difficult for Israeli artists to be anything but 
political. As the director of an arts-based organisation, Dershowitz regularly 
sees Israeli artists almost forced to take a political stance, either by action 
or inaction, to which he poses the question: “Do the artists feel the need to 
respond – or are they just being asked the question? When they do answer, it’s 
amplified 1,000 times more than any other artist.”

Sculptor and installation artist Sigalit Landau <http://www.sigalitlandau.com/>
, who has been keenly aware of this politicisation since her first exhibitions 
in the early 90s, says: “You are always going to be judged [in the light of 
the] conflict and your background.”

Landau, whose arts deals primarily with identity and occasionally dips into 
politically uncomfortable territory, believes the bill shows how Regev likes to 
take advantage of Israel’s politicised atmosphere in order to grab headlines: 
“There are always new things. Every week there’s a new idea.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6ad419f3a8d4e5b7e9dba3cde300406caad9d30%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='What's%20happening%20is%20fascism'%3A%20artists%20respond%20to%20Israel's%20'war%20on%20culture'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27What%27s%20happening%20is%20fascism%27%3A%20artists%20respond%20to%20Israel%27s%20%27war%20on%20culture%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fisrael-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6ad419f3a8d4e5b7e9dba3cde300406caad9d30%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘We’re talking about so little money’ … sculptor and installation artist 
Sigalit Landau at the Venice Biennale’s Israeli pavilion, 2011. Photograph: 
Barbara Zanon/Getty Images 
While Landau is uncomfortable with the symbolism of Regev’s bill, she believes 
the influence of government grants can be overstated: “We’re talking about so 
little money. Some people say, ‘Keep your money. It’s not affecting anything 
anyway. You’re talking like you’re an ATM machine.’”

However, she regrets the fact that Regev isn’t treating art “as a way to 
bridge opinions, backgrounds and differences”. She adds: “It didn’t used to be 
about agreeing on everything – culture comes out of disagreement. I think most 
people who bother living here do love this place in a way. They prove it by not 
leaving, by making art or literature, by teaching or a taking part in a debate.”

While Israel’s artists seem split on the question of whether Regev’s bill 
represents a war on free expression, or is simply to be expected in such a 
country, Landau says there is one thing she couldn’t work without: “Hope in 
Israeli culture.”
 