
The training company A4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> has been found 
guilty of racial discrimination and been ordered to pay out £50,000 in 
compensation, the Guardian has learned. Employment tribunal judges found that 
the company, paid £345m by the Department for Work and Pensions for its 
back-to-work employment services since 2010, racially discriminated against 
Rohim Ullah when it unlawfully dismissed him from its Bradford office in 2011.

Two other white managers who were facing almost identical allegations of 
failing to follow proper procedures – one of whom was also accused of 
commenting that an Iraqi customer should "fuck off back to his own country" – 
were not subject to a similar standard of investigation, tribunal judges found.

Ullah, from Yorkshire, who was "very pleased" at winning the two-year battle, 
said he was picked on by the company because of the colour of his skin."I 
believe the reason why they discriminated against me was they had to find a 
scapegoat [for failures in the office] ... and they thought, we'll get this 
black person here."

In their judgment, the tribunal said it could not understand why A4e, which is 
appealing against the ruling, chose to proceed with allegations of serious 
misconduct against only Ullah and ignored the similar allegations made against 
two white members of staff which were "swept under the carpet or treated as 
minor misconduct [issues]".

"The other managers were not even questioned regarding these allegations, but 
every comment that was made against me, they took it [their investigations] to 
the extreme limit," Ullah said.

Giving their verdict, the judges said that 40-year-old Ullah was "the subject 
of unlawful detriment in facing disciplinary proceedings leading to his 
dismissal and that he was unlawfully dismissed as an act of race 
discrimination".

In a statement, A4e said it was proud to have a diverse community of people 
within its organisation and that it had in place robust policies to protect 
their rights and to ensure that all staff were treated with dignity and respect.
 