
The start of multimillion-pound contracts for the controversial 
welfare-to-work provider A4E to take over education services in 25 prisons has 
been delayed because of the need to carry out anti-fraud checks.

The extra audit was ordered earlier this year by the Skills Funding Agency 
(SFA), which is responsible for prison education in England and Wales, after 
police began a fraud investigation into A4E and the Department for Work and 
Pensions terminated the firm's contract for mandatory work activity for the 
unemployed in the south-east.

The prison education contracts for jails in England and Wales that went to 
further education colleges began on 1 August. But the start of the A4E 
contracts for 25 prisons in London and the east of England were delayed until 1 
November while the special audit of its past work in prison education was 
carried out.

The delay has caused uncertainty among affected prison education staff who 
were told they were to transfer to the new provider from their existing 
contracts with Kensington and Chelsea college and Manchester college, but not 
the final details of what was going to happen.

The SFA said it had ordered the extra audit on all its A4E contracts after it 
had named the company as a "preferred bidder" as part of the bidding process 
with the National Offender Management Service (Noms), which runs prisons and 
probation.

The "comprehensive assurance audit" work was not completed until May and talks 
on the details of the contracts were delayed until the exercise was finished. 
The start date was put back from August until November "as a temporary 
agreement" and the existing contracts were extended in London and the east of 
England to ensure there was no disruption to prison education work.

"Through the audit work the agency carried out, the agency did not find any 
cases of fraud. Therefore it decided to proceed with the next stage of the 
procurement process in respect of London and the east of England, and to award 
contracts to A4E," the SFA said in a statement.

"As with all our providers, once contracts are signed the agency continues to 
apply its robust contract management processes, including quarterly performance 
reviews, audits and working with Noms and lead governors. This enables 
continued assurance that public funding is being used and protected 
appropriately."

The UCU, the university lecturers union, which represents prison education 
staff, said earlier this year it was difficult to see how A4E could be 
considered an appropriate provider after the DWP terminated its work programme 
contract because of "significant weaknesses in A4E's internal controls" and 
ministers' comments at the time that it was "too risky to work with A4E".

An A4E spokesman emphasised the audit had given the company a clean bill of 
health and resulted in a 0% error rate. The company said it had been involved 
in prisoner education since 2005 and had made a positive difference for 
thousands of offenders. It had overperformed against its targets for delivering 
qualifications since its current contracts began in 2009.

Ronnie Coyle, the director of operations for A4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> Justice, said the company was delighted to 
have been awarded the contracts for the east of England and London: "This will 
enable us to engage and work with more offenders to help support them into 
employment on release, and not back into custody.

"A4e has a longstanding and well-evidenced experience of providing the 
practical interventions through education and training which make a real 
difference to offenders, and â€¦ we will continue to work in collaboration with a 
range of stakeholders to achieve this."
 