
A$AP Rocky’s Red Bull Music Academy 
<http://www.redbull.com/en/music/stories/1331715530871/stream-asap-rocky-rbma-lecture-live>
 lecture in London on 8 April ended the rapper’s musical hiatus between his 
last album and the forthcoming At.Long.Last.A$AP (A.L.L.A.). The break has 
meant an absence of new material, so rumours that new music would be previewed 
at the event saw fans, media and artists descend on a hotel in King’s Cross, 
London. A$AP talked for an hour and a half about what he’s been up to, while 
the internet fixated on the jerky livestream. So what did we learn?

He’s as pretty as he says he is

In case his regular reference to being a “pretty motherfucker 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r6I2Ek_j_Xc>” has somehow passed fans by, the 
Harlem-born rapper made sure everyone knew just how good-looking he is during 
his livestream. When discussing his monikers – he’s known as both A$AP Rocky 
and Pretty Flacko – he describes the latter name as paying homage to his rap 
iconMos Def <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mos-def>, who shares the title. 
He also described its linguistic origin as being taken from the spanish word
flaco, meaning “skinny”, declaring to the room, “I’m skinny and pretty, what 
can I say?”

He keeps his friends close

As someone who spends most of his time as part of a mob, it’s no surprise that 
A$AP’s the kind of guy that enjoys having his friends close. Tonight, he hadMos 
Def/Yasiin Bey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/24/yasiin-bey-review-artist-known-as-mos-def-disappoints>
 in the front row, who jumped on stage to talk about their collaboration on the 
upcoming album. A$AP recalled his first words to Bey (“Do you like my music? Do 
you like it more thanTyler, the Creator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/09/tyler-the-creator-collaborates-with-kanye-west-on-new-album>
?”) and went on to namecheck J Cole, Kendrick Lamar and Joey Bada$$ as fellow 
artists who have influenced him. He also introduced little-known British 
collaborator Joe Fox who joined him briefly on stage to talk about his 
contribution to A.L.L.A. At this point, you could almost hear the collective 
stampede of editors rushing to feature him: if you hadn’t heard of Fox up until 
now, you will by the end of the summer.

Girls and vegetables help his creative process

Vegetables, crisps and girls are what you might find on A$AP’s studio rider, 
as the rapper noted exactly what makes a conducive working environment for him 
and his crew. While his fondness for girls isn’t exactly news (he was famously 
invited over toKathy Griffin’s hotel after he and Danny Brown 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=afwMC5IL5co> said she was hot, while in his 
documentary,SVDDXNLY <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0oqPzN6uMOA>, he says his 
favourite thing about Las Vegas is the guarantee of sex with more than one girl 
at the same time), he noted his appreciation for women’s “soft voices”, breasts 
and bums as a source of particular inspiration. He didn’t clarify what role the 
crisps played.

He likes King Krule

Pink potato chips and “cops on rollerskates” were just some of the myths about 
the UK that A$AP was trying to investigate while in Britain. Although he soon 
uncovered the disappointing truth behind the Met’s mode of transport and our 
drably hued crisps, he did at least seek some enjoyment from the Piccadilly 
Line, which he rode undercover and bewilderingly described as “awesome”. It was 
his love and knowledge of UK grime that really thrilled the audience, though, 
as he described its authenticity as what drew him to the sound. He namechecked 
Skepta, Kano, Little Simz and Tempa T, but most surprisingly was perhaps his 
co-sign of south London producerKing Krule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/24/king-krule-interview>.

He’s an innovator

 What A$AP and his mob brought to rap when his mixtape Live. Love. A$AP 
dropped in 2011, was druggy, foggy-visioned cloud rap with sharp production. In 
the months that followed, his sound became ubiquitous and inspired other 
artists to emulate it. So what does his new material sound like? He premiered 
the previously unheard track M’s, and its trappy, clipped beats soon sent the 
internet into a tailspin, confirming that the new album is going to be worth 
waiting for.
 