
A$AP Rocky is a product of his environment. His early work drew on the 
cultural diversity of New York by challenging one-dimensional rap, while his 
slick, brand-obsessed aesthetic is indebted to the street life of the city. His 
debut mixtape, Long.Live.A$AP, paved the way for a new wave of rap eccentrics 
including Flatbush Zombies, Danny Brown and Action Bronson to become accepted 
by the mainstream, but a lot has happened to New York and the artist since his 
foggy cloud rap first appeared. The political landscape has become fractured, 
thanks to rising tensions between police and the black community, and A$AP’s 
ear for production has developed, making room for grime influences, young 
producers and new experiences. Following hisRed Bull Lecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/apr/09/aap-rocky-at-the-red-bull-academy-lecture-what-we-learned-about-the-rapper>
 this week, he talks us through where he’s at.


Mos Def and Joe Fox will feature on A.L.L.A, but what else can we expect from 
this album, sonically?

It’s not so druggy – it still has that Indian substance, but it’s way more 
psychedelic now. I feel like people are gonna really feel it when they hear it; 
it’s more of an experience than an album.

Was it informed by some of the political events happening in New York over the 
last year regarding young black men and the police?

I think we already have a To Pimp a Butterfly  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/19/kendrick-lamar-to-pimp-a-butterfly-review>
album. I think that’s enough self-righteous, self-conscious black shit going 
on. I don’t really need to manifest that into my music. I’m black and I’m 
proud, but I’m more proud to be black and handsome than anything. New York is 
like it’s always been, but I think that more people are aware of the fucked-up 
shit that people do in the States, or what police do in general, but especially 
minorities in the States who don’t have money to support themselves with 
lawyers and [police] are killing kids and shit for no reason.

What was school life like for you?

I was really smart. When I utilised my brain I would get good grades, but for 
the most part I was more concerned with rap songs, bitches, money, weed and 
selling crack. Those are stupid things that distract us in the urban community 
because those are the things that we praise. We don’t know any better. Knowing 
what I know now, I don’t think I would have changed anything, because it made 
me the man I am today, so I guess some people have to go through those trials 
and tribulations.


How influential do you think you have been on a generation of rap eccentrics?

I think I have a lot to do with that. People shouldn’t be scared to be 
themselves. I get inspired by 14-year-olds, 13-year-olds, I get inspired by 
homeless people when I’m walking. Sometimes I like to ask them questions before 
I give them money. I’m like, So what you doing out here? How did you get to 
this point? I’m really curious. I don’t bait them with money, but I’m just 
curious to know what their life is like. Do you ever wonder what it’s like to 
be a billionaire? How come we never wonder what it’s like to be really, really 
poor? Nine times out of 10, that’s more of a possibility.

Last time you were here was for Culture Clash 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hbo1JLM7gl0>. You had some criticism from 
Rodigan on the night.

What was he saying?

He was saying you didn’t understand sound system culture.

I didn’t! But I was right about him being old as fuck too, right?

What’s next for you?

I finished the instrumental album a year ago. I feel like now that I’ve 
finished A.L.L.A, I should put it out first, and then the instrumental. Right 
now I’m working on the album that[the late A$AP] Yams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/18/asap-yams-dies-aged-26> started, 
and it’s amazing. Fucking amazing. He left us notes on how he wanted it to be. 
He gave us the blueprint, and we’re about to make another masterpiece.
 