
A pink carnation-coloured crushed velvet tracksuit might sound like the 
emperor's new clothes but to those who like their fashion flavoured with a side 
of hip-hop, it's actually the "it" piece of the moment. Said tracksuit is the 
centrepiece ofa collection for Topman by Danish designer Astrid Andersen 
<http://www.style.com/fashionshows/complete/F2014MEN-ASTRIDAND> and is 
currently being modelled by rapper A$AP Ferg. It hits stores on 12 June, ahead 
of the fifth London Collections: Men set of shows, where Andersen will present 
her third solo show. The only thing she will reveal about this forthcoming 
collection is that the audience can expect "something sensual".

Andersen's designs have often looked to the world of hip-hop. Her 
autumn/winter 2014 mainline collection featured crop tops, fur trims, 
oversized-logo sweat tops and variations on the luxury track pant; for Topman, 
she has produced a 17-piece collection that includes neoprene bomber jackets, 
oversized mesh vests and brushed fleece sweatpants. And A$AP Ferg's modelling 
debut is about more than a niche interest of Andersen's, it represents a 
noticeable shift in focus across the fashion industry in the last few years 
towards hip-hop.

Kanye West's debut collection for APC 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2013/07/16/kanye-west-apc-clothing-collection-fashion---sold-out-second-drop>
 speedily sold out;A$AP Rocky's backing of Hood by Air 
<http://www.gq.com/fashion-shows/blogs/fashion-week/2013/02/celeb-spotting-aap-rocky-closes-hood-by-air-fall-2013.html>
 has undoubtedly boosted the brand's profile;Pharrell Williams's T-shirt line 
for Uniqlo <http://www.uniqlo.com/uk/store/clothing/uq/ut/i_am_other/> is 
splashed across billboards. Everywhere you look, brands are hitching their 
wagons to rappers. Similarly, even when hip-hop artists aren't directly 
involved with a label, their influence can run large. Givenchy's print T-shirts 
and sweatshirts, worn by the likes of A$AP Rocky, Jay Z, Waka Flocka, Big Sean 
and Pusha T, have been a massive hit, marking out the Parisian label's Riccardo 
Tisci as one of the most influential designers in menswear.

"A lot of hip-hop icons push an agenda to care about how you dress," says 
Andersen. "They have made people care about labels in the way you would care 
about a sports team, which is amazing, because you choose your team from a very 
personal point of view." She also concedes that having the right celebrity 
endorsement – A$AP Rocky has worn her main line – can be "very powerful".

Gordon Richardson, creative director at Topman, points to the ongoing 
influence of music on fashion, particularly hip-hop. "The genre inspires a 
dress code that is unapologetic and confident in its stance, and one that 
resonates with a fashion audience big on sportswear and brand recognition," he 
says.
 In the hood … A$AP Ferg wearing Astrid Anderson for Topman. 
New York-based designer Tim Coppens 
<http://www.matchesfashion.com/mens/the-style-report/personal-style-ss14/spotlight-on-tim-coppens>
, the recent recipient of the CFDA Swarovski award for menswear, creates 
luxurious sportswear, which has proved popular with the likes of Drake, Pusha T 
and Wiz Khalifa. Coppens grew up in the 1990s, listening to the likes of Kool 
Keith and Antipop Consortium. "Hip-hop has always been a lot about style," he 
says. "Maybe not always high-end fashion but a lot of trends start in the 
street and especially now with streetwear being such an influence in high 
fashion, it's cool to see them side by side."

The second collaboration between APC and Kayne West goes on sale in July 
<http://www.style.com/fashionshows/review/F2014MEN-APC>. At a press and buyers 
event in Paris in January, West, in what was a rather humble turn, talked 
through the process behind the collection, quipping that the influential 
Central Saint Martins professor Louise Wilson (who died in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/may/20/louise-wilson>) refused him a 
place at the school. The new range has expanded on his first APC collection of 
jeans and T-shirts to include fur-trim parkas, zip-adorned sweats and 
balaclavas – the latter, naturally, ideal for hiding from the paparazzi.

APC founder Jean Touitou says the collaboration with West was born out of a 
mutual interest in each other's chosen fields. "Eventually, I succeeded making 
stuff with Kanye because he's been wandering many years around fashion, and I 
was wandering around hip-hop at its very beginning in the US," he says. Ask 
Touitou why he thinks there is such a synergy between hip-hop and fashion, and 
he offers a typically dry response: "I believe there is no synergy at all. 
There is just mutual love."
 