
It isn’t easy to pinpoint the core of A$AP Yams’ influence on contemporary 
hip-hop. In the shrouded world of the New York rap collectiveA$AP Mob 
<http://www.asapmob.com/>’s inner circle, he was cited as a gamechanger and 
innovator – past reports have pegged him as a visionary and a young man who 
exerted power in a “nebulous fashion 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/27/arts/music/asap-yams-partner-to-hip-hops-asap-rocky.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
”.

Yams, born Steven Rodriguez to a Puerto Rican father and Dominican mother, was 
neither a rapper nor a down-the-line producer in Harlem’s A$AP Mob. He was 
often credited as a main orchestrator of the rap crew’s growing success before
his unexpected death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/18/asap-yams-dies-aged-26>, aged 
26, on 18 January. And while A$AP Mob members A$AP Rocky and A$AP Ferg might 
have garnered more personal fame and recognition than Rodriguez, he spearheaded 
the Mob’s expansion as a branded business and gave uptown hip-hop a new 
identity imbued with woozy southern influences.
...... (@ASAPYams) 
pic.twitter.com/WmkmOE3xGN <http://t.co/WmkmOE3xGN>
 <https://twitter.com/ASAPYams/status/527048080211066880> October 28, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ASAPYams/status/527048080211066880> 
As early as 2006, Rodriguez was laying down the foundations that would come to 
support A$AP Mob’s growth. At 17, he had the word “A$AP” tattooed on his arm 
and joined forces with friends A$AP Bari (Jabari Shelton) and A$AP Illz 
(Illijah Ulanga) to cobble together the bare bones of the rap crew. Rodriguez 
coined the “A$AP” moniker, deciding it stood for “always strive and prosper”, 
and over the years about a dozen rappers and producers would adopt the 
stage-name prefix. With every utterance and mention, it furthered their brand.

One of the first rappers to take on the crew’s name went on to be its most 
commercially successful: Rakim “A$AP Rocky” Mayers. Rodriguez met Mayers in 
2008, and thus completed his hunt for a charismatic and talented rapper to 
kick-start the A$AP Mob’s musical output.

“Yams is the reason why Rocky is at where he’s at right now,” said Shelton, in 
a 2012interview with Complex magazine 
<http://uk.complex.com/music/2012/01/who-is-asap-mob/3>. “If it wasn’t for 
Yams, Rocky wouldn’t never be anywhere in the industry.” Between 2009 and 2011, 
Rodriguez cultivated a sound for Mayers that grafted pitched-down vocal lines 
with a rap flow that bounced from languid to the skittish nature of a typically 
Midwestern delivery. It didn’t sound like New York rap. And that helped set the 
A$AP Mob apart.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuZ2QZKYj7c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuZ2QZKYj7c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKuZ2QZKYj7c&media=>
 A$AP Rocky’s Purple Swag 
In 2010 Rodriguez started posting to his now-defunct music blog, Real Nigga 
Tumblr. It served as a vast archive of his musical obsessions and favourites, 
earning him credibility as a tastemaker. It also proved a strategic home for 
Mayers’ single Purple Swag in early 2011 – the song’s online popularity on 
Tumblr propelled it into the laps of execs at RCA and led to the Mayers’ place 
as the Mob’s first major label signing. From there, Rodriguez stepped into his 
role as co-owner of the RCA and Polo Grounds-affiliated A$AP Worldwide record 
label.

Elsewhere on the internet, Rodriguez’s frequent tweets 
<https://twitter.com/ASAPYams> showed off his absurdist and observational sense 
of humour. He often coined terms that briefly found a life online, giving rise 
to the “cozy boyz <http://four-pins.com/style/the-rise-of-the-cozy-boyz/>” 
fashion micro-trend of touting luxuriously comfortable clothes after giving it 
one throwaway mention. He was openly silly on both Twitter andTumblr 
<http://yamborghini.tumblr.com/>, his posts contrasting with his usual posed 
and deadpan facial expression in photos.

From his executive producer credits on Mayers’ Long Live A$AP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/10/asap-rocky-long-live-review> 
debut album and the Trap Lord mixtape by A$AP Ferg (Darold Ferguson, Jr) to his 
foray into fashion design for the Blackout Boyz DJ collective, Rodriguez left 
his mark on hip-hop in a matter of years. It’s certainly not the simplest path 
to trace, nor one dotted with clear signposts. But, for fans of his work, it’s 
more than enough.
 