
Investors who are willing to back risky startups on crowdfunding websites 
could be rewarded with freebies such as beer or bespoke shoes as well as the 
potential for returns.

The term crowdfunding encompasses several quite different models. Kickstarter, 
Indiegogo and similar websites are used to fund creative projects, such as 
films, art exhibitions or innovative products, but are not designed to give 
contributors a financial return on their investment. Instead they offer backers 
such rewards as a mention in the film credits, an appearance as an extra, a 
print of an artist’s work or the chance to be one of the first to own a new 
gadget.

In contrast, peer-to-peer lending websites such as Funding Circle, Rate Setter 
or Zopa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/06/peer-to-peer-lending-p2p-returns-investment>
 allow investors to achieve returns that can be as high as 7% but lenders do 
not get to choose exactly where their money is going.

For investors who want something closer to the Dragon’s Den experience, a 
third type of platform, which includes Seedrs, Crowdcube and InvestingZone, 
allows you to give financial backing to early-stage ventures in exchange for a 
stake in them. As most startups fail, this is high-risk and should be 
considered only by experienced investors or those willing to gamble a small 
amount they are prepared to lose.

You won’t make money unless the business succeeds and is bought out by another 
company and listed on the stock market, or reaches a level of profitability 
where it is able to pay dividends, all of which is likely to take time. The 
suggested investment horizon is at least five years. If a venture does not 
receive the full amount requested in the pitch, money is returned to backers 
and the investment does not go ahead.

It may be possible to resell your stake in these businesses if the company you 
invest in is listed on a platform such asAssetMatch.com <http://assetmatch.com/>
, which aims to create a market for private company shares. However, there is 
no guarantee that anybody will want to buy your share or pay as much as you 
originally invested.

Some of the businesses listed on this last type of website are offering 
freebies to further incentivise investors. Thomas Davies, chief investment 
officer at Seedrs, says it is not a good idea to base investment decisions on 
these extras, but they can be “the cherry on the cake”. He says: “One of the 
big advantages for ventures offering these incentives is that investors become 
mini-marketers as they are going to be talking about the product to their 
friends. They will be keen to do this, as they are shareholders and want the 
value of their investment to grow.”


Investors can usually back businesses with as little as £10, right up to the 
total fundraising target for each pitch. Here are five crowdfunding investments 
that come with attractive extras.

Free beer and parties: Camden Town Brewery, CrowdCube 
<https://www.crowdcube.com/investment/camden-town-brewery-17825>

Target: The company has already surpassed its target, £1,500,000 for 2.19% 
equity offered, but is continuing to accept investment.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Fa-beer-or-a-milkshake-crowdfunding-can-bring-delicious-dividends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425919678627%2F14c7c3d1-db0f-45cf-9e1f-07487f0cbf86-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20beer%20or%20a%20milkshake%3F%20Crowdfunding%20can%20bring%20delicious%20dividends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Fa-beer-or-a-milkshake-crowdfunding-can-bring-delicious-dividends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20beer%20or%20a%20milkshake%3F%20Crowdfunding%20can%20bring%20delicious%20dividends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Fa-beer-or-a-milkshake-crowdfunding-can-bring-delicious-dividends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425919678627%2F14c7c3d1-db0f-45cf-9e1f-07487f0cbf86-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jasper Cuppaidge, the owner of the Camden Town Brewery, says crowdfunding 
investors ‘become ambassadors for the products’. Photograph: Richard Saker 
Founder Jasper Cuppaidge began by making beer in the basement of his pub but 
has developed theCamden Town Brewery <http://www.camdentownbrewery.com/> to 
become one of the largest in London. The annual revenue has increased 10-fold 
from £900,000 to about £9m in just three years, he says. It is raising money in 
order to build a new brewery to meet demand and reach an international market. 
It has reached its target but is still accepting, and incentivising, investment.

Freebies start with a limited-edition, bottled Camden Hells lager plus a 5% 
discount on beer and merchandise at the bars owned by the company and at its 
online store for those who invest £100 or more. Invest £1,000 or more and you 
will get invited to twice-yearly parties where the beer is free, plus a 10% 
discount the rest of the year and an annual case of Camden Hells lager.

The amount of free beer and opportunities, special brew-day experiences and 
opportunities for private functions increase right up to those who invest 
£500,000, who are told they can “basically do whatever you want (within legal 
and moral constraints) on our premises”; every quarter they also get their own 
tank delivered by a personalised lorry (with a monogrammed engraving), as well 
as a case of beer every month.

Cuppaidge says crowdfunding “is about making some noise as much as it is 
raising money. We now have 1,500 investors, who become ambassadors for the 
products and will tell their friends and colleagues. Also, the bar to entry is 
low because the minimum sums are small, so the man who drinks in our bar on a 
Friday has the chance to invest.”

Free bespoke shoes: Upper Street, Seedrs 
<https://www.seedrs.com/startups/upper-street>

Target: £200,016 for 6.62% equity offered.
 Helena Bonham Carter is among the customers of Upper Street, which allows 
shoppers to design their own shoes by choosing the colour, materials, heel 
height and other features. 
Upper Street allows female shoppers to design their own shoes by choosing the 
colour, materials, heel height and other features. Shoes can be bought online 
or via theShoe Lounge <http://www.upperstreet.com/shoe-lounge> in Fitzrovia, 
London, at an average price of £254. Celebrity customers include Helena Bonham 
Carter and Erin O’Conor. Investors’ money will be used to market the company’s 
new website, extend the product range and cover the recent acquisition of a US 
customer database. Marketing will focus on online advertising, including 
pay-per-click ads on Google, promoted posts on Facebook and search engine 
optimisation.

Invest £100 and you will get a free tote bag and leather key-ring. Invest 
£1,000 and you will get an Upper Street gift voucher for £100. Invest £2,500 
and you get a gift voucher for £350.

Julia Elliot Brown, chief executive and co-founder of Upper Street, says: “We 
had seen freebies offered by other brands through crowdfunding and we thought 
it could work for us to encourage people on the consumer side of the market who 
are looking to invest smaller amounts. We’d love to get them wearing our shoes 
and talking about them.”

Free gourmet food or craft beer boxes: Flavourly, CrowdCube 
<https://www.crowdcube.com/investment/flavourly-18263>

Target: £300,000 for 16.67% equity offered.

Flavourly <https://www.flavourly.com/> is a foodie subscription service 
offering a choice of either an artisan food or craft beer box delivered 
monthly. The company wants to use backers’ money to help to attract a further 
10,000 customers each month by investing in marketing, operations and products.

Invest £250 and get a choice of craft beer box or gourmet food box. Invest 
£1,500 and get a three-month membership for either food or beer boxes (three 
boxes). Invest £2,500 and get six months’ membership for either box. Invest 
£10,000 and get a year’s membership for both the food and beer boxes. Invest 
£20,000 and get membership for both food and beer boxes for the duration of 
your shareholding (12 boxes per year).

Free GPS dog tracker collar: Dog Tracker Nano, Seedrs 
<https://www.seedrs.com/startups/rdtp>

Target: The company has already surpassed its target, £100,000 for 10% equity, 
and has decided to keep the fundraising open to reach up to £150,000 for 15% 
equity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Fa-beer-or-a-milkshake-crowdfunding-can-bring-delicious-dividends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425920019463%2Fa91dbc83-c56c-437d-9467-9f4f2fe0876d-680x1020.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20beer%20or%20a%20milkshake%3F%20Crowdfunding%20can%20bring%20delicious%20dividends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Fa-beer-or-a-milkshake-crowdfunding-can-bring-delicious-dividends%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20beer%20or%20a%20milkshake%3F%20Crowdfunding%20can%20bring%20delicious%20dividends&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Fa-beer-or-a-milkshake-crowdfunding-can-bring-delicious-dividends%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425920019463%2Fa91dbc83-c56c-437d-9467-9f4f2fe0876d-680x1020.png>
 The Dog Tracker Nano provides the owner with information about their canine. 
The company already sells GPS tracking collars to stop dogs from going 
missing, and is raising money to help to bring an upgraded product to market. 
TheDog Tracker Nano <http://dogtrackernano.com/> will not only monitor the 
location of the dog, but also provide the owner with information about its 
daily activity that can be used to monitor its exercise, weight and nutrition. 
This will be housed in a lightweight and waterproof casing.

Invest £250 and get a £50 discount off a Dog Tracker Nano (which will cost 
£99, plus a £6 a month subscription). Invest £500 and get a free tracker. 
Invest £1,000 or more and get a free tracker with a two-year contract, worth 
£250.

Free pizza: La Favorita Delivered, InvestingZone 
<https://www.investingzone.com/pitch/255/la-favorita-delivered>

Target: Between £200,000 for 5% equity and £400k for 10% equity.

La Favorita Delivered <http://www.lafavoritadelivered.com/> is a pizza 
delivery chain with four stores in Edinburgh, two more opening in Glasgow and 
plans eventually to reach a total of 50 shops throughout the UK. The investment 
will be used to open the two Glasgow stores and capitalise on the seasonal peak 
in December. These sites will look to repay their capital cost fully within 18 
months, including all store equipment, installation, legal services and 
introductory marketing.

Backers need to invest a minimum of £100, unlike the other examples here, in 
which investments start at £10. In return, they will receive vouchers worth 10% 
of their investment for use in any of the branches.

Free milkshake: Mr. Sherick’s, CrowdCube 
<https://www.crowdcube.com/investment/mr-shericks-shakes-17348>

Target: £250,000 for 16.97% equity. 

The company <http://www.mrshericksshakes.co.uk/> makes luxury bottled 
milkshakes in flavours such as banoffee and strawberry pavlova (two separate 
flavours). It is founded by former Marks & Spencer food buyer Andrew Sherick 
and is looking to raise money for promotional activity, increasing capacity and 
buying a delivery van.

Invest £100 and get an invitation to a cocktail and shakes party, where you 
will receive a coolbag full of the products. Invest £15,000 and you can design 
your own milkshake recipe and packaging with the company’s chefs as well as 
entry to the party and goodies.
 