
Devotees of brutalist architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/apr/08/brutal-utopia-modern-heritage-london-architecture-brutalism>
 are likely to be disappointed by the news that the tower blocks ofThamesmead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gallery/2008/may/14/communities> in 
south-east London – the buildings that provided the dystopianbackdrop to the 
film of A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/mar/13/artsfeatures2> – are due a 
£1.5bn facelift 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/clockwork-orange-estate-in-thamesmead-to-be-given-15bn-regeneration-a3248721.html>
. Brutalism was once much maligned, but there’s been a resurgence of interest, 
in part inspired by the film adaptation of JG Ballard’s novelHigh-Rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/20/high-rise-review-ben-wheatley-jg-ballard-tom-hiddleston>
, in which an apocalyptic tower block bears witness to the breakdown of the 
society imprisoned and isolated within it.

Utopia now: the heritage of London's brutalist architecture – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/apr/08/brutal-utopia-modern-heritage-london-architecture-brutalism>
I always laugh when I hear middle-class people – and it so often is 
middle-class people – fervently defending brutalism. When they wax lyrical 
about the sparse beauty of, say, theTrellick Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/mar/11/features11.g28>, you can’t 
help but think: “That’s all very well, but you didn’t have to live in it.” It’s 
like yuppies queuing for a cafe that specialises infree school meals 
<https://www.gov.uk/apply-free-school-meals>. (There’s already a bar called Job 
Centre in Deptford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/09/job-centre-bar-gentrification-ironically-deptford>
 and a cocktail lounge in an old prison).

In the 1960s and 70s, brutalist estates were portrayed as modernist paradises 
alive with opportunity, concrete utopias that would liberate working-class 
families from the Victorian slums (where houses can now go for a few million a 
pop). In fact, they illustrated how grim architecture can exacerbate social 
problems.

The lifts broke down, the stairwells were awash with urine, there was poor 
lighting and scant green or communal space. A visitor to theHolly Street estate 
<http://www.lovelondoncouncilhousing.com/2010/11/holly-street-estate-past-and-present.html>
 in east London, quoted byDominic Sandbrook in State of Emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/sep/26/state-of-emergency-dominic-sandbrook>
, wrote of “dark passages, blind alleys, gloomy staircases”, corridors that 
were a “thieves’ highway” and people who would “stick to the lit areas and walk 
hurriedly”. No kind of paradise, in other words, and hardly embodying the 
social progressivism claimed by postwar city planners.

Another challenge is making your way around. Every time I visit the Barbican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/feb/22/building-the-brutal-barbican-peter-bloomfield>
 in central London, I seem to find myself high up on some infernal “skywalk” as 
I look down despairingly at the part of the building in which I need to be, 
with absolutely no clue how I will ever get there. Call me old-fashioned, but I 
prefer the kind of building where you simply walk through the door and you’re 
in there.

Play it again, Madeleine


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fbrutal-way-to-live-truth-about-tower-blocks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78996ca7aff7dbff69021fd3f923eee15d088e38%2F0_0_1899_2373%2F1899.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20brutal%20way%C2%A0to%20live%3A%20the%20truth%20about%20tower%20blocks%20%7C%20Rhiannon%20Lucy%20Cosslett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fbrutal-way-to-live-truth-about-tower-blocks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20brutal%20way%C2%A0to%20live%3A%20the%20truth%20about%20tower%20blocks%20%7C%20Rhiannon%20Lucy%20Cosslett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fbrutal-way-to-live-truth-about-tower-blocks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78996ca7aff7dbff69021fd3f923eee15d088e38%2F0_0_1899_2373%2F1899.jpg>
 Madeleine LeBeau as Yvonne in Casablanca. Photograph: 
Allstar/Warner/Sportsphoto/Allstar 
The French actor Madeleine LeBeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/madeleine-lebeau-obituary>, who 
has died aged 92, was the last surviving cast member of the film Casablanca. 
Her own experience fleeing Nazi persecution no doubt informed her performance. 
Casablanca is one of my all-time favourite films, a classic that can be watched 
again and again and far from simply being a love story, has a script sizzling 
with wit and subversion. It’s often overlooked how funny and political it is.

As an American, Rick is teased for his dogged isolationism (“I stick my neck 
out for nobody”). Meanwhile, the Italian fascist commander trots after the 
German Major Strasser like an irrelevant poodle, and there is much mockery of 
the Nazis (“Carl, see that Major Strasser gets a good table, one close to the 
ladies” … “I have already given him the best, knowing he is German and would 
take it anyway”). As Rick’s lover Yvonne, LeBeau’s performance was both tender 
and comic. They really don’t make them like they used to.

A load of wrap 



A class action lawsuit against Ryanair 
<https://casehub.com/cases/ryanair-class-action-passenger-fees> claims the 
airline’s many “hidden charges 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/passengers-take-ryanair-to-court-over-hidden-fees-d720mn8gt>
” are illegal. Not before time – £160 to change a name on a ticket is 
preposterous, but perhaps most infuriating was forcing passengers to pay £70 to 
print out boarding passes. This has now been lowered to £15, but anyone who has 
had to pay through the nose for a reprinted barcode will no doubt rejoice at 
the case.

It is, along with BA’s decision to stop providing not so savoury complimentary 
snacks 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/travel/news-and-advice/ba-to-start-charging-for-food-on-short-haul-economy-flights-a7030791.html>
 on short-haul flights (probably for the good of customers – I had a chicken 
wrap on a flight to Lisbon that was a brazen insult to the category of food), 
an encouraging development.
 