
Even though it was made in long-ago 1971, there is still something almost 
fetishistically futuristic about A Clockwork Orange. Perhaps that is owed to 
the exuberant and indelible production design, its characters' peculiar teenage 
argot ("Nadsat") or its electrified, classical score by transsexual composer 
Walter (later Wendy) Carlos – or perhaps simply because the early 70s were 
crazier – in hyper-stylised design and fashion – than any period since. Either 
way,A Clockwork Orange <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> 
endures, not so much for its philosophical musings on the nature of free will 
in the face of good and evil, but because it is simply a triumph of style from 
its opening sequence in the Korova Milk Bar through its cartoony violence and 
horrible retribution, all the way to its bizarre final shot of Alex (Malcolm 
McDowell in a role that has dogged him for 40 years) having wild sex before an 
audience of voyeurs clad in Louis XIV courtier finery as he crows: "I was cured 
all right!"

Kubrick thought of every detail in the costuming (the droogs' white thug 
outfits, with their crotch-emphatic outer jockstraps and bowler hats, not to 
mention Alex's false eyelashes), furniture, decor and art (the giant plaster 
penis that Alex uses as a murder weapon) – giving them as much attention as he 
had to the dashboards of his bomber in Dr Strangelove, the spaceships in 2001, 
or the painterly compositions in Barry Lyndon.

Within the universe he created, he let loose a cast of characters closer to 
grotesque gargoyle status than anything in the rest of Kubrick's body of work, 
and it is here that Kubrick first deploys his tactic of starting close-up on a 
face and pulling back drastically to show its environs (by the time of The 
Shining, most of his camera movements tracked maniacally forwards, not sombrely 
backwards).

These days we have cause to wonder what all the fuss over the violence in the 
movie was about. It seems so tame now (and probably did even then, 
alongside, say, Straw Dogs). Evidently the copycat aspect of the audience 
response – certain violent crimes were rumoured to have been inspired by the 
film – was real enough for Kubrick, who made the movie unavailable in his 
adopted homeland for the rest of his life. More's the pity, because it's a 
crucial British film of its period, and a key to our larger understanding of 
Kubrick himself.
 