
During a symposium on the role of social work in the context of political 
conflict earlier this year, one of the participants highlighted the historical 
contradiction confronting social work. The participant, who leads on an 
activist project supporting refugees in the UK, stood up and said: “Of course 
our campaigning work has been supported by social workers. We have many 
volunteers and activists who are social workers by trade. However, they 
contribute to our work mainly during evenings and weekends, outside their 
formal social work professional activity.”

The dichotomy between the social worker as a nine-to-five state agent and 
five-nine activist is a crucial one. The question can be summarised as: is 
there space, willingness and scope within social work to engage with broader 
structural issues that affect the lives of the people we work with?

The role of social work in the refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/15/social-work-refugee-crisis>
Radical social work addresses this by reminding us that meaningful practice 
should always incorporate elements of political action. Social workers need to 
appreciate the public causes of private pain and misery.

Despite recent deviations and misinterpretations of the term, a radical 
concept historically refers to a political theory and practice that aims to 
understand the root causes of social problems. While appreciation of these 
causes and alleviation of their detrimental effects on people’s lives are 
important dimensions of radical social work, what really differentiates it from 
mainstream approaches is its emphasis on action that aims at social change.

In the realm of social welfare it is not uncommon for state policies to 
promote exactly opposite values, ignore the structural causes of service users’ 
hardships and even blame the victims. Approaches that artificially separate 
context from practice have been surprisingly persistent in social work. In 
2014, then government adviser Martin Nareyendorsed comments 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10634209/Social-workers-training-too-focused-on-theory-rather-than-working-with-children.html>
 suggesting that “the concentration on non-oppressive practice [happens] at the 
expense of understanding practicalities about the job”. This is not dissimilar 
to the claims of the Charity Organisation Society, which in the 19th century 
insisted on portraying poverty as an issue exclusively linked to people’s 
feeble and manipulative personalities. In both cases, social workers are asked 
to get on with the job, focus on the technical aspects of their practice and, 
above all, stop asking inconvenient questions.

But social workers cannot and should not ignore the overwhelming body of 
evidence that shows inequality and poverty as the root cause and underlying 
factor affecting the lives of most service users. ResearchersPickett and 
Wilkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/09/society-unequal-the-spirit-level>
 have confirmed beyond doubt what generations of social workers have witnessed 
first hand: it is the material circumstances that primarily shape people’s 
lives, not their morality. If we ignore inequality and poverty then our 
practice would be reduced to the futile function of a social aspirin. 
Appreciation of this formidable body of evidence shapes the knowledge base of 
radical social work.

Radical and critical social work has existed since the start of the 
profession. From thesettlement movement 
<http://www.socialwelfarehistory.com/settlement-houses/origins-of-the-settlement-house-movement/>
, to the feminist and anti-racist social approaches of the 1970s and the more 
recentSocial Work Action Network <http://www.socialworkfuture.org/>, radical 
social workers have contributed to the development of inclusive and genuinely 
anti-oppressive practices in social work. These influences can be found not 
only in current curricula, projects and ethical statements but also in the
global definition of social work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/jul/07/what-is-social-work>
 that suggests: “Social work promotes social change and the empowerment and 
liberation of people.”

The most influential examples of radical social work come from Latin America 
where social workers have been using service-user empowerment through
consientisation 
<http://www.academia.edu/8376181/Conscientization_and_the_Ontology_of_Personhood_in_Latin_American_Liberation_Psychology>
 for several years. These techniques give primacy to the material circumstances 
affecting people’s lives as well as the psychological effects of oppression. 
The recent wave of austerity also helped give rise to a more radical 
reconceptualisation of social work in southern Europe. In Greece,social workers 
used their skills and experiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/19/social-work-in-greece-i-havent-been-paid-for-nine-months>
 to speak truth to power; they documented the catastrophic impact of austerity 
on the lives of service users and through actions of civil disobedience they 
refused to implement punitive policies. The most notable recent example of 
combining social action with social work comes from Spain whereaward-winning 
social workers helped develop the orange tide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/jul/12/spanish-social-work-leader-wins-award-for-inspirational-anti-cuts-movement>
; a diverse movement that focuses on defending social services, challenging 
neoliberal narratives and shaping grassroots alliances with services users, 
ensuring that no one goes through the crisis isolated and demoralised. Their 
iconic orange t-shirts epitomise the character of their action: “Say No to 
Cuts. Don’t Shut Up!”

Volunteering in Greece showed me how vital social work is in this refugee 
crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/mar/09/volunteering-greece-europe-vital-social-work-refugee-crisis>
What connects these diverse but creative radical social work interventions is 
an emphasis on the structural causes of private hardships. Radical social work 
is a broad approach that connects theory and practice. It is an important 
analytical tool which helps us work on present situations, while retaining a 
focus on the structural issues that affect our cases. In this sense, radical 
social workers borrow various methodological techniques such us group work, 
arts-based interventions, advocacy, awareness raising and social action. In 
radical social work the use of diverse, creative skills is a means to an end, 
not an end in itself. The objective is to use our social work skills and 
knowledge in order to support the victims of an unequal system but also create 
the conditions that will lead to the creation of a socially just society.

New radicalism in social work has been based on five main pillars: democracy, 
empathy, militancy, anti-oppressiveness and structural practice. These pillars 
form the acronym Demos, a powerful concept which refers to “the populace of a 
democracy as a political unit”. Contrary to dominant social work narratives 
which claim that social workers’ legitimacy stems from their identity as 
creatures of the statute, radical social work has earned its recognition 
through an ability to grasp and utilise the transformative political power of 
the people we work with.

 * Take a look at our quick guides to attachment theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/15/attachment-theory-social-work-child-protection>
 andmotivational interviewing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/08/motivational-interviewing-quick-guide-social-work>
Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.

 