
As A-ha prepare for their final concerts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/16/a-ha-to-split>, the Oslo band 
are investing in a new generation of Norwegian musicians, giving away millions 
of kroner as part of a talent grant. Acts including Casiokids and Hanne 
Hukkelberg have been competing to win opening spots on A-ha's farewell tour.

The A-ha talent grant is like the Mercury prize or Arts Council funding, 
except that, er, it's financed, administered and partly judged by the people 
who made Take On Me. The trio have invested €500,000 (£413,000) of their own 
money to create four awards, allocated to Norway's east, west, north and south, 
respectively.A-ha <https://www.theguardian.com/music/a-ha> chose eight 
finalists from about 50 candidates, and these finalists will compete at events 
across the country.

Two of these finals have already taken place (via Drowned in Sound 
<http://drownedinsound.com/news/4140440-norwegian-bands-compete-for-an-awful-lot-of-a-has-money>
), with another scheduled for tonight. On 18 June, jazz-metal act Shining 
defeated singer-songwriter Hanne Hukkelberg, while chanteuse Susanne Sundfør 
ripped the circuitry out of Pink Robots on 30 June. This evening, folk acts 
Moddi and Adjagas face off in Trondheim, and another duel takes place on 14 
July in Bergen. In each case, the winners will be chosen by popular vote – and 
receive 1m kroner in prize money.

How much is 1m kroner? It's about £100,000. In other words, A-ha are giving 
each of four bands a grant worth twice that of literature's most famous award, 
the Man Booker prize. It is, as far as we can tell, one of the biggest arts 
prizes in the world.

"We have had a fantastic career with lots of people supporting us, and this is 
a way for us to give something back," explained A-ha's Magne Furuholmen.
 