Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5v6ihMmxcoE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5v6ihMmxcoE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5v6ihMmxcoE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This week, guest editors Bloc Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blocparty> - no slackers in the innovative 
video stakes themselves, it must be said - have chosen a true classic for our 
delectation.

"This is the first video I ever remember from when I was little," says 
guitarist Russell Lissack. "Watching it on my sister's black and white TV, and 
its still one of the best ever. Apart from sentimental value and, of course, 
the amazing song itself, it's also a great video."

And what might they be talking about? Why, it's Take On Me! But which version 
do they mean? Well let's face it, it's probably the 1985 a-ha version.

The video named as the third best of all time by MTV. It's a seminal classic 
(seminal in the sense of fluid, manly and full of spunk) in which we find a 
girl reading a comic about motorcycle racing ....

... in a busy cafe, when all of a sudden, after staring intently at the 
handsome hero in the comic, a sketchy hand reaches out and grabs hers, pulling 
her into the comic.

And the real girl gets caught up in the world inside the comic, becoming 
romantically involved with the rugged hero.

Wait ... That's the version they mean, right? Because it's certainly not the 
only one. The thing about creating a classic song and a video that everyone 
fixes in their memory as a part of their pop-culture history is that people 
will be covering that song and referencing that video until the second coming.

And when the second coming comes, it'll probably come in illustrated form at 
first, soundtracked by bouncy synth and implausibly high notes, because 
everyone will feel much more familiar and comfortable with the apocalypse that 
way. THAT'S how iconic this video is.

Unless they're not talking about this video. They could be talking about the 
original video for the song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j1GTf1T4_7Y> on its 
first release in 1984.

With a split screen displaying electric keyboard and slap bass, or, as seen 
above, showcasing the eminently likable Morten Harket and some bird in a 
leotard doing cartwheels. Apologies for the quality of that. Actually, why am I 
apologising for the 80s? It's not my fault that someone thought leotards were 
perfectly acceptable outerwear.
I am sorry it's a fuzzy picture, though.

Even less likely, they might be referring to the version by some no-mark band 
called Reel Big Fish in acover version 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GqlzVeq1S0o> made esspecially for the movie 
BASEketball <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0131857/>.

Although there's no animation there, so it's possible he's thinking of that 
memorable cover byVision Divine <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUBpTpsjwsk> (an
Italian progressive metal band <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vision_Divine> 
that sound like Satan with constipation but look like Boyzone) who at least 
have animated virtual reality as part of the video for their cover version.

And they almost certainly weren't talking about the Jonas Brothers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SgMeFJBJCYU> version (as seen on Dancing with 
the Stars (aka Strictly Come Dancing US).

Because there is no official video for that version. Also, if that counts 
among their first memories, they have bigger problems than a bad case of a-ha 
nostalgia, because that only happened last year.

And I know they weren't talking about the version to be found only on YouTube 
wherea guy named Gerry (Jerry) plays the whole damned thing using only 
farty-palm noises <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kwxvOKuLUQ0>.

But gosh darn it, they SHOULD be.

No, I feel sure that we're supposed to be talking about the famous, instantly 
recognisable 1985 version with the London Cafe and the comic, sadly. Which we 
really shan't bother going into in great depth, as we might as well just point 
you towardthe literal version <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8HE9OQ4FnkQ> 
apparently by some gentleman called Dustin McLean that's been doing the rounds 
lately, because it's comedy genius, and we shall not seek to try and surpass it.

And if you haven't watched it, you should already - but just in case you've 
never seen the video and were relying on me, Anna Pickard, video EXPERT, for a 
reliable summary of what you have been missing all these years (I pity you); 
then for you I will finish what I started.

Back in the cafe, the grumpy waitress finds the comic on an empty table, 
thinks the girl has run off without paying, balls up her reading matter and 
throws it in the bin, angrily - unwittingly trapping our hero and heroine 
inside the comic.

[infographics courtesy of the PotP expert graphics department]

Inside the comic, trapped inside a maze of crumpled frames, the couple are 
threatened by two beefy motorcyclists brandishing a wrench. Manly Morten helps 
the hapless heroine escape through a hole in the paper.

Suddenly, she reappears back in the cafe, lying next to the bin behind the 
counter covered in ink, much to the surprise of the grumpy waitress. She picks 
up the crumpled comic and flees, taking the paper back to her house, where she 
tries to decrumple the pages and save the boy. She does.

He appears in real life sweaty and 3D, and everyone ends up happily ever after 
(we assume).

As Bloc Party's video spokesman says: "It feels almost like a film due to the 
storyline, even though its only a few minutes long, and the animation/live 
action crossover is even better than ... er ... Who Framed Roger Rabbit?"

Well, quite. And also ... OOH! HEY! Look! The farty-hand bloke does The Final 
Countdown <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jvn8wsIrHag> by Europe, too! 

Sorry, if I had a point I've forgotten it. Farty-hands, though. Brilliant. 
Thank you for that, Bloc Party.
 