
Morten Harket, singer 

I had always wanted to make music on a big scale, but never knew how it was 
going happen – until I saw a band in Oslo called Bridges. I was stunned. They 
had everything. The only thing they didn’t have was me. I knew I needed to 
join, not for my own sake, but for the band’s. I knew I was a necessary 
ingredient.

We had to leave Norway and go where it was all happening, which was London. We 
loved it there, but it was hard. We had no money – we were literally starving. 
It started to get ugly. Paying for food wasn’t an option. I remember nearly 
fainting in the street. It was affecting my mental state. We sent a guy called 
Terry Slater a couple of demos, using the last of our money. And then things 
turned. He landed us a deal with Warners and said just keep coming up with 
songs, because when success hits you, you won’t even know your name.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdjV11Xbc914&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdjV11Xbc914>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdjV11Xbc914&media=>
We’d already written Take on Me but hadn’t recorded it. Paul [Waaktaar-Savoy, 
guitarist] had first played it to me in his parents’ house, down in the 
basement. He had a crappy old nylon-stringed guitar with hippy paintings on it 
and he strummed the chords with Magne [Furuholmen] playing the riff on piano. 
The moment I heard it, I knew it was the one that would break the whole thing 
open.

It was only a riff, though. We wrote the rest together. It reminded me of an 
advert for chewing gum that went: “Juicy Fruit is a packet full of sunshine.” 
That influenced the verse melody. Paul had the idea of really using my vocal 
range in the chorus, having notes rising in octaves like Strauss’sAlso Sprach 
Zarathustra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3rzDXNQxjHs>. As for hitting that 
last high note, you either have wings or you don’t – the voice is not in the 
throat, it’s in the blood. It’s what you envisage, what you believe. People 
think the chorus is the hard part in Take on Me, but they’re wrong. The hard 
part was making the verses bounce.

It was released three times and kept flopping. Things weren’t well managed in 
the early days. But Jeff Ayeroff at Warners liked it and put up the team for 
the video, which was what got things really moving. It was a steady climb, 
getting to No 2 in the UK and No 1 in America in 1985. It was what we’d been 
waiting for and expecting to happen. It was meant to be. Since then, the song 
and video have been played to death around the world. It has its own career. It 
lives its own life.

Michael Patterson, animator of the music video 


I’d made a short film called Commuter <https://vimeo.com/75682934> that 
pioneered the pencil-sketch animation style I later used in the Take on Me 
video. I was experimenting with how to create a fleeting impression. If you 
look at a Turner painting, you can see into it: the style might be 
impressionist but you can still see the reality. I wanted to do animation that 
had that quality.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-ha-how-we-made-take-on-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442300072562%2Feb044733-e8e9-4b07-9987-54038ee9fc3b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-ha%3A%20how%20we%20made%20Take%20on%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-ha-how-we-made-take-on-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-ha%3A%20how%20we%20made%20Take%20on%20Me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-ha-how-we-made-take-on-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442300072562%2Feb044733-e8e9-4b07-9987-54038ee9fc3b-1020x612.jpeg>
 On the set of the Take on Me video. Photograph: Michael Patterson 
Me and my partner Candace got a call from our distributor. “This man in 
Hollywood wants a free copy of Commuter,” he said. “I told him to go to hell, 
but if you want to call him, here’s his number.” I wrote it down on a scrap of 
paper and put it in my wallet. Ten months later, we were in LA and running out 
of money, so I called the number and the guy said: “Hey, are you interested in 
doing a music video?”

Next we met Jeff Ayeroff at Warners, the Diaghilev of music videos. He had a 
doormat outside his office saying: “Master of the Universe.” He said: “I have 
this idea – a comic-book character comes to life and falls in love with a 
girl.” For 16 weeks, all we did was sleep and work on the video, me in the 
living room, Candace in the kitchen. We made around 2,000 drawings.

Nobody had ever seen anything like it. We watched many people rip it off, year 
after year. We once stopped to fill up the car – and the attendant was sitting 
there drawing animation frames. I said: “What are you doing?” He said: “Oh, 
we’re copying this guy’s work – you know, theA-ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/a-ha> video?”

• The 30th anniversary edition of the album Hunting High and Low is out on 18 
September.
 