
Should art ever be made from human skin? It used to be serial killers like Ed 
Gein <https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_Gein>, the real life model for Alfred 
Hitchcock’s Norman Bates, who made themselves skin trophies. Today, there are 
more legitimate ways of getting hold of human skin to make art. Instead of 
murdering and skinning people, you can grow an epidermis in a lab. But is the 
resulting art any less creepy?

In this year’s Central St Martins degree show, Tina Gorjanc is showcasing a 
proposal to create handbags and other designer accessories from the skin of the 
celebrated couture designerAlexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>, who died in 2010. 
Gorjanc has filed a patent for the method that would grow cell cultures from 
his DNA, extract skin cells, and tan the resulting remake of McQueen’s skin 
into leather for luxury goods.

Wow. And yet this is not the first attempt to grow celebrity flesh in the name 
of art. Italian artist Diemut Strebe has already regrowna living “clone” 
<http://www.wired.com/2014/06/heres-a-living-clone-of-van-goghs-ear/> of Van 
Gogh’s ear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jul/12/vincent-van-gogh-truth-about-ear-exhibition-on-verge-of-insanity-amsterdam>
 with DNA obtained from a member of the Van Gogh family.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Falexander-mcqueen-human-skin-handbag-tina-gorjanc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57a724cf3f90674de20735f6726d136f6e98d4c8%2F0_91_2126_2657%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20skin%20handbag%20is%20not%20fashion%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20a%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Falexander-mcqueen-human-skin-handbag-tina-gorjanc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20skin%20handbag%20is%20not%20fashion%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20a%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Falexander-mcqueen-human-skin-handbag-tina-gorjanc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57a724cf3f90674de20735f6726d136f6e98d4c8%2F0_91_2126_2657%2F2126.jpg>
 Tina Gorjanc’s patent application and ‘skin’ swatches. Photograph: Tom Mannion 
Scientists who have commented on Gorjanc’s idea say it is theoretically 
possible – although it would be difficult to produce enough McQueen skin to 
make a full accessories line. Are we entering the era of cloned celebrity art 
and sculptures, not to mention clothes, made with people’s skin? And if so, 
what are the ethics of this?

Way back in the 1990s, art already seemed poised to enter the realm of the 
dead. After Damien Hirst won the 1995 Turner prize for his vitrines containing
the bisected bodies of a mother cow and her calf 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hirst-mother-and-child-divided-t12751>, 
where could he go next? Was he about to put a human body on view? In the event, 
he never stepped over that line. He just sank more animals into tanks of 
formaldehyde inever sillier ways <http://www.damienhirst.com/the-dream>. 
Instead it was Gunther von Hagens, inventor of “plastination”, who got people 
queuing up to seedead people posed as sculptures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/mar/19/arts.highereducation>, their 
anatomies eerily revealed.

The idea of making art with human bodies disturbs me – with its self-evident 
degradation of our respect for each other. Of course, there’s a long history of 
anatomical science toeing that fine line. Old science collections are full of 
such gothic delights as preserved human arteries and flayed bodies. Some 
Catholic churches preserve pickled body parts of saints. But art, since the 
Renaissance, has been about the worship of the human.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Falexander-mcqueen-human-skin-handbag-tina-gorjanc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5727086de1628de3eba180a6546d657cc258ee65%2F0_0_3168_3960%2F3168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20skin%20handbag%20is%20not%20fashion%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20a%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Falexander-mcqueen-human-skin-handbag-tina-gorjanc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20skin%20handbag%20is%20not%20fashion%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20a%20crime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Falexander-mcqueen-human-skin-handbag-tina-gorjanc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5727086de1628de3eba180a6546d657cc258ee65%2F0_0_3168_3960%2F3168.jpg>
 ‘Tattooed jacket’ by Tina Gorjanc. Photograph: Tina Gorjanc 
As the physicist Richard Feynman once observed: “The artists of the 
Renaissance said that man’s first concern should be for man.” Leonardo da Vinci 
carried out some of the greatest scientific dissections in history, but never 
dreamt of exhibiting those bodies. Instead, he drew his discoverieswith a 
tender precision 
<http://www.leonardodavinci.net/anatomical-studies-of-the-shoulder.jsp> that is 
both scientifically informative and compassionate. Rembrandt, too, paintedthe 
interior of the human body 
<https://www.mauritshuis.nl/en/explore/the-collection/artworks/the-anatomy-lesson-of-dr-nicolaes-tulp-146/>
 exposed by anatomy – with profound compassion.

It is natural for artists to be fascinated by the human body because that’s 
where we live – in this fleshy machine. Yet Leonardo and Rembrandt offer 
imaginative, and above all humane, visions of our bodily existence.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> is drawn to the flesh but 
does not possess it. That’s why Hirst never did pickle his granny. A shark in a 
tank is an image, but a human body in a tank is a crime, or should be, even if 
it has been grown in a lab.

I suspect Tina Gorjanc knows this. Her proposal to grow McQueen’s skin and 
make it into leather sounds like, you know, a joke. A joke about fashion and 
the macabre.

Still, she really has taken out a patent. We live on the edge of science 
fiction. Who knows, in 10 years’ time there may be skin art everywhere. Instead 
of Titian’s painting of theFlaying of Marsyas 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Punishment_of_Marsyas#/media/File%3ATitian_-_The_Flaying_of_Marsyas.jpg>
, imagine vast abstract works made from human skin. Old man Hirst will be 
grumping about it, saying it isn’t right. And every oligarch in Russia will be 
waiting to get his skin on the wall.
 