
Forget domestic noir and put down all those books with “Girl” in the title. 
Crime fiction is turning back the clock to its golden age with a host of books 
that pay homage to the genre’s grande dame,Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie>, either intentionally or in 
spirit.

Last week saw the publication of Closed Casket, Sophie Hannah’s second Hercule 
Poirot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/05/poirot-returns-exclusive-extract-from-closed-casket-by-sophie-hannah>
 book, which “continues” the great sleuth’s life of solving crimes. The book 
has been published to coincide with what would have been the author’s birthday 
and to commemorate100 years since she wrote her first published novel 
<http://www.agathachristiefestival.com/>.

In October Hodder & Stoughton will bring out chatshow host Graham Norton’s 
first novel,Holding, described as a story of “love, secrets and loss” centring 
around a crime in a small village in Ireland. In May, Bloomsbury publishes Plum 
Sykes’sParty Girls Die In Pearls, the first of a new crime series billed as 
“Agatha Christie meetsClueless”, and Orion has just announced a deal with 
bonkbuster queen Tilly Bagshawe to write a new “cosy” crime series as MB Shaw. 
Meanwhile, reprints of 30s and 40s crime classics are continuing to sell well 
and HarperCollins has just commissioned writer and theatre-maker Stella Duffy 
to complete an unfinished novel by New Zealand crime writer Ngaio Marsh, set 
during the second world war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcrime-fiction-new-generation-golden-age-agatha-christie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3c2e754e92477031338ada955652a0dfc139692%2F239_108_1539_1924%2F1539.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20hundred%20years%20on%20from%20Agatha%20Christie%E2%80%99s%20first%20novel%2C%20crime%20fiction%20is%20going%20cosy%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcrime-fiction-new-generation-golden-age-agatha-christie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20hundred%20years%20on%20from%20Agatha%20Christie%E2%80%99s%20first%20novel%2C%20crime%20fiction%20is%20going%20cosy%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcrime-fiction-new-generation-golden-age-agatha-christie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3c2e754e92477031338ada955652a0dfc139692%2F239_108_1539_1924%2F1539.jpg>
 Chatshow host Graham Norton’s debut crime novel, Holding, comes out in October.
So why does crime’s golden era continue to exert such a pull? Hannah says it’s 
largely down to our desire to be entertained.

“I think the resurgence in the popularity of golden age crime fiction is 
partly down to the fact that we do, at some level, like to have that 
satisfaction of having a story told to us in a very overtly story-like way,” 
she says. “Inherent in golden age crime writing is the message: ‘This is a 
great story and you will have fun reading it’.”

It also helps that Christie was a genius, she says. “She really, really put 
the story above everything else … you’re so gripped by the mystery that you 
never guess what’s coming and are always pleasantly shocked by the ending.”

Bagshawe, whose new series about amateur sleuth and portrait painter Iris Grey 
was inspired by Christie, agrees. “I came up with the idea for this series 
because a whole bunch of publishers were asking me to write a sexy 
psychological thriller and I practically passed out with boredom,” she says. 
“Soon after that I re-read Agatha Christie’s Miss Marple short stories and was 
really struck by how beautifully drawn the character is. It’s a wonderful 
character study of a woman who is constantly underestimated because of her age 
and her gender.”

She was keen to differentiate her heroine from all the troubled “Girls” 
dominating crime fiction. “I really wanted to write a series about a woman who 
was in her 40s, who didn’t have an addiction or an unhappy marriage or a messy 
life, who wasn’t unreliable. She’s just a woman in her 40s who’s good at 
noticing things. That’s her tic.”

David Brawn, estates publisher at HarperCollins, says that the resurgence of 
interest in the golden age is largely driven by practical concerns. “One of the 
main reasons behind the sudden popularity of crime from this period is that 
modern publishing and new technology allows for shorter runs in printing, which 
means that we can now mine backlists that would previously have been 
unprofitable,” he says. “We’ve had a lot of success with theDetective Story 
Club imprint <http://www.booksmonthly.co.uk/codeclub.html>, which tries to 
bring some of the best less well-known writers of the Christie era to public 
attention.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcrime-fiction-new-generation-golden-age-agatha-christie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddfaf690ac947c4e9929b898288dccec409d5108%2F0_0_2012_2514%2F2012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20hundred%20years%20on%20from%20Agatha%20Christie%E2%80%99s%20first%20novel%2C%20crime%20fiction%20is%20going%20cosy%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcrime-fiction-new-generation-golden-age-agatha-christie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20hundred%20years%20on%20from%20Agatha%20Christie%E2%80%99s%20first%20novel%2C%20crime%20fiction%20is%20going%20cosy%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fcrime-fiction-new-generation-golden-age-agatha-christie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddfaf690ac947c4e9929b898288dccec409d5108%2F0_0_2012_2514%2F2012.jpg>
 Queen of crime-writing Agatha Christie is providing inspiration for a new wave 
of whodunnits. Photograph: Bentley Archive/Popperfoto/Getty Images 
There’s also a growing appetite at publishing houses for books by modern 
authors who can put their own spin on the golden age genre.

Alexandra Pringle, editor-in-chief at Bloomsbury, says that it bought Sykes’s 
series – which follows two undergraduates, one British and one a more worldly 
American, as they solve crimes in 1980s Oxford – because “it felt as if Dorothy 
Parker or Nancy Mitford were to try their hand at an Agatha Christie … 
subversive, wickedly funny and modern”.

Sykes herself says she’s a huge Christie fan who wanted “to take what I know I 
can do, which is high-society comedy and romance, and then add mystery to the 
mix”.

That said, Brawn warns that Christie’s deceptively simple style is not easy to 
get right. “There are definite challenges for modern authors. These days, crime 
writers rely a lot on police procedurals and technology, and to write a good 
golden age novel you really have to unlearn those things and embrace the 
disciplines of the golden age, which really centre around plot and character.”

The real appeal with Christie is that not only are they really good stories 
but there’s a lot going on under the surface, he says. “They’re sometimes 
unfairly dismissed as being a bit safe compared with today’s crime thrillers, 
but in reality there’s a lot of darkness there.”

James Prichard, Christie’s great grandson and the chairman of Agatha Christie 
Ltd <http://www.agathachristie.com/about-agatha-christie-limited>, agrees. 
“There’s a terrible tendency to see golden age crime as cosy crime, but I think 
it’s pretty evident that my great-grandmother found murder a serious and 
horrific business,” he says. “The reason that these books have lasted and that 
so many people still read or try to emulate them today is because the plots 
stand up. People enjoy the puzzle elements in them and they like the fact that 
you might feel a little uncomfortable, but never so uncomfortable that you 
can’t go on.”
 