
As students line up for exam results this month, thoughts inevitably turn to 
future career options. Despite views thatyoung people are having to make big 
career decisions too early 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/young-people-take-career-decisions-too-early>, 
there is lots of advice and support available to help you make the right 
decision.

University isn't for everyone, and in many cases isn't a guarantee of a 
specific career path or job. There are lots of other valuable ways to kickstart 
your working life, such as apprenticeships, school-leaver programmes, or even 
taking a gap year.

We've pulled together a list of our top blogposts to help you plan your next 
move.



What are your options if you don't want to go to university? 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/career-options-not-going-to-university-expert-advice>

Contrary to traditional beliefs, studying for a degree is by no means the best 
or only choice when you finish school. Here are some things to consider before 
you make a decision.

How much do you know about apprenticeships? 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/quiz/apprenticeship-week-quiz-test-your-knowledge>

For some light relief from making important career decisions, take our fun 
apprenticeship quiz to find out how much you really know about them. You may 
even learn something if you're thinking about doing one.

Find out the truth about apprenticeships 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/apprenticeships-myths-career-choice>

Playground remarks and your parents' views about these schemes may not 
actually be based on the facts. For example, did you know you're able to study 
while you work for a recognised qualification, up to foundation degree level? 
Read the other common myths about apprenticeships, and find out if they're true.

What are employers looking for in apprentices? 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/what-employers-look-for-apprentices>

Once the decision is made, you'll need to send off your applications, but 
what's more important? Qualifications, punctuality, a real interest in the job, 
or a willingness to learn? Find out what employers are really looking for in 
their apprentices.

A beginner's guide to school-leaver programmes 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/school-leaver-programme-advice-experts>

While they haven't been around for as long as apprenticeships, school-leaver 
programmes are still a worthy option, as long as you do your research and find 
the best one for you. Here our experts give their advice on your most asked 
questions about school-leaver programmes.

Get your first job off to a flying start 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/first-job-flying-start>

If you're not keen on accumulating lots of university debt and want to start 
earning straight away, then read these tips on how to act and learn as much as 
possible when you start your first job.

Ideas on what to do on a gap year to boost your CV 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/five-things-do-gap-year-boost-cv>

With more and more people taking a year out once they've finished school, it's 
important to make yours count if you want to stand out to future employers. 
Here we've got some useful ideas about what you can do.

How should you talk about work experience? 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/how-to-talk-work-experience-school-leavers>

Wherever you've decided to take your career, you'll more than likely be asked 
about your experience. Whether it's in a job application or interview, you need 
to present any work experience you have in the best light.

How to write a CV if you lack direct work experience 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/how-to-write-cv-without-work-experience>

As a school leaver you won't have tons of experience, but don't worry. You 
need to make the most of any experience you may have, as well as highlight 
qualities such as attitude, potential and enthusiasm.

10 ways to beat interview nerves 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/10-quirky-tips-beating-interview-nerves-job>

After the joy of being offered a job interview, you may start to feel daunted 
by the prospect of going to your first one. Preparation is always key, so why 
not try these strange tips on how to feel more calm and confident.

More resources

To help you apply for your dream job or scheme, check out these CV templates 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/cv-templates> and cover letter examples 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/covering-letter-examples>. We also have lots of 
interview tips <http://careers.guardian.co.uk/interview-help> to help you 
prepare.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 