
4.14pm GMT 
 'The clothes have no emperor!' An overexposed photograph of a model on the 
catwalk during the Mercedes-Benz China fashion week. Photograph: Feng Li/Getty 
Images  A dog whose bite will be worse than his bark â€“ in crocodile fancy dress 
for the Halloween Parade in New York. Photograph: Jennifer Graylock/Rex  ...and 
a pig cunningly disguised as a dachshund joins in too. Bacon-wrapped sausages 
anyone? Photograph: Anthony Behar/Rex  Bijou property in sought-after, central 
location; deceptively spacious, close to transport. Compact garden. Or is it a 
publicity stunt promoting the benefits of power-naps to Toronto's workers? 
Photograph: Xinhua/Landov/Barcroft Media  'What did you do at work today 
Daddy?' The French prime minister's Chief Precipitation Prevention Officer 
averts a crisis, at the Hotel Matignon in Paris. Photograph: Remy de la 
Mauviniere/AP  The bike looks a bit dodgy - a boneshaker, presumably? 
Preparations are made for the forthcoming Day of the Dead in downtown Mexico 
City. Photograph: Alberto Millares/Demotix/Corbis  A feast for the eyes? 
Eyeball cakes at the Halloween-themed 'Feed the Beast extreme cake shop' in 
London. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP  Whose idea was it to commission 
Jake & Dinos Chapman to write the next Wallace and Gromit screenplay? Statues 
representing the realms of hell, according to Buddhist teachings, show humans 
being buried alive at Kaew Prasert temple in southern Thailand. Photograph: 
Matthew Richards/Demotix/Corbis  Great faces for radio - camels outside Radio 
City Music Hall for the first day of rehearsals for the 2013 Radio City 
Christmas Spectacular. Photograph: Amanda Schwab/AP  Ho Ho Ho. I haven't 
laughed so much since Grandma died. Clowns participate in the "15 minutes of 
laughter" event during their 18th international convention in Mexico City. 
Photograph: Xinhua/Landov/Barcroft Media  