
If white women are under-represented in the public sphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/awomansplace>, then black women are 
near to invisible. One reason is that, while the feminist movement has been the 
main organisational driver for female involvement in politics, most black women 
feel excluded by it. In theory, black woman are natural feminists. And, in 
principle, I am happy to call myself one.

But, in practice, the unrelentingly white and middle-class nature of the 
modern women's movement has repelled many of us. Inspired bySimone de Beauvoir 
<http://books.theguardian.com/authors/author/0,,-51,00.html> and Betty Friedan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/feb/06/guardianobituaries.gender>, I 
joined my first women's group in my teens. I felt a little out of place among 
the white suburban housewives, but I persevered. However, when they started 
planning a fundraiser that featured a black male stripper, their knowing 
sniggers got to me and I fled. As a Cambridge undergraduate, I tried again. I 
was the only black woman in the student-only group, but that was OK. Then they 
decided to invite a woman "from the town" to talk. The way my fellow students 
stared at that poor working-class woman, as if she was a laboratory specimen, 
was too much for me and I terminated my involvement with the formal woman's 
movement.

In the 1980s, black women who believed in the principles of feminism, but felt 
excluded by the women's movement, set up a black feminist organisation called 
the Organisation of Woman of African and Asian Descent (OWAAD). I still 
remember the early inspirational conferences. But it eventually faded away.

In the 1980s and 1990s, I was also a strong supporter of the campaign to get 
morewomen MPs in parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/07/women>. We succeeded in 
getting the Labour party to adopt the (controversial) policy of all-women 
shortlists. But, of all the women elected to parliament in 1997 on that system, 
not a single one was black. It seemed that "more women in parliament" meant 
"more white women".

I had already been elected to parliament by then (in 1987, on an ordinary 
shortlist) and I was on the Labour party national executive. It was clear that 
new black women candidates were not emerging, so I pushed the party to arrange 
special training weekends for potential black female parliamentary candidates. 
Lots of intelligent and lively women attended. But the party officials who came 
to observe the weekends regarded them with distaste. It was clear that they 
were not interested in talent – they were looking for women they could control.

I was elected more than 20 years ago. There is still only one other black 
woman in the House of Commons –Dawn Butler MP <http://www.dawnbutlermp.com/>. 
But, in local government, things have actually gone backwards. In the 1980s, 
there were two black female council leaders in London: Merle Amory in Brent and 
Linda Bellos in Lambeth. Now there are none. I remember the many clever and 
charismatic black female activists I worked with in the 80s on a range of 
grassroots campaigns. They should be in parliament today.

Maybe they had too much sense. But it is parliament's loss.
 