
The sport of baseball has always been known for odd symmetries. Friday night, 
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> played the 
last game of his career as a New York Yankee against the same team he played 
his first, the Tampa Bay Rays (he hit a double too). Fitting that this time his 
Yankees would leave the winners, and it couldn’t have mattered more in the 
dugout – or less in the standings.

 Rodriguez is probably the most reviled US athlete of his generation, in any 
sport. Barry Bonds probably surpasses him, but Bonds started playing a decade 
earlier – and by the end of Bonds’s career, A-Rod was giving him a run for his 
money. There are lots of reasons those who hated Rodriguez – those who still 
hate Rodriguez – will give for that: his offputting attitude, his arrogance, 
his inability to stay out of the tabloids, and of course, the steroids. These 
are just symptoms; external expressions of a root cause. People feel the way 
they feel about A-Rod, as intensely as they do, because of money and the 
morality behind it.

There is a distinction so ingrained in the way we talk about Rodriguez and his 
career that it almost feels strange to explicitly spell it out: while on paper 
Rodriguez made hisMLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> debut in 1994 for 
the Seattle Mariners and played 790 games over that seven season period, the 
real story of Alex Rodriguez – the parable of the rise and fall of a superstar 
– doesn’t begin until 26 January 2001, when the 25-year-old shortstop signed a 
10-year, $252m contract with the Texas Rangers. It was the largest free agent 
contract in major league history by a wide margin, and arguably it ruined 
Rodriguez’s career.

Three years later, Alex Rodriguez came to the New York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> on a stormcloud; the 
disposition – and disposal – of his massive contract by the Rangers was the 
hottest topic of the winter of 2003, and it ended with everyone angry at 
Rodriguez: the Rangers and their fans because their team had gone nowhere over 
the first three seasons of Rodriguez’s deal; the Mariners and their fans 
because Rodriguez left Seattle for that contract in the first place; the MLBPA 
because Rodriguez tried to renegotiate that contract in order to go to the Red 
Sox; the Red Sox and their fans because Rodriguez listened to the MLBPA when 
they told him in no uncertain terms that was not permissible; and the Yankees 
and their fans because they already had Derek Jeter, a shortstop they loved on 
the team, a guy they nicknamed “the Captain,” and three years earlier their new 
third baseman gave an Esquire interview in which he opined that the Captain had 
it easy and had never actually had to lead.

 That anger would not abate. Rodriguez was merely the sixth-best third baseman 
in the majors in his first season in New York, which was unacceptable 
considering he was the reigning American League MVP and was being paid a king’s 
fortune (you know, comparatively; the 2004 Yankees were a $182m enterprise). 
And 2004 was painful for Yankees fans for other reasons as well, though 
Rodriguez was hardly to blame for New York’s implosion in the ALCS. He had an 
.895 OPS with 2 HR and 5 RBI that series. “But most of that came in the Game 3 
19-8 blowout when everyone was hitting,” comes the reply from certain quarters. 
“He disappeared after that.” So did the rest of the Yankee lineup. That’s why 
they lost.

 The next year Rodriguez was once again the MVP of the American League, by a 
wide margin on the stat sheet, if not on award voters’ ballots – in 2005, 
baseball writers’ love affair with Boston’s David Ortiz was beginning to 
blossom. The Yankees didn’t win the World Series. In 2006, Rodriguez had 
another off year (for him): only a .914 OPS with 35 HR. The Yankees didn’t win 
the World Series. In 2007, Rodriguez won his third and final American League 
MVP Award, this one pretty much uncontested. The Yankees, once again, did not 
win the World Series. This was a franchise whose fans were used to success – 
not merely historically, but specifically and immediately. It had only been a 
few years since the Bronx Bombers won four world championships in five seasons, 
after all.

 The Yankees were a good, solid playoff team in those years, if a bit 
inconsistent in the starting pitching and without a clear staff ace; but most 
good, solid playoff teams don’t end up winning the World Series once, let alone 
multiple times – the current San Francisco Giants “dynasty” being the modern 
exception that tests the rule. But this was about money, remember. By Opening 
Day of 2008, the Yankees were paying $209m for their roster. They expected that 
to buy them more than just a good, solid playoff team.

Alex Rodriguez: the good, the bad and the performance enhancing drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-career-peds-steriods>
 So who was to blame? There’s always so much to go around, when expectations 
have been frustrated: Randy Johnson took his fair share (yes, these were the 
Randy Johnson years in New York); Melky Cabrera, then in his early twenties and 
a well-regarded prospect, was unable to put together the success he’d find 
later on elsewhere; first base was an underwhelming carousel of novelty guys, 
journeymen and Jason Giambi. But in the winter of 2007, one target dwarfed all 
the rest in ire: Alex Rodriguez, the reigning American League MVP. Why? How?

 Because that damn contract of his had one last finger to curl shut, of 
course. Mere days after the Boston Red Sox swept the Colorado Rockies out of 
the World Series, A-Rod opted out.

 Opt-out clauses are now almost boilerplate features of any massive free agent 
contract, but back at the turn of the century when Rodriguez’s agent, Scott 
Boras, negotiated the 10-year deal with the Rangers they were fairly new 
territory. Starting in 2007, A-Rod had the contractual right to void the 
remainder of his deal in the ten days following the end of that year’s World 
Series, and thereby become a free agent.

 Looking back, what’s odd about that winter was how certain 
<http://www.espn.com/mlb/news/story?id=3084583> everyone was Rodriguez was 
leaving New York. Part of this was because that’s what JD Drew had done when he 
similarly opted out of his Boras-negotiated contract with the Dodgers and went 
to the Red Sox the year before; part of it was because it was hard to imagine 
the unhappy (but productive) relationship between A-Rod and the Yankees going 
on any longer. The local media was thrilled, in that peculiar, angry, excited 
way columnists get when an ambiguous issue suddenly clarifies into a moral 
fable – for example,here 
<http://yankees.lhblogs.com/2007/11/04/boras-is-not-to-blame-a-rod-is/> is Pete 
Abraham, then-Yankees beatwriter for The Journal News, propping up Ron Villone 
of all people as the Gallant to Rodriguez’s free agent Goofus. The year 
Rodriguez won his third American League MVP Award, Ron Villone pitched 42.1 
innings of 4.25 ERA baseball in middle relief and walked almost as many guys as 
he struck out. Weird thoughts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Falex-rodriguez-final-game-new-york-yankees-mlb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b40020040a66d75112f656266a0701ac9bc8876%2F0_64_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-Rod%20was%20both%20a%20cheat%20and%20a%20pleasure%20to%20watch%3A%20how%20we%20will%20miss%20him&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Falex-rodriguez-final-game-new-york-yankees-mlb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-Rod%20was%20both%20a%20cheat%20and%20a%20pleasure%20to%20watch%3A%20how%20we%20will%20miss%20him&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Falex-rodriguez-final-game-new-york-yankees-mlb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b40020040a66d75112f656266a0701ac9bc8876%2F0_64_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Alex Rodriguez embraces his team-mate Mark Teixeira during his final game. 
Photograph: Drew Hallowell/Getty Images 
 Abraham wrote that blog in the first week of November; by the second week of 
December, Rodriguez had re-signed with the Yankees. His new deal capped a crazy 
five weeks or so for Yankees fans, appetites whetted but never satiated by the 
obsessive coverage – every public statement, sourced, anonymous, or otherwise, 
was being parsed and reparsed, then parsed again, thenturned into a conspiracy 
theory <http://riveraveblues.com/2007/11/a-few-a-rod-conspiracy-theories-1575/>
. This, not his performance on the field, was how the nation knew Alex 
Rodriguez: the endless story, the star consuming everything around him in the 
gravity well of his undeserved fortune and misapplied fame. The cautionary 
tale: Minnesota, Oakland, Pittsburgh, teach your children right. Don’t let your 
prospects grow up to be A-Rod. As if they would be so lucky.

 Alex Rodriguez has only signed four professional contracts in his career. The 
first was a three year deal with the Seattle Mariners after they took him first 
overall in the 1993 draft. The second was also with the Mariners, signed after 
the first expired, buying out the next four team-controlled years of his 
career. The third was that fateful January deal with the Texas Rangers. Then 
there was the contract he signed days before Christmas to stay in New York. 
That was his fourth, and Rodriguez intended for it to be his last. He – not 
Boras – negotiated the terms,as he took pains to make clear to the press 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/a-rod-yankees-agree-terms-275m-deal-article-1.259792>
. He wanted everyone to know that, as if somehow that was the thing that was 
going to make fans like him. Above all, he wanted to retire a Yankee. Last 
night, his wish was finally, brutally granted. It took the form of a mercy 
killing.

Alex Rodriguez is Major League Baseball's last megastar, and that's OK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/11/mlb-news-alex-rodriguez-last-baseball-megastar>
 The fourth contract was ten years in length, just like the one that had 
preceded it, and was loaded with all sorts of synergistic, cross-promotional 
escalators and sidepots concocted with an eye towards the triumphal end of his 
Hall of Fame career. The centerpiece was a $30m “marketing agreement” based on 
reaching home run milestones; $6m apiece for reaching 660, 714, 755, 762, and 
763. In 2008, these were not idle clauses; it seemed plausible if not probable 
that Rodriguez would end his career as the new Home Run King. In 2016, they 
seem not tragic but cruel; a mean-spirited joke Rodriguez played on his future 
self.

 The history of this contract is far fresher, far more raw: after being the 
best hitter on a forgettable 2008 team that finished in third place and was 
most notable for giving 80 innings to Sidney Ponson, Rodriguez finally did it. 
In 2009, the New York Yankees won the World Series on the back of an amazing 
postseason performance by A-Rod: 68 PA of 1.308 OPS hitting, with 6 HR and 18 
RBI. He won the Babe Ruth Award, making him the postseason MVP. That should 
have been it: that should have been the moment things changed for Alex 
Rodriguez in New York.

In another world, maybe they did. But in this one, shortly before the 
beginning of the 2009 season someone leaked a list of 104 players that had 
tested positive for performance-enhancing drugs in a supposedly sealed 2003 MLB 
fact-finding survey to Sports Illustrated. Rodriguez’s name was on that list. 
He denied the allegations for two days, and on the third, he admitted to 
steroid use.

 That was what the world took away from Rodriguez’s year. Not the postseason 
heroics and not the World Series ring, but the money and the cheating. Without 
the money, the Yankees could have quietly forgiven the cheating, as they did 
with other players. Without the cheating, the Yankees would have been more than 
happy to spend the money. But both together made them look like fools that had 
overpaid a liar for a defective product.

 That wasn’t the end of A-Rod and PEDs; in 2013 he’d be named as an offender 
in the Biogenesis investigation, asloppy 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/08/05/biogenesis-anniversary-alex-rodriguez-ryan-braun-peds-tony-bosch-porter-fischer/13593357/>
,ethically and legally compromised 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/report-mlb-impeded-fl-dept-of-health-investigation-into-biogenesis/>
 show trial that Major League Baseball inflicted on their product more as a 
means to expand the discretionary power of the Commissioner’s Office than as a 
good-faith effort to punish violations of the Joint Drug Agreement. As part of 
the Biogenesis fallout, Rodriguez would accept a one-year suspension for the 
2014 season, despite not having failed a drug test. This was his nadir; at one 
point Rodriguez was not only suing MLB, but the Player’s Association as well, 
doing anything in his power to get a legal injunction to allow him to continue 
playing.

 But it was three years earlier, in 2009, when Rodriguez’s dream of a 
triumphal final season full of milestones, columnist hagiographies and pre-game 
farewells at visiting stadiums vanished. That was when the narrative 
surrounding his money and his morality suddenly clarified, his story arc was 
made legible, and it turned out he was not a hero, not even the flawed, Greek 
kind. Nor was he a villain, because villains have the power to do harm. Somehow 
the best baseball player of his generation was nothing more than an undignified 
fraud. That he was successful in spite of that became an embarrassment; his 
career was either a lie, a joke, or both, and the Yankees didn’t want him to 
stick around for them to find out. They tried everything they could to get rid 
of him, but Rodriguez just kept showing up to work, eager to get out there and 
play; a ghost haunting Yankee Stadium, ignoring his own exorcism.

 All of that is why a guy who was Rodriguez’s clear inferior on his best day 
got to hit weak grounders at the top of the order for all of 2014, and A-Rod 
got a press conference, a week on the bench, one final out playing third base 
at Yankee Stadium and his unconditional release after the game. And you know 
what? He looked pretty goddamn happy with it.

 His last game was won by Yankee heroics, but they were not his own. That 
didn’t seem to affect his enjoyment of them. Jeter’s story ended in triumph; 
A-Rod’s ended with the acceptance of fate. There’s something more human about 
the latter than the former. Rodriguez is retiring to work with Yankees minor 
leaguers as a special instructor and advisor; that’s something he’s been doing 
for years informally,but has shown an especially keen interest in 
<http://m.yesnetwork.com/news/article/2016/03/28/168871034> lately. It’s work 
he seems well-suited for. It will keep him around a game he clearly loves, and 
an organization he clearly tries to love.

 A-Rod can be baffling, infuriating, frustrating and mystifying in turn, but 
he is never tragic. Alex Rodriguez spent 22 years hitting baseballs better than 
just about anyone else alive, and along the way made a whole lot of money, 
alienated friends, lied, cheated, disappointed himself and others, filed 
lawsuits, got suspended, wonked out over swing mechanics, mentored rookies, 
became a father, never really figured out how to talk to the press, watched his 
mistakes close the door on his chance at history and then made his peace with 
walking away. It was a privilege to watch him play and to write about his 
career, and I will miss him dearly.

 * This article was amended on Saturday 13 August to correct the details of JD 
Drew’s contract. Drew had opted out of his contract with the Los Angeles 
Dodgers and gone to Boston, not, as we had written, opted out of Boston and 
gone to Philly. This has now been changed.  