
I could never claim that I was driven to switch from television screenwriting 
to writing novels by the limitations of the TV storytelling palette. After all, 
we live in the era of the trinity of Davids – Chase, Simon and Milch – and 
their titanic achievements (The Sopranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-sopranos>, The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, Deadwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/jul/26/deadwood-season-one>
). That said, although this level of excellence is attainable, few apart from 
the US cable showrunners are allowed to reach for it. This wasn’t always the 
case, but I sadly doubt a contemporaryEdge of Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/25/edge-of-darkness-box-set-apocalyptic-thriller>
 would feature an extended dialogue-free scene where a father slowly explores 
the contents of his murdered daughter’s room, finds a Geiger counter and a gun, 
and determines from the counter’s reading of a lock of her hair that she had 
been exposed to high levels of radiation. Nowadays that would be INT. EMMA’S 
BEDROOM. NIGHT. Ronald approaches a forensic detective. RONALD: What have you 
found? DETECTIVE: A gun, and high levels of radiation.

The UK’s closest equivalents to the US showrunners are Steven Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevenmoffat> and Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>. Few others are allowed to 
go off and wrangle a team of writers, with only the lightest of touches from 
the higher echelons. Even Moffat had to re-pilotSherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>, although the fact that the 
BBC allowed him to do this shows the respect and faith they (rightly) accord 
him. I’m on a far lower rung, and so for me, part of the appeal of novel 
writing is that the chain from author to reader is short and simple – agent, 
editor, proofreader, shop/website.

In TV, the script will have to be signed off by producers, executive 
producers, genre commissioners and channel commissioners, and that’s still only 
a starting point; the director and actors (once they’ve been approved) will 
then have their say. None of this is necessarily bad; any writer will welcome 
informed opinions that improve their work. But the longer the chain of opinions 
that have to be taken into account, the more the danger of weak links. Hence 
the (possibly apocryphal) tale of the executive whose main note on the script of
The Manchester Passion was “more jeopardy for Jesus?”

Apocryphal or not, it’s the sort of thing that does happen. My personal low 
point was working on an entertainment show where the producers booked a live 
turkey for 4 July. Neither the host nor the guests were American, but no 
matter, we were asked to “write some ad libs in case the turkey clucks”. 
I pointed out that turkeys were associated with Thanksgiving and had nothing to 
do with 4 July. An exec retorted that it was America’s national bird. I 
responded (correctly) that this was the bald eagle, but was told testily: “I’m 
sorry, Will, but we’ve booked the turkey.”

Shortly after working with that turkey (who I discovered was on a higher rate 
than the writers), I was lucky enough to be hired by Iannucci, and have spent 
most of the past 10 years sheltering from interference under his umbrella on
Time Trumpet, The Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it> and Veep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep>. These are team-written shows, 
the writing staff onVeep currently numbering 14.

As a teenager, I worshipped John Cleese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-cleese> and Stephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry> and dreamed of being part of 
a writing or performing troupe. But I also reveredCharlotte Brontë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte> and George Eliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot>, so in tandem with forging a 
career as a standup, occasional actor and comedy writer, I’ve also been trying 
to write novels. This is the first one to pass a publisher’s muster, in part I 
think because the setting – Jersey, where I grew up – meant that the veracity I 
prize in screenwriting and fiction came more easily. Working with Armando has 
resulted in countless blessings, chief among them learning that it’s OK to have 
blank patches in your canvas. He’ll know where he wants to begin, and where he 
wants to end, and he’ll trust himself to fill in the gaps. But he’ll never 
allow those gaps to be filled with padding; each scene has to move the story 
on, something I rigorously tried to apply to my chapters. I’m not sure whether 
I approached the plotting as I would the arc of a TV drama. Perhaps anyway the 
outstanding TV dramas of our time borrow their plotting structure from novels.

Certainly, I want the reader to be drawn in as they would be by a box set. 
I’ll end with a bid for Pseud’s Corner: I findAnna Karenina to be more of 
a page-turner than any airport thriller, andI Claudius as addictive as Breaking 
Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>. The trick for any 
writer is to absent yourself from the finished work; the plot should feel 
propelled by the characters rather than the writer. And the writer should never 
have to write fake ad-libs for possible interruptions from a recalcitrant fowl.

• Will Smith’s novel Mainlander is published by 4th Estate.
 