
One in three children who ends up in hospital with an asthma attack has been 
exposed to cigarette smoke, prompting renewed concern aboutparents smoking at 
home around their offspring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/mar/24/smoking-asthma-children-health>
.

A major review of how hospitals treat children with asthma found that 32% of 
those treated for breathing difficulties encountered “environmental tobacco 
smoke” just beforehand.

Given that both the number of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/number-of-uk-smokers-falls-to-lowest-level>
 and also thenumber of mothers who smoke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2013/nov/27/pregnant-smokers-how-many-are-there>
 is declining, “the fact that one third of children admitted in this audit were 
recorded as being exposed to cigarette smoking is worrying”, according to the 
British Thoracic Society’s national paediatric asthma audit.

It examined the records of 5,443 children treated as inpatients for asthma in 
153 hospitals during November 2015.

“This study highlights the importance of making homes smoke-free since that is 
where children are most likely to be exposed to tobacco smoke, which can 
trigger asthma attacks,” said Deborah Arnott, chief executive of the 
anti-tobacco group Action onSmoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/smoking> and Health.

“Health professionals need to do more to inform parents of the health risks of 
second-hand smoke, particularly to their children, and also to support parents 
who smoke to quit.”

Dr Russell Viner, officer for health promotion at the Royal College of 
Paediatrics and ChildHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, said: 
“It is concerning that one third of children are exposed to environmental 
tobacco smoke. The effects of second-hand smoke on children are well known, yet 
it seems our children are still often feeling the brunt of it.”

Yes, asthma is over-diagnosed, but it is still a matter of life or death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/18/asthma-over-diagnosed-still-matter-life-death>
Children’s doctors want the government to reverse its £200m-a-year cut to the 
public health budget in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/03/public-health-funding-cuts-will-cost-nhs-dear>
 in order to boost stop-smoking services, he added. “If adults and parents are 
properly supported to overcome this addiction, then this can have a real 
positive knock-on effect to asthma sufferers.”

A legal ban on adults smoking in cars containing under-18s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/11/motorists-alerted-ban-smoking-cars-prevent-surge-fines>
 came into force in England and Wales in October 2015. However, freedom of 
information requests in March showed that 39 out of 44 police forces who 
responded to the BBC’s request had issued none of the £50 fines or court 
summons and only six warnings to adults found smoking in a vehicle containing a 
child. Police officers say the law is almost unenforceable as they cannot issue 
a physical ticket for the offence.

The audit found that “medical care of children with acute wheeze/asthma 
continues to be highly efficient and effective”. Few children need to be 
ventilated or spend time in intensive care and most spend only a short time in 
hospital.

But too many children who present with asthma receive an X-ray or antibiotics 
or both and 44% still do not receive a writtenpersonal asthma plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/18/asthma-over-diagnosed-still-matter-life-death>
 when they are being discharged, making it more likely that they will have to 
be readmitted, the audit points out. In addition, 58% were not shown how to use 
their inhaler properly and 47% received explanatory leaflets about asthma and 
how to avoid a flare-up.


 