
TV

Real Rob


Now streaming

This new Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> original boasts a 
familiar – indeed, some might say over-familiar – conceit. Rob Schneider is the 
latest comedian to play a self-deprecatingly fictionalised version of himself. 
Is he a lovable enough character to pull it off? And does this idea really 
still have legs? On the basis of the opening episode, the jury’s out.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqhXQrIAzkpk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqhXQrIAzkpk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqhXQrIAzkpk&media=>
 Real Rob trailer. 
A Very Murray Christmas


Now streaming

Netflix moves into the world of Christmas variety shows. But this is a variety 
show with a difference – your average, low-rent crackers and carols affair 
can’t usually boast direction by Sofia Coppola. This Bill Murray-helmed 
extravaganza offers some serious star power with contributions fromGeorge 
Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney>, Amy Poehler and Chris 
Rock. And it’s an enjoyably meta and self-aware business, pitched somewhere 
between piss-take and homage.

A Very Murray Christmas: Bill and friends' happy hipster holiday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/04/a-very-murray-christmas-george-clooney-netflix-special>
F is for Family


18 December

Yet another animated sitcom exploring the American family but this one at 
least boasts the period trappings of 1973 as a USP. Back then, people did 
things differently; they smoked like chimneys, drank like fish, patronised 
their woman-folk and took guns to the airport. And the Murphy clan were no 
different – Bill Burr voices sweary, lairy patriarch Frank and Laura Dern his 
long-suffering wife (is there any other kind in American animated sitcoms?) Sue.

Glitter Force


18 December

Perfectly timed for the beginning of the school holidays, this new childrens’ 
series is set in the magical kingdom of Jubiland, which has been invaded by an 
evil emperor. Fortunately, a pixie called Candy is on hand to recruit five 
pre-teen girls – aka Glitter Force – to save the day.

Serial, one year on: web sleuths keep making discoveries in Adnan Syed's case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/11/serial-one-year-later-adnan-syed-investigation>
Making a Murderer


18 December

Netflix has clearly been paying attention to the success of sleeper sensation 
podcastSerial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>. This 
documentary series is only the site’s second non-fiction offering and it 
follows the harrowing true story of Steven Avery who was convicted and then 
exonerated on an assault charge, then filed a lawsuit in search of compensation 
before becoming the prime suspect in a second, equally grisly case. Directors 
Laura Ricciardi and Moira Demos have spent the last decade on this project but 
the case itself now spans 30 years.

Film

Lost River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/09/lost-river-review-ryan-gosling-a-fantastically-annoying-film>


Streaming now

“Watching Ryan Gosling’s feature debut as writer-director is like getting an 
over-rich but also somehow flavourless stew plonked down in front of you by the 
preening winner of Celebrity MasterChef.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH8ngDiG9V8w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH8ngDiG9V8w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH8ngDiG9V8w&media=>
 Lost River trailer. 
Good Kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/09/good-kill-review-psychological-study-drone-use-ethan-hawke>

Streaming now

“With this piercing study of a US drone pilot, writer-director Andrew Niccol 
updates the premise of his script for 1998’s The Truman Show: Big Brother is 
now not only watching, but able to obliterate us with a single button-push. The 
irony is that Ethan Hawke’s Tom Egan, patrolling Afghanistan from a Portakabin 
in the Nevada desert, suffers a growing impotence…”

Hot Tub Time Machine 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/09/hot-tub-time-machine-2-film-review-rob-corddry>


Streaming now

“The first Hot Tub, a spirited Hangover derivative, qualified as a guilty 
pleasure; five years on, any enjoyment this afterthought generates may 
necessitate a lifetime of Hail Marys.”

Still Alice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/08/still-alice-review-julianne-moore-superb-alzheimers>


Streaming now

“Still Alice casts the superb Julianne Moore as a 50-year-old linguistics 
professor whose bouts of forgetfulness are devastatingly diagnosed as early 
onset Alzheimer’s.”


Oldboy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/05/oldboy-review>

7 December

“Spike Lee’s English-language remake of Park Chan-wook’s revenge nightmare 
fails to grasp its black-comic bad taste.”

Aloha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/29/aloha-review-inspiration-overdose-pixie-dust-buffet>


10 December

“Cameron Crowe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cameron-crowe> has been 
making movies about lost man-puppies on the comeback trail for so long now that 
it’s almost become a kind of mantra. His latest movie, Aloha, is so hell-bent 
on self-consolation it feels like whistling in the dark. You want to pet it and 
tell it not to worry: everything will be OK.”

The Ridiculous 6


11 December

A spoof Western that represents the first fruits of a four-film deal between 
Netflix andAdam Sandler <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqUp7Qgimn38&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqUp7Qgimn38>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqUp7Qgimn38&media=>
The Canyons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/08/the-canyons-review-schrader-easton-ellis-james-deen-lindsay-lohan>

20 December

“Paul Schrader’s The Canyons has had a bad rap. This is the erotic thriller he 
shot with $250,000 (£150,000) raised through Kickstarter – making every cent 
count. It features a sulphurous script byBret Easton Ellis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis>, and stars the 
extravagantly unreliable and difficult Lindsay Lohan, with whom Schrader has 
now fallen out. Or perhaps it is rather that Lohan never regarded herself as 
having fallen in with him.”

The Muppet Christmas Carol  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/22/muppets-christmas-carol-review>

Christmas Day

“There’s lots to love in Muppets’ 1992 take on Dickens, not least Gonzo’s 
narrative skills.”

Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/26/jack-ryan-shadow-recruit-review-mark-kermode>

Boxing Day

“Kenneth Branagh’s old-fashioned cold war thriller is an efficient nail-biter.”

All is Lost <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/26/all-is-lost-review> 

28 December


“JC Chandor’s All is Lost is a quasi-silent movie, or perhaps rather 
quasi-mute, portraying the ordeal of a lone sailor in a desperate situation: he 
is played with grizzled impassivity by the 77-year-oldRobert Redford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertredford>. Throughout the film, he is 
the only person on screen.”

Dear White People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/dear-white-people-review-clever-campus-satire>

New Year’s Eve

“This refreshingly angular approach to class, racism and the interracial sex 
taboo addresses the elephants in cinema’s crowded room.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwJhmqLU0so&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwJhmqLU0so>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwJhmqLU0so&media=>
 Dear White People trailer. 
Monsters: Dark Continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/03/monsters-dark-continent-review-disappointing-sci-fi>

New Year’s Eve

“This disappointing sequel, directed by Tom Green, mimics the Alien/Aliens 
genre shift, moving from moody atmospherics to blood-and-guts warpic as it 
follows soldiers from Detroit into the expanding “infected zone” battlefields 
of the Middle East.”
 