
My previous exposure to the BBC World Service has been limited to that moment 
duringRadio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 5 Live's Saturday 
afternoon football commentary when Alan Green or John Murray announces: "And 
I'd like to welcome listeners from the World Service". It always makes me 
imagine some soccer-loving Laplanders, or footy obsessed desert dwellers glued 
to their transistor radios listening to the same match as me. That somehow the 
world is briefly united by a 3-1 scoreline from the Etihad stadium.

This weekend, however, I was listening to BBC World Service when it linked up 
with 5 Live. It wasn't as exciting as I'd hoped – even though the moment of 
union did coincide with a goal – but then I suppose listening to the World 
Service from north London loses some of the frisson you might get in more 
far-flung destinations.

In fact, if you're not listening to the World Service outside of the UK is 
there any point in tuning into it at all? Pretty soon the BBC may be trying to 
persuade us that there is. Currently it exists thanks to grant aid from the 
Foreign Office, but in 2014 that is set to change,leaving the World Service 
funded entirely by the licence fee 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/oct/19/bbc-tv-licence-world-service>. So 
what does it offer home-based listeners? I spent a week tuning in to find out.

The World Service is about as old-fashioned as you'd expect a radio station 
with a title including the word "service" to be. In brief, it makes Radio 4 
sound as gaudy and brash as TalkSport. But there are plenty of bonuses to this 
old-fashioned, decaffeinated approach – the biggest being the news, which is 
treated with the reverence that elsewhere it is so often denied.

Despite sounding slightly as though it is being read by a 1930s butler, World 
Service news manages to light upon international events that I suspect go 
ignored elsewhere. Saturday afternoon's World Briefing, for example, included 
items on riots at a Metallica concert in India, the Kyrgyzstan elections and 
why Russia is not putting the clocks back this winter. (Among other reasons, 
Dmitry Medvedev was concerned about the nation's cows.)

Despite its global agenda the World Service often feels like a local radio 
station – albeit a rather exotic one, with its pseudo-dramatic roll call of 
international cities "Melbourne … Shanghai … New York" which sounds uncannily 
likethe Alan Partridge jingle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OEAIpEy5yvw> that 
boasted that his audience reached "Wivenhoe … Flitwick … Tiptree…" Opinions on 
the discussion programmeWorld Have Your Say 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/worldhaveyoursay/> on Monday, which asked if the UK 
should cut aid to anti-gay nations, also sounded sadly familiar – the only 
difference being the homophobia was being broadcast from Lagos instead of Essex.

While the menu of world affairs is expansive, the World Service is 
predominantly a station that broadcasts around the planet through the lens of 
British culture. Many non-news and sport programmes would sit comfortably in 
the Radio 4 schedule. Some, such as the woefully titledStephanomics 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/correspondents/stephanieflanders/>, already do, 
while others strangely don't.

Among them last week's The Documentary – The British Establishment: Who For? 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p00kvwqw/The_Documentary_The_British_Establishment_Who_For_Episode_2/>
 was a fantastic listen. US journalist Michael Goldfarb left no doubt that the 
ruling elite is far from a myth – 68% of the coalition cabinet went to Oxford 
or Cambridge universities compared with 16% in Tony Blair's first term – it was 
a surprise to learn what a relatively recent notion "the establishment" is. It 
wasn't until the 1950s that people began to see the matrix of well-connected 
people who dominated power.

There's lots of philosophical debate and esoteric pondering on the World 
Service. Last week's Heart and Soul attempted to define the word evil; The 
Forum contemplated death and how best to prepare for it andDiscovery: Tribes of 
Science 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p00kv55s/Discovery_Tribes_of_Science_3_Volcanologists/>
 asked a group of volcanologists how they cope with the "terrible beauty" of 
their chosen profession, introducing us to a professor who "once studied the 
mathematics of droplets in agricultural sprays before being seduced by molten 
ash clouds".

I doubt you'd find much space for volcanology or agricultural sprays anywhere 
else but the World Service, which is part of its charm. Also brilliant – and 
superbly condensed into 10 minutes – isWitness 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p00ldx6j/Witness_75_years_of_BBC_TV/>, 
which recalls historical events as told by the people who were there and spans 
incidents as diverse as the Mau Mau uprising and the publication of The Joy of 
Sex. Again. Where else would the BBC put this stuff?

The World Service is an interesting, and sometimes strange, listen. I loved it 
and will definitely return. But what do you think,? Have you ever tuned in at 
home or abroad – and are you happy that the licence fee will soon fund it?
 