
There is disquiet among regular BBC Radio 3 listeners, who have accused the 
station of "dumbing down" to appeal to a broader audience 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/classicalmusic/8735974/Radio-3-fans-complain-station-is-dumbing-down.html>
. As someone who has managed to ignore the station for its entire 44-year 
existence, scared off by the prospect of 15-hour operas and my general 
classical music ignorance, I am definitely not the best person to judge whether 
it is becoming less challenging. (Please do weigh in with your superior 
knowledge below). But I might be just the man to test its broad appeal. So I 
spent a week ignoring the rest of radioland and listened to nothing but Radio 3.

The first target of listeners' unrest is softly spoken Breakfast host Petroc 
Trelawny, who has the kind of accentless accent and measured demeanour you 
might find reassuring if he were the captain of your EasyJet flight to Bodrum, 
or your gran's oncologist. Here, however, it is deployed to bring us amusing 
stories from the Telegraph and Daily Mail.

Trelawny's gentle upbeat presence has jarred with some, who perhaps regard the 
intrusions of DJs as an unnecessary vulgarity – or as Trelawny put it when 
introducing Bach's Sixth Brandeburg Concerto on Friday morning, a bit "below 
stairs". I rather liked it, but I did feel as if I was locked in a National 
Trust gift shop; a firewalled world where the only aspects of the 21st century 
allowed in are bland news items and souvenir fudge.

Breakfast is followed by another programme that prickles traditionalist 
sensibilities – Essential Classics. "Essential" is the kind of label Classic FM 
would give a golden hour of relaxing tunes from TV commercials and period 
dramas (which is exactly what it is), but it could just as easily be a range of 
biscuits. Programmes such as this, populated by listener requests and CD 
charts, are evidence of the station's creeping populism, say the critics.

Unlike any other radio station, however, Radio 3 remains a place where you can 
lose yourself in music; enjoying vast oceans of time without trails for 
forthcoming programmes, vox pops, endless mentions of Twitter or advertisements 
for Autoglass. Romantically, I had imagined that, like the scene inShawshank 
Redemption <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y_lp4_Jfz7U> where Andy smuggles The 
Marriage of Figaro on to the prison speakers, Radio 3 would bring me music so 
beautiful I would be stopped in my uneducated tracks. And I was. Twice.

Sibelius' Symphony Number 5 had me pulling over to the side of the road to 
hold back the tears – admittedly largely because of it reminded me ofSince 
Yesterday by Strawberry Switchblade <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x7QPBzAJ_io>
, which steals its best bit – while Idyl by Russian romanticAlexander 
Konstantinovich Glazunov <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_Glazunov> 
added a moving poignancy to the construction of a cheese and ham sandwich that 
you just don't get when your soundtrack is David Guetta.

Last Wednesday's In Concert featured 90 minutes of Finnish and German opera. 
As with every concert I heard onRadio 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3>, the presenter who popped up 
between movements and spoke in hushed tones, like a posh snooker commentator, 
remarked how appreciative the audience was. But as someone more familiar with 
rock gigs and football matches, I wondered how they knew – I didn't hear any 
wolf whistles or whoops, just polite ripples of conservative applause.

Deeper into the schedule I loved Late Junction 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tp52>, which has a coverage of world and 
folk music liberal and wild enough to include both Brian Eno and Joni Mitchell 
alongside obscure wonders from Ethiopia and Looney Tunes composer Raymond 
Scott. It's one of those magnificent radio programmes where you won't like 
everything on it but you will always discover something new and amazing. Jazz 
Line-Up on Sunday evening was equally grown up and revelational, treating its 
subject matter with a reverence that serious music fans are starved of 
elsewhere.

The weirdest thing was Russ Abbott – the 80s comedian and recent star of Last 
Of The Summer Wine – starring in Glass Chair Chair Glass on Sunday night, a 
play that imagined a meeting between comic magician Tommy Cooper and absurdist 
playwright Eugene Ionesco. Abbot's impression was spot on, but what jarred was 
a succession of exaggerated "ooh la la" accents that wouldn't have been out of 
place in 'Allo 'Allo! I didn't knowRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 3 did drama, l wish I still didn't.

I will return to Radio 3 – particularly Late Junction – but I'm uncertain what 
to make of their moves to become more mainstream. What do you think of it?
 