Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBqzLyU1vxhY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBqzLyU1vxhY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBqzLyU1vxhY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Do you actually know anyone called Neville? No, me neither. But Bonnie Tyler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bonnie-tyler> does. He's a chinless shlub 
who shops alone at weekends. And Bonnie has been told by her bosses that, 
though he may be negligible as a human being, Neville is a loyal MasterCard 
customer who deserves something back. So she sets out to show him in the only 
way she knows – by dressing up as an angel and ambushing him with a special 
performance of Total Eclipse of the Heart.

In truth, it is a rather ramshackle serenade, with roller-skating angels, a 
jet-propelled guitar solo, fireworks, the unveiling of a statue, a dog in a 
homemade "Thanks Nev" hat... But it is clear that Bonnie means well. Hers is 
the kind of touchingly inept display, like a child's drawing, that draws more 
on love than money.

Which is, of course, what MasterCard Worldwide intends. This commercial is 
part of their long-running "Priceless" campaign, which sets out to convince us 
that human feelings matter more than cash. So deeply does the company care 
about this point, in fact, that they have even registered trademarks on the 
wordsPriceless <http://www.ipo.gov.uk/ohim?ohimnum=E5390802>, Priceless Evening 
<http://www.ipo.gov.uk/ohim?ohimnum=E7286974>, and Priceless Moments 
<http://www.ipo.gov.uk/ohim?ohimnum=E5390778> to prevent them being sullied by 
the less sincere.

And they must be pleased, because their new ad is certainly funny. Dressed up 
dogs are funny. Guitar solos are very funny. Total Eclipse of the Heart is 
bloody hilarious. (If nowsomewhat overused 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VdgI0j1odkY> by all manner of advertisers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H47N9lk2xhI>). But in amongst this heartfelt 
silliness, is Bonnie not forgetting something? Neville has just used his 
MasterCard to buy a pack of economy lager and some reduced-to-clear ready meals 
– is this act not worthy of a mention? Gratitude is meant to be about the 
thankee, after all, yet her performance feels more like some bloated thanker 
indulging in a Pharisaic orgy of self-glorification.

Fortunately Neville is not rich enough in self-esteem to notice. (He is a 
distant cousin, I believe, of"Unlucky Nev" who accepts his ritual abandonment 
so stoically in the William Hill commercial 
<http://www.tellyads.com/show_movie.php?filename=TA10757>.) This guy is just 
pleased that Bonnie Tyler knows of his existence, let alone his purchasing 
habits. So there he is at the end, his bags forgotten, a goofy grin of 
gratitude on his face. Thank you MasterCard for your rewards programme, he is 
thinking. Thank you so, so much. Never mind that it was meant to be the other 
way around.

What they say: "We're thanking you straight from the heart!"

What it means: You there! Consumer drone! Kneel before my ironic gratitude!
 