
Christine Walsh wants the weather to be as tough as possible when she flies. 
She'll jet off to the Alaskan city of Fairbanks in mid-winter when the 
temperature plunges below -20C, drop by the South Pacific island of Guam during 
a heatwave, and seek out the most malevolent crosswinds in central US during 
the gale season. "I go to the most beautiful places in the world in the worst 
conditions," she says.

Walsh, 44, is a test pilot for Boeing based in Seattle. A smooth holiday 
flight to Majorca on one of the 737s beloved of British budget airlines is 
partly down to her and her colleagues, whose job it is to test every detail of 
a new or modified aircraft when it leaves the production line.

She might be trialling something as tiny as a new indicator light, or as large 
as the emergency back-up systems. Routinely Walsh and her colleagues will shut 
down and refire each of the engines mid-flight. They have to assess how much 
information from increasingly sophisticated controls systems the human brain 
can safely absorb, and sometimes recommend life-saving modifications that can 
only be identified by flying experience.

It's a job that requires a cool head, raw courage and, unlike the role of 
commercial pilots, expertise in engineering. And, shaming as such prejudice may 
be, it's not a job that you expect to see fulfilled by a petite blonde. "Some 
clients are surprised when a woman shows up as their captain for the day," says 
Walsh, who is required to demonstrate new aircraft to the clients who have 
purchased it.

Currently, four of Boeing's 40-odd test pilots are women and in the past two 
years female engineers have overseen the building of three of the company's 
five new jetliners. It's predicted that a million new airline pilots and 
technicians will be needed worldwide by 2031 to keep pace with the expanding 
aviation industry, and Walsh hopes to inspire female students to fill the 
shortfall.

Her professional journey was forged with the same determination required to 
steer a jet through a violent crosswind. "I took one of Boeing's chief test 
pilots to lunch and asked him what I had to do to become one," she says. "He 
said it was impossible because most test pilots come via a military rather than 
a civilian route. He made out a huge list of things I would have to achieve, 
the most daunting of which was to clock up 1,500 hours of flying time."

Undeterred, Walsh began training for a pilot's licence and each time she 
achieved a goal on the list she sent her mentor a resume. It took her seven 
years and eventually she had to resign from her original job at Boeing and 
become a flight instructor to achieve the requisite flying time. When she had 
completed the list she received a call from the test pilot offering her a job 
as a co-pilot.

Although Walsh is the first to launch a newly minted aircraft into the skies, 
she says it's euphoria she feels, not nerves. Every aircraft will have been 
thoroughly tested on the ground and in flight simulators before take off; the 
essential part of her job is to test how, rather than whether, it flies. To 
her, the terrifying complexity of the control panels is a thing of beauty. "I 
love it when I turn it on and they all light up like a Christmas tree."

Walsh, the daughter of a miner and a sociologist, was two when she realised 
that she wanted to conquer the skies. "I wanted to be an astronaut," she says. 
"The space programme was at its height in the US and men had just started 
walking on the moon. I remember my parents' excitement."

Boeing interviewed her during a job fair at the University of Colorado while 
she was studying aerospace engineering and offered her a post as a payload 
engineer responsible for routine maintenance. The glamour of an airborne career 
was dolefully missing from her first assignment. "I had to redesign the 
underneath of the toilet bowl," she grimaces. "It wasn't flushing properly and 
my first introduction to test flying was when I had to flush dog food down the 
pan in mid-air."

She progressed swiftly through the engineering ranks, before reaching the 
pilot seat from where she works closely with the production team to fine-tune a 
new plane. It's the combination of designing and flying an aircraft that she 
loves most about her role. "We have to be fluent in two languages – engineering 
and aviation," says Walsh. "If we see, smell or hear anything that needs to be 
addressed, we have to be able to relay it clearly to the engineering team, and 
we also need to be able to speak at a very detailed technical level to our 
customer pilots."

Twenty-three years after she began with Boeing, Walsh is still dazzled by her 
own good fortune. "So many people are involved in designing and making these 
planes and they never get to go up on a test flight and see their work in 
action," she says. She is proof that anyone can progress from the production 
line to the cockpit if they have the determination. "Having a goal is the most 
important part," she says. "Then broadcast it. When I first mentioned that I 
wanted to be a test pilot I had zero flight hours, and it's amazing how many 
people from everywhere in life came forward to help me achieve it."

Curriculum vitae

Salary £97,000-£140,000.

Hours Usually 40 hours, five days and one flight a week. More if there's a big 
project under way.

Work-life balance "We find out the day before where we are to fly and when to 
report in. But sometimes, when meteorologists predict the right weather 
conditions somewhere in the world we fly off at a moment's notice … such a 
random schedule makes it hard to find time for family and friends."

Best thing "The anticipation when, after months of planning, you step up to 
the aircraft for a test flight."

Worst thing "The guilt I feel that most of the people in the teams I work with 
will never have the privilege of actually flying the plane they helped create 
like I do."
 