
Wayne Rooney <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wayne-rooney> faces a 
possible Uefa investigation after being accused of stamping on an Aalborg 
player during Manchester United's 2-2 draw with the Danish champions at Old 
Trafford.

Rooney was involved in a series of clashes with at least three Aalborg players 
throughout the match and appeared to bring down his studs on Kasper Risgard 
when his opponent was on the floor.

The incident was similar to the striker's clash with Ricardo Carvalho in 
England's World Cup quarter-final against Portugal which led to Rooney being 
sent off and also becoming the target of condemnation from last night's 
apparent victim.

"I don't know what he was thinking but he jumped on my chest," said Risgard. 
"I don't know why but I think he was a little bit frustrated. But I don't 
understand it because they were playing good football and the score was 1-1 at 
the time.

"Anywhere else but here and it would have been a red card," the 25-year-old 
midfielder add. "But the referee didn't say anything. I think referees are 
frightened to punish players at Old Trafford, and especially players like 
Rooney. But I can see the marks on my chest - big marks. He's apologised, so 
that's OK. But there was another incident too when he used his arm to hurt one 
of our players. I don't think it looks good on television."

Rooney's defence was simple - "It's football, a physical game" - and Sir Alex 
Ferguson tried to absolve him. "I didn't see anything at all," said the United 
manager. Uefa, however, could conceivably open a disciplinary case. Rooney is 
already suspended from Saturday's game at Tottenham Hotspur and Ferguson also 
revealed Dimitar Berbatov may miss playing against his former club because of 
an achilles injury. Rio Ferdinand, meanwhile, suffered a back spasm after the 
game and will need extensive treatment.
 