
I could be a better person. A better partner, a better son. I could be nicer 
to cats and small children. But probably only if I moved toAarhus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/aarhus>. The citizens of Denmark’s second 
city respect each other – grannies hold shop doors open for gangs of teenagers; 
cyclists indicate with hand signals – but not the same gestures you see on 
London’s streets.

They also seem happy in their skins – which is pretty good going because 
they’ve lived in the shadow of Copenhagen, three hours’ drive south-east, for 
so long that you wouldn’t blame them for being a bit chippy.

Not a bit of it. “We know that we’re a smaller city, but we like that,” said 
Jacob, an app developer I met in a cafe on my first day in town. “We like that 
you can get across town on foot or your bike. And people are friendlier here – 
they look you in the eye.”

We like that you can get across town on foot or your bike. And people are 
friendlier here – they look you in the eye

And now Aarhus’s time has come. It will be joint European Capital of Culture 
in 2017 (along with Paphos, in Cyprus), and the docks are already being 
transformed by new cultural venues such asDokk1 
<http://www.urbanmediaspace.dk/en/dokk1> and the dramatic Iceberg housing 
development <http://jdsa.eu/tad/>. Plus, the city is getting a reputation as 
the new kid on the Scandi gastronomic scene. Last year, three restaurants,
Frederikshøj <http://frederikshoj.com/en/>, Substans 
<http://www.restaurantsubstans.dk/> and Gastromé <http://gastrome.dk/?lang=en>, 
won the city’s first Michelin stars (awarded again this year) – only one star 
each, so they are not yet in Noma territory, but they are part of an exuberant 
food scene to suit all pockets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a28b972de4b23bc98ce7c3e2ebb5e4a1e743668%2F0_0_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20star%3A%20small%20and%20friendly%2C%20Aarhus%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20star%3A%20small%20and%20friendly%2C%20Aarhus%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a28b972de4b23bc98ce7c3e2ebb5e4a1e743668%2F0_0_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 Local heroes: backstage at Gastromé, fanatical about seasonal produce 
Gastromé, like the other two restaurants, is fanatical about local, seasonal 
produce and claims to bring the countryside to the city. Hence animal hides 
draped over the chairs and a first dish served on a bed of log, dried leaves 
and moss. Its “Full Throttle” menu (798DKK/£85) took me on a seven-course race 
through land and sea, from scallops with ginger, coconut and Jerusalem 
artichoke to lobster consommé and salsify with trout roe and ox with yellow 
beetroot – and more moss.

It was good, but I preferred a new restaurant, Domestic 
<http://www.restaurantdomestic.dk/>, which is hotly tipped for a star. Its 
passionate young team refuses to use anything from outside Jutland, so olive 
oil, for example, is replaced by herb oil.

My budget was all but blown after two nights, but the city’s huge student 
population means there is plenty of affordable food and great nightlife. 
Indeed, Michelin-starred Frederikshøj has a café,F-Høj <http://fhoj.dk/en/>, 
serving delicious smørrebrød, the classic Danish open sandwich, for 65DKK. 
Students fill up on hot dogs after a boozy session but even these are getting a 
gastro makeover. The crowd atRis Ras Filliongongong <http://caferisras.dk/>, an 
exceptionally cosy bar in the city’s lively Latin Quarter, befriended me then 
sent me off toHaute Friture <https://www.facebook.com/hautefrituredk> for a dog 
that was worth all of its 45DKK (£4.75).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff67830e6f3da906e24136ac7706bb8f6630a865%2F0_958_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20star%3A%20small%20and%20friendly%2C%20Aarhus%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20star%3A%20small%20and%20friendly%2C%20Aarhus%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff67830e6f3da906e24136ac7706bb8f6630a865%2F0_958_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
 Snacktastic: smørrebrød open sandwich. Photograph: Maria Nielsen 
Even the culture comes with a side order of food. Over a light elevenses of 
pig snacks in the recently revamped restaurant of theARoS art museum 
<http://en.aros.dk/>, its director, Erlend Høyersten, told me about his 
expansion plans. “We need more space to become a better museum,” he said. “We 
aim to be in the top 20 in the world within a few years.”

I wasn’t about to argue with a gigantic Norwegian bloke with big hair and 
skull rings on his fingers who seemed to be channelling a Viking look. Anyway, 
he’s on the right path: this year’s programme includes a Grayson Perry show 
from June until September. The museum’s contribution to Aarhus 2017 will be The 
Garden, a 4km art trail running from its own exhibition spaces, including Your 
Rainbow Panorama, an iconic circular rooftop walkway through the city and to 
the beach.

Moesgaard Museum <http://www.moesgaardmuseum.dk/en/> is in an amazing new 
building which bursts out of a hill, its sides concrete, its roof grass. The 
design gives a clue to what visitors find here – thousands of Bronze, Iron and 
Viking Age artefacts pulled from Jutland’s peat bogs. The star exhibit is 
Grauballe Man, from the 3rd century BC, whose body has been wonderfully 
preserved, including a gruesome slash to his throat and a shock of unnervingly 
red hair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11178529c05fa298db34f8e0ea4151233575e0c2%2F0_0_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northern%20star%3A%20small%20and%20friendly%2C%20Aarhus%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northern%20star%3A%20small%20and%20friendly%2C%20Aarhus%20is%20having%20a%20moment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Faarhus-denmark-city-of-culture-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11178529c05fa298db34f8e0ea4151233575e0c2%2F0_0_2700_1621%2F2700.jpg>
 Bog standard … Moesgaard Museum, housing bronze, iron and Viking age artefacts 
The grass roof will be the stage in Aarhus 2017 for Red Serpent, a rip-roaring 
tale of a Viking hero, playing to an audience of up to 100,000 over the summer.

On my last day I walked to the trendy neighbourhood of Frederiksbjerg for a 
beer at the new outpost of Copenhagen micro-breweryMikkeller 
<http://mikkeller.dk/location/mikkeller-bar-aarhus/>, then a meal at Nordisk 
Spisehus <http://www.nordiskspisehus.dk/>, which puts its own spin on dishes 
from famous restaurants from around the world (with their permission) and uses 
local ingredients.

I had a flash of inspiration for a new Aarhus restaurant. “We could call it 
The End of the World,” I told a chef I met later at Mikkeller. He laughed 
nervously as I suggested flying in food from as far away from Denmark as 
possible – rock lobster from New Zealand, guinea pig from the Andes. “There is 
a niche in the market,” he smiled, but he didn’t look convinced. Like I said – 
I’d be a nicer person if I spent more time in Aarhus.

Essentials

Ryanair <https://www.ryanair.com/gb/en/> flies from Stansted to Aarhus and 
also to nearby Billund.British Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb> starts flights to 
Billund from Heathrow in May. Accomodation was provided byVilla Provence 
<http://villaprovence.dk/> with doubles from £135, and Scandic Aarhus City 
<http://www.scandichotels.com/> with doubles from £95. For more information, go 
toVisit Aarhus <http://www.visitaarhus.com/ln-int/denmark/tourist-in-aarhus>
 