
They are, if not the holy trinity, then at least the hallowed trio. Amos Oz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/feb/14/amos-oz-interview>, David 
Grossman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-grossman> and AB Yehoshua – 
once hailed as “the three tenors” of Israeli literature, who have for decades 
served an exalted double role. Inside the country, they are the unofficial 
liberal conscience of the nation: delivering rousing speeches at demonstrations 
or firing off newspaper polemics that burn with righteous indignation, whether 
lamenting Israel’s march rightward, denouncing its presence in the territories 
occupied since 1967 or making the deeply unfashionable case for peace with 
the Palestinians. Outside Israel, where literary prizes are heaped on them 
with unflagging regularity, they offer those same red-hot criticisms – but 
at the same time, and with no contradiction, also mount a defence of Israel 
itself: not its governments, but its right to be there and what they see as its 
enduring necessity.

Of the three, Yehoshua might be the least well known beyond Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. Perhaps that’s because he does not 
have Oz or Grossman’s unnerving ability to deploy the English language with a 
precision and eloquence few native speakers can muster. Yet Yehoshua, who in 
his 80th year is the oldest of the trio, is at least as celebrated. In 2005, he 
was the sole Israeli on the shortlist for the first International Man Booker 
prize.

And yet recent times have not been good for the version of their country the 
trio have come to embody. Liberal, outward-looking Israel has been under 
sustained assault, taking its most overt form this year with apublicity campaign
 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/likud-mk-pummels-fascist-group-for-outing-lefty-artists/>
 mounted by a rightwing activist group, Im Tirtzu, which named and shamed 
artists it branded “moles in culture”, slamming them for supporting leftwing 
organisations partially funded by foreign governments. On the hitlist were 
a variety of Israeli performers and singers, but pride of place went, 
naturally, to Oz, Grossman and Yehoshua.

The Likud politician, Benny Begin – son of former prime minister Menachem 
Begin – condemned the campaign as “fascist”, while others warned that branding 
dissenting artists as, in effect, traitors was a tactic bound to end in 
violence against those targeted. WhenIm Tirtzu’s leader was accused of 
McCarthyism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/israel-im-tirtzu-accused-mccarthyism-anti-artist-campaign>
, his response was to defend Joe McCarthy.

But it goes broader than that. Yehoshua and his comrades have been on the 
losing side of Israel’s internal argument for more than 20 years. The “peace 
camp”, as it was always quaintly styled, has never recovered from the 
assassination in 1995 of Yitzhak Rabin, the prime minister who appeared to 
be on the brink of doing the peace deal they had all been advocating for 
decades. Since then, the “two-state solution” – which Oz and Yehoshua began to 
sketch out almost as soon as the 1967 war was over, and which imagines a secure 
Israel alongside an independent state of Palestine – has come to seem a 
fantasy, and a dead one at that. The cause of death, the Israeli peace camp 
would say, has been the intransigence of both the Israeli and Palestinian 
leaderships and Israel’s ever-expanding settlements on the West Bank. And as 
that two-state vision has withered, so has the movement – or the Israeli tribe 
– that once nurtured it. Where once the likes of Yehoshua could claim to speak 
for at least half of Israeli society, these days he seems to speak for an 
Israel – secular, enlightened, humane – that is shrinking, banished ever 
further to the margins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f7133495d97aa5677bfac4dc4e71fbd7f31b2f%2F0_0_4875_2992%2F4875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AB%20Yehoshua%3A%20%E2%80%98Instead%20of%20dealing%20with%20Palestine%2C%20the%20new%20generation%20do%20a%20play%20or%20write%20a%20story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AB%20Yehoshua%3A%20%E2%80%98Instead%20of%20dealing%20with%20Palestine%2C%20the%20new%20generation%20do%20a%20play%20or%20write%20a%20story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f7133495d97aa5677bfac4dc4e71fbd7f31b2f%2F0_0_4875_2992%2F4875.jpg>
 Amos Oz, once hailed, along with Jehoshua and Grossman, as one of the ‘three 
tenors’ of Israeli literature. Photograph: isifa/Getty Images 
In person, Avraham Yehoshua – the B is for Bulli, a nickname given to him by 
two girls at junior school that has stuck for life – conveys none of this. 
In London to promote his new novel,The Extra 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400636//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, he bubbles with vitality, laughing easily, smiling readily, rushing to 
embrace Rivka – he calls her Ika – his psychoanalyst wife who accompanies him 
everywhere: “More than 50 years of being analysed!” Some of his literary 
colleagues can cut a sober, even severe figure, but Yehoshua is garrulous and 
effervescent. If the New York Times once called him “the Israeli Faulkner”, you 
wouldn’t hesitate to cast him as the Israeli Falstaff.

Yet none of that joie de vivre detracts from the seriousness of what he has to 
say. “The occupation is poisoning us,” he tells me. “Poisoning us! The problem 
is not only for the Palestinians. It’s poisoning Israel, poisoning the DNA of 
the Israeli people. The two systems of law [in the West Bank], of judges, this 
is penetrating Israel. It’s corrupting Israel.”

He cites as an example the growing intrusion of racism and casual bigotry into 
the country’s discourse. “I remember the [1948] war of independence. We were a 
small community, attacked by seven Arab states. And really they wanted to wipe 
us from Earth. But I never heard people speaking about the Arabs in a racist 
way. Even though justice was on our side. Now the Arabs are very – very – weak, 
so you can permit yourself to speak like this about the Arabs. Then there was 
respect. You spoke about peace because you were afraid. Now,” – and he begins 
to channel the voice of the Israeli everyman – “‘I don’t need peace, what do I 
need peace for? Because of Syria, which is totally in chaos? And Iraq, which is 
in ruins? And all the Arabs are killing each other! What do I need peace for?’” 
And so “the racist and nationalist” discourse rises, a reaction to the weakness 
of the Arab nations that have arrived, says the writer, at “one of the terrible 
moments in their history”.

This is something of a theme for Yehoshua, present in several of his novels 
(though it does not loom large in the latest one): the question of Israeli 
respect, or even simple recognition, of the Palestinians who live among and 
alongside them. In the 1962 story that made Yehoshua’s name, “Facing the 
Forests”, a young army reservist is on guard duty, watching over a wood planted 
in the new state of Israel. Sharing his duties is an older and mute Palestinian 
Arab, whose tongue was cut out in the 1948 war. The climax of the story comes 
when the latter sets the forest alight, burning it down until the ruin of his 
own, ancient village emerges from the ashes. Read from today’s vantage point, 
the symbolism may seem too direct, if not obvious, but in its time the story 
was a radical, provocative statement – recognising that the new Israel had been 
built, in part, on the ruins of another society, displaced and dispossessed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff01ef4c92b97d85ce4bb2031321ac99b5afcd667%2F0_0_2100_1311%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AB%20Yehoshua%3A%20%E2%80%98Instead%20of%20dealing%20with%20Palestine%2C%20the%20new%20generation%20do%20a%20play%20or%20write%20a%20story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AB%20Yehoshua%3A%20%E2%80%98Instead%20of%20dealing%20with%20Palestine%2C%20the%20new%20generation%20do%20a%20play%20or%20write%20a%20story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff01ef4c92b97d85ce4bb2031321ac99b5afcd667%2F0_0_2100_1311%2F2100.jpg>
 AB Yehoshua in 2002. Photograph: FLASH 90/EPA 
Perhaps Yehoshua saw what others had not seen because his background was 
different from theirs. Unlike Oz, Grossman and the rest of Israel’s literary 
aristocracy, whose roots are Ashkenazi or European, Yehoshua’s are Sephardi or 
Mizrachi, sunk deep in the Mediterranean and North Africa. He is a 
fifth-generation Jerusalemite, his father’s family originally from Salonica, 
his mother from Morocco. He once said that he sees the Arabs“not as enemies but 
as cousins” 
<http://www.thejc.com/lifestyle/lifestyle-features/102912/a-b-yehoshua-%E2%80%94-writer-still-shaping-israel%E2%80%99s-identity>
. No matter how fierce the conflict, “they are more of a kind of family, with 
all the problems of family. We have to live with them.”

And so, that early story apart, the Palestinian characters in Yehoshua’s works 
are far from silent.The Lover features a 14-year-old Arab boy, fluent in the 
Hebrew poems of Bialik. InThe Liberated Bride, perhaps the most driven 
character is an ambitious young Palestinian woman, studying for a master’s 
degree. Yehoshua has said that he sees it as part of his duty to “make the 
Arabs flesh and blood, to make them real”.

No doubt that remark, like those fictional creations, would enrage your 
average lecturer in postcolonial studies, eager to denounce Yehoshua for his 
privileged condescension. But Yehoshua is self-aware on that score too. The 
cast ofThe Liberated Bride consists of a cluster of Orientalist academics, 
at the centre of which is a Yehoshua-like scholar at Haifa University – where 
the novelist taught for much of his career – engaged in a quest to “understand 
the Arab mind”. In which mission he, of course, fails. (Yehoshua’s father was 
himself an Orientalist scholar.)

Like most of Israel’s writers, Yehoshua is used to his work facing this kind 
of political scrutiny, each novel read as if it were a manifesto. While 
a British or American novelist may be regularly asked what aspects are 
autobiographical, the Israeli writer is constantly called on to defend the 
views of his characters, either explicit or implied. Oz has always attributed 
this habit to the“Judeo-Slavonic tradition” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/feb/22/artsfeatures.israelandthepalestinians>
 of seeing the writer as a prophet, guiding his wayward people out of 
the wilderness. But Yehoshua traces a more specific, and recent, lineage.

He notes that the founding fathers of 19th- and 20th-century political Zionism 
– he namechecksTheodor Herzl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2013/apr/05/antisemitic-attacks-hungary-israel>
,Max Nordau <http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/biography/nordau.html> 
andVladimir Jabotinsky <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Vladimir-Jabotinsky>
, the latter revered as the spiritual father of the Likud right – were all 
writers. “Jabotinsky was a writer, translator and a poet. He wanted all the 
time to return to his desk.” He didn’t want to be running a political party, 
meeting world leaders. He wanted to write plays and tell stories. But the call 
of national duty was too great.

Yehoshua sees himself, along with Oz and Grossman, as staying true to that 
tradition. When the moment demands it, they put down the novel and take up the 
megaphone. Which is why you can bet that at any rally of the Israeli peace 
movement over the last three or more decades, one of those three will have been 
on the platform.

But what is striking is that the three tenors have not had any real 
competition for the role of literary-cum-political seers since the 1980s. Why 
hasn’t a new generation of novelist-activists emerged to take their place? 
Could it be that Yehoshua is part of a dying breed?

“I blame our camp [the peace camp], for abandoning ideology,” he says. While 
the national-religious forces, those who back the settlement project and favour 
territorial maximalism, have been busy – organising seminars, even arranging 
weekend talks for young soldiers doing their compulsory military service – “we 
are doing culture  instead of politics. After 1967, I did [constant] talks and 
articles. The new generation, instead of dealing with the Palestinian issue, 
they do a play or write a story. All the energy is going into the culture.” He 
worries about this decline in activism and advocacy, of the kind to which he, 
Oz and Grossman have given so much of their working lives. “They are not well 
prepared to do battle with the ideology that is coming from the other camp.”

What’s more, the new generation rarely engage in the careful balancing act 
that has long characterised the famous trio: always defending the idea of 
Israel, its right to survive and thrive, even when lambasting successive 
governments. And, no less important, being sensitive to those neuralgic areas 
which, if mishandled, are likely to alienate mainstream Jewish or Israeli 
opinion that might otherwise be open to persuasion.

Sounds Jewish podcast: Jewish Book Week special
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/audio/2013/mar/01/sounds-jewish-podcast-book-week>
In an appearance at Jewish Book Week in London earlier this year, Yehoshua 
gave a masterclass in the art, speaking candidly of Israel’s flaws – referring 
to Israel’s West Bank settlements as “colonies” – without losing the sympathy 
of a largely Jewish audience. He faults younger Israeli writers for not only 
staying out of the national debate but also, when they do wade in, getting it 
wrong by throwing around loose analogies with Nazi Germany or apartheid South 
Africa, language that closes the ears of those who might have been ready to 
listen.

In that same spirit, Yehoshua is at pains to show he understands why his camp 
lost an Israeli electorate that was once ready to elect dove-ish prime 
ministers. The key turning point was the 2005 withdrawal from Gaza. The way 
Israelis saw it, the country dismantled its settlements and pulled out its 
soldiers – only to be rewarded with Hamas rockets landing on towns and villages 
in southern Israel. “After what happened in Gaza, people are despair[ing],” he 
says. The novelist channels the everyman’s voice again. “‘What, we gave Gaza to 
the Hamas, all the settlements evacuated, and they are throwing missiles: so 
[if we withdraw from the West Bank] they will be throwing missiles on the 
airport from Ramallah. Is that you want?’”

It’s strange, this pressure on a man who, almost anywhere else, would surely 
be allowed just to be a writer and university professor, producing short 
stories and plays; his novels adapted for TV, film and even opera. Instead, he 
is obliged to navigate around his society’s sore spots with as much dextrous 
empathy as any politician or diplomat.

And yet, you can see how it happens. To be sure, Yehoshua’s novels are not 
frontal accounts of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Rather, they are often 
gently paced, meandering tales of quotidian Israeli life, in no hurry to yield 
their secrets. They dwell on families, especially marriage. Their characters 
regularly include people returning home, keen to excavate or interrogate the 
past, hoping it might provide a guide to the perplexing present and future. 
Sometimes these stories can turn dark, pivoting on incest or suicide. Still, 
for all their focus on the private and intimate, a public, political reading 
is all but irresistible.

Take the latest book, The Extra. It tells the story of Noga, a harpist who had 
moved to the Netherlands but is back in Jerusalem for a few months. To bring in 
some money she takes on work as a film extra. Earlier, her marriage broke up, 
in part because of her unwillingness to have children – a decision deemed all 
but criminal in an Israeli society that venerates child-raising and that can 
regard any woman who has had fewer than three children as ducking her national 
duty. What’s more, Noga has returned to a Jerusalem neighbourhood that was once 
a diverse mixture of religious and secular Jews but that is now almost 
completely “black” – here used to refer to the black-suited, black-hatted men 
of Jewish ultra-orthodoxy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1c02d7e8f7314a1f5c83600a212c4070c4dea25%2F0_0_2832_4256%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AB%20Yehoshua%3A%20%E2%80%98Instead%20of%20dealing%20with%20Palestine%2C%20the%20new%20generation%20do%20a%20play%20or%20write%20a%20story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AB%20Yehoshua%3A%20%E2%80%98Instead%20of%20dealing%20with%20Palestine%2C%20the%20new%20generation%20do%20a%20play%20or%20write%20a%20story%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1c02d7e8f7314a1f5c83600a212c4070c4dea25%2F0_0_2832_4256%2F2832.jpg>
 David Grossman in 2011. Photograph: Martin Bureau/AFP/Getty Images 
Before you know it, what should be a human, personal story can be read as 
journalistic, sociological observation. What does Yehoshua make of this Israeli 
demand for fecundity (driven, in part, by a post-Holocaust urge to create 
Jewish life)? “I have three children and seven grandchildren: I have done my 
duty!” And of the increasing religiosity of Jerusalem’s Jews? He does not 
lament it much, because the ultra-orthodox Jews are not his “adversary”. That 
label is reserved for the dogmatic ideologues of the national-religious and the 
settler movements.

More subtle is the fact of Noga’s move away from Israel. She is one of many 
Yehoshua characters to have left the country, only to come back. Usually, these 
people –yordim in Hebrew, literally “those who have descended” – are portrayed 
in a dim light, evidence of what one critic accurately described as“Yehoshua’s 
contempt for the diaspora” <http://www.thenation.com/article/scenes-marriage/>.

That contempt is rooted in a worldview best characterised as classical 
Zionism. The Z-word is now so widely misunderstood as to have become almost 
useless. Too many people think it refers to a hawkish attitude to the 
Palestinians or a maximalist position on territory. But it was originally the 
name for the revolutionary belief that Jewish life could only thrive, that Jews 
could only be complete, if they lived as a free people in a land where they 
could govern themselves. Yehoshua is a lifelong peacenik, fierce in his 
opposition to the occupation – but, in this classical sense of the term, he is 
also a diehard, unbending Zionist.

Which means he believes that for Jews to live outside Israel, as a minority in 
the lands of others, is to live an innately “neurotic” life, where their 
identity is unclear: are they a nation or a religion, an ethnic minority or 
what exactly? Only Jews who live in the ancestral homeland, speaking Hebrew, 
the rhythms of their life set by a Jewish calendar and, most important of all, 
taking responsibility for the decisions of the world’s only Jewish society by 
participating in its democratic decision-making – only those Jews can be 
described as “complete”.

At intervals, Yehoshua delivers this message to diaspora Jewish audiences, 
usually in the US, offending them in the process. He did it again in 2013, 
telling young Americans they were only“partial Jews” 
<http://www.tabletmag.com/scroll/124689/a-b-yehoshua-calls-american-jews-partial-jews 
Jews> and that they should move to Israel. It caused a rumpus. But that is 
chiefly because these days few dare voice such a thing out loud. There was a 
time when it was the standard catechism of Zionism. But among 21st-century 
Jews, especially in the US, it is deemed impolite, judgemental and 
insufficiently respectful of difference.

For some it makes Yehoshua a dinosaur, clinging to a theoretical, hardcore 
doctrine that no longer fits the way Jews have chosen to live. But it is deeply 
challenging. When we meet, he cheerfully declares that I too am a “partial Jew” 
while he is a “total Jew”. He contrasts me withSalim Joubran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/apr/22/israel>, the Palestinian Arab 
judge who sits on Israel’s supreme court and who in 2011upheld the sentencing 
of Moshe Katsav, the country’s former president to seven years in jail for rape 
and sexual abuse 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/israel-s-supreme-court-upholds-former-president-katsav-s-rape-conviction-7-year-jail-term-1.394752>
. Joubran “knows the language, Hebrew and the legal code” that has emerged from 
three millennia of Jewish jurisprudence, Yehoshua says. “As an Arab, he was 
helping to define a new moral code in the Jewish tradition.” Of course, he is 
not suggesting that Joubran is a Jew or somehow more Jewish than me. But he is 
raising a profound question about Jewish identity and, especially, what meaning 
it contains outside a society with a Jewish majority.

If the criticism of Yehoshua is that he has remained too stubbornly loyal to 
his brand of paleo-Zionism, he has not remained fixed on the Palestinian 
question. He opposes calls for a cultural boycott of Israel, believing that 
dialogue and the free circulation of ideas are essential. But he is flexible on 
matters others regard as non-negotiable. “We have to rethink the two-state 
solution,” he says. “We were repeating all the time ‘two states, two states, 
two states’ for 45 years. We cannot just repeat it,” not when the two peoples 
themselves clearly do not favour it enough to have made it happen.

Rather than do nothing, simply waiting for the distant day when the two sides 
make peace – “I cannot wait for the Messiah!” – better to do what can be done 
now to reduce the occupation. To that end, he suggests Israel give full voting 
rights to those Palestinians living in the so-called Area C of the West Bank, 
where most of the settlers live, so that that part of the territory is absorbed 
into Israel proper: Jews and Palestinians there will then come under the same 
single legal system. It is strange to hear this – a call for annexation of 
occupied territory – from a titan of the Israeli left, but you can see what has 
brought him to this point. “This is my target: to stop or reduce occupation.”

He is committed to that end, but insists he is “open” on the means. It could 
be “an intermediate” spell of Israelis and Palestinians living in a single 
binational state, with a view to forming two states later. Or perhaps a 
confederation, of Israel, Palestine and Jordan. Yehoshua even has a name for 
such a place, a compound word formed (like “Benelux <http://www.benelux.int/fr>
”, he says) from the first syllable of each country’s name in its own language. 
It would be Isfalur: Israel, Falestine and Urdun. “Its a beautiful word,” he 
says. “It sounds good.” And Yehoshua – both the novelist and the political 
thinker – smiles.
 