
Abdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> – 
Hamid Karzai's main challenger in Afghanistan's disputed presidential election 
– has ruled himself out of the incoming government.

Afghanistan's former foreign minister, who refused to take part in a runoff 
election, said he had no interest in joining Karzai's cabinet and questioned 
the president's ability to deliver promised reform. "That government cannot 
bring legitimacy, cannot fight corruption," Abdullah said in his first comments 
since Afghanistan's election authority, the Independent Election Commission, 
declared Karzai the winner after Abdullah pulled out.

"A government which is derived from such an illegal decision will not be able 
to deliver ... [It] cannot deal with all the challenges, especially the threat 
of terrorism, security problems, poverty, unemployment and many others."

The run-off was triggered by widespread fraud in the August first round. 
Abdullah withdrew from the second round, citing serious concerns about further 
ballot rigging. His refusal to work with Karzai is a blow to the president's 
western backers who have urged him to reach out to the opposition to form a 
government that will enjoy popular support in an increasingly bloody war 
against the Taliban.

People close to Karzai and Abdullah said the two held talks over the last few 
weeks but failed to reach a power-sharing agreement. Karzai said in hisvictory 
speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/nov/03/afghanistan-election-abdullah-karzai>
 that he would welcome anyone from the opposition into his administration but 
did not make a direct appeal to Abdullah.

In his criticism of Karzai, Abdullah accused the president of wasting eight 
years of "golden opportunity" and western aid by failing to stop corruption or 
create a government that responded to the needs of the Afghan people.Afghanistan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> needed more foreign troops in 
the absence of a "credible and legitimate partner" for the occupying forces, he 
said.

The US and Britain have warned Abdullah they might not be prepared to work 
with him if he does anything to incite his followers to violence.
 