



That the government should step in with £250m to help ailing Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen>, the centre of Britain’s oil and gas 
industry, seems right given the billions in tax revenues ministers have 
extracted from the North Sea over several decades. And though it might seem 
counterintuitive to come to the rescue of a city built on fossil fuels – given 
the threat of global warming – it also makes sense for Britain to keep 
producing its own oil and gas until it can find ways of doing without them.


But the reality is that the £250m “city deal” from David Cameron, topped up 
with £254m from the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/28/aberdeen-500m-investment-north-sea-oil-price-slump>
 – will do little to stem the crisis that has leftoil workers in the city using 
food banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/23/aberdeen-once-rich-oil-city-now-relying-on-food-banks>
.

BP to announce 70% collapse in profits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/31/bp-to-announce-70-collapse-in-profits>
Around 70,000 redundancies have already been made across the British oil and 
gas industry, and more will follow, given that the price of oil has fallen from 
$115 a barrel to $30 in a little more than 18 months. North Sea exploration and 
development drilling has dropped to a trickle, leaving rigs and other equipment 
laid up or moved elsewhere.

The danger is that the North Sea becomes the Dead Sea, with business not 
returning even though there is plenty of oil and gas still under the waves. 
Some of the government cash will be used to find ways to extract small reserves 
profitably, before platforms and pipelines are abandoned.

The oil price collapse has thrown Aberdeen into turmoil, but its decline has 
long been in sight. Ministers should have made the North Sea’s twilight years 
productive but transitional.

A lot will depend on tax rates, which are already being cut. International 
companies make up the bulk of the North Sea operators, and they will stick 
around only if it is worth their while. This inevitably sticks in the craw of 
environmentalists, who see ministers rushing to the aid of BigOil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> while slashing support for wind and 
solar energy, as well as ending carbon capture and storage projects.

Ultimately the future of Britain’s energy should be green, not black. We need 
to find a new Aberdeen where low-carbon technologies are celebrated – and 
financed properly.
 