
Richard Curtis's film is a good-natured fantasy romance of such utterable 
daftness that it's impossible to dislike. Criticising it is like vivisecting a 
Labrador puppy. All the traditional Curtis items are in place, including a 
jolly cast of upper-class folk, a wacky/vulnerable kid sister, characters who 
go into strange Curtis-speak under pressure ("Oh my arsing God in a box!"), and 
a Hugh-Grant-replicant leading man: 30-year-old Domhnall Gleeson sounds so much 
like the young Grant I suspected he'd been dubbed. But there are some nice gags 
and some ingenious narrative turns in Curtis's well-carpentered screenplay.

Gleeson plays Tim, the shy son of eccentric, well-off parents (Bill Nighy and 
Lindsay Duncan). At 21, he leaves the family nest in Cornwall to take up his 
barrister pupillage in London and, yearning for love, meets Mary (Rachel 
McAdams), whose under-par frock and non-glam fringe can't deflect his and our 
appreciation of what a babe she is. Their relationship is, however, made 
fraught by Tim's secret superpower: he can travel back in time to any point in 
his own past, and correct his dopey mistakes, though creating new ones along 
the way. This is nearer to Sliding Doors than the dyspeptic Groundhog Day. 
Curtis is a director who likes his spoonful of sugar, and isn't shy of breaking 
out Arvo Pärt on the soundtrack to make sure we recognise the sad bits. (Come 
to think of it, Jean-Luc Godard has done the same sentimental thing in Origins 
of the 21st Century, though the comparison of these two directors is best left 
there.) You'll need a sweet tooth for this film, but it's heartfelt, with a 
fragile sort of sincerity.
 