
The radical cleric Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> and 
four other terrorist suspects were last night extradited to the US after the 
high court cleared the way for their immediate removal.

The men were on two planes that left a military airbase in Suffolk late last 
night, the home secretary, Theresa May, said. Speaking after the US-bound 
flights had taken off, May said: "I can confirm that tonight two planes have 
left RAF Mildenhall to transport Abu Hamza, Babar Ahmad, Adel Abdul Bary, Syed 
Ahsan and Khalid al-Fawwaz to the US to face trial.

"I am pleased the decision of the court today meant that these men, who used 
every available opportunity to frustrate and delay the extradition process over 
many years, could finally be removed.

"This government has co-operated fully with the courts and pressed at every 
stage to ensure this happened. We have worked tirelessly, alongside the US 
authorities, the police and the prison service, to put plans in place so that 
tonight these men could be handed over within hours of the court's decision. It 
is right that these men, who are all accused of very serious offences, will 
finally face justice."

After three days of legal argument, Sir John Thomas, president of the Queen's 
Bench division, and Mr Justice Ouseley lifted injunctions that had been 
preventing the men's removal.

The decision is the culmination of an eight-year legal battle that has 
strained the government's constitutional relationship with the European court 
of human rights in Strasbourg and frustrated politicians, as well as the lord 
chief justice.

The cases have involved appeals through the hierarchy of British and European 
courts, then back to the royal courts of justice in London.

Delivering judgment, Sir John Thomas said: "All of these claimants have long 
ago exhausted the [legal] procedures in the UK. There's an overwhelming public 
interest in the proper functioning of the extradition arrangements in the US. 
It's important to recognise the finality of these proceedings."

Sir John said that extradition proceedings should take months not years and 
the process had been "disfigured" by protracted delays. "There's no appeal from 
our decision and the home secretary will be free" to extradite them, he added.

Sir John was scathing about the attempt to try to bring a private prosecution 
against Babar Ahmad and Talha Ahsan in Britain. "It's now far, far, far too 
late to raise it now," he said. The use of such a procedure amounted to an 
"abuse of process".

Sir John Thomas also suggested that reform of extradition procedures in future 
to stop them dragging on for so long. He said: "There may well be a need to 
reconsider the inter-relationship of the statutory appeal scheme, the ability 
to reopen appeals and the role of judicial review."

The US wants all five men to face al-Qaida-related terrorist charges in 
American courts.

The Home Office reacted immediately to the decision by tweeting 
<https://twitter.com/ukhomeoffice/status/254219752531177472>: "We welcome the 
high court decision on Abu Hamza & others. We are now working to extradite 
these men as quickly as possible."

Police vehicles, including armoured vans, arrived at HMP Long Lartin, near 
Evesham, in Worcestershire at around 6.30pm on Friday. After about an hour, the 
vehicles, understood to have Hamza and the other men inside, left the prison 
grounds. Under heavy security, they drove off at speed to RAF Mildenhall.

Four of the five men had claimed that harsh prison conditions in the high 
security unit at the US jail, ADX Florence in Colorado, where they may 
eventually be imprisoned would breach their human rights. Abu Hamza, it was 
said, would not have to spend too long at the facility because of hid many 
medical conditions.

Abu Hamza, 54, who was jailed for seven years for soliciting murder and 
inciting racial hatred, has been fighting extradition since 2004. His lawyers 
opposed deportation on the grounds that he wassuffering memory loss and 
depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/03/abu-hamza-depression-court?newsfeed=true>
 and was unfit to plead. They sought permission for the former imam at Finsbury 
Park mosque in north London to be given an MRI scan to assess his medical 
condition.

Ahmad, 37, a computer expert, and Ahsan, 33, are accused of raising funds for 
terrorism through a website. Lawyers for the two men challenged the director of 
public prosecution's decision not to charge them with offences allegedly 
committed in the UK. Fawwaz, who is alleged to have been an aide to Osama bin 
Laden in the 1990s, was seeking disclosure of an 800-page MI6 document relating 
to the debriefing of another suspect which, his lawyers maintain, would 
undermine the charges against him.

Bary, 52, is also said to have worked closely with Bin Laden. His barrister 
argued that conditions in US high-security jails would breach his rights under 
the European convention on human rights â€“ a claim already dismissed by the 
Strasbourg court.

Bary and Fawwaz are wanted in relation to the bombings of US embassies in east 
Africa in 1998.

Protesters opposing deportation and supporting Ahmad and Ahsan gathered 
outside the royal courts of justice.

Lines of police officers watched as protesters chanted: "British justice for 
British citizens" and waved "Stop extradition" placards. A few wore union flag 
T-shirts emblazoned with the motto: "Extradite me, I'm British".

The US embassy in London welcomed the court's decision and noted that they had 
submitted the first extradition request 14 years ago: "These extraditions mark 
the end of a lengthy process of litigation through the UK courts and the 
European court of human rights." Its statement particularly highlighted the 
Strasbourg court's finding that conditions in American maximum security 
facilities did not violate European standards.

Babar Ahmad stated: "Today I have lost my eight-year-and-two-month battle 
against extradition to the US. I would like to thank all those over the years 
who supported me and my family: lawyers, politicians, journalists and members 
of the public from all walks of life.

"By exposing the fallacy of the UK's extradition arrangements with the US, I 
leave with my head held high, having won the moral victory."

Ashfaq Ahmad, father of Babar Ahmad, stated: "After over 40 years of paying 
taxes in this country, I am appalled that the system has let me down in a 
manner more befitting of a third world country than one of the world's oldest 
democracies.

"It seems that the Metropolitan police, the CPS and even the court have all 
colluded to implement a predetermined decision which was made in Washington.

"We will never abandon our struggle for justice and the truth will eventually 
emerge of what will be for ever remembered as a shameful chapter in the history 
of Britain."
 