
The Islamist cleric Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza> 
and four other terrorism suspects have arrived in the US after being extradited 
from Britain, US officials have confirmed.

The US attorney's office in New York said Hamza, Khaled al-Fawwaz and Adel 
Abdul Bary were in New York City and were expected to appear in court later on 
Saturday.

The US attorney's office in Connecticut said Babar Ahmad and Syed Talha Ahsan 
are scheduled to appear in US district court in New Haven, in connection with 
the alleged running of a pro-jihad website.

The men were deported on two planes which left a military airbase in Suffolk 
late on Friday night after the high court rejected their final appeals earlier 
in the day.

Abu Hamza faces 11 charges in the US relating to hostage taking, conspiracy to 
establish a militant training camp and calling for holy war in Afghanistan.

His lawyers argued he was not fit to be deported on health grounds but UK 
judges rejected his appeal, paving the way for his immediate removal from the 
UK.

The prime minister, David Cameron, has expressed his delight that Hamza had 
finally been deported from Britain.

"Like the rest of the public I'm sick to the back teeth of people who come 
here, threaten our country, who stay at vast expense to the taxpayer and we 
can't get rid of them," he said.

"I'm delighted on this occasion we've managed to send this person off to a 
country where he will face justice."

Cameron said the government must consider ways of stopping similar cases 
reoccurring.

"Now we should learn every lesson," he said. "How do we stop these people 
coming in? How do we get rid of them more quickly? How do we make sure they 
don't spend so long at taxpayers' expense?

"I'm as frustrated as the rest of the country when these things happen."

The high court also threw out challenges by Babar Ahmad, Syed Ahsan, Khaled 
al-Fawwaz and Adel Abdul Bary after ruling they did not show "new and 
compelling" reasons to stay in the UK.

Speaking after the US-bound flights had taken off, the home secretary, Theresa 
May, said: "I am pleased the decision of the court today meant that these men, 
who used every available opportunity to frustrate and delay the extradition 
process over many years, could finally be removed.

"This government has co-operated fully with the courts and pressed at every 
stage to ensure this happened. We have worked tirelessly, alongside the US 
authorities, the police and the prison service, to put plans in place so that 
tonight these men could be handed over within hours of the court's decision. It 
is right that these men, who are all accused of very serious offences, will 
finally face justice."

After three days of legal argument, Sir John Thomas, president of the Queen's 
Bench division, and Mr Justice Ouseley lifted injunctions that had been 
preventing the men's removal.

The decision is the culmination of an eight-year legal battle that has 
strained the government's constitutional relationship with the European court 
of human rights in Strasbourg and frustrated politicians, as well as the lord 
chief justice.

The cases have involved appeals through the hierarchy of British and European 
courts, then back to the royal courts of justice in London.

Delivering judgment, Thomas said: "All of these claimants have long ago 
exhausted the [legal] procedures in the UK. There's an overwhelming public 
interest in the proper functioning of the extradition arrangements in the US. 
It's important to recognise the finality of these proceedings."

Thomas said extradition proceedings should take months not years and the 
process had been "disfigured" by protracted delays. "There's no appeal from our 
decision and the home secretary will be free" to extradite them, he said.

Thomas was scathing about the attempt to try to bring a private prosecution 
against Babar Ahmad and Talha Ahsan in Britain. "It's now far, far, far too 
late to raise it," he said. The use of such a procedure amounted to an "abuse 
of process".

He also suggested that reform of extradition procedures should be considered 
to stop them being dragged out. "There may well be a need to reconsider the 
inter-relationship of the statutory appeal scheme, the ability to reopen 
appeals and the role of judicial review."

The US wants all five men to face al-Qaida-related terrorist charges in US 
courts.

Preet Bharara, the US attorney for the southern district of New York, said 
Hamza would appear in court on Saturday before being arraigned on Tuesday 
morning during which there would be a pre-trial conference.

"As is charged, these are men who were at the nerve centres of al-Qaida's acts 
of terror, and they caused blood to be shed, lives to be lost and families to 
be shattered," he said.

"After years of protracted legal battles, the extradition of these three 
alleged terrorists to the US is a watershed moment in our nation's efforts to 
eradicate terrorism, and it makes good on a promise to the American people to 
use every available diplomatic, legal, and administrative tool to pursue and 
prosecute charged terrorists no matter how long it takes. Now, Abu Hamza, Adel 
Abdul Bary and Khaled al-Fawwaz will finally face justice."

Four of the five suspects had claimed that harsh prison conditions in the 
high-security unit of ADX Florence jail in Colorado, where they may eventually 
be imprisoned, would breach their human rights. It was said Abu Hamza would not 
have to spend too long at the facility because of his many medical conditions.

The 54-year-old, who was jailed for seven years for soliciting murder and 
inciting racial hatred, has been fighting extradition since 2004. His lawyers 
opposed deportation on the grounds that he was suffering memory loss and 
depression and was unfit to plead. They sought permission for the former imam 
at Finsbury Park mosque in north London to be given an MRI scan to assess his 
medical condition.

Ahmad, 37, a computer expert, and Ahsan, 33, are accused of raising funds for 
terrorism through a website. Lawyers for the two men challenged the director of 
public prosecutions' decision not to charge them with offences allegedly 
committed in the UK.

Fawwaz, who is alleged to have been an aide to Osama bin Laden in the 1990s, 
was seeking disclosure of an 800-page MI6 document relating to the debriefing 
of another suspect which, his lawyers maintain, would undermine the charges 
against him. Bary, 52, is also said to have worked closely with Bin Laden. His 
barrister argued that conditions in US high-security jails would breach his 
rights under the European convention on human rights â€“ a claim already 
dismissed by the Strasbourg court.

Bary and Fawwaz are wanted in relation to the bombings of US embassies in east 
Africa in 1998.

Protesters opposing deportation and supporting Ahmad and Ahsan gathered 
outside the royal courts of justice. Lines of police officers watched as they 
chanted: "British justice for British citizens" and waved "Stop extradition" 
placards. A few wore union flag T-shirts emblazoned with the motto: "Extradite 
me, I'm British".

After the ruling, Ahmad stated: "Today I have lost my eight-year-and-two-month 
battle against extradition to the US. I would like to thank all those over the 
years who supported me and my family: lawyers, politicians, journalists and 
members of the public from all walks of life.

"By exposing the fallacy of the UK's extradition arrangements with the US, I 
leave with my head held high, having won the moral victory."

His father, Ashfaq Ahmad, said: "After over 40 years of paying taxes in this 
country, I am appalled that the system has let me down in a manner more 
befitting of a third world country than one of the world's oldest democracies.

"It seems that the Metropolitan police, the CPS [Crown Prosecution Service] 
and even the court have all colluded to implement a predetermined decision 
which was made in Washington.

"We will never abandon our struggle for justice and the truth will eventually 
emerge of what will be forever remembered as a shameful chapter in the history 
of Britain."
 