
Radical Islamist cleric Abu Hamza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>
 and four other terrorism suspects appeared in front of US judges on Saturday, 
having arrived on American soil in the middle of the night following 
extradition from Britain.

Hamza, Khaled al-Fawwaz and Adel Abdul Bary all appeared in New York, in a 
downtown-Manhattan courtroom; Babar Ahmad and Syed Talha Ahsan were put in 
front of a judge in New Haven, Connecticut.

Hamza, who has gained notoriety as a firebrand preacher with hooks for hands, 
had his prosthetic limbs confiscated by the Bureau of Prisons. He appeared in 
front of Judge Frank Maas with his bare stumps on display as he was read his 
rights. He then listened to a long list of terror charges filed against him, 
ranging from kidnapping in Yemen to supplying the Taliban.

Hamza's lawyer, Sabrina Shroff, asked the court to return her client's medical 
devices as soon as possible as he could not bathe without them.

"Otherwise he will not be able to function in a civilised manner," she told 
the judge, who then granted that they be returned.

Hamza wore simple blue prison garb and was unshackled during the court 
appearance. He seemed calm when in court and anxious only when discussing his 
medical needs with his lawyer. He spoke to the judge only once, saying "I do" 
when asked if he could affirm the details of a financial affidavit he had 
filled out.

Earlier, al-Fawwaz and Abdul Bary, dressed in similar prison clothes and 
seeming calm but serious, both pleaded not guilty to a similarly lengthy list 
of terror charges. In Connecticut, Ahmad and Ahsan likewise pleaded their 
innocence.

The men were deported on Friday night, aboard two planes which left a military 
airbase in Suffolk, UK, after the high court rejected their final appeals 
earlier in the day. They touched down in the US around 2.30am on Saturday.

Abu Hamza faces 11 charges in the US, relating to hostage taking, conspiracy 
to establish a militant training camp and calling for holy war in Afghanistan.

His lawyers argued he was not fit to be deported on health grounds but UK 
judges rejected his appeal, paving the way for his immediate removal from the 
UK.

The British prime minister, David Cameron, has expressed his delight that 
Hamza had finally been deported from Britain.

"Like the rest of the public I'm sick to the back teeth of people who come 
here, threaten our country, who stay at vast expense to the taxpayer and we 
can't get rid of them," he said. "I'm delighted on this occasion we've managed 
to send this person off to a country where he will face justice."

Cameron said the government must consider ways of stopping similar cases 
occurring.

The high court also threw out challenges by Babar Ahmad, Syed Ahsan, Khaled 
al-Fawwaz and Adel Abdul Bary after ruling they did not show "new and 
compelling" reasons to stay in the UK.

Speaking after the US-bound flights had taken off the British home secretary, 
Theresa May, said: "I am pleased the decision of the court today meant that 
these men, who used every available opportunity to frustrate and delay the 
extradition process over many years, could finally be removed.

"This government has co-operated fully with the courts and pressed at every 
stage to ensure this happened. We have worked tirelessly, alongside the US 
authorities, the police and the prison service, to put plans in place so that 
tonight these men could be handed over within hours of the court's decision. It 
is right that these men, who are all accused of very serious offences, will 
finally face justice."

After three days of legal argument, Sir John Thomas, president of the Queen's 
Bench division, and Mr Justice Ouseley lifted injunctions that had been 
preventing the men's removal.

The decision is the culmination of an eight-year legal battle that has 
strained the government's constitutional relationship with the European court 
of human rights in Strasbourg and frustrated politicians as well as the lord 
chief justice.

The cases have involved appeals through the hierarchy of British and European 
courts, then back to the royal courts of justice in London.

Delivering judgement, Thomas said: "All of these claimants have long ago 
exhausted the [legal] procedures in the UK. There's an overwhelming public 
interest in the proper functioning of the extradition arrangements in the US. 
It's important to recognise the finality of these proceedings."

Thomas said extradition proceedings should take months not years and that the 
process had been "disfigured" by protracted delays. He said there was "no 
appeal from our decision and the home secretary will be free" to extradite them.

Four of the five suspects had claimed that harsh prison conditions in the 
high-security unit of ADX Florence jail in Colorado, where they may be 
imprisoned, would breach their human rights. It was said Abu Hamza would not 
have to spend too long at the facility, because of his many medical conditions.

The 54-year-old Hamza, who was jailed for seven years for soliciting murder 
and inciting racial hatred, has been fighting extradition since 2004. His 
lawyers opposed deportation on the grounds that he was suffering memory loss 
and depression and was unfit to plead. They sought permission for the former 
imam at Finsbury Park mosque in north London to be given an MRI scan to assess 
his medical condition.

Ahmad, 37, a computer expert, and Ahsan, 33, are accused of raising funds for 
terrorism through a website. Lawyers for the two men challenged the director of 
public prosecutions' decision not to charge them with offences allegedly 
committed in the UK.

Fawwaz, who is alleged to have been an aide to Osama bin Laden in the 1990s, 
was seeking disclosure of an 800-page British secret service document relating 
to the debriefing of another suspect which, his lawyers maintain, would 
undermine the charges against him.

Bary, 52, is also said to have worked closely with Bin Laden. His barrister 
argued that conditions in US high-security jails would breach his rights under 
the European convention on human rights â€“ a claim already dismissed by the 
Strasbourg court.

Bary and Fawwaz are wanted in relation to the bombings of US embassies in east 
Africa in 1998.

Hamza will next appear in a New York courtroom on Tuesday for a pretrial 
hearing.
 