
Abu Hamza al-Masri, the Islamist cleric extradited from Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/05/abu-hamza-loses-extradition-appeal>
 to the US on terror charges, on Monday claimed he was merely the mouthpiece of 
rebel soldiers planning a coup to overthrow the Yemeni president, and played no 
part in the kidnapping of tourists in 1998.


In his third day of testimony in his New York trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/17/abu-hamza-cover-religion-terrorism-trial>
, Hamza compared himself toGerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>, the leader of the Irish 
political party Sinn Fein.

“I was acting as a mouthpiece, like Gerry Adams” he said. “And like Gerry 
Adams, of the IRA, you can't afford to do anything that is not legal and 
transparent.”

Hamza, the former imam of Finsbury Park mosque in North London, is charged 
with 11 criminal counts, including securing a satellite phone for hostage 
takers ina kidnapping in Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1998/dec/30/brianwhitaker1> in which three 
Britons and an Australian were killed in 1998.

The court heard how Hamza, 56, whose real name is Mustafa Kamel Mustafa, was 
called by the kidnappers three-and-a-half hours after the hostages were taken, 
spoke to the lead kidnapper and then contacted journalists.

Hamza, white-haired and wearing blue T-shirt, told the court he provided a 
satellite phone for the rebel soldiers but felt “angry and betrayed” when he 
was informed about the hostage-taking in Yemen.

“I had a big mix of emotions, a lot of things went through my mind, a can of 
worms,” said Hamza, who lost his hands after what he has said was an accidental 
explosion in Pakistan.

“I felt angry and I felt betrayed because of the ignorance of the people. They 
cannot focus on the cause. I did not have control of things.”

Abu Hassan, the head of the kidnappers, was “not visualising the real 
situation”, Hamza said. He said that the Yemeni government knew “exactly where 
he was” and there were also SAS special forces in the area.

“They will finish him even if they finish the whole tourists with him,” Hamza 
said.

Hamza said he agreed to become the mouthpiece for Hassan in Yemen because 
Osama bin Laden had left a vacuum in the area, through his reluctance to get 
involved in the struggle against the government, and because Hamza had access 
to the media and to Islamic organisations.

Hamza admitted buying a satellite phone, which he sent to an operator in Yemen 
with his stepson and another man. He claimed it was for use in mountainous 
regions, for those involved in resistance against then-presidentAli Abdullah 
Saleh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/24/yemen-ali-abdullah-saleh-resigns>
.

He said that when he found out about the kidnapping he tried to raise the 
alarm, offered to negotiate and tried to ensure that the rebels allowed the 
hostages access to telephones and to inform their embassies.

“I was trying to make sure that the government of Yemen did not do anything 
undesirable and to let the tourists talk to their families,” he said.

Hamza said he told Abu Hassan he had a "duty to protect the Muslims you have 
around you", and added that he produced a statement quickly in Arabic and sent 
it to journalists at the Al-Hayat Arabic newspaper in time for a 3.30pm 
printing deadline.

Earlier, Mary Quinn, a witness in the kidnapping who interviewed Hamza about 
it in London in 2000 at a Finsbury Park mosque, gave evidence. In taped 
excerpts of the interview played to the court, Hamza told Quinn the 
hostage-taking was justified "Islamically" and that it was intended to help 
secure the release of "my people".


Joshua Dratel, Hamza's defence counsel, asked him what he meant by the phrase 
“let my people go”. Hamza replied that he was speaking on behalf of Hassan and 
explained that in Arabic, people remove words that are unnecessary.

Hamza is charged with counts including setting up training camps in Bly, 
Oregon, 15 years ago, and advocating jihad in Afghanistan. He denies all the 
charges and faces life in prison if convicted.

 Abu Hamza in Trafalgar Square, London, in 2002. Photograph: PA 
Hamza was jailed in the UK in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/feb/08/topstories3.terrorism>, for 
inciting racial hatred and soliciting murder. He was extradited to the US in 
2012.

Hamza said that on the day before the kidnapping he received a call from 
Hassan, who was angry about “a lot of things" happening in Yemen – such as 
houses being raided, people being attacked and women being taken away and 
imprisoned.

Hassan asked him to put out a statement to the media, Hamza said. He said he 
told Hassan he could not make a statement but would "blow it up" if he sent him 
one.

Hamza said he told Hassan to keep his focus on the longer term.

"I said to him: 'Focus on what you want, you want an Islamic state, you should 
not be jumpy.'"

Asked by Dratel if there was "any discussion of the kidnapping", Hamza 
replied: "No, certainly no."
 