
The American Civil Liberties Union will go to court on Thursday in an attempt 
to get theCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> to hand over documents 
related to President Barack Obama's controversial "targeted killing" programme 
that uses unmanned drones to strike suspected Islamic militants.

The programme has been repeatedly referenced in public by numerous senior 
officials, including by Obama himself and defence secretary Leon Panetta, but 
the spy agency has refused to comply with a Freedom of Information Act request 
from the civil liberties group because it says it will not confirm the 
secretive use of drones.

As a result the ACLU has gone to court 
<http://www.aclu.org/keep-america-safe-free/aclu-appeals-court-thursday-arguing-against-cias-secrecy-claim-targeted>
 to argue that the CIA cannot deny the existence of a programme that has been 
so widely reported, including in great detail in off-the-record briefings by 
administration and agency officials. Jameel Jaffer, the deputy legal director 
of the ACLU, said: "It is preposterous. The assertion that this programme is a 
secret is nothing short of absurd.

"For more than two years, senior officials have been making claims about the 
programme both on the record and off. They've claimed that the programme is 
effective, lawful and closely supervised. If they can make these claims, there 
is no reason why they should not be required to respond to [FOIA] requests."

The so-called targeted killing programme has become one of the most 
controversial aspects of Obama's national security policy. It has been used in 
countries such as Pakistan,Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, Yemen and Somalia to strike at 
suspected terrorists and their supporters. Proponents of the programme say 
attacks can be highly accurate and come at little risk to American forces as 
there is no need for ground forces. Critics point out that there often civilian 
casualties and little is known about how targets are identified and targeted.

The London-based Bureau of Investigative Journalism tracks the strikes 
<http://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drone-data/> and has 
calculated that there have been 344 CIA drone hits in Pakistan alone since 
2002, killing up to 3,325 people, including 881 civilians. Another area of 
concern is the use of drones to kill American citizens, such asradical American 
cleric Anwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/30/anwar-al-awlaki-dead>and his 
16-year-old Colorado-born son. Both died in drone strikes in Yemen and 
relatives have sued top Pentagon and CIA officials 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/19/world/middleeast/us-officials-sued-over-citizens-killed-in-yemen.html>
 for damages.

The ACLU's demand for details of the programme – including documents related 
to its legal justification drawn up by the department of justice – is aimed at 
prompting a national debate on the scope of the drone programme and how it is 
used. Its legality is a particular issue. The memorandum justifying the legal 
basis for the targeted killing has now been requested by at least 10 members of 
Congress and three different lawsuits but it remains so secret that that 
acknowledging its existence is a classified matter. "The public has a right to 
decide for itself whether or not the programme is lawful or moral," Jaffer said.

Some legal and security experts agree and believe that the current boom in 
drone warfare is only like to increase the demand for greater openness about 
how and why the weapons are used. Professor Amos Guiora, a national security 
and legal expert at the University of Utah, said: "Given that the drones are 
the warfare of the future you need a public debate about what's being done in 
the public's name."
 