
Deliberately infuriating your audience is not usually rule No 1 in the 
marketing world. But that’s exactly the experiencethe magnificent trailer for 
Zootropolis <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bY73vFGhSVk> gives us. A taster 
for Disney’s forthcoming animation (titled Zootopia in the US) about a city 
populated by animals, it is mostly one unbroken scene of a rabbit police 
officer and her fox accomplice trying to run a licence plate at a vehicle 
registry staffed by sloths. Which means – unlike almost every other trailer out 
there – it takes its own sweet time.

“We are in a really big hurry,” squeals the rabbit, as Flash the sloth 
subjects her to torture-by-painstaking-keyboard-input. Every sleepy blink, 
every superfluous extra word, every gag – we see them coming a thousand miles 
off. All the better: every audience I’ve seen the trailer with has been in 
hysterics.

Both perfectly synced – through its aping of slo-mo HD – with the digital era 
and gloriously heedless of it, the Zootropolis trailer takes a much-needed step 
back from our frenzied media environment. In cinemas alone, its change of pace 
effortlessly wrests attention from any rival publicity.

The American Sniper trailer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6xNDrSG1A8U> in 
2014 – which showed Bradley Cooper coolly appraising a target – was perhaps the 
first to kill the speed, but also currently deploying the “slow trailer” 
approach is Universal’ssecond spot for the Coen brothers’ Hail, Caesar! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s9amal6Qkrw> It, too, trades in frustration as 
Ralph Fiennes’ dispirited studio hack tries to coach a wooden matinee idol into 
a satisfactory delivery of his line: “Would that it were so simple!” As the 
thesp spectacularly fails to nail it, the line snowballs into a farce-mantra 
that encapsulates the Coens’ tale of golden-age Hollywood.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds9amal6Qkrw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds9amal6Qkrw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds9amal6Qkrw&media=>
 The Coen brothers’ trailer for Hail Caesar! is another to adopt a deliberately 
unhurried pace. 
The slow trailer works as a response to the same fatigue with web-fuelled 
cultural cacophony that has promptedtech detoxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/26/digital-detox-holidays-turn-off-shut-down-log-out>
,mindfulness classes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/20/mindfulness-in-the-mainstream-an-old-solution-to-modern-problems>
 and the Be Like Bill meme. “Trailers have got as fast and overloaded as they 
can be, so it’s refreshing when there’s a change of pace,” says Mark Woollen, 
the head of aboutique trailer-cutting operation <http://www.markwoollen.com/> 
responsible for recent promos for The Revenant, Anomalisa and Room. In 2013, 
Wired magazine calculated thatthe average number of cuts 
<http://www.wired.com/2013/06/online-trailers-cuts/> per minute in a trailer 
had more than tripled from 12 in the 1950s to 38 since the 1990s. This is 
partly attributable to the rise of digital-editing software, but Woollen also 
points out evolutionary pressures in modern Hollywood. “There’s a lot at stake. 
So there’s a school of thought that the more we show, the more film-goers will 
know, and the more likely it’ll be they’ll come and see the film.”

Jason Bourne to the X Men: Super Bowl movie trailers reviewed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/super-bowl-50-movie-trailers> 
Fortunately, there are other schools of thought. The move to jolt film 
promotion out of its current mania has its roots in outlying teasers like the 
one forThe Shining <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HEew7zvpAWE>, which 
sustained a shot of the Overlook hotel’s lift area for 50 seconds until 
deluging the scene with blood; or for Terminator 2: Judgment Day, depictinga 
neat assembly guide for the T-800 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=us3ggae8-Ec>
. They were among the first to be built around a single scene; a ploy that has 
recently boomed in reaction to the two-minute-thirty splurge of plot highlights 
that tends to comprise the modern trailer. By using a material from one 
sustained scene, trailers for the likes ofUnbreakable 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R_f1uCWKZQs>, Super 8 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vpzUCA5i6zY>, War of the Worlds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MJYnHA2OzfA>, Gravity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C4pcg7bXgmU> and Captain Phillips 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pV-ptQX-75> (another Woollen cut) encouraged 
audiences to vote for movies based on a feeling of immersive dramatic 
engagement, rather than methed-up synaptic overload. By reducing the action to 
a lentissimo crawl, Zootropolis et al are going one step further.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHEew7zvpAWE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHEew7zvpAWE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHEew7zvpAWE&media=>
 The Shining’s trailer, consisting of a single static shot, captured the film’s 
creeping sense of dread. 
Other techniques have been used recently to hypnotise would-be audiences, like 
soundtracking trailers with down-tempo covers of well-known songs, which began 
with Woollen’s use of a choir’s cover of Creep by Radiohead inhis trailer for 
The Social Network <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lB95KLmpLR4>. He has also 
experimented with repetitive editing derived from remix and gif culture, like 
the montage he used to evoke Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s cycle of self-abuse inporn 
comedy Don Jon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2A63Ly0Pvpk>. “It’s a constant 
battle to try to find your own new thing, to keep working the form,” says 
Woollen. “Audiences have become more sophisticated, so you can try and take 
greater risks. On the other hand, the movies cost more and marketing has got 
more conservative. So it’s a little bit of push and pull.”

The slow trailer is perhaps the most obstinate method of staking a claim for a 
forthcoming film; asserting, truthfully or not, thatthis one has a special 
confidence – so it must be worth seeing. Ironically, the move towards shorter, 
speedier marketing also originated, during the auteur era, in defence of 
artistic integrity. Movie directors began cutting more idiosyncratic trailers – 
a business previously monopolised by theNational Screen Service 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Screen_Service> – in the 1960s. Stanley 
Kubrick’s hyperactive work with his title designerPablo Ferro 
<http://www.artofthetitle.com/designer/pablo-ferro/> for Dr Strangelove and A 
Clockwork Orange <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SPRzm8ibDQ8> broke new 
ground, as did Alfred Hitchcock’sskittishly unhinged Psycho spot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NG3-GlvKPcghttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NG3-GlvKPcg>
. The unsettling,stroboscopic trailer for The Exorcist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u15h02Y0MDY> and the one for Alien 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bEVY_lonKf4> – a surreal montage conflating a 
lunar surface and that of an egg, following by traumatised flashes aboard the 
Nostromo – pushed the kineticism further.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEVY_lonKf4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEVY_lonKf4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbEVY_lonKf4&media=>
 The trailer for Ridley Scott’s Alien merged slow-burn patience with arresting 
freneticism. 
Now that Zootropolis has made the way back to the snail-paced end of the 
spectrum, can we expect a horde of publicity to follow suit and operate on 
geological time? That might be a nice respite from the daily info-blitz, but 
surely the slow trailer works best as a contrast. If it were the default, it 
would lose impact as quickly as everything else. Would that it were so simple.

• This article was amended on 10 February 2016. The original stated the 
Zootropolis trailer featured two rabbit police officers. This has been 
corrected.








































 