
London’s advertising industry was in high spirits last week as it gathered for 
the annual shindig that is Advertising Week Europe (AWE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising-week-europe>) and it was good to 
see Soho buzzing with delegates taking part in an eclectic mix of sessions in 
situ or via AWE’s live streaming platform.

I came away with some great insights into the challenges we face and the 
future direction of our industry.

Firstly, the Spotify Culture and Commerce 
<http://advertisingweek.eu/calendar/-culture-commerce-lunch-2016-04-19-1215> 
session highlighted that the way musicians and advertisers work together has 
undergone a revolution in the last decade. Brands can no longer get by with a 
catchy jingle, instead they search for songs that tell stories, conjure 
memories and forge genuine connections with people.

 Jeff Rossi, the global director of business marketing at Spotify, spoke about 
how as the market for musicians becomes more competitive, artists are looking 
for new ways to monetise their work. Brand collaborations can propel marketers 
and musicians to new levels (when done right) and this new wave of advertising 
has led to branded music videos.

Five lessons for creative businesses from the world of music management
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/mar/21/five-lessons-creative-businesses-music-management>
It was revealed that the use of music in marketing can drive up to 30% better 
performance for brands, yet on a TV spot or piece of video content, music is 
still the last thing to be considered by the agency and client. It was 
interesting to hear that landing a track on a television commercial is no 
longer seen as selling out, but as a desirable method of actually selling 
something in a world where the traditional music model is dead. This does also 
feel indicative of the fact that everyone – particularly musicians – are 
viewing themselves as brands.

But if marketing is increasingly important in driving revenue for musicians, 
shouldn’t we be looking for ways to bring them upstream in the whole process, 
as opposed to a bolt on at the end?

Fragmented agency relationships 

Of the many sessions at AWE, I was particularly interested by the discussion 
aroundfragmented agency relationships 
<http://advertisingweek.eu/calendar/?keyword=sainsbury%27s> – it definitely 
struck a chord with me.

In partnership with the Marketing Society, top marketers from Sainsbury’s, 
Unilever and Travelex discussed the complex issues around agency collaboration 
or lack thereof.

Mark Given, head of brand at Sainsbury’s, explained that at the start of his 
career his job was straightforward in terms of agency relationships. Brands are 
now expected to deliver “anomni-channel customer experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/jul/22/omni-channel-retail-consumer-experience>
” by joining up the dots – something that he argued is becoming increasingly 
difficult as a result of fragmented agency relationships.

Dominic Grounsell, global marketing director at Travelex reinforced Given’s 
point. He claimed that marketing’s image problem is theelephant in the room 
<https://www.marketingweek.com/2016/04/21/uncomfortable-truths-about-marketing-agency-siloes-image-problems-and-data-obsession/>
. With the industry becoming increasingly “data-driven and 
technology-orientated”, brands are hiring “fundamentally different” marketers 
compared to a decade ago.

The point they are both making is that agencies need to start working together 
and at the moment they’re not doing it willingly. The truth is companies are 
becoming threatened by the “lead” agency meaning it’s becoming hard to get the 
collaboration that clients need. Understandably agencies are protecting their 
remit – but it’s impacting the desired omni-channel experience.

Agencies need to realise that there isn’t a sole lead any more. As an industry 
we need to find a way to be truly collaborative and equal when we sit at the 
same table. The reality is a close group of agencies can deliver the most 
fantastic results for its client if the rules of engagement are clearly laid 
down.

Data, data, data

Another hot topic was the industry’s obsession with data and the effect that 
it may have on the next generation of marketers. This always puts a smile on my 
face as, for so long the word data outside of the industry, was derided as 
dull, yet now it has a certain rock’n’roll swagger. Patricia Corsi, vice 
president foods and beverage UK Ireland at Unilever talked about her own 
love/hate relationship. She made a pertinent point that although we live in the 
age of data, we shouldn’t be teaching aspiring marketers to rely solely on 
data, at the expense of risk-taking and gut instincts. If we do then marketing 
will lose its art and meaning. I think that’s spot on, data is a tool in the 
quest to find unique and compelling insight, it is not a replacement for 
inspiring thinking.

Collaboration is the key word here. In the always-on world stronger and closer 
working partnerships between all parties involved will drive better results and 
greater success for our clients. I am optimistic about the future of marketing 
and advertising. It’s an old cliche – that change is the only constant – but 
what AWE proved is that consumers and technology are constantly evolving so 
marketing and advertising can’t afford to stand still.

Jonathan Goodman is the managing director of LIDA <http://www.lida.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 