
Regular readers of these pages will know how loudly I kick and scream and 
bitch and moan whenever the subject of Woody Allen’s ongoing creative 
bankruptcy comes up, but the Woodster’s shortcomings in his hastening, 
deepening, darkening dotage are as nothing to those ofAdam Sandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler>. Sandler reached the bottom of 
the bottom of the barrel long ago, yet he has always acted – and been 
remunerated – as if said destination were the summit of Everest. I skipped 
Woody’s latest, Irrational Man, mainly because life’s just too short, but for 
the benefit of my beloved readers I stood firm and intrepid on the battlefield 
and took the blunt force of Sandler’s latest fiasco full in the face. You’re 
welcome!

Pixels sits about where you’d expect it in the flatlining, Hades-bound 
trajectory of Sandler’s creative arc: That’s My Boy, Jack And Jill, Blended... 
downward and downward in the widening gyre, indeed. There are some differences: 
Sandler’s in-house hack Dennis Dugan isn’t at the helm this time, but any 
relief to be derived from that absence vanishes when you learn that his 
replacement is satanic studio drudge Chris Columbus, no doubt bussed in to take 
care of the only thing that actually works inPixels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pixels>, the computer graphics and digital 
effects.

Game over for Adam Sandler comedy Pixels at US box office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/27/game-over-for-adam-sandler-comedy-pixels-at-us-box-office>
What hasn’t changed is the usual low-brow, high-concept pitch: remember Click 
and Jack And Jill and their three-word pitches, one of which was probably 
“Sandler”? Here, aliens have retro-engineered a bunch of 1980s video games, 
such as Pac-Man, Donkey Kong and Space Invaders, into the means with which to 
occupy and subdue planet Earth, which is forced to call upon the talents of an 
ageing group of 80s arcade-rats – Sandler et al – to see off the invader.

Obviously, this depends upon one’s enthusiasm for arcade games and the 1980s, 
and – full disclosure – I don’t mind arcade games (or didn’t when I was 20) but 
would prefer to have lived through the 80s in a medically induced coma. That 
leaves the comedy, and here the pickings are terribly slim, creepily tinged 
with misogyny and racism, overly broad and irritatingly loud.

This leaves Sandler, whose appeal has always been a mystery to me, as not much 
more than the lowest-hanging fruit pilfered from the Tree of Jerry Lewis (and 
none of the high-hanging Frank Tashlin-style stuff that the French quite 
rightly admire); lots of sad little boy voices interspersed with violent temper 
tantrums, and a surfeit of suburban brattiness. To me, it’s partly a grim 
foretaste of the comedic “Ow, my balls!” crap you see on TV in Idiocracy and 
partly just the waste byproduct of the first amendment. Stunt-casting gave 
Sandler his only artistic highlights – Punch-Drunk Love and Funny People – but, 
left to his own devices, all we get is the laziness and imaginative impotence 
that Pixels embodies all too well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXAHprLW48no&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXAHprLW48no>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXAHprLW48no&media=> 