
It was many years after the publication of his first book, Lantern Lecture, 
that Adam Mars-Jones realised it was “almost entirely made up of insults to 
father figures”. And not just fatherfigures. Alongside novella-length stories 
about the Queen contracting rabies and the last squire of a north Wales estate 
was a version of the 1976Black Panther murder trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/jul/22/black-panther-donald-neilson-killer-archive>
. Mars-Jones had wanted to show how the court and the judge “had missed the 
point”. The judge in this case being his actual father, Sir William Mars-Jones.

Nearly 35 years later Mars-Jones is, apparently, more straightforwardly 
writing about his father again, this time in a memoir,Kid Gloves, published 
next week. “He was a big believer in respectful piety and not digging too 
deep,” he explains. “He liked surfaces and the formal mask and so probably 
wouldn’t have liked it that this book is not formal or distant. But while he’d 
be mortified by some things, I also think he’d have been pleased by others.”

Adam Mars-Jones is best known as a novelist, most recently of two enormous 
books,Pilcrow and Cedilla, the start of a series narrated by the almost 
completely immobile John Cromer. He is also a film, theatre and book critic 
whose stringent analyses won him the inauguralHatchet Job of the Year award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/07/michael-cunningham-review-hatchet-job>
 for his demolition of Michael Cunningham’s 2012 novelBy Nightfall.

But despite his apparent productivity, he says “I don’t do motivation. I 
started the memoir because I joined in with a creative writing student 
exercise. I thought the best way to limit the material was to write about the 
time I was looking after my father towards the end of his life. I hoped that 
might stop the material from tendrilling everywhere, but as I went on, the 
material indeed tendrilled everywhere.”

It was in early 1998 that his mother, “with self-effacing briskness in little 
more than a month”, died of lung cancer. Mars-Jones thought “it made sense for 
me to stay in place to look after the survivor”. His father was by now 
suffering from mild dementia, but he had once been a junior counsel at theMoors 
murderers trial <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/nov/15/ukcrime>, presided 
over the ABC official secrets trial, and Ken Dodd’s tax evasion as well as many 
other high-profile cases that included imposing the longest single sentence 
ever handed down in the UK, for a plot to blow up an Israeli plane. Sir William 
was also highly conscious of his position in the world, and it would have been 
easy for Mars-Jones to sum him up with the anecdote of his father arguing on 
the phone with American Express about “how many of his honorifics – MBE, LLB – 
could be crammed onto his Gold Card”. (He compromised by calling himself “Sir 
Wm”).

But while this is, mostly, a memoir of Sir William, it is also about Adam. 
Despite his father being a keen guitar player and fan ofthe Beatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles>, “when you’re a teenager and 
your father is a judge it was unthinkable that he could be in any way liberal”. 
In fact Sir William, towards the end of his career, was applauded as a maverick 
who stood up for individual rights, which Mars-Jones was slow to appreciate.

One landmark case involved a family being racially persecuted by the police, 
during which Sir William found it amusing that the black family’s name was 
White. “I was so offended by his failure to observe metropolitan conventions 
and not regard a black person called White as any stranger than a white person 
called Black,” says Mars-Jones, “that I managed not to notice that he had not 
only awarded damages to the family, but exemplary damages, conveying that the 
police behaviour was intolerable.”

But while his father was liberal on issues such as police malpractice, and 
indeed the death penalty, he was decidedly less so about homosexuality. Then 
again, so was Adam when younger, as evidenced by the self-headlined essay for 
the New Statesman “I was a Teenage Homophobe”. Even when he was sure of his own 
sexuality, Mars-Jones says he took to gay life less like a “duck to water than 
a stone to treacle. You might think your attitudes today are what you always 
thought, but they are not. I had no expectations. No one had given it any sort 
of good press. There was a doomed existential honesty about putting your hand 
up and saying ‘I am Spartacus’, but it was not expected to be fun.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Fadam-mars-jones-books-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440085316897%2F60b549ed-6fd6-44d3-9978-b7570b736a54-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adam%20Mars-Jones%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you%E2%80%99re%20writing%20about%20the%20dead%2C%20you%20have%20the%20last%20word%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Fadam-mars-jones-books-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adam%20Mars-Jones%3A%20%E2%80%98When%20you%E2%80%99re%20writing%20about%20the%20dead%2C%20you%20have%20the%20last%20word%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Fadam-mars-jones-books-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440085316897%2F60b549ed-6fd6-44d3-9978-b7570b736a54-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A hotel porter assists Sir William Mars-Jones with his gown. Photograph: 
Gordon Priestley/Associated News 
Kid Gloves contains a semi-comic set piece of him coming out to his father, 
but he says much worse was his “mawkish self-pity when I came out to my mother. 
I accepted it as a blot and wound. The idea that I might have some sort of 
whole or fulfilling life was not really contemplated.” In fact Mars-Jones has 
gone on to have not only a successful career but also two successful family 
lives. He and his long-term partner Keith King entered into a civil partnership 
in 2008. Perhaps more unexpectedly, in this memoir of his father he also writes 
about being a father, too, to a daughter born in 1991.

“When she was young it seemed better to have some privacy. Her mother and I 
assumed that at some stage we would all sit down and tell her that you may have 
noticed there is something slightly different about our family … but that 
moment was never required. When Keith and I eventually had our civil ceremony I 
thought she might have reservations, but she wanted to be bridesmaid and for 
the dog to be there and so on.” Mars-Jones says there was always a “minimum 
assumption” of his involvement in her life “but it has turned out a great deal 
more than that. My parents maybe saw more of her than of their other 
grandchildren and it did provide the elements of family life that my father 
would have wanted.”


Perhaps there is a similarity between Dad hammering bent coppers and me 
getting medieval on a book as a critic

While he says he is not necessarily comfortable writing about his own life, in 
this instance it seemed required. “Not because I’m an exhibitionist, but when 
you’re talking about the dead they have no dignity. You have the last word, and 
so I thought the only way of rectifying that balance was to remove a little of 
my own dignity. Also, if you try to rise above it then the tone becomes phoney.”

Mars-Jones was born in 1954 and brought up in the Gray’s Inn lodgings where he 
would eventually nurse both his parents. He went to Westminster school in 1967 
and says the word that then best summed him up was “timid”. “The school was 
actually very liberal and London was felt to be part of what it had to offer. 
But I was so down on myself and so self-limiting that I somehow didn’t feel I 
was entitled to go and seePeter Brook’s transformational production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/15/peter-brook-midsummer-nights-dream>
 ofA Midsummer Night’s Dream, which many of the other boys went to. Instead I 
sawLaurence Olivier <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/olivier> in Strindberg’s 
Dance of Death, also a wonderful production, but somehow typical of what I 
would allow myself.”

While his father “certainly expressed the wish” that Adam and his two brothers 
would follow him into the law, none of them did. Adam went to Cambridge to 
study classics but soon changed courses to English. He then started a PhD on 
Faulkner at the University of Virginia.

Although he had had gay relationships, Virginia was the first place where he 
was “able to present myself as gay from the outset”. His first stories were for 
a class in Virginia, and the idea for the Black Panther trial story came from 
seeing a course on law in literature. “I didn’t even attend it, but until then 
had thought of the two things as absolutely opposed in the way they dealt with 
experience: the law made things black-and-white, literature dealt with grey 
areas.” He chose the Black Panther trial because he had acted as his father’s 
Marshall, his personal assistant, and had himself sat on the bench.

Mars-Jones acknowledges some relationship between legal judgment and his 
reviewing. “There is certainly an element of the forensic in it. I try to quote 
a great deal and provide evidence. I don’t say I hated something, I say, ‘On 
page 300 the missing toe was on the other foot’. This tells you more about 
inattentiveness than just asserting the whole thing is slapdash. Perhaps there 
is some similarity between Dad hammering bent coppers and me getting medieval 
on things that hadn’t been thought through.”

Such is his reputation as a stern critic that he says people are surprised 
when he teaches – currently at Goldsmiths – to find him “nurturing and 
mother-hennish. They imagine I get pleasure from seeing blood on the walls, but 
there seems to me all the difference in the world between a manuscript, which 
is a work in progress and is still living and breathing and drawing these 
nutrients from the soil around it, and something that is announced to the world 
as finished, yet is still defective.”

Lantern Lecture was published to acclaim in 1981, but Mars-Jones still wasn’t 
sure that this was the start of a career, or even that he was a writer. In 1983 
he edited an anthology of lesbian and gay fiction,Mae West Is Dead. In the 
introduction he made a passing reference to Aids. By 1987, with the scale of 
the epidemic now evident, he co-authored withEdmund White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edmund-white> The Darker Proof: Stories from 
a Crisis featuring men living, and dying, with HIV and Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/aids-and-hiv>.

“It was through Aids that my generation learned about hands-on death, so when 
my mother was diagnosed with cancer I pretty confidently said that she could 
die on me. It was different, but not that new. AsDylan Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas> said ‘After the first death, 
there is no other’.” Looking back, Mars‑Jones is proud that a “community that 
seemed to be best at identifying pleasure also turned out to be loyal and 
dutiful and organised” – as he put in a short story, “the disco bunnies were 
Stoic philosophers”.

Although he had been named on Granta’s 20 best young British novelists list in 
both 1983 and 1993, it wasn’t until after the second list that he produced a 
novel,The Waters of Thirst, featuring a voice-over actor waiting for a kidney 
transplant. That his next novel,Pilcrow, emerged 15 years later was assumed to 
be because of writer’s block. “Perhaps by other writers’ standards, for whom 
writing is their salvation and interior monologue, it was. But that wasn’t the 
case with me. I’m not the sort of person who writes every day. I write when 
there’s something to write, and if I can’t think of a way to write something, I 
just don’t.”

This approach has paid dividends. “Maybe if I’d had a stronger sense of what I 
did as a writer, it would have been inconceivable to go from a short, 
crystalline comic novel about suffering,Waters of Thirst, to Pilcrow, to this 
enormous, near-modernist, not quite stream of consciousness about somebody with 
an incredibly restricted minority status.” He says volume three of the series 
will likely be shorter, but he is certain it will extend beyond three books. “I 
know how it ends and what material it covers, but the great thing is that it is 
potentially indefinite, and it is a very good feeling to be writing something 
that has a future built into it.”

He says the sense of continuity and longevity in his personal life has also 
come as a nice surprise.Kid Gloves is dedicated to his daughter and her 
cousins, his parents’ grandchildren. When he came out, “the idea was that gay 
people were trapped inside a family. Then, fostered by things such asClause 28 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/homeaffairs/page/0,11026,875944,00.html>, 
gay people were supposed to be inherently anti-family and their arrangements 
were parody families and potentially corrupting. Looking at my own experience, 
I am actually rather family minded. I like my kin and take the trouble to keep 
in touch. That idea that when a writer is born in the family, the family is 
finished – usually attributed toPhilip Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth> because he is easier to 
pronounce than Czesław Milosz who actually said it – is also not right. First, 
I don’t think writers are born, and second, I don’t think there’s anything 
anti-family about writing. Writing this memoir has been interesting for all 
sorts of reasons, not least for locating relatively conventional sentiments 
within myself, such as not wanting Dad to be looked after by other people. Not 
as a virtue or an act of self-sacrifice, just something that didn’t sit well 
with me.”
 