
7.07am GMT 

That's all from Adelaide for today

Do join us tomorrow for more live coverage of the festival. Here’s what we 
brought you today.

 * Adelaide’s best cheap eats – as chosen by Central Market stallholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/11/adelaide-best-cheap-eats-chosen-by-central-market-stallholders>

 * Alex Needham interviewed artist Benedict Drew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/benedict-drew-adelaide-festival?view=desktop>

 * Bill Code a look at Julia de Ville’s Phantasmagoria at the Biennial in this 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/mar/11/my-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video>

 * Alfred Hickling reviewed Femi Kuti at the final night of Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/femi-kuti-shanren-review-triumph-from-beginning-to-end>

 * Alex reviewed the final night of classical/avant-garde experiment Tectonics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/tectonics-adelaide-program-two-review?view=desktop>

 * Jana Perkovic reviewed Glory Box at the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/finucane-and-smith-glory-box-review-this-burlesque-doesnt-play-nice?view=desktop>

 * We bought you our fourth Adelaide festival podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-four>

 * Jane Howard bought us the latest edition of her Adelaide Fringe diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-swamp-juice-edge-bound-for-glory?view=desktop>

 * Bill Code and Jana Perkovic made this video about Stone/Castro’s Blackout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/11/blackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video>

 * Windmill Theatre practitioners shared their memories of being 15 with us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/creating-theatre-for-teenagers-practitioners-remember-being-15>

 * Alicia Canter brought us this gallery of glorious pictures from Lola’s 
Pergola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-2014-adelaide>

 * Jane Howard reviewed FOMO: the Fear of Missing Out on the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out-review-a-nightmarish-dissection-of-a-life?view=desktop>

 Guardian Australia travelled to and stayed in Adelaide courtesy of the 
Adelaide festival. Flights from the UK were provided by Emirates 
<http://www.emirates.com/>.

Updated at 7.10am GMT

6.50am GMT 

Fringe review: The Fear of Missing Out

We’ll start heading out for our latest festival shows quite soon. But first, 
we have the latest Fringe review from Jane Howard, who has been to see FOMO: 
The Fear of Missing Out at Radio Adelaide. Which is apt, given it is a show 
about community radio (well sort of). Youcan read Jane’s three-star review in 
full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out-review-a-nightmarish-dissection-of-a-life?view=desktop>
, or there’s a snippet below.

In Studio Two, a small audience gathers for the recording of the Zoe McDonald 
show. Zoe, we’re told, has the fear of missing out, and tonight that needs to 
be explored … The work quickly becomes less about Zoe’s FOMO and more a 
bizarre, almost nightmarish dissection of her life. McDonald’s performance is 
sharp and funny, and her text deftly integrates other characters. While her 
vocal performance and accent work are, naturally, at the production’s core, it 
is her physical performance that is the most humorous: the blank stare of Dina; 
the downturned mouth and protruding chin of Jessica; the upturned pinky fingers 
of Anita.

6.35am GMT 

In pictures: dinner at Lola's Pergola

Adelaide festival’s pop-up nightspot Lola’s Pergola emerged on the banks of 
the Torrens in the city centre almost two weeks ago. With degustation dinners 
from top Australian chefs and DJs playing late into the night, photographer 
Alicia Canter enjoyed some evenings down by the river. Youcan see a whole 
gallery of beautiful images here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-2014-adelaide>
, or catch a few below.
 First Fruit Dinners take place in an outdoor area at Pop up bar Lola's 
Pergola, located in the city on the banks of the River Torrens. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian  The host of First Fruit Dinners, Maxwell Mason, 
speaks to guests. The dinners take place in an outdoor area at Pop up bar 
Lola's Pergola, located in the city on the banks of the River Torrens. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian  The theme for the degustation 
dinner this evening was Appetite for Excellence where seasonal produce from 
Adelaide Farmers Market created the ultimate BBQ. Photograph: Alicia Canter for 
the Gu  The food was created by chefs Chloe Proud from Ethos in Hobart, James 
Viles from Biota Dining in Bowral, NSW Jake Davey from Est in Sydney and Sonia 
Bandera from Rockpool in Melbourne. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Updated at 6.36am GMT

6.12am GMT 

Windmill Theatre: practitioners remember being 15
 Windmill Theatre's Girl Asleep, at the Space Theatre Adelaide. Pictured: 
Paige Whitby as young Greta and Ellen Steele as the fifteen year old Greta 
Driscoll. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Adelaide’s Windmill Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
creates work for children, families and teenagers, and at the festival they’re 
performing a trilogy of works created for teenagers; adolescent coming-of-age 
stories with a very distinct aesthetic. The newest of these, Girl Asleep, is 
set on the evening of Greta’s 15th birthday as she struggles to come to terms 
with leaving childhood behind. So we asked the Windmill team to talk to us – 
and their younger selves – about their 15th year, and their memories of it.

The results are really quite lovely – and very honest. Do have a read of the 
piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/creating-theatre-for-teenagers-practitioners-remember-being-15>
. It will spark lots of memories of your 15th year too. (Mine involved quite a 
lot of going to places I wasn’t old enough to legally drink in, if I remember 
properly. And some fairly ill-advised clothing choices).

You can also catch up with our reviews of Windmill’s work. Our review of Girl 
Asleep can be found here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/girl-asleep-review-as-inventive-and-surprising-as-its-audience>
, andour review of Fugitive here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/windmill-theatre-trilogy-fugitive-review-a-dystopian-robin-hood>
. I’ll be seeing School Dance tomorrow night.

Updated at 6.39am GMT

5.41am GMT 

Video: Stone/Castro's Blackout
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fblackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394435134440%2FBlackout-Adelaide-Festiva-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blackout%3A%20Stone%2FCastro%20look%20to%20the%20dark%20side%20at%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fblackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blackout%3A%20Stone%2FCastro%20look%20to%20the%20dark%20side%20at%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fblackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394435134440%2FBlackout-Adelaide-Festiva-001.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fblackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394435134440%2FBlackout-Adelaide-Festiva-001.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blackout%3A%20Stone%2FCastro%20look%20to%20the%20dark%20side%20at%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fblackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blackout%3A%20Stone%2FCastro%20look%20to%20the%20dark%20side%20at%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fblackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394435134440%2FBlackout-Adelaide-Festiva-001.jpg>
close 
Bill Code and Jana Perkovic have made this video about Stone/Castro’s 
Blackout, which takes audiences to the dark side of the human soul. When a 
power-cut appears to interrupt proceedings aboard a wedding boat, the 
partygoers begin to act strangely. All is not as it seems in this physical 
theatre production which has been taking audiences through the spectrum of 
human emotions at the 2014 Adelaide Festival. Director Paulo Castro explains 
how the attacks of September 11, 2001, led to the birth of the piece, and what 
he thinks of Australian critics’ using the term “theatre of the absurd”

You can also read Jana’s review of this piece here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/blackout-stonecastro-adelaide-festival-review>

5.23am GMT 

Fringe: Swamp Juice, Edge!, Bound for Glory

Jane Howard takes the risks at Fringe so you don’t have to – and it doesn’t 
always go in her favour. A punt on Bound for Glory on Monday night did not end 
well: the show was “an uncomfortable, unfunny and underdeveloped piece about 
two men trying to find money to buy pizza for our party” reports Jane.

Still, she had a better time at both Swamp Juice and Edge!, although it does 
rather sound like she’s still processing the latter, which is pretty dark 
comedy. Below you’ll find an extract from her daily Fringe diary for you,and 
you can catch up with the whole thing over here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-swamp-juice-edge-bound-for-glory?view=desktop>
.

Also: Adelaide residents will be pleased with Jane’s fact-finding skills: 
she’s learned that Tuxedo Catis going to become a year-round arts venue in the 
city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-swamp-juice-edge-bound-for-glory?view=desktop>
. Good news!

Canadian artist Jeff Achtem <http://www.bunkpuppets.com/>  
<http://www.bunkpuppets.com/>creates his puppets out of cardboard and recycled 
materials, and both puppet and shadow are exposed simultaneously. It’s a 
celebration of simple things used to great effect. The show is billed as ending 
in an “eye-popping 3D finale”, with red and blue light, and old-school glasses 
used to render the puppets in 3D. It’s genuinely quite extraordinary. The 
audience of children raised on Disney 3D films screamed as the shadow of a bird 
flew towards their face – and I must admit I did too.

There was also a lovely holiday Monday vibe at Tuxedo Cat when I went to see 
Edge! 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/edge/dfc66c8c-76a9-4614-93a5-76c4ed9d62f7>
, the story of 11-year-old “tween viral sensation” Stella, played by 
25-year-old Isabel Angus. Stella starts as a bubbly child, but the work becomes 
a commentary – and harsh criticism – of the sexualisation of women and girls, 
and particularly on the pressures faced by young women in the public spotlight.

4.58am GMT 

Festival podcast: episode four

Time for the next of our festival podcasts from producer Belinda Lopez. On 
today’s show, recorded last night after the culmination of Tectonics, we’re 
discussing the highs and lows of the festival with Jana Perkovic – who managed 
to see a five star and one star show straight after each other – why our 
perception of avant-garde music could do with being more like our perception of 
conceptual art, and how to make good theatre for teenagers.
 Guardian Australia's culture team record latenight in a park Photograph: 
Vicky Frost for the Guardian 
All this, and the delightful sounds of an Adelaide park at midnight – as 
evidenced by this quick phone snap above. (We edited the drunk people out, 
sadly). You canlisten to the podcast here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-four>
, orsubscribe via iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/podcast/guardian-australia-culture/id796931454?mt=2>
. You can also catch up with the rest of the festival’s audio below.


 * Episode three: we talk to Femi Kuti down at Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-3>

 * Episode two: we talk to Morton Subotnick and Arrested Development’s Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-womadelaide-podcast-episode-two>

 * Episode one: we talk to Christos Tsiolkas and festival director David Sefton
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/08/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-one>

Updated at 4.59am GMT

4.37am GMT 

Fringe review: Glory Box
 Backstage with the Glory Box performers, photographed in The Garden of 
Unearthly Delights by Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Jana Perkovic took a trip down to the Garden of Unearthly Delights to see 
Glory Box, a big burlesque hit on the festival circuit from Moira Finucane and 
Jackie Smith. Jana is not completely convinced by the show – at times the idea 
seems better than the reality of the acts, she notes, although you won’t find 
yourself glancing at your watch and counting off the minutes.

Finucane and Smith’s productions have a cumulative, atmospheric effect. It is 
not just the sum of the performances that one must consider, but the entire 
world crafted around them, down to the carefully calibrated tone of their 
marketing material: “Seductive Spectacle! Wild Child Circus! LiveArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Exotica!” (One of their past 
events advertised “Anatomically Correct Erotica!”) The magical, carnivalesque 
setting of Adelaide’s Garden of Unearthly Delights works perfectly to support 
the world they are creating: equal parts camp and horror; tongue-in-cheek yet 
uncompromising.

Glory Box is an uneven and often unpolished show. Many acts are better in 
concept than in execution. But the total experience is so grotesque, and 
bizarrely feminist – here is an entirely female cast, switching between sparkly 
gowns and full frontal nudity, turning their dainty, feminine acts into 
terrifying, omnipotent monsters – that it is not at all uninteresting to watch.

You can read Jana’s two-star review in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/finucane-and-smith-glory-box-review-this-burlesque-doesnt-play-nice?view=desktop>
 if that intrigues you.

3.34am GMT 

Tectonics: baffling, scary and comical – but never boring
 Forget new rave, here's new grave: Gravetemple play Tectonics Adelaide 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Alex Needham has filed a great review of last night’s Tectonics marathon gig. 
It’s so good, that it’s making me think I should have joined him for nine hours 
of rustling, shouting and avant garde improvisation. (And this from a woman who 
tends to like a tune.) Catch up with what you’ve missed below –and read Alex’s 
review in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/tectonics-adelaide-program-two-review?view=desktop>
.

Having eased us in reasonably gently with Sunday’s collaboration with the 
Adelaide Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-ilan-volkov-adelaide-symphony-orchestra-review>
, for the second instalment of Tectonics, curatorIlan Volkov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/ilan-volkov-classical-musics-super-collider>
 took the gloves off. The concert lasted an astonishing nine hours – almost 
long enough to listen toGötterdämmerung 
<http://www.melbourneringcycle.com.au/ring_cycle/the_operas/gotterdammerung> 
twice – and included some of the most challenging music in the world, from 
Fluxus legendTakehisa Kosugi <http://www.lovely.com/bios/kosugi.html>, playing 
lights and electronics, to Canadian sound artistCrys Cole <http://cryscole.com/>
, whose 25-minute ambient improvisation was so quiet it was barely there.

The MO of Techtonics is to bring together the classical and avant garde 
worlds, but the latter far outweighed the former, and the audience – which 
ranged pleasingly from heavy metal fans here to see the closing performance by
Gravetemple <http://editionsmego.com/release/SOMA015> to elderly classical 
music buffs – were encouraged to come down from the tiered seating to immerse 
themselves in the music. Well, if you could call it music – certainly some 
pieces, likeMarco Fusinato <http://www.marcofusinato.com/>’s TEMA, a 30 
terrifying minutes of feedback which would have made a dentists’ drill sound 
melodious, stretched the definition to its utmost. But then, that was part of 
the point.

While Tectonics was often baffling, scary or comical, despite its great length 
it was never boring, with something bizarre and original rarely more than two 
works away.

Updated at 4.12am GMT

2.55am GMT 

Femi Kuti at Womadelaide – a triumph from beginning to end

Alfred Hickling had a brilliant evening at the closing night of Womadelaide, 
where he saw Femi Kuti and Shanren. He gave the nighta five star review, which 
you can read in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/femi-kuti-shanren-review-triumph-from-beginning-to-end>
, or grab a snippet about each of those acts below.
 Femi Kuti on stage at Womadelaide 2014. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
There could be no more fitting spectacle to close the festival than Kuti’s 
hyperactive ensemble of musicians and dancers who seem to be putting on at 
least three shows at once. Femi’s feats of unbroken, circular breathing on the 
saxophone are worth setting a stop-watch for, while you’d pay good money to 
watch his horn section alone. Then there’s the astonishing trio of women who, 
when not belting out full-bloodied harmonies, turn their backs to the audience 
and deliver a masterclass that revealsMiley Cyrus  <http://youtu.be/qqOTagYAFhY>
to be a rank amateur at twerking.

And here is Alfred on Shanren

A huge crowd gravitates to this unexplored corner of the park, their curiosity 
piqued by the choppy, folk-indie mix of ethnic lutes and electric guitars. 
Shanren conclude a triumphant set with a rousing version ofJiu Ge 
<http://youtu.be/Lho4qnh7gmU> , the delirious traditional drinking song that 
went straight to everyone’s heads when Mongolian metal sensationsHanggai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/womadelaide-hanggai-and-neko-case-review>
 performed it earlier in the weekend, and will be remembered as the unofficial 
anthem of Womadelaide 2014.

2.10am GMT 

Video: Julia de Ville's Phantasmagoria: taxidermy on a grand scale
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fmy-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394494606610%2FJulia-deVille-Phantasmago-004.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Julia%20de%20Ville's%20Phantasmagoria%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fmy-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Julia%20de%20Ville%27s%20Phantasmagoria%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fmy-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394494606610%2FJulia-deVille-Phantasmago-004.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fmy-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394494606610%2FJulia-deVille-Phantasmago-004.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Julia%20de%20Ville's%20Phantasmagoria%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fmy-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Julia%20de%20Ville%27s%20Phantasmagoria%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fmy-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394494606610%2FJulia-deVille-Phantasmago-004.jpg>
close 
All this week we’ve been asking curators and artists to share their favourite 
works from the Adelaide Biennial 2014. Today, Robert Reason, curator of 
European and Australian decorative arts at the Art Gallery of South Australia, 
introduces Julia de Ville’s childhood room filled with taxidermy. Mummified 
cats; stuffed, startled-looking rats; a beautiful, morose horse and an 
intricately beaded pig and alpaca lend the room an ethereal quality. And all 
the while, a charming octopus lamp and a child’s mobile made from hearts hang 
in the air.

You can also catch up with other videos in this series

 * My favourite work: Fiona Hall’s Out of My Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/10/my-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial>

 * My favourite work: A Dozen Useless Actions for Grieving Blondes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/09/my-favourite-work-nick-mitzevich-dozen-useless-actions-grieving-blondes>

 * My favourite work: Kulata Tjuta Project  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/07/favourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>

Updated at 2.56am GMT

1.27am GMT 

Benedict Drew: 'It felt like psychogeographic warfare in my head'
 Benedict Drew with his work The Persuaders Photograph: Tony Lewis 
Alex Needham has been chatting to the artist Benedict Drew, whose work is 
showing as part of the festival’s headline visual art show,Worlds in Collision 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/visual_arts/adelaide_international-worlds_in_collision>
. Alex describes it as “a head trip into both outer and inner space, the 
frontiers of technology, the human psyche and the occult.”

Drew’s work at the festival is called The Persuaders, which you can find at the
SASA <http://www.unisa.edu.au/sasa-gallery> in the University of South 
Australia, and takes you through three rooms. Here’s more from Alex.

The first contains several flatscreen TVs showing fluorescent colours and, on 
two of them, revolving monsters that look to be made of mud. In the second, 
there are overhead projectors with protractors and the kind of cardboard stars 
used to show prices in discount shops arranged on them to look like faces. In 
the third, there is a row of more mud monsters arranged on plinths, watching a 
film projected on a large pull-down screen. The film consists of a swirling 
pattern and the instructions to “breath in/breath out” [sic]. As it gets faster 
and faster, it’s intercut with images of building sites and railings overlaid 
with slogans like “stop fucking changing things” and “stop it being so solid”. 
It’s a complicated, beguiling work about our relationship with an increasingly 
sophisticated digital world – one that is starting to make as many demands on 
us as we are on it.

The artist, who is Australian-born but based in the UK, explains: “Part of 
that work is a personal scream about living in London, really.”

You can read more about Drew’s recurring motif of monsters (in this work they 
act as “empathetic mascots”), the digital realm, and making a complaint about 
the world in Alex’s interview with the artist, which you’ll find here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/benedict-drew-adelaide-festival?view=desktop>

Updated at 2.57am GMT

1.04am GMT 

Adelaide's best cheap eats

Good though some of the work in Adelaide is, a woman cannot survive on culture 
alone, so we asked Jane Howard to help us find the city’s best eats on a 
budget. And who better to give us their recommendations than the stallholders 
at Adelaide Central Market, the city’s amazing produce centre. I wish I could 
take it home with me: it’s not so fancy that your weekly essentials now cost 
more than your mortgage, but there’s also some fantastic artisanal produce for 
sale in its halls including some excellent cheese.

You can read the stallholder’s nominations for Adelaide’s top 10 cheap eats in 
Jane’s article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/11/adelaide-best-cheap-eats-chosen-by-central-market-stallholders>
, which includes more of Alicia Canter’s gorgeous portraits.
 Lucinna Chua of The Asian Grocer at Adelaide Central Market. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Cheeses on the Say Cheese stall in the Market. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Produce at the House of Organics & 
Sustainably Grown Produce stall. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian  
Peter Pessios of Central Market Flowers. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
Updated at 2.42am GMT

12.40am GMT 

Last night's Twitter reviews

It’s Vicky Frost with you on the liveblog all day. We’ll have reviews from the 
Guardian Australia team coming soon. But first, some reaction to yesterday at 
the festival from Twitter. Dan Thorpe hits the nail on the head here, I think – 
at times this festival has felt very male, particularly in its music 
commissioning.
Dan Thorpe (@danisnotadj) 
To sum up: #tectonics <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23tectonics&src=hash>, 
some striking chamber and solo performances, but with a distinct lack of 
representation of women in the commissions.
 <https://twitter.com/danisnotadj/statuses/443019444155973634> March 10, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/danisnotadj/statuses/443019444155973634> Mark de Raad 
(@markderaad) 
There was life. Then there was @adelaidefest <https://twitter.com/adelaidefest>
 Tectonics with Takehisa Kosugi. Life altered.#adlfest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/markderaad/statuses/442955409117036544> March 10, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/markderaad/statuses/442955409117036544> katkp (@katkp) 
Thought provoking and stirring. Thank you @mitzevich 
<https://twitter.com/mitzevich> @artgalleryofsa 
<https://twitter.com/artgalleryofsa> #darkheart 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23darkheart&src=hash> #AdelaideBiennial2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AdelaideBiennial2014&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/8O6oyQ9HsA <http://t.co/8O6oyQ9HsA>
 <https://twitter.com/katkp/statuses/442770892339150848> March 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/katkp/statuses/442770892339150848> 
Updated at 12.40am GMT

12.30am GMT 

Welcome to Tuesday's live coverage of Adelaide festival

We’ll have pictures, video, audio and text for you from the festival all day. 
But first a round-up of yesterday’s events

 * Alicia Canter shot these gorgeous pictures of Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-australia-pictures-2014>

 * Jane Howard went on a hunt for a Thylacine and a Fringe cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken>

 * Alfred Hickling hung out with Pokey LeFarge and Coloured Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/alfred-hicklings-womadelaide-diary-monday-10-march?view=desktop>

 * We looked at the work of Fiona Hall, exhibiting as part of Adelaide 
Biennial, in this video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/10/my-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial>

 * Jana Perkovic was disappointed by the State Theatre Company’s production of 
The Seagull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/seagull-review-tremendous-drama-lacking-direction?view=desktop>

 * Musicians collaborating in Tectonics Adelaide told us about their favourite 
musical discoveries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-my-musical-discovery>

 * Alfred reviewed Emel Mathlouthi and Rachid Taha at Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-emel-mathlouthi-and-rachid-taha-review-rocking-the-arab-world?view=desktop>

 * Alex was enthusiastic about Tectonics program one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-ilan-volkov-adelaide-symphony-orchestra-review>

 * Jane Howard reviewed You Wanna Talk About It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/you-wanna-talk-about-it-review>

 * Femi Kuti tried to teach Womad – and Guardian Australia – how to dance on 
our podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-3>

 * Vicky Frost reviewed Windmill Theatre Trilogy: Fugitive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/windmill-theatre-trilogy-fugitive-review-a-dystopian-robin-hood?view=desktop> 