
7.29am GMT 

That's all from the festival on Wednesday

We’re off out tonight to see The Rime of the Ancient Mariner, Windmill 
Theatre’s School Dance, and Zorn’s second program. Reports on all those in the 
morning, along with an interview with Robert LePage in our final day live 
coverage, but first a round-up of today’s stories

 * Alfred Hickling asked what the Adelaide Biennial could tell us about 
Australian art that the RA exhibition couldn’t 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/11/australian-contemporary-art-adelaide-biennial>

 * Alicia Canter brought us pictures from the Biennial and Four Rooms 
exhibitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/mar/11/adelaide-biennial-australian-art-2014>

 * Bill Code spent a morning with Sound Introversion Radio for this lovely 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/mar/12/sound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video>

 * Alex Needham reviewed John Zorn’s first program: Masada Marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/john-zorn-masada-marathonreview-free-jazz-at-full-power>

 * In our fifth and final Adelaide podcast, we discussed our festival highs 
and lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/12/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-five>

 * Jane Howard brought us another instalment of her Adelaide Fringe diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-lovesongcircus-asking-for-it-birdman?view=desktop>

 * We interviewed Alexander Devriendt, the artistic director of Ontroerend Goed
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/ontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge?view=desktop>

 * We brought you our latest film from the Biennial: Richard Lewer’s Worse 
Luck I’m Still Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/mar/12/my-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here>

 * Jana Perkovic reviewed Continuum by the Australian String Quartet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/continuum-australian-string-quartet-review-eclectic-and-electric?view=desktop>

7.14am GMT 

Australian String Quartet: Continuum – review
 Australian String Quartet Adelaide Festival Photograph: Supplied 
Last night Jana Perkovic went to a concert by the Australian String Quartet, 
who are also touring nationally. She was very impressed by the company’s 
programme which took pieces with little in common, at least at first glance. 
“Brahms’ String Quartet No.1 in C minor is in the eclectic company of Luigi 
Boccherini, a late-baroque composer in the shadow of Haydn; Adelaide-based 
contemporary composer Stephen Whittington moves on to the Vietnam War-era Black 
Angels by avante garde US composer George Crumb,” writes Jana.

The result is unexpected and makes for excellent listening she says. You can 
read her review in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/continuum-australian-string-quartet-review-eclectic-and-electric?view=desktop>
, or you can find an extract below

The highlight of the evening is the second half, with works by two 
contemporary composers. Whittington’s Windmill opens with the interplay of 
bowed harmonics, recalling the rhythmic creaking and whining of the eponymous 
symbol of outback settlement. While in places rasping and ragged (yet elegant 
throughout), its simple understatement eschews the maximalist complexity of 
other contemporary composers. Only about 10 minutes long, it is clean, light 
and delightful. At the end, the composer stands up in the crowd, and takes a 
modest bow …

This is how chamber music should be presented in 2014: a refreshed take on the 
past, plenty of technical innovation, and local contemporary content done 
without pretence and performed with gusto.

6.58am GMT 

Jane Howard's fringe diary – the final instalment!
 Katie Noonan Adelaide Fringe 2014 Photograph: suspplied 
Jane Howard, Guardian Australia’s queen of the fringe, has basically not seen 
daylight for a week. So after this final dispatch from Adelaide Fringe she’s 
going to emerge blinking into the daylight. (Not really: she’s going to see a 
coupe of festival shows for us instead). Today we’re getting her take on Katie 
Noonan and Circa’s collaborationLove-Song-Circus 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/katie-noonan-and-circa-love-song-circus/db0daf1d-9b52-41f0-a229-11fc72b4e72d>
, Adrienne Truscott’s Asking For It,and Birdman. You can get a full dose of her 
knowledgehere, by reading the article in full 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-lovesongcircus-asking-for-it-birdman?view=desktop>
, or read an extract below.

(I should say: I also went to a fringe show last night. Which was a perfectly 
OK comedy act until we headed off down a thick-headed cul-de-sac about what is 
worse, death or rape. Needless to say, the argument wasn’t nuanced. I was 
hoping Adrienne Truscott was going to turn up and heckle the (male) comedian.)

On my final night in the Garden of Unearthly Delights, I began with 
Love-Song-Circus 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/katie-noonan-and-circa-love-song-circus/db0daf1d-9b52-41f0-a229-11fc72b4e72d>
. MusicianKatie Noonan <> developed the piece after viewing the National Museum 
of Australia’s collection ofconvict love tokens <>and extensively researching 
Australia’s early female convicts. Unsurprisingly, sadness runs through the 
work, but Noonan’s tribute to these women also finds time to celebrate their 
strength and joy. In the performance, she is joined by three performers from
Circa <http://circa.org.au/> who are all beautifully expressive and responsive 
to the composition – although at times the choreographic vocabulary under 
directors Yaron Lifschitz and Ben Knapton feels limited by the need to show off 
flexibility, strength and acrobatic skills. I wondered whether the partnership 
might have benefited from more fallibility or ugliness, as expressed in 
Noonan’s stories.

6.00am GMT 

My favourite work: Richard Lewer’s Worst Luck I’m Still Here
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fmy-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394579240291%2FAdelaide-Festival-Richard-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Richard%20Lewer%E2%80%99s%20Worst%20Luck%20I%E2%80%99m%20Still%20Here%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fmy-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Richard%20Lewer%E2%80%99s%20Worst%20Luck%20I%E2%80%99m%20Still%20Here%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fmy-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394579240291%2FAdelaide-Festival-Richard-016.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fmy-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394579240291%2FAdelaide-Festival-Richard-016.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Richard%20Lewer%E2%80%99s%20Worst%20Luck%20I%E2%80%99m%20Still%20Here%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fmy-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Richard%20Lewer%E2%80%99s%20Worst%20Luck%20I%E2%80%99m%20Still%20Here%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fmy-favourite-work-worst-luck-im-still-here&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394579240291%2FAdelaide-Festival-Richard-016.jpg>
close 
We’ve been asking curators and artists to share their favourite pieces from 
the Adelaide Biennial all this week. Here Maria Zagala, associate curator of 
prints, drawings and photographs at the Art Gallery of South Australia, 
discusses this moving, animated piece from Richard Lewer. She argues that the 
naivety of the drawings, the questions it asks about our approach to 
euthanasia, and the beauty of the storytelling, all play a role in this 
touching animation.

You can also catch up with our other videos in this series that we’ve produced 
this week:

 * My favourite work: Julia de Ville’s Phantasmagoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/mar/11/my-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video>
 * My favourite work: Fiona Hall’s Out of My Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/10/my-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial>

 * My favourite work: A Dozen Useless Actions for Grieving Blondes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/09/my-favourite-work-nick-mitzevich-dozen-useless-actions-grieving-blondes>

 * My favourite work: Kulata Tjuta Project  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/07/favourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>
Updated at 6.42am GMT

5.45am GMT 

Ontroerend Goed: In the black box, you can do really anything. And we have 
always abused that,’
 Fight Night: Ontroerend Goed's new production asks the audience to choose 
between actors Photograph: Reinhout Hiel/Sydney Theatre Company 
Jana Perkovic has been talking to Alexander Devriendt, the artistic director 
of Ontroerend Goed – the Belgian theatre collective known for their sometimes 
confronting immersive work. The company are presenting their latest production 
at the festival – and the audience get off relatively lightly in Fight Night. 
(Or at least when compared to previous Ontroerend Goed shows).

Fight night springs out of Devriendt’s interest in how we make decisions – in 
this production the audience votes actors off the stage on the basis of very 
limited gobbets of information. “I’m interested in the decisions we make as 
individuals, in the context of limited power,” Devriendt tells Jana. “That 
interests me more than just showing a metaphor for a political situation.”

You can read Jana’s interview with the director here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/ontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge?view=desktop>
, or read a snippet below. And you can catch the show in Adelaide from tomorrow 
until the 16th, and then inSydney from March 20 to April 13 
<http://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2014/fight-night.aspx>.

In Fight Night, the audience has it relatively easy; the task is to eliminate 
the actors by voting them off, one by one, until there is a winner. “In making 
each show, I have a question for myself, and this time it was: ‘Why do I vote, 
and for whom?’ I always vote socialist, but I realised that I don’t vote based 
on their political program, which I don’t know, but because I like their 
candidate,” says Devriendt. “He just seems trustworthy ...

4.50am GMT 

Festival podcast: episode five
 Rosemary Laing's A Dozen Useless Actions for Grieving Blondes, 2009, at 
Adelaide Biennial. Photograph by Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
It’s time for our final festival podcast from Adelaide, in which Guardian 
critics discuss their festival highs and lows, we consider the programming at 
the festival (too male? too much weird music?), and its overall tone (at the 
fringes – in a good way).

Join Vicky Frost, Alex Needham and Jana Perkovic for that discussion, while 
audio producer Belinda Lopez heads out to hunt for fossils at Dig It at the 
South Australian Museum.

You’ll find episode five the podcast here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/12/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-five>
 – and can catch up with other episodes from this week

 * Episode four: we talk about avant-garde music and theatre for teenagers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-four>
 * Episode three: we talk to Femi Kuti down at Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-3>

 * Episode two: we talk to Morton Subotnick and Arrested Development’s Speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-womadelaide-podcast-episode-two>

 * Episode one: we talk to Christos Tsiolkas and festival director David Sefton
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/08/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-one>
3.47am GMT 

Review: John Zorn does free jazz at full power
 Joey Baron (drums), Marc Ribot (guitar), Cyro Baptista (percussion), Ikue 
Mori (electronics) play with John Zorn at the Adelaide festival Photograph: 
Tony Lewis/Adelaide festival 
Alex Needham has been out reviewing the first of John Zorn’s gigs. The avant 
garde musician has never been to Australia, and apparently –according to 
Adelaide festival director David Sefton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/28/adelaide-festval-david-sefton>
 – he’s never coming back, so this is your chance to catch him working with a 
massive cast of musicians includingMike Patton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/29/whats-that-sound-mike-patton>, 
andDave Lombardo 
<http://www.metalinjection.net/latest-news/drama/dave-lombardo-is-basically-never-coming-back-to-slayer>
, formerly of Slayer, plus the Adelaide Symphony orchestra.

You can read Alex’s four-star review in full here, or catch a bit of it below. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/john-zorn-masada-marathonreview-free-jazz-at-full-power>

Masada Marathon is a four-hour taster of Zorn’s sprawling Masada project 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masada_%28band%29>. Taking in some 500 tunes, one 
tranche written in the 90s and another in 2004, Masada is Zorn’s bid to fuse 
jazz withklezmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/03/klezmer-jewish-judaism-world-music>
, the music made by Jewish musicians as they travelled through eastern Europe 
and America, the result being, Zorn hopes, “a sort of radical Jewish music ... 
music for the Jews of today.”

In concert, this meant a succession of 12 crack ensembles or soloists paying 
three or four tunes each. In the first and last ensembles, Masada Quartet and 
Electric Masada, Zorn played saxophone in a style so furiously exuberant it 
could have stripped the paint off the back wall of the theatre.

2.55am GMT 

A morning with Sound Introversion Radio
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394534285175%2FJason-Sweeney-of-Sound-In-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20morning%20with%20Sound%20Introversion%20Radio%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20morning%20with%20Sound%20Introversion%20Radio%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394534285175%2FJason-Sweeney-of-Sound-In-001.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394534285175%2FJason-Sweeney-of-Sound-In-001.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20morning%20with%20Sound%20Introversion%20Radio%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20morning%20with%20Sound%20Introversion%20Radio%20at%20the%20Adelaide%20festival%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fsound-introversion-radio-adelaide-festival-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F11%2F1394534285175%2FJason-Sweeney-of-Sound-In-001.jpg>
close 
This is a lovely idea – creating an aural record of a city at festival time – 
and Bill Code has made a great video exploring it with Sound Introversion 
Radio. Each morning during the Adelaide festival, ambient noise specialists 
Jason Sweeney and Yuri Tomanek scour the streets of the city for the noises 
that usually pass many of us by. By tweaking, filtering and mixing the sounds 
they collect, they turn traffic, buskers and snippets of conversations into an 
aural record of the city, 24 hours a day atwww.soundintroversion.com 
<http://www.soundintroversion.com/>

1.57am GMT 

In pictures: Dark Heart and Four Rooms

Alicia Canter has been taking pictures at the exhibitions all week. You can 
see a beautiful gallery of her photographs here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/mar/11/adelaide-biennial-australian-art-2014>
, some of which feature below.
 Landed by Ian Strange is being shown outside of the Art Gallery of South 
Australia. Photograph by Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Shoufay Derz's moving 
image work Depart Without Return, in which silk moths crawl across the face of 
the artist painted in deep indigo blue. Photograph by Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian  Work by artist Zane Saunders from Queensland at the Four Rooms art 
exhibition in the Tandanya National Aboriginal Cultural Institute.  The Four 
Rooms art exhibition in the Tandanya National Aboriginal Cultural Institute. 
Curator Troy-Anthony Baylis. Photograph: Alicia Canter  The Kulata Tjuta 
Project: a series of contemporary art installations rooted in age-old 
traditions, knowledge and skills, teaching young men the skills of carving punu 
(wood) and kulata (spear) production. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian
1.42am GMT 

What the Adelaide Biennial tells us about Australian art that the Royal 
Academy show did not

Alfred Hickling, who is usually based in the UK for the Guardian, has been 
considering what the Adelaide Biennial and Four Room exhibitions say about 
Australian art, and putting that in the context of the Royal Academy Australia 
show which got such awful reviews.It’s a really interesting piece – you can 
read it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/11/australian-contemporary-art-adelaide-biennial>
.

He talks to The curator of Four Rooms, Troy-Anthony Baylis 
<https://radio.adelaide.edu.au/bestival-interview-troy-anthony-baylis/>, and 
the Nick Mitzevich, director of theArt Gallery of South Australia 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home> and curator of Dark Heart. They 
each have interesting takes on that RA exhibition – Baylis makes the point that 
Anwerlarr Anganenty, byEmily Kame Kngwarreye 
<http://www.nma.gov.au/exhibitions/utopia_the_genius_of_emily_kame_kngwarreye/emily_kame_kngwarreye>
, which opened the exhibition was never going to benefit from hanging in that 
way. “These paintings are not pictorial representations of the landscape, they 
are part of the landscape itself. Displacing them to the white walls and 
artificial lighting of a gallery is like putting a lion in a cage.”

Mitzevich is more diplomatic about the London exhibition. But he’s interesting 
on his motivation behind Dark Heart. “For me, the most exciting artists today 
are those interested in representing the underbelly of Australian culture,” he 
says. “I wanted to show work that represents a young country still healing from 
the wounds of its frankly brutal colonial past.”

For Alfred, there’s one piece in this exhibition that outstrips everything the 
RA attempted: Ben Quilty’s the Island. Here’s his take on it

He has created a vast, symmetrical, butterfly-shaped blob formed by slathering 
an eight metre canvas in acrylic and folding it in half. Its title, The Island, 
pays homage to the Tasmanian views ofthe great 19th-century Australian 
landscape painter Haughton Forrest 
<http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/forrest-haughton-6210>, and has been executed 
with a confrontational messiness in which European history painting, Aboriginal 
art and contemporary surf culture slide into a viscous mix. There’s horror 
within it, like smeared entrails, but great beauty as well. It’s too big. It 
defies comprehension. It’s aRorschach test <http://theinkblot.com/> that opens 
up the subconscious of Australia.

1.00am GMT 

Last night's Twitter reviews

More from our critics soon – but first, some thoughts on last night’s shows 
from Twitter. John Zorn gets glowing notices.
Will McRostie (@couldyoujustnot) 
Quit your job, kill the dog, send your kid into the woods with some beans and 
GO. SEE. ZORN.#incredible <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23incredible&src=hash> 
#adlfest <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/couldyoujustnot/statuses/443384532218040321> March 11, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/couldyoujustnot/statuses/443384532218040321> 
Hyndsight2020 (@Hyndsight2020) 
@adelaidefest <https://twitter.com/adelaidefest> #JohnZorn 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23JohnZorn&src=hash> Mind-blowing brilliance of 
the Masada Marathon. Go see ANY of Zorn's remaining concerts. I urge you!!
 <https://twitter.com/Hyndsight2020/statuses/443382386047188992> March 11, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/Hyndsight2020/statuses/443382386047188992> Ben Hewett 
(@benhewett) 
The #JohnZorn <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23JohnZorn&src=hash> Masada at 
#AdelaideFestival <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AdelaideFestival&src=hash> 
is truly extraordinary, & we are only half way through the first performance of 
the week#awesome <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23awesome&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/benhewett/statuses/443343237718102016> March 11, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/benhewett/statuses/443343237718102016> 
12.46am GMT 

Welcome to Wednesday's live coverage of Adelaide festival

Lots of great features, video and pictures on the way – and of course our 
festival reviews. But first, a catch-up with yesterday’s coverage.

 * Tuesday’s live coverage as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-2014-tuesday-11-march-live>
 * Adelaide’s best cheap eats – as chosen by Central  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/11/adelaide-best-cheap-eats-chosen-by-central-market-stallholders>
Market stallholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/11/adelaide-best-cheap-eats-chosen-by-central-market-stallholders>
 * Alex Needham interviewed artist Benedict Drew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/benedict-drew-adelaide-festival?view=desktop>

 * Bill Code a look at Julia de Ville’s Phantasmagoria at the Biennial in this 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/mar/11/my-favourite-work-julia-deville-phantasmagoria-adelaide-biennial-video>

 * Alfred Hickling reviewed Femi Kuti at the final night of Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/femi-kuti-shanren-review-triumph-from-beginning-to-end>

 * Alex reviewed the final night of classical/avant-garde experiment Tectonics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/tectonics-adelaide-program-two-review?view=desktop>

 * Jana Perkovic reviewed Glory Box at the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/finucane-and-smith-glory-box-review-this-burlesque-doesnt-play-nice?view=desktop>

 * We bought you our fourth Adelaide festival podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-four>

 * Jane Howard bought us the latest edition of her Adelaide Fringe diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-swamp-juice-edge-bound-for-glory?view=desktop>

 * Bill Code and Jana Perkovic made this video about Stone/Castro’s Blackout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/11/blackout-stone-castro-adelaide-festival-video>

 * Windmill Theatre practitioners shared their memories of being 15 with us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/creating-theatre-for-teenagers-practitioners-remember-being-15>

 * Alicia Canter brought us this gallery of glorious pictures from Lola’s 
Pergola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2014/mar/11/adelaide-festival-2014-adelaide>

 * Jane Howard reviewed FOMO: the Fear of Missing Out on the fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/11/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out-review-a-nightmarish-dissection-of-a-life?view=desktop>
Updated at 12.58am GMT
 