
The Adelaide locals call it “Mad March” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-09/adelaide-cup-attendances-down-due-to-competing-march-events/6291028>
, and why wouldn’t they? For them, this single month annually contains a 
supercars road race, a world music festival, international cricket competition, 
a horse-racing cup and an international arts festival. This extravaganza of 
civic entertainment may have the appearance of a tourism scheduling nightmare, 
but it’s inarguable the city has ambition.

It needs it. The South Australian capital faces an uncertain future. If it 
wasn’t enough that climate change is predicted to cost the city half of its 
presentwater supply 
<http://theconversation.com/adelaide-is-facing-a-dry-future-it-needs-to-start-planning-now-37750>
 by 2070, the closure of its localcar industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/19/losing-your-job-is-not-a-liberation-tony-abbott>
 and threats to its shipyards are destabilising the economy as well. It’s 
little wonder that Christopher Pynepetitioned his own government 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/news/article/2014/11/19/joke-christopher-pynes-abc-petition-slammed>
 to reverse cuts to local broadcasting jobs at the ABC. Creative social and 
economic initiatives are precious values in an uncertain place.Commentators 
suggest 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2015/03/06/why-are-the-sa-liberals-so-completely-terrible/?wpmp_switcher=mobile>
 that “a failure to project a positive vision for the future” is why 
conservatives have governed South Australia for only 14 years out of the last 
50.

The capitalisation of Adelaide’s cultural infrastructure started back in the 
1970s with South Australia’s visionary Labor premier,Don Dunstan 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/booksandarts/don-dunstan27s-artistic-legacy/5631280>
. It was Dunstan’s belief in the centrality of arts investment to social policy 
outcomes that, among many achievements, built the Adelaide Film Commission and 
injected enough money for the International Arts Festival to develop scope, 
influence and prestige.

This reconceptualisation of Adelaide as a vibrant cultural tourist destination 
rather than a sleepy “city of churches” is the positive economic outcome of 
Dunstan’s progessive social policy. While it’s tempting to write off Mad 
March’s races and shows as bread and circus events in an 
incipient-factory-closure town, the compensation that creative cultural 
investment provides has been borne out in international examples like Sheffield 
in the UK. That city’s depressing industrial decline as depicted in the movie 
The Full Monty was partially arrested by 1990s’ programs of cultural investment 
in sport, arts infrastructure and education that rebranded the city as a cheap 
and fun place to study and innovate. These days, 43.2% of Sheffield’s workforce
are employed in higher-end occupations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/02/cities-in-culture-has-sheffield-finally-shaken-off-its-full-monty-image>
 – with a high percentage of students choosing to remain living in the old 
blue-collar town after they graduate from its two local universities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fadelaide-fringe-festival-review-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425553908706%2FAdelaide-Fringe-review-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20fringe%20festival%202015%20review%3A%20clowns%2C%20calypso%2C%20naked%20cabaret%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fadelaide-fringe-festival-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20fringe%20festival%202015%20review%3A%20clowns%2C%20calypso%2C%20naked%20cabaret%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Fadelaide-fringe-festival-review-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425553908706%2FAdelaide-Fringe-review-001.jpg>
 Adelaide fringe festival highlights 
The Australian tribes that converge at Adelaide’s Mad March events also bring 
the cultural value of diversity to the city. Communities of artists and 
performers assembling for the Adelaide fringe spend four days sharing 
Adelaide’s eastern half with the crowds of the car races in the Clipsal 500. 
This year,fringe highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/video/2015/mar/06/adelaide-fringe-festival-review-video>
 included Marieke Hardy staging funerals for her audience members and Bryony 
Kimmings’ cute show made with her boyfriend about his depression. It was a 
helluva contrast with the nearby roars of petrol engines from V8 Supercars and 
a daily ear-bursting sky-rip by a fighter-jet flyover. As both the fringe and 
the Clipsal are now annual events, so now, too, are the complaints from fringe 
artists that the Clipsal “bogans” are noisy and clogging up the roads while 
Clipsal attendees grumble they can’t get cheap accommodation in a city suddenly 
full of pasty “weirdos”.

The city’s last laugh is that the appeal, interest and value of the twinned 
events is much the same. In 2014, the month-long fringe sold more than 450,000 
tickets to events, brought 1.9 million people into the city and injected$66.3m 
<https://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/media-news/adelaide-fringe-delivers-a-massive-66-3-million-to-sas-economy>
 to the South Australian economy. This year, Clipsal attendance over its four 
days hit 285,000 and its own$60m 
<http://www.tourism.sa.gov.au/media/huge-attendance-of-285000at-clipsal-500-adelaide.aspx>
 economic contribution.

The crowds are essentially coming for the same thing. As fringe performers in 
circuses likeScotch and Soda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/17/scotch-and-soda-review-sydney-festival>
 display death-defying feats on rollerskates, so, too, are the Supercar teams 
defying the notorious “turn eight” on the Adelaide track, with its risks of 
spectacular smashed bodywork. Grumpy Adelaide theatremakers can’t count on the 
climate change imperative to phase out the fuel engine and therefore the 
Clipsal crowds, either. The sport is adaptive – hybrid fuel technology is 
already in Formula One, supercars are embracing biofuels and Formula E electric 
racingis in bud 
<http://www.speedcafe.com/2014/06/26/formula-e-adelaide-street-race-talks/>. 
Motoring journalist Peter Anderson could easily be talking about theatre when 
he explains the demise of the local car production will not affect the Clipsal, 
either:

It’s always a drama-packed race and people come for the drama. You could have 
a bunch of Australians driving Mazda hatchbacks around and if it’s a spectacle, 
Australians would probably turn up and watch.

It would be unwise to underestimate the positive policy effects of what merely 
appears to be popular entertainment. Engaging diverse local communities and 
industries in intersecting cultural events is inspirational to people, and 
inspiration is a necessary resource for economic development and growth.

South Australia faces present and future challenges of serious economic and 
climate change transformation. Creativity, innovation, adaptability, community 
harmony and popular involvement are required to confront them. It just may be 
that the conceptual framework presented by its singular cultural season will 
encourage theindustries, ideas, intellectual capital, property and products 
<http://economic.priorities.sa.gov.au/> required to survive the seasons ahead.

 