
From a chamber opera about Marilyn Monroe to a one-woman show that embodies 
the voice of the river in Finnegans Wake, the line-up for the 2015Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> festival shows a taste 
for the experimental.


After his last coup of securing Matthew Barney’s five-hour epic film River of 
Fundament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/03/river-fundament-review-adelaide-festival>
, there is no one stand-out act in director David Sefton’s next three-week 
program – announced on Thursday – but plenty to savour.

Bill Viola is the big international guest, with seven separate video and sound 
installations bythe prolific American video artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/23/bill-viola-video-artist-interview-tate-modern-st-pauls-cathedral>
 across three sites in the city: the Art Gallery of South Australia, St Peter’s 
Cathedral and the Queen’s theatre.

Competing with Viola for the limelight is Blinc 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2015/visual_arts/blinc>, an enormous 
light-show cum digital art showcase, that takes a leaf out of Vivid Sydney’s 
book. Blinc will feature the work of 18 separate international artists, with a 
giant 3D elephant in Elder park set to steal the show.

Also in residence is the British musician and composer Gavin Bryars, whose 
work Marilyn Forever gets its Australian premiere alongside two concerts by his 
chamber ensemble at Elder Hall. Bryars, who has worked with John Cage, Merce 
Cunningham and the late Charlie Haden, will also conduct the Adelaide Symphony 
Orchestra for his opus, Jesus’ Blood Never Failed Me Yet.

The ASO will also turn its hands to the music of film composer Danny Elfman 
(best known for Edward Scissorhands) in one of two movie-inspired festival 
concerts alongside the Terry Edwards-directed Blow the Bloody Doors Off, 
inspired by the films of Michael Caines.

Amid an eclectic international theatre program, Australian theatre is 
represented by the star of 2014’s festival circuit, Queensland Theatre Company’s
Black Diggaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/video/2014/jan/18/black-diggers-wesley-enoch-tom-wright-video>
, directed by Wesley Enoch, balanced by the more traditional Beckett Triptych 
by the State Theatre Company of South Australia.

Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and music meet in the 
middle in a Pete Townshend-approved concert re-creation of Tommy, the Who’s 
double rock opera album, in the band’s 50th anniversary year, while Fela! The 
Concert celebrates the father of Afrobeat with the spirit of the Broadway 
musical it is based on.


As Adelaide has come to expect, there are several festivals within the 
festival. Experimental music fans are catered to by the lucky 13 acts involved 
in the third year of UnSound Adelaide, world music fans by WomAdelaide, and 
literary buffs by the Adelaide writers’ festival.


And that river? Olwen Fouere’s Riverrun sees the Irish actor attempt the 
impossible: bringing James Joyce’s rich and challenging language to the stage 
in a show that won five stars from the Guardian’s Lyn Gardner when it opened in 
London. “An inexorable rush of thought and idea, full of mystery and marvel,”
she wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/13/riverrun-national-theatre-review-joyce>
, “much like the great text that inspired it.”

 * Adelaide festival 2015 <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/> runs from 27 
February to 15 March at venues citywide. Find all Guardian Australia’s coverage
here <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adelaide-festival-2015>  