
7.40am GMT 

That's all from Monday's liveblog

Join us again tomorrow for more live coverage of the festival. But first, a 
reminder of today’s stories

 * Alicia Canter shot these gorgeous pictures of Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-australia-pictures-2014>

 * Jane Howard went on a hunt for a Thylacine and a Fringe cruise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken>

 * Alfred Hickling hung out with Pokey LeFarge and Coloured Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/alfred-hicklings-womadelaide-diary-monday-10-march?view=desktop>

 * We looked at the work of Fiona Hall, exhibiting as part of Adelaide 
Biennial, in this video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/10/my-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial>

 * Jana Perkovic was disappointed by the State Theatre Company’s production of 
The Seagull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/seagull-review-tremendous-drama-lacking-direction?view=desktop>

 * Musicians collaborating in Tectonics Adelaide told us about their favourite 
musical discoveries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-my-musical-discovery>

 * Alfred reviewed Emel Mathlouthi and Rachid Taha at Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-emel-mathlouthi-and-rachid-taha-review-rocking-the-arab-world?view=desktop>

 * Alex was enthusiastic about Tectonics program one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-ilan-volkov-adelaide-symphony-orchestra-review>

 * Jane Howard reviewed You Wanna Talk About It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/you-wanna-talk-about-it-review>

 * Femi Kuti tried to teach Womad – and Guardian Australia – how to dance on 
our podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-3>

 * Vicky Frost reviewed Windmill Theatre Trilogy: Fugitive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/windmill-theatre-trilogy-fugitive-review-a-dystopian-robin-hood?view=desktop>

• Guardian Australia travelled to and stayed in Adelaide courtesy of the 
Adelaide festival. Flights from the UK were provided by Emirates 
<http://www.emirates.com/>.

Updated at 8.38am GMT

6.31am GMT 

Alfred Hickling's Womadelaide diary – Pokey LaFarge and Coloured Stone
 Pokey LaFarge performs on the Speakers Corner stage at Womadelaide. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Alfred has been hanging out with Pokey La Farge – the best dressed and also, 
apparently, most erudite man you’ll meet at Womadelaide – and discussing Norman 
Mailer books with him. Obviously. He’s also been watchingColoured Stone 
<https://www.facebook.com/ColouredStoneOfficialPage>, celebrating their 35th 
anniversary this year, and the longest-established Indigenous rock band in 
Australia; and dancing to the Australian-Iraqi fusion sounds ofAzadoota 
<http://www.azadoota.com/bio.html>, who sing in ancient Assyrian. All this and 
the only Punjabi rock band to feature a sousaphone in the line-up,Red Baraat 
<http://www.redbaraat.com/news.html>. 

You can read more about all this here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/alfred-hicklings-womadelaide-diary-monday-10-march?view=desktop>

6.21am GMT 

Tectonics: live

More from Alex’s Tectonics marathon (which seems to be quite changeable)
Alex Needham (@alexneedham74) 
Music is very quiet and ambient at Tectonics so far. Crys Cole piece a bit 
like someone rustling a bag of crisps for 20 minutes
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/442891740672827392> March 10, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/442891740672827392> Alex Needham 
(@alexneedham74) 
Shaken and stirred by Hammers Lake at Tectonics, including the amazing throat 
singing, screaming and spitting of Judith Hamann#adlfest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/442906953660919808> March 10, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/442906953660919808> 
5.54am GMT 

Womdelaide 2014: the festival in pictures

As Womadelaide begins to near its end for this year, Alicia Canter has filed a 
gorgeous set of pictures – basically, the festival looks like paradise –that 
you can (and should) look at in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-australia-pictures-2014>
. You’ll also find a selection below.
 The Mexican themed Viva La Vida Parade on Sunday afternoon. Children could 
create skeleton puppets, floral skulls, masks and colourful bunting at 
workshops over the weekend, to be carried in this year's parade. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Arrested Devlopment sing and play pots and pans 
on the Taste The World stage. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Nadia 
Mahmoud, 29 and Mariearma Admosu both from Adelaide, enjoy the festival. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Adelaidian singer Loren Kate on the 
Moreton Bay stage. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Updated at 2.45am GMT

5.39am GMT 

Fringe: Jane Howard's festival diary: They Saw a Thyalacine and Storytellers 
Club

Our amazing woman at the Fringe, Jane Howard, has filed her latest update.

While I was waiting to go into FOMO 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out/b5b8c2e8-9c8a-4810-b556-89288afeda47>
 yesterday,  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out/b5b8c2e8-9c8a-4810-b556-89288afeda47>
I ran into Pete Muller, better known asFestival Freak <http://ff.moobaa.com/>,  
<http://ff.moobaa.com/>who has now seen over 10% of the 2014 Fringe program. 
(Keep in mind that there are more than 900 shows). FOMO was show number 101, 
and his plan had him at another six before the day was through. Post festival 
season, Muller gets blogging, where he’ll spend the next year catching up on a 
backlog of reviews until he starts it all again in 2015. When I expressed 
amazement that he was still going so strong, he brushed me off. “Seeing shows 
is easy,” he told me, “you pay your money, you show up, you go.” Simple.

I was back at the Tuxedo Cat in the evening to see They Saw a Thylacine 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/they-saw-a-thylacine/f609f953-a588-4979-8a5a-0d49f34d1fb3>
,from Melbourne performance makers Sarah Hamilton and Justine Campbell. This 
lyrical piece sees two women narrating the stories of their relationships with 
the thylacine, or Tasmanian tiger, in the years before its extinction: Hamilton 
shares the story of a tracker, and Campbell the story of a zoo keeper’s 
daughter – not allowed to become a zoo keeper herself. While the show offers a 
brief history of the Tasmanian tiger in the 1930s, its real focus is Australian 
women in that decade: it details sexually inappropriate treatment from men, and 
the very real restrictions placed on women. This is simple theatre done well – 
just two women sharing their stories with heart and with humour.

I had a journey of a completely different sort at the Storytellers’ Club 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/storytellers-club-on-the-popeye/05cddbcc-e092-4010-a39c-c788b14ae526>
: four comedians and host Sarah Bennetto telling stories while we puttered 
along the Torrens. It is hardly the most scenic of waterways – it’s probably a 
good thing the journey takes place under the darkness of night – but there was 
something particularly lovely about a festival cruise that traveled between 
Lola’s and the music of Womad. It was the perfect night for it, too. The boat 
has a changing lineup of comics through the season, who all tell stories then 
bring out their traditional acts. The pick of my night wasKatie Mulgrew 
<http://katiemulgrew.wordpress.com/>,  <http://katiemulgrew.wordpress.com/>who 
unfortunately doesn’t have a standalone show this Fringe – perhaps you’ll be 
lucky and grab her again on Popeye.

5.11am GMT 

My favourite work: Fiona Hall's Out of My Tree at Adelaide Biennial 2014 – 
video

We’ve been asking artists and curators to share their favourite works of the 
Adelaide Biennial: Dark Heart with us all week. Here’s the third video in our 
series. You can catch up with our film about theKulata Tjuta Project here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/07/favourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>
, and our film aboutRosemary Laing’s A Dozen Useless Actions for Grieving 
Blondes here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/09/my-favourite-work-nick-mitzevich-dozen-useless-actions-grieving-blondes>
.

Artist Julia Robinson, whose work also appears in the Biennial, explains why 
Fiona Hall’s nightmarish collection Out of My Tree is her pick at this year’s 
exhibition. Skulls, cuckoo clocks and other memento mori line the room. Filling 
the air are the cries of crows, a musty smell and the ticking of clocks. Is 
this a countdown to our own death?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmy-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394419428175%2FFiona-Hall---Out-of-my-tr-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Fiona%20Hall's%20Out%20of%20My%20Tree%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmy-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Fiona%20Hall%27s%20Out%20of%20My%20Tree%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmy-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394419428175%2FFiona-Hall---Out-of-my-tr-001.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmy-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394419428175%2FFiona-Hall---Out-of-my-tr-001.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Fiona%20Hall's%20Out%20of%20My%20Tree%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmy-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Fiona%20Hall%27s%20Out%20of%20My%20Tree%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F10%2Fmy-favourite-work-fiona-hall-adelaide-biennial&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F10%2F1394419428175%2FFiona-Hall---Out-of-my-tr-001.jpg>
close 
4.48am GMT 

The Seagull – a tremendous drama lacking in direction
 Hilary Bell's adaptation of The Seagull by Anton Chekhov. Photograph: Shane 
Reid/State Theatre Company of South Australia 
We’ve liked a lot of the work we’ve seen here in Adelaide – but not everything 
has proved as thrilling asBatsheva’s Sadeh21 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/batsheva-dance-company-sadeh21-review-striking-stage-imagery>
, or theUnsound gigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/unsound-gardland-james-ferraro-emptyset-moritz-von-oswald-trio-review>
. Jana Perkovic found little to like when she went to the State Theatre Company 
of South Australia’s production of The Seagull. It’s a new adaptation by Hilary 
Bell, but it remains pretty faithful to the original, which makes it more 
difficult to understand the direction, Jana writes.

She gives the show a one-star review, drawing comparisons with Simon Stone’s 
productions of Chekhov in Melbourne, and blaming its failure on direction that 
fails to find the nuances in the work.You can read the review in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/seagull-review-tremendous-drama-lacking-direction?view=desktop>
, and here’s an extract.

There is tremendous drama here, but, just as in life, it needs to be perceived 
beyond the mundane routines of the everyday. To bring such nuance to life on 
stage, good acting is not optional: it is requisite. And here the direction is 
lacking. This is a traditional production, with Hilary Bell’s adaptation very 
faithful to Chekhov, so there is no conceptual reason for coarse-grained 
performances. And yet the actors’ gestures here are large at moments when they 
should hit the precise notes of complex interactions. At others, when they 
should lose both control and dignity, they lack intensity.

As a result, instead of being naturalistic, the acting seems histrionic. It’s 
tricky to tell if Brookman consciously set this production in the 1950s United 
States (and if so why) – the costumes and set are equivocal – but the acting is 
reminiscent of the strongly gendered, exaggerated gestures of cinema and 
television of that time. Instead of Stanislavsky, it is Peyton Place 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peyton_Place_(TV_series)>.

4.04am GMT 

Tectonics program two – live updates

Alex will be tweeting throughout his nine-hour music marathon. If he isn’t 
deafened by the large instrument situated perilously close to him
Alex Needham (@alexneedham74) 
Tectonics, I am in you (and probably sitting unwisely close to a big gong) 
#adlfest <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/f58fm3DzR8 <http://t.co/f58fm3DzR8>
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/442872006631882754> March 10, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/442872006631882754> 
4.03am GMT 

Tectonics: musicians share their favourite musical discoveries with us
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB8UiPc2FwY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB8UiPc2FwY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB8UiPc2FwY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB8UiPc2FwY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB8UiPc2FwY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhB8UiPc2FwY&media=>
close 
This is a gorgeous thing: Alex Needham has been collecting the musical 
discoveries of some of the Tectonics collaborators. Youcan read the feature in 
full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-my-musical-discovery>
. I’m tempted to go and listen to everything mentioned and see what happens to 
my musical brain. (It would almost certainly finish in better shape than it 
started.)

Among the stories of discovery, is that of Attila Csihar 
<http://www.thewire.co.uk/in-writing/interviews/sunno_exclusive-interview-transcripts_attila-csihar>
, vocalist with Mayhem and Sunn O))), who talks about the impact of UK 
experimental dark ambient bandCurrent 93 <http://www.brainwashed.com/c93/>. 
“Their music made a huge impact on me with its bizarre other-dimensional 
atmosphere,” Csihar says.

The composer Jim Denley <http://www.rainerlinz.net/NMA/22CAC/denley.html> 
shares what he terms his “most important influence” –Teletopa 
<http://www.messandnoise.com/discussions/3708318>. It was 1971, Denley was 14 
and the group played all over the space, in among the audience. “It was the 
loudest, most extreme music I’d seen,” he explains. “The music sounded like a 
cultural revolution. Nothing that they played resembled music that I’d heard 
before. Every gesture had been stripped of tired cultural references and we 
were left with raw sound. It was, and probably remains, my most important 
influence.”

And Eugene Ughetti, artistic director of Speak Percussion 
<http://www.melbournerecital.com.au/events/2013/eugeneughetti/> talks about 
discoveringspectral music 
<http://www.moz.ac.at/sem/lehre/lib/bib/software/cm/Notes_from_the_Metalevel/spectral.html>
 (You’ll find an example above). “That was a defining moment for me. It’s music 
that is based on theovertone series 
<http://www.phy.mtu.edu/~suits/overtone.html>, or the sound spectrum of a 
particular sound colour.”

And more! Much more! It’s a really fantastic read.

Updated at 7.35am GMT

3.45am GMT 

Spotted: Billy Bragg

Hanging around the lobby of Adelaide Hilton sporting a rather fetching beard, 
ahead of his set at Womadelaide tonight. I must say, it seems unlikely that 
this hotel is ever more fun than it is now. I had a live jazz flute backing 
track in my room yesterday thanks to someone rehearsing next door, and I’ve 
just shared a lift with a lady in head to toe sequins at 2pm on a Monday. That 
is not your normal hotel stay.

3.21am GMT 

Review: Emel Mathlouthi and Rachid Taha at Womadelaide

You heard Alfred Hickling talking on the podcast to Emel Mathlouthi ahead of 
her performance at Womadelaide last night. Here’s what Alfred made of the gig, 
and his thoughts on Rachid Taha, an algerian rocker obsessed by the clash. (You 
might have heard his cover of Rock the Casbah).

Mathlouthi was reluctant to confirm to Alfred whether she’d be playing the 
song for which she is best known, Kelmti Horra (My Word is Free) which became 
the soundtrack to the Arab Spring, but in the event did so as an encore – it 
came after a solo version of Leonard Cohen’s Hallelujah.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA6ho8YPL_-I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA6ho8YPL_-I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA6ho8YPL_-I&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA6ho8YPL_-I&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA6ho8YPL_-I>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA6ho8YPL_-I&media=>
close 
You can read Alfred’s review of the evening here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/womadelaide-emel-mathlouthi-and-rachid-taha-review-rocking-the-arab-world?view=desktop>
. You’ll find a brief extract below

For her first Australian show, Mathlouthi chooses to debut the music she has 
been working on since the emergence of that song. It’s a darker, harder-edged 
sound driven by a laptop and a violin. But it’s the astonishing range and 
sensuousness of Mathlouthi’s voice that is most compelling. There are swoops 
and growls reminiscent of Bjork, whom she cites as a major influence, and even 
traces of her goth past as she picks out minimal, reverberant lines on electric 
guitar which make you wonder if she’s also been listening tothe XX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-xx> .

Updated at 5.36am GMT

3.06am GMT 

Review: Tectonics program one

Proving that he is a man of quite astonishing cultural stamina, Alex Needham 
has followed up two nights of experimental electronic music with a trip to 
Tectonics. (More astonishingly: he’s back there this afternoon for another 
nine-hour session). Must be that massively carb-heavy dinner we ate far too 
late last night that’s seeing him through.

Alex can explain the thinking behind Tectonics better than I, so I’ll leave it 
to him in this extract fromhis four-star review, you can read in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-ilan-volkov-adelaide-symphony-orchestra-review>
.
 Conductor Ilan Volkov rehearses with Adelaide Symphony Orchestra ahead of 
their Tectonics Adelaide performance. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian
Tectonics is an ambitious attempt to bring together two world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/ilan-volkov-classical-musics-super-collider>
s: that of the classical orchestra and experimental music. In this, its fifth 
edition but first in the southern hemisphere, curator and conductor Ilan Volkov 
has recruited the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra to play with a host of 
avant-garde composers and musicians in a five-hour program. It takes in 
everything from a piano recital by John Cage collaboratorAki Takahashi  
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/aki-takahashi-mn0000857461>to a 40-minute 
semi-improvised drone by the composer and electronic musicianOren Ambarchi 
<http://www.orenambarchi.com/>.

The second program, on Monday, will go even further out there – it’s over nine 
hours long and culminates in a performance by Sunn O))) side projectGravetemple 
<http://editionsmego.com/release/SOMA015>.

Total immersion, then, and it works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-2014-endurance-art>
. Tectonics is sometimes baffling, occasionally annoying, but seldom boring. As 
well as commissioning two entirely new pieces of music –Matthew Shlomowitz 
<http://www.shlom.com/>’s Listening Styles andElena Kats-Chernin’ 
<http://www.australianmusiccentre.com.au/artist/kats-chernin-elena>s and Jon 
Rose <http://www.jonroseweb.com/>’s Elastic Band – Volkov has focused on three 
composers:David Ahern 
<http://www.australianmusiccentre.com.au/artist/ahern-david>, an Australian who 
died in 1988 aged 40 and whose work is rarely performed; and the more 
celebrated 20th-century composersIannis Xenakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/17/iannis-xenakis-huddersfield-contemporary-music>
 andGiacinto Scelsi <http://www.therestisnoise.com/2005/11/giacinto_scelsi.html>
, who each have four works played apiece.

Updated at 3.11am GMT

2.42am GMT 

In pictures: Four Rooms at Tandanya

We been visiting Four Rooms, an exhibition at Tandanya National Aboriginal 
Cultural Institute <http://www.tandanya.com.au/> here in Adelaide, curated by 
Troy-Anthony Baylis, and featuring the work of artists Zane Saunders, Jenny 
Fraser and James Luna, Gordon Hookey, and Tess Allas, Charlie Schneider and 
Vernon Ah-Kee.

The work is split between four “rooms”, with the show taking its name from the 
1995 film <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0113101/> where four individual 
narratives are brought together: you can hear Alfred Hickling discussing Vernon 
Ah-Kee’s contribution to the exhibitionon our first podcast from the festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/08/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-one>
. Alicia Canter took some pictures at the exhibition; find them below – and 
visit the exhibition until April 6
 Curator Troy-Anthony Baylis at the Four Rooms exhibition at the Tandanya 
National Aboriginal Cultural Institute. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian  Work from artist Zane Saunders from Queensland, Australia at Four 
Rooms. Photograph by Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Artists Jenny Fraser (QLD) 
and James Luna (USA) in their room at the Tandanya National Aboriginal Cultural 
Institute. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian  Queensland-based artist 
Gordon Hookey at Four Rooms, photographed in front of his work. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Updated at 2.46am GMT

2.12am GMT 

Fringe review: You Wanna Talk About It – the mad world of breaking news

Jane Howard, Guardian Australia’s queen of the Fringe, is always on the hunt 
for new experiences. And she had one at You Wanna Talk About It, a production 
by Adelaide company isthisyours? The show, which is a comment on the 24-hour 
news cycle, involves the audience fully as a news “event” breaks. You can read 
Jane’sthree-star review of the show in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/you-wanna-talk-about-it-review>
, or catch an extract below.

You Wanna Talk About It asks the audience to contribute to the at times 
maddening vagueness of breaking news in a 24 hour news cycle. Through text 
messages, a handful of tweets, Facebook posts, and witness interviews we 
attempt to define exactly what the event was. Well, in theory – at my show, 24 
Hour Newz was diverted into a discussion about whether the Dewey decimal system 
truly is the best system for cataloguing libraries.

The production asks a lot of its audience, but does so with such and humour 
and warmth that you want to participate. You’ll laugh at both the effects of 
the contemporary news cycle and your own attempts to infer meaning into the 
smallest of actions. And, just as the audience begins to find its own version 
of the event, the work shifts into a space that allows us to really look at 
themselves. It’s an unexpected development that really creates the payoff to 
the production.

2.04am GMT 

Festival podcast: episode three
 Femi Kuti dancers and musicians show the crowd how to dance at Womadelaide 
2014 on Sunday. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
On today’s podcast, Femi Kuti & Positive Force try and teach Womad – and 
Guardian Australia – how to dance. We’re glad that this is an audio feature, 
frankly. Less ludicrously, Alfred Hickling talks to Tunisian artist Emel 
Mathlouth, whose music became the soundtrack to revolution in her country, and 
Belinda Lopez heads away from the festival din to talk to Sound Introversion 
Radio, who are creating quiet, slow music.

You can listen to the podcast here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-3>
, or youcan subscribe via iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/podcast/guardian-australia-culture/id796931454?mt=2>
 – we have two more editions still to come.

Updated at 2.47am GMT

1.17am GMT 

Windmill Theatre's Fugitive – a dystopian Robin Hood
 Fugitive Photograph: Tony Lewis 
Yesterday I went to see Fugitive, part of the Windmill Theatre Trilogy, fresh 
from seeing Girl Asleep – the latest addition to it – the night before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/girl-asleep-review-as-inventive-and-surprising-as-its-audience>
. I feel in quite a lucky position: I hadn’t seen any of Windmill’s work before 
arriving in Adelaide this festival, so all of the Trilogy is new to me, even 
though both School Dance and Fugitive premiered a number of years ago.

It’s a fascinating way to meet a company, particularly one which produces its 
own new work, and where there is a real through line to follow. The Trilogy has 
a distinct aesthetic and approach, and you can watch it develop from Fugitive 
(the earliest play, first staged in 2010) to Girl Asleep (the latest).

There are distinct themes emerging, and preoccupations that writer Matthew 
Whittet clearly will keep returning to. Seeing the three as a whole illuminates 
that brilliantly – but it also means that the earlier work rather suffers 
against the more recent stuff. You can readmy three star review of Fugitive in 
full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/windmill-theatre-trilogy-fugitive-review-a-dystopian-robin-hood?view=desktop>
, or find a snippet below.

From the discordant, high-volume opening, you’d be forgiven for thinking you’d 
stumbled into an experimental Unsound Adelaide gig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/unsound-gardland-james-ferraro-emptyset-moritz-von-oswald-trio-review?view=desktop>
, rather than a rite-of-passage story based loosely on the adventures of Robin 
Hood. But then Windmill don’t much care about the “correct” way of doing 
things, and the teenage boys next to me stop glumly discussing why they’ve been 
made to come to this stupid show, and start paying attention. They don’t stop 
until the story’s done.

12.44am GMT 

Last night's Twitter reviews

Plenty from our critics on the way. But first, a look at what festival goers 
have been making of Womad
Krystle Aunger (@KrystleAunger) 
La Chiva Gantiva = Columbian Rage Against the Machine meets Super Mario? 
#WOMAD14 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23WOMAD14&src=hash> #WOMADelaide 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23WOMADelaide&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/KrystleAunger/statuses/442604862916669440> March 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/KrystleAunger/statuses/442604862916669440> ToryShepherd 
(@ToryShepherd) 
There are various ways you can measure happiness ... I choose the level of 
foot filth...#Womadelaide2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Womadelaide2014&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/mrZ0oS8g9Q <http://t.co/mrZ0oS8g9Q>
 <https://twitter.com/ToryShepherd/statuses/442640978839478273> March 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ToryShepherd/statuses/442640978839478273> Laura Trieste 
(@Laura_Trieste) 
A fun mix of cultural music and food bringing people of all kinds together 
@WOMADelaide <https://twitter.com/WOMADelaide>, reminds me of what I love about 
Australia#adlfest <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Laura_Trieste/statuses/442521487992299521> March 9, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Laura_Trieste/statuses/442521487992299521> 
12.26am GMT 

Welcome to Monday's live coverage of Adelaide festival

It’s an odd day in Adelaide today: overcast, hot and with the city largely 
shut for a public holiday. (And when I say largely, I mean almost completely). 
But the festival has no time for resting: we’ll be out at the final day of 
Womad, enjoying Fringe and reflecting on the work we’ve seen to date. I’m Vicky 
Frost, and I’ll be your liveblog host for the day.

But first, a reminder of the treats from yesterday’s live coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-2014-sunday-9-march-live>
:

 * Vicky Frost reviewed Windmill Theatre’s latest work Girl Asleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/girl-asleep-review-as-inventive-and-surprising-as-its-audience>

 * Alex Needham interviewed the man behind Tectonics, Illan Volkov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/ilan-volkov-classical-musics-super-collider?view=desktop>

 * We went to see Wil Anderson’s new show at the Fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/wil-anderson-wiluminati-review-you-could-power-adelaide-off-the-warm-glow-in-this-room?view=desktop>

 * We thrilled to the final night of Unsound Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/unsound-gardland-james-ferraro-emptyset-moritz-von-oswald-trio-review?view=desktop>

 * We talked to Arrested Development’s Speech and Morton Subotnick in our 
second festival podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-womadelaide-podcast-episode-two>

 * Alfred Hickling considered the rise and rise of the epic arts event. (Very 
much in evidence here) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-2014-endurance-art>

 * Alicia Canter brought us a gallery of gorgeous images from the Fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2014/mar/09/adelaide-festival-2014-fringetheatre>

 * Jane Howard gave us the latest instalment of her fringe diary 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary>

 * Bill Code and Alex Needham brought us video from the Adelaide Biennial of 
Australian art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/09/my-favourite-work-nick-mitzevich-dozen-useless-actions-grieving-blondes>

 * Jana Perkovic was awed by Batsheva’s Sadeh21 – awarding our first five star 
review of the festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/batsheva-dance-company-sadeh21-review-striking-stage-imagery>

 * We reviewed Arrested Development at Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/arrested-development-review-cooking-up-a-storm?view=desktop>

 * Alfred Hickling and Bill Code took us on a delightful video wander through 
Womadelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/mar/09/an-evening-at-womadelaide-video> 