
I was a mad Led Zeppelin fan when I was 13 or 14. But one day, I was browsing 
through my dad’s record collection when an album jumped out at me: Since We 
Met, byan American pianist and jazz-trio leader called Bill Evans 
<http://intotherhyth.blogspot.co.uk/2014/08/bill-evans-trio-since-we-met.html>. 
And that got me hooked. It’s everything I think jazz should be: the classic 
trio of bass, piano and drums,with a wonderfully sharp, smart and simple title 
track <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gvj-ZaxfO-M>.

Trad jazz doesn’t suit me, and I never got into high-tempo free jazz – it just 
sounds like everyone’s playing different rhythms as rapidly as possible. So, 
though I often say I like jazz, maybe it’s more accurate to say I like Evans. 
Since We Met was one of his late albums, recorded live at the Village Vanguard 
in New York in 1974 with bassist Eddie Gómez and drummer Marty Morrell. Evans 
had done time as a soloist and sideman in other groups before setting up his 
own trio. Despite being classically trained, learning four different 
instruments, he was hugely nervous on stage, but he found himself in the music. 
He had a desperately sad life, though: he had an abusive father, his brother 
killed himself, and so did one of his partners.He developed a raging addiction 
to heroin, then cocaine, which eventually killed him at the age of 51 
<http://www.billevanswebpages.com>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fadrian-chiles-why-i-love-bill-evans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F4%2F1415116665567%2F663d3b37-bf61-4819-8640-4e202b51a12d-1601x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Chiles%3A%20why%20I%20love%20Bill%20Evans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fadrian-chiles-why-i-love-bill-evans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Chiles%3A%20why%20I%20love%20Bill%20Evans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fadrian-chiles-why-i-love-bill-evans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F4%2F1415116665567%2F663d3b37-bf61-4819-8640-4e202b51a12d-1601x2040.jpeg>
 Adrian Chiles Photograph: Jon Furniss/WireImage 
Another classic album I liked at the time was Miles Davis’s Kind of Blue 
<http://www.npr.org/programs/jazzprofiles/archive/miles_kob.html>. It turned 
out Evans was the pianist on that, the only white member of the group. Davis 
said Evans had “quiet fire”, which is beautifully put. I don’t think there’s a 
jazz pianist alive who isn’t influenced by Bill Evans.At school, my English 
teacher Mr Ralph <http://www.tes.co.uk/article.aspx?storyCode=6376885> was 
fanatical about him. He was a pianist and asked me to join his trio. The only 
thing I’m remotely competent at is double-bass, so I played that, with my 
friend Neil on drums. I remember talking to Mr Ralph about other pianists, and 
he said: “No, it’s got to be Bill!” I thought that was a bit like saying 
Shakespeare was the only writer, but I’ve come to agree with him.

I used to go to the Pizza Express jazz club in Soho 
<http://www.pizzaexpresslive.com/jazzList.aspx> and watch all these bass 
players, mesmerised, their fingers as big as my thighs. I love playing the 
double-bass, though I’ve never done it seriously enough. A friend recently 
offered me one she didn’t have space for, but I live in a flat – it’d drive the 
neighbours mad. Still, I pick it up every so often and have a go. It’s a great 
bluffer’s instrument. I don’t know why we give kids violins: a quarter of a 
millimetre out and it sounds like a cat’s being run over. But with the bass, 
you can get away with anything. When I was presenting The One Show, Nigel 
Kennedy came on and I said: “Let’s jam.” They got me a bass and we played Fever.
He told me I was good, but the truth was he made me sound good 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hECAyyiCC1M>.

Liking jazz as a teenager was hardly the coolest thing in the world, but I was 
never self-conscious about it. I just loved the music. I’m a huge fan of the 
pianistMose Allison <http://moseallison.com>, must have seen him live 30 times, 
and I love Stan Kenton and Count Basie. My only worry is that jazz is in danger 
of dying out. I went to see a saxophonist recently and realised I was the 
youngest person in the room – but then I’ve also sat in audiences full of 
hipsters. And to be honest, I’m more comfortable with the old farts. I’ve got a 
pair of sandals and I do possess socks. It’s getting to that time in life.

Bill in brief

Way in: “The studio album Everybody Digs Bill Evans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZRh9kGdYB9I]>. Peace Piece is one of the 
simplest jazz tracks ever, a thing of extraordinary beauty: same theme all the 
way through, a series of soft chords in the left hand with the gentlest 
improvisation in the right.”

Key work: “Since We Met 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93JtDuWx7zM&list=PLxZJSRjy5DX7t2f7NXXMkFn64xl3sVnpE>
 – there’s a purity about it, you can hear exactly what they’re trying to do.”

In three words: “Gotta be Bill.”

• Adrian Chiles <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles> presents 5 
Live Daily.
 