
We knew it would be good, but no one had the right to believe it would turn 
out this good. The setting’s been brilliant; the football’s been brilliant. Why 
did we ever doubt it?

But doubt we did, especially when we arrived in Rio five days before the 
tournament started. There were few signs that a global football tournament was 
happening any time soon. There was no bunting, no flag waving, no buzz. While 
there wasn’t exactly revolution in the air, you couldn’t walk very far without 
seeing graffiti imploring us to “FUCK FIFA”. On the night of the opening game a 
protest amassed behind our studio on Copacabana beach. Before long, ball 
bearings (we think) were being fired at our window. Things looked grim.

But that’s when the bad stuff stopped and the fun started. With the help of 
their team’s steady, if uncertain, progress, Brazilians fell in love with their 
ownWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, 
embracing it with the fervour of new lovers. The armies of visiting fans from 
Chile, Mexico, Argentina, Uruguay, wherever, were only too happy to join in, 
their exuberance astonishingly good-natured.

And then there was the brilliance of the football itself. In club football the 
trend has been for some teams to try “to win without the ball”; to absorb 
pressure and counter-attack when it suits them. Not anti-football exactly, and 
not without merit, but certainly not the beautiful game (dread cliché) extolled 
by Pelé. But what do you know, the world’s footballers turned up here inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> hell-bent on playing what can only 
be described as “Brazilian”, devil-may-care football.
 Holland's Robin van Persie scores with a spectacular header in a win against 
Spain in the 2014 World Cup. Photograph: Jeff Gross/Getty Images 
There are those, among them ITV’s smoulderingly beautiful pundit Fabio 
Cannavaro, who cry “Mamma mia!” in despair at the quality of defending. But 
hang the defending: just feel the net stir the air and the spirits as another 
ball crashes into it.

Ironically, one of the few teams not trying to play like Brazil was Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>. But, hell, they kept winning 
almost despite themselves; forced over the line by the sheer impossibility of 
it being otherwise in the eyes of their people. And the party went on – at 
least until their semi final against German.

Their 7-1 defeat was brutal for the home nation, but it couldn’t dampen the 
rest of the world’s enthusiasm for a tournament that had made children of us 
all.

Ian Wright, Lee Dixon, Gordon Strachan, Glenn Hoddle, Gus Poyet and I went to 
theMaracana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2013/mar/27/brazil-world-cup-maracana-stadium-video>
 one evening. These people have played in these kinds of stadia. But they, like 
me, were like kids on Christmas morning.

We were lucky enough to stay in the same hotel as the Dutch and were in the 
bar when they returned to base having trounced Spain. Wide-eyed with childlike 
wonder,Robin Van Persie <https://www.theguardian.com/football/robin-van-persie> 
said to us: “How did that happen? Where did that come from?”

It’s what we’ll be asking of the whole experience as we pack up our things and 
return home after the headiest month of our lives.

Adrian Chiles presents ITV’s World Cup coverage
 