
Afghanistan's leadership crisis has deepened after one presidential candidate 
released audio recordings that he said captured a senior election official 
conspiring to commit large-scale fraud using the code word "stuffed sheep" to 
discuss illegally filled ballot boxes.

In 15 minutes of sometimes slightly surreal conversation, two men urge an 
official to fire election staff with suspect loyalties and replace them with 
known supporters, ramp up plans for vote buying and ballot stuffing, and close 
down polling stations in areas thought to be unsympathetic.

"Take the sheep into the mountain and bring them back stuffed," one man says, 
before apparently lamenting the growing cost of buying votes. "The price of 
goats and sheep has gone up these days," he says ruefully.

A campaign manager for former mujahideen doctor Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> on Sunday said one 
speaker in that conversation was a close aide of the country's chief electoral 
officer, Ziaulhaq Amarkhil, although he refused to reveal the source of the 
recordings or offer any verification of the speakers' identity.

He claimed that the other man was from the campaign team of Ashraf Ghani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ashraf-ghani>, a former World Bank 
technocrat and author of the book Fixing Failed States. Ghani appears to have a 
majority of votes in the 14 June run-off against Abdullah but is accused by his 
rival of cheating.

A two-stage vote that was initially hailed as a triumph for the Afghan people 
and their fledging democracy, after Taliban threats failed to deter millions 
from turning out to cast their ballots, has sincedescended into a tense standoff
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/15/afghan-election-candidates-optimism-recriminations>
 with no clear path to a resolution.

Abdullah announced last week that he was withdrawing from the election process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/18/afghan-presidential-election-crisis-runoff-blatant-fraud>
, accusing incumbent Hamid Karzai and Amarkhil of helping Ghani rig the vote, 
with assistance from government and election officials around the country.

He called for United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> 
mediation, an offer unexpectedly endorsed by Karzai himself, even though the 
president had spent years squeezing all traces of foreign influence out of the 
electoral system. The UN itself has been more circumspect.

"This is a process which we respect as an Afghan-led process, Afghan-managed 
process and we would not want to take steps which would be seen as interfering 
or substituting the UN for Afghan leadership," deputy UN envoy Nicholas Haysom 
told journalists on Saturday.

"The task ahead of us is to have the candidates re-engage fully in the 
electoral process â€¦ There is no other way of electing a legitimate leader."

The UN has not been given a copy of the phone conversations but has urged 
Abdullah's team to submit the recording to officials monitoring fraud, 
spokesman Ari Gaitanis said.

Amarkhil himself was allegedly captured in some of the conversations played to 
journalists, asking a contact to "bring the sheep, stuffed properly", but also 
complaining peevishly about how little attention Ghani was giving him.

Abdullah's team had already complained to media about Amarkhil, and his 
photograph was burned at anti-fraud demonstrations called by Abdullah's 
supporters at the weekend.

Amarkhil, a former UN employee, denied that he had meddled in the election or 
that the audio recordings captured his conversations."I would never talk like 
that," he told the Wall Street Journa 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/supporters-of-afghanistans-abdullah-want-election-official-removed-1403425923>
l. Spokesmen for Ghani and the election commission, in interviews broadcast on 
Afghan TV, questioned both the authenticity of the recordings and how they had 
been obtained.

Mokhtar Amiri contributed reporting
 