
Afghan presidential hopeful Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> said he believes 2m votes 
cast for his rival in a June runoff poll were fraudulent and that the planned 
inauguration of a new leader in August should be delayed if more time is needed 
to audit ballot boxes rigorously.

The position places him at odds with the other contender, former World Bank 
technocrat Ashraf Ghani, and much of the international community, who claim the 
uncertainty stirred up by the months-long election process is costing the 
country's fragile economy dearly.

Pushing back the 2 August inauguration date could also threaten long-term 
military support from the US and other Nato countries after their combat 
mission ends this year. It is due to be replaced by a training mission and 
billions in financial support, but they can only be provided under a long-term 
cooperation deal that incumbent president, Hamid Karzai, has refused to sign, 
saying it is a decision for his successor.

"The international schedule is important, but it is more important that we do 
not sacrifice the rights of people in favour of a date," Abdullah said, after a 
day of meetings to try to defuse the standoff over results. "I don't think that 
people are waiting for the wrong solution."

The election crisis comes amidheavy violence, with the latest attack on 
Wednesday morning killing six members of the country's small airforce just 
outside a Kabul university, a senior police officer said. A suicide bomber on 
foot detonated his explosives near a military bus. The blast also injured at 
least 16 others, including security forces and civilians.

Plans to release preliminary election results on 2 July may have been put on 
hold as election authorities audit thousands of ballot boxes. The Independent 
Election Commission said it was not clear if figures would be given on 
Wednesday as scheduled.

Abdullah has withdrawn from the vote-counting process saying that fraud checks 
are not strict enough, and welcomed any delay for further investigations. But 
Ghani's team warned that a postponement would break election laws, disrespect 
voters and risk national stability.

"The Afghan people are awaiting results to be announced â€¦ They cannot be left 
in any more uncertainty," the team said.

"We are fully in favour of transparency and public accountability. That is why 
we believe the results should be announced, so that the nation can move on to 
the adjudication of complaints."

While both campaigns agree that Ghani came out of the election with an 
unexpectedly large lead, they dispute how he won it. His team say the vocal 
support of clerics, a higher turnout of women, a series of televised town 
hall-style meetings and polling day transportenabled him to pick up 2m more 
votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/27/ashraf-ghani-claims-afghan-presidential-election-victory>
 than in the first round.

Abdullah's team say almost all those ballots were fake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/22/afghan-election-crisis-stuffed-sheep-fraud>
, and have released audio recordings that they claim captured senior officials, 
including chief election officer Ziaulhaq Amarkhil, plotting to rig the vote 
for Ghani.

"Altogether we believe that 2m fraudulent votes are there," said Abdullah, who 
had a strong lead in the first round of voting and says he would have won a 
clean runoff.

Amarkhil has since stepped down, but protested his innocence, saying he was 
leaving only for the sake of national unity because Abdullah demanded his 
removal.

The dispute has become tinged with old ethnic rivalries, and thinly veiled 
threats, with shouts of "Death to Ghani" at rallies organised by Abdullah's 
supporters, and images of armed menamong many controversial images posted on 
social media 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/worldviews/wp/2014/06/30/how-facebook-is-seen-as-a-threat-to-afghan-unity/>
.

Abdullah said he condemned any threat of violence, but when asked how long the 
impasse could drag on, he refused to set a limit. "That I don't know. It's a 
technical issue, but it's an important issue because it affects the outcome," 
he said.

"For me, the legitimacy of the process is important, and the credibility of 
the process is damaged not because of our claims but because of what has 
happened."
 