
Former mujahideen doctor Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> has claimed victory in 
Afghanistan's elections, rejecting official results that put him a million 
votes shy of his rival and deepening the crisis over who will succeed Hamid 
Karzai as president.

Abdullah on Tuesday told thousands of supporters that he would sacrifice his 
own life to throw out "fraudulent results", although he stopped just short of 
announcing a parallel government afterstern warnings from Washington that any 
unilateral move could mean a halt in aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/us-afghanistan-election-fraud-turning-point>
.

"There is no doubt we are the winners of this election. We will not let a fake 
government take power for even one day," he told the rally in a cavernous hall 
in the capital, Kabul. He asked for time to untangle the crisis, but hinted at 
plans to unveil his own cabinet, saying: "The people are waiting for the 
announcement of our government."

Before he arrived angry supporters tore and destroyed down a giant poster of 
Karzai, who Abdullah claimed helped election opponent Ashraf Ghani cheat his 
way to victory. Abdullah condemned the vandalism.

Election authorities on Monday released delayed results from the runoff on 14 
June,putting Ghani ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/07/ashraf-ghani-afghanistan-presidential-vote-lead>
 with 56% of the vote. But election commission's chairman, Ahmad Yusuf 
Nuristani, also warned that there was not yet a winner, as millions of votes 
still had to be audited for fraud.

The two candidates have agreed on an audit of results from about 7,000 polling 
sites that triggered fraud concerns, including places with unusual ratios of 
male and female voters, and ones where almost all the ballots provided were 
used.

Abdullah had officially withdrawn from the vote counting process shortly after 
polling day, and had demanded a hold on the results announcement. He claimed 
that up to 2m ballots cast for Ghani were fraudulent and wanted full checks 
before any figures were made public.

His spokesman was quick to describe the release of the preliminary figures as 
a "coup", and within hours one of Abdullah's most powerful backers, the 
governor of Balkh province, Atta Mohammad Noor, warned of "widespread civil 
unrest".

Ghani dismissed concerns that Afghanistan's stability was at risk, saying he 
respected his rival as a "national figure", and hinting at the possibility of a 
unity government.

"Talk of parallel governments will remain at the level of talk, because of the 
historic responsibility that his excellency Dr Abdullah and I … have to ensure 
the stability of this country," he told reporters, after confirming he fully 
backed a wider audit of the results.

"We do not have preconditions for political discussions because we must engage 
in finding solutions... to ensure the legitimacy of the process, its fairness 
and the acceptance of its results."

Ghani appears to be softening his stance on giving Abdullah a stake in 
government, in the face of the fast-growing crisis. He had previously insisted 
that were he to be declared winner, his election rival would have to concede 
defeat before any discussion of jobs could begin.

The international community have responded cautiously to the results, with 
both the US and the UN calling on election authorities to move ahead swiftly 
with plans to audit another 3m of the 8m votes cast – an unexpectedly high 
turnout.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, also issued a stern warning 
against resorting to violence, threats of violence, or abandoning the messy 
democratic process.

"I have noted reports of protests in Afghanistan and of suggestions of a 
parallel government with the gravest concern," Kerry said, calling on the 
Afghan security forces to stay neutral. "Any action to take power by 
extra-legal means will costAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> the financial and security 
support of the United States and the international community."

If the current standoff can be resolved, the new president should be 
inaugurated on 2 August in Afghanistan's first ever democratic transfer of 
power. Any delays will likely strain an economy already undermined by political 
uncertainty and escalate security concerns as the last Nato combat troops head 
home.
 