
The frontrunner in Afghanistan's presidential election <> has narrowly escaped 
an assassination attempt in Kabul after suicide bombers attacked his armoured 
car, killing three of his bodyguards and three bystanders.

Two bombs hit the convoy of Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> as he was driven through 
the city from one campaign event to another on Friday. They ripped apart the 
bullet-proof four-wheel drive, blew the glass out of nearby buildings and left 
the ground strewn with blood and twisted metal, but Abdullah emerged apparently 
unscathed.
 Abdullah arrives at a campaign rally shortly after the attack. Photograph: 
Massoud Hossaini/AP 
"We condemn the attack," he told supporters at the next rally, which went 
ahead as planned. "If one person is killed it is a tragedy, but today six 
people lost their lives. Three were bystanders and three were from my team. 
They were young men, who had worked with me for a long time. The best response 
to this conspiracy [to kill me] is to go to vote on election day. Nothing can 
separate our team from the people."

It was first serious attack on a presidential candidate since campaigning 
began in February.

The Kabul police chief, Mohammad Zahir, said two men, one in a car and another 
on foot, carried out the attack, which almost entirely sheared off the front of 
the vehicle.

The toll could have been higher, but the convoy was still some way from the 
hotel hosting the next rally when the bombs exploded, and most supporters were 
already inside. No group has claimed responsibility, but the Taliban have vowed 
to disrupt a vote they say is not legitimate, and that anyone connected with it 
is considered a target.

If either of the two candidates due to face off in a second-round poll on 14 
June are killed before then, the constitution stipulates that the election must 
be re-run. It would be a slow and risky process at a time of great uncertainty 
about Afghanistan's future. All foreign combat troops will be gone by the end 
of this year, leaving the national police and army to fight the Taliban alone.

Critical training and support from a smaller US and Nato mission depends on a 
new leader signing off on a long-term security deal with Washington. The 
outgoing president, Hamid Karzai, who was barred by the constitution from 
standing for a third term, has said he will not seal the agreement. Both 
candidates have said they would finalise the bilateral security agreement as 
soon as possible if they won.

Abdullah won 45% of votes in the first round, and has won endorsements from 
the third- and fourth-placed candidates, putting him in a strong position for 
the showdown with former finance minister and World Bank technocrat Ashraf 
Ghani, who won 32% of votes. Ghani has also won some key endorsements and it is 
expected to be a hard-fought race.

The first round in the election was an unexpected success, as Afghans defied 
Taliban threats by turning out to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/15/afghanistan-presidential-election-voters-runoff>
. However there are fears – partly in response to the news reports and the 
injection of confidence that the vote gave citizens – that theinsurgents plan 
to cause more disruption in the second round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/15/afghanistan-presidential-election-voters-runoff>
.

The summer fighting season is now well under way so the Taliban, under the 
leadership of anew military commander 
<http://www.nation.com.pk/national/14-May-2014/taliban-appoints-new-military-commander>
, have more men and weapons to draw on for attacks.
 