
Team of the tournament

It would be churlish not to praise the winner, Ivory Coast, even if they 
stumbled over the line. They had waited 23 years for this and, mainly for their 
performances in the games against Cameroon, Algeria and DR Congo, could 
justifiably be called the best team. Equatorial Guinea deserve a mention too – 
their progress from the group stage was exhilarating and played out to 
remarkable levels of volume, and not even their fortunate win over Tunisia 
could completely silence the feelgood story. An unusually technical, mobile 
team of overachievers were fascinating to watch but in falling short against 
Ghana, their story became overtaken somewhatby off-pitch events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/06/equatorial-guinea-fined-africa-cup-violence-ghana>
.

Player of the tournament

Ghana’s Christian Atsu won the official award and probably deserved it 
overall. He was the best attacking player on display in the final – even if 
that was not saying a lot – and produced coruscating performances against 
Guinea, against whom he scored a remarkable angled 30-yarder, and Equatorial 
Guinea too. Can he push on and produce the goods for Everton at long last? 
Honourable mentions here go to Chancel Mbemba, the Anderlecht and DR Congo 
midfielder, and the veteranEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> holding player, Ivan 
Zarandona, whose languishing in the Hong Kong league seems a thing of the 
imagination.

Game of the tournament

Despite a sometimes tedious group stage there ended up being a few contenders. 
Algeria’s 3-1 win overSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica> was rollicking good fun 
after the interval, even if error-strewn, while the quarter-finals were 
uniformly fun and DR Congo’s 4-2 comeback win over Republic of the Congo – 
another game where the action came in the second-half – was breathless stuff. 
Ivory Coast’s 3-1 quarter-final win over Algeria was the best example of two 
top sides going blow for blow, though, and a tight game that grew in quality 
was far closer than the scoreline suggests. It was a match that would have been 
worthy of the final and, not for the first time, you cursed the skewed nature 
of the draw.

Goal of the tournament
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNCUGgGMrLWo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNCUGgGMrLWo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNCUGgGMrLWo&media=>
 Christian Atsu’s brilliant goal for Ghana 
For drama, timing and did-he-really-just-do-that, Javier Balboa’s free-kick 
winner for Equatorial Guinea in the controversial quarter-final against Tunisia 
is a clear winner. There were suggestions that Aymen Mathlouthi had been too 
slow across his goal but this was a wonderfully-placed free-kick, taken in an 
air pregnant with expectant tension, and sparked levels of pandemonium barely 
credible to even the most seasoned observers. Other honourable mentions go to 
Atsu, Bakary Sako – whose left-foot half-volley against the Ivorians was a 
delightful study in technique – and two of an entertaining South African side. 
Thuso Phala was on the end of the flowing team goal againstAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> and Mandla Masango scored a 
thudding volley against the Ghanaians, but both would be in vain.

Regret of the tournament

Although the host nation’s progress to the semi-finals was exuberantly 
received there had been a degree of unease at one or two of their games. The 
group fixture againstBurkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso> saw skirmishes between 
police and fans at the gates and it only took a tiny skip of the imagination to 
see that things might not have gone off smoothly if the teams’ fates had been 
reversed in the Tunisia quarter-final. But there was still no foreseeing the 
extent to which things degenerated in the last-four match with the Ghanaians: 
however you analyse the root cause of the supporters’ actions, it was an 
episode that will cloud memories of the past few weeks and, if Caf have any 
self-awareness, should lead to some soul-searching about the chain of events 
that led to the competition being held here at all.

Revelation of the tournament

The Equatoguinean league rarely crosses the radars of even the most hardened 
African football scouts but perhaps a few might attempt to negotiate the 
country’s labyrinthine visa process and head to a Deportivo Mongomo game soon. 
That is if Felipe Ovono has not convinced somebody to take the plunge already. 
The home nation’s goalkeeper is just 21 and stands only slightly taller than 
6ft, yet he was the stand-out goalkeeper here and a figure who commanded 
attention even when the freedom with which his outfield team-mates sometimes 
played was a more obvious draw.

Ovono is laudably brave and made a speciality of claiming balls he had little 
right to contest – generally to a backdrop of near-hysterical cheers. It was 
unfortunate that his one major misjudgment resulted in a penalty and goal for
Ghana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> in the semi-final, but Ovono 
mixes the exuberance of youth with a genuine sense of command and it would be 
interesting to see how he would fare higher up the football food chain. But he 
did not make the …

… Save of the tournament

Darren Keet will not look back on this competition with much fondness. The 
South Africa goalkeeper was relieved of first-choice status after their first 
game, against Algeria, after the north Africans overturned a deficit to win 
3-1. Nitpickers could fault Keet for Algeria’s first two goals and he was more 
squarely to blame for the third, when Islam Slimani’s shot went right through 
him. So it will be lost to history that Keet had made a thrilling double save 
just moments after Tokelo Rantie had missed the penalty that would have put 
South Africa 2-0 up. An instinctive save from Slimani’s backheel was good but 
his reaction to the follow-up, tipping the same player’s rebound on to the bar 
from point-blank range, was genuinely brilliant. The Kortrijk player will, at 
least, always have that.

Feelgood moment of the tournament

It came right at the very end. Boubacar Barry is far from the biggest name of 
Ivory Coast’s “golden generation”, and perhaps it is generous to bracket him in 
that category at all, but the 35-year-old goalkeeper has been there through the 
good and the bad times – including two final defeats – and here he served up 
the best of all.

Barry, who plays for Lokeren in Belgium and has been a derided figure down the 
years, travelled here as second choice and was not expected to appear, but an 
injury to Sylvain Gbohouo gave him a chance in the final and perhaps the script 
had been written in advance. At the end of a see-sawing penalty shoot-out, a 
seemingly injured Barry picked himself up to save his counterpart Razak 
Braimah’s penalty and then coolly convert his own. You smiled spontaneously as 
he wheeled away and then reflected that after another tournament in which Ivory 
Coast’s bigger names had struggled for consistency and form, this might have 
been the best way for them to win.

Ivory Coast 0-0 Ghana (IC 9-8 on pens) | Africa Cup of Nations final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/ivory-coast-ghana-africa-cup-of-nations-final-match-report>
Disappointment of the tournament

Much was expected of Paul Put’s Burkina Faso, runners-up last time and placed 
in the kinder half of the draw here. But despite creating enough chances in 
their first two games to win several groups, they came away from those with 
just one point and then lost 2-1 against Congo to seal their fate. Perhaps they 
were just unlucky; perhaps they are only a competent centre-forward away from 
being a potent force for the long-term; perhaps they just are not as good as 
their 2012 performance suggested. If they were the biggest on-pitch shame, the 
events of Equatorial Guinea’s semi-final against Ghanaprobably need little 
further recounting here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/feb/05/equatorial-guinea-v-ghana-semi-final-marred-by-violence-in-pictures>
, but will colour many perceptions of the tournament.

Team hotel of the tournament

This award should be dedicated to Claude Le Roy, the Congo coach who is always 
a pleasure to engage in football conversation but this month reached Mastermind 
levels of cogniscience with the sometimes sub-standard accommodation 
arrangements that his team and others had to tolerate. It was in fact the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo who ended up with the weirdest arrangement, in 
a Butlins-esque resort next to Bata’s airport. Butlins holds a certain appeal 
to some but the cavernous dining hall in this venue, peopled by various 
ne’er-do-wells who you suspected might benefit from the proximity of flights 
out, was a slightly unsettling place when an ebullient DR Congo squad was not 
sitting down to eat.

A shout out, too, to the Vistamar in Bata and the Hilton in Malabo. Le Roy was 
not wrong – Caf and their associates had definitely made sure they were well 
looked after.

Dubious claim to fame of the tournament

It is always nice to feel that you have contributed to another’s success and 
the Ipswich Star newspaper seemed proud that Suffolk constabulary had been 
prior owners of the helicopter used to disperse supporters in the Equatorial 
Guinea v Ghana game 
<http://www.ipswichstar.co.uk/news/former_suffolk_police_helicopter_helps_quell_trouble_at_african_cup_of_nations_semi_final_between_equatorial_guinea_and_ghana_1_3946895#sharinganchor>
. How fuzzy the glow would have been if the chopper, whose manoeuvre was 
frightening even to those watching at a distance, had made the slightest of 
wrong moves is probably a question best left alone.

Near miss of the tournament

Journalists filed into what looked a respectably proportioned mixed zone in 
the period between Equatorial Guinea v Congo and Gabon v Burkina Faso on the 
opening day, readying themselves for the obligatory quote-gathering scrum. They 
were then mired in a different kind of crush as a crowd of Gabon fans, 
attempting to enter the stand via a narrow adjacent staircase, exerted enough 
pressure on the flimsy plastic screens to send some of them tumbling and leave 
this reporter – along with others – scrambling away towards safety. The chaos 
eventually died down, at the cost of any post-match interviews, but fortunately 
this was one security issue from which organisers learned.

Venue of the tournament

If this was awarded for weirdness alone, Mongomo would take the crown most 
years. The vast Italianate basilica, modelled on St Peter’s in Rome, is odd 
enough and the numerous brand-new, empty edifices – a library, museum and 
college among them – that pepper the landscape around this small jungle town 
speak of an ambition that may or may not be realised. And when you have had 
enough of that, the quickest way back to Bata if you are in luck – or have a 
convenient contact in the army – is an entirely empty dual carriageway, not 
open to the general public, carved through dense jungle. But Estadio de Bata, 
comfortably the biggest stadium here, was probably the best in which to watch 
football – achieving the rare balance of being both modern and able to hold in 
37,000 fans’ worth of noise.
 