
Africa could be the first region in the world to power its economic 
development on renewable energy rather than fossil fuels such as coal, the head 
of the InternationalEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> 
Agency (IEA) told a press conference yesterday.

“I’m very excited about this,” said Fatih Birol as he launched the World 
Energy Outlook 2015 
<https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/weo-2015-special-report-energy-climate-change.html>
. “When we look at the history of energy – in Europe, the US, China – economic 
development was realised by a substantial amount of coal. But in Africa, we may 
well see, for the first time, a region [realising] its economic growth using 
renewable energy.”

Akon: ‘I don't think charities in Africa work’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/05/akon-charities-africa-lighting-energy-access>
Birol said the big push from governments to get electricity to the two out of 
three people in Africa who don’t have access will help support this, as will 
falling costs of renewable energy. The price of solar panelsfell by 75% from 
2009 to 2014 
<http://reneweconomy.com.au/2015/graph-day-plunging-cost-renewables-49704> and 
the costs of producing energy from the suncontinues to fall 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/business/cost-of-solar-energy-seen-falling-sharply-by-2020-iea/articleshow/48747784.cms>
.

Energy demand is growing in Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
the Middle East and south-east Asia, said Birol, but India is “the engine of 
the global energy demand” now that China’s energy demand is plateauing.

This year India is the special focus of the World Energy Outlook report, the 
“bible” of the sector, which comes out annually. It predicts that industrial 
growth, with the government’s emphasis on “make in India 
<http://www.makeinindia.com/home>”, will lead to a rapid growth in energy 
demand. Birol told the press conference that the IEA expects coal and oil 
consumption to grow significantly in India, but the country is also focusing on 
renewables, with a pledge to have 40% of power sector capacity non-fossil fuels 
by 2030.

We see a decoupling of energy demand growth and economic growth
Fatih Birol 
According to the report’s central scenario which forecasts changes to the 
global sector by 2040, energy demand in south-east Asia will rise by 80% and by 
70% in the Middle East, 90% of which which still be provided by domestic oil 
and natural gas.

In Latin America, according to the report, energy demand will increase by 50% 
and the region expands its relatively high share of renewables to 35% in 2040. 
This takes into account Brazil’s current drought, which is affecting hydropower 
and increasing reliance on gas. The report predicts that the region will 
continue to be a world leader in biofuels.

Low oil prices are affecting Africa’s exporting countries – Libya, Algeria, 
Nigeria and Angola. But countries in east Africa, such asMozambique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mozambique> and Tanzania, are becoming 
significant natural gas exporters and users. The report predicts that nearly 
40% of the total power generation capacity in Africa will be from renewables by 
2040.

Race to renewable: five developing countries ditching fossil fuels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/15/five-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania>
In developed countries, the report observes that economic growth and carbon 
emissions are no longer inextricably linked. “In advanced economies – Europe, 
US and Japan – energy demand is declining despite growth in [their economies],” 
said Birol. “So we see a decoupling of energy demand growth and economic growth 
in major advanced economies.”

In total, the report predicts that electricity consumption will grow by more 
than 70% to 2040, although 550 million people will still not have access, and 
that renewables will overtake coal as the largest source of power generation by 
the early 2030s. “Renewables are not a niche fuel anymore,” said Birol. 
“Renewables have become a mainstream fuel as of now.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#EnergyAccess <https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=%23EnergyAccess>.
 