
While Dorothy, blue-skirted and pigtailed, clutching a wicker basket and a 
bewildered dog under her arm, surveys the weird flowers and pygmy huts around 
her, she’s sure of just one thing: she’s not in Kansas any more.L Frank Baum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/14/wizard-of-oz-digested-classic>’s 
character was, it turns out, born slightly too early. In 1901, a year after the 
publication ofThe Wonderful Wizard of Oz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jul/19/fiction6>, Baum wrote The Master 
Key, a novel credited with the invention of augmented reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/mar/21/augmented-reality-iphone-advertising>
 via a pair of imagined spectacles that could map information on to whatever or 
whomever its wearer looked at. Had Dorothy owned a pair, she might have learned 
that she’d been whisked to Oz, or that her new friend the Tin Man was in need 
of a heart, even, perhaps, that a wicked witch is burned not by fire, but by 
water.

It was almost a century until Baum’s invention gained a label. In a 1992 
research paper, the Boeing engineersThomas Caudell and David Mizell 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=OyGiW2OYI8AC&pg=PA8&lpg=PA8&dq=1992+research+paper,+the+Boeing+engineers+Thomas+Caudell+and+David+Mizell&source=bl&ots=ZZGR0-N_G7&sig=Ddupwmjba8_xhhaIfnCy8GuF2ko&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwje9L7miuTPAhUHthQKHQsHA2oQ6AEIMzAD#v=onepage&q=1992%20research%20paper%2C%20the%20Boeing%20engineers%20Thomas%20Caudell%20and%20David%20Mizell&f=false>
 described a pair of “see-thru virtual reality goggles”, a device that would 
enhance the vision of factory workers with the complicated task of piecing 
together a jumbo jet’s nests of internal wiring with dynamically changing 
labels and information. Caudell termed this principle of annotating the seen 
world “augmented reality”, thereby formalising forSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>’s mavens and investors 
a fresh and unplundered field of technological opportunity, one that would 
eventually lead to the invention ofGoogle Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-glass>, a pair of 
information-spewing spectacles built, unbelievably, to Baum’s century-old 
definition.

Who wouldn’t like a natural history programme where the dinosaurs roam across 
your room?

If the breathless press releases are to be believed, 2016 has been the year of 
virtual reality – a discarded technology that, thanks to the revolution in 
low-cost components heralded by smartphones, is currently enjoying a lavish 
revival. Sony, Facebook and HTC have all launched expensive,miraculous visors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/14/google-translate-app-update-break-language-barrier>
 that transport us into fabricated realities, fooling the brain into believing 
that, like Dorothy, we’ve been bodily transported to another place. At its 
best, VR allows us to visit places too remote, too dangerous or too expensive 
to otherwise reach. Documentarians are using the nascent medium to allow us to 
experience life through the eyes of another. But VR technology also has 
numerous drawbacks. As well as the cost (just 3% of Britons are expected to 
invest in a serious headset this year, the cheapest of which costs £350, even 
without the PlayStation needed to run it) there’s also the sense of 
vulnerability that wearers experience while sitting blind in front of the 
television, as well as the perils of bumping into furniture. As one Microsoft 
spokesperson put it, VR users are “best advised to stay seated or keep still to 
avoid collisions”.

AR, while not having quite the same transporting effects, gets around this 
issue by layering its simulated elements over the real world. Through a pair of 
AR glasses, or a smartphone’s camera, you are able to see both the elbow-y 
chair and teetering lamp in front of you, and the data that overlays it. 
Microsoft’s apparent scepticism about VR is understandable; the company has 
instead focused millions of R&D dollars into AR (or, as the company prefers to 
term it, “mixed reality”) via itsHoloLens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/09/hololens-microsoft-virtual-world-augmented-reality->
, a see-through PC-in-a-visor that launches in November for the precise and 
gargantuan cost of£2,719 
<http://www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/2473929/want-a-microsoft-hololens-headset-itll-cost-you-gbp2-719>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F925e0fa58e641efe7826f3483a8088e518f7cf2b%2F0_109_1536_1745%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20success%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go!%2C%20what%20is%20the%20future%20for%20augmented%20reality%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20success%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%21%2C%20what%20is%20the%20future%20for%20augmented%20reality%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F925e0fa58e641efe7826f3483a8088e518f7cf2b%2F0_109_1536_1745%2F1536.jpg>
 Star Chart lets you annotate the night sky using GPS positioning on your 
smartphone. Photograph: Escape Velocity Ltd 
Microsoft believes that HoloLens is the next evolution for AR, technology that 
we have seen for years whenever, for example, a weather reporter gestures 
toward a virtual map behind them in a television studio, or a football pundit 
offers an assessment of the starting 11 in a football match, as digital 
versions of the players magically appear in front of them on the desk. In 
HoloLens the data isn’t merely layered on top of the world you’re looking at. 
It’s conjured and anchored into the environment around you. In this way, you 
can play Minecraft on the dining room table, walking around the room in order 
to get a different perspective on your creation. ForMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft>, it’s a way to pull the 
software on which we rely from our smartphone screens into the room, a 
holographic conjuring act that, as the spokesperson puts it, enables us to 
“interact with them in the same way we interact with physical objects”.

For Caudell, who coined the term AR, the technology, which he believed would 
be adopted across industries such as architecture, automotive design, building 
construction and even medicine never quite took off in the ways he expected. 
“There were technical and cultural issues at that time that kept it in the 
research lab,” he says. “In that sense it was probably ahead of its time.” The 
pervasiveness and power of smartphones has, however, “drastically opened up the 
market,” he says.

Meanwhile, the success of AR games such as Pokémon Go! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-becomes-global-phenomenon-as-number-of-us-users-overtakes-twitter>
, which was downloaded more than100 million times 
<http://www.techtimes.com/articles/172156/20160802/pok%C3%A9mon-go-reaches-100-million-downloads-earns-over-10-million-in-daily-revenue.htm>
 in its first month, reportedly earning $10m per day at the height of its 
popularity, has attracted widespread attention and investment. “It’s hard to 
say whether all the attention is warranted,” says Caudell. “But the potential 
for benefit is huge.”

New to Snapchat? Here’s how to join the conversation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/25/how-to-use-snapchat-tips-join-conversation>
At the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which has been using AR 
elements in its programming for more than a decade, the next generation of 
technology is opening up extraordinary possibilities. “It’s becoming possible 
to break down all the aspects of a traditional programme – like a presenter, an 
overlay and even the sound – and treat them as separate objects,” explains 
Graham Thomas, from the corporation’s R&D department. This could enable, Thomas 
claims, new kinds of TV programming. “It might be as simple as swapping out the 
usual presenter of a show for one who uses sign language, or automatically 
editing a news report to fit the time you have available. Or it might allow you 
to create AR experiences by reusing the objects from a TV show in a novel way. 
Who wouldn’t like a natural history programme where the dinosaurs roam across 
your coffee table?”

This kind of speculative pitching may sell AR to venture capitalists 
(according to Digi-Capital, investment in VR and AR in the 12 months from March 
2015 to March 2016 exceeded $1.7bn) but consumers soon tire of gimmickry. “As 
with any emerging technology, the experiences need to be compelling enough once 
the novelty has worn off,” says Thomas.

Besides, simplicity, rather than ambition, is where AR has proved itself. 
Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/25/how-to-use-snapchat-tips-join-conversation>
, the social media platform beloved of tweens, where your messages 
self-destruct after a few seconds, has produced perhaps the most widely used AR 
app in the world via its novelty camera filters which, for example, add dog 
ears and a lolling tongue in real time to the camera feed of one’s face.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ba35abd63a5ef6a7c2d1b28699e4170827c1dd6%2F0_0_939_934%2F939.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20success%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go!%2C%20what%20is%20the%20future%20for%20augmented%20reality%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20success%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%21%2C%20what%20is%20the%20future%20for%20augmented%20reality%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ba35abd63a5ef6a7c2d1b28699e4170827c1dd6%2F0_0_939_934%2F939.jpg>
 Inkhunter allows you to visualise how a tattoo might look on your body. 
Photograph: Inkhunter 
For Alex Fleetwood, the designer of Beasts of Balance, a forthcoming boardgame 
that uses AR to complement the play experience, Snapchat’s AR filters show how 
the technology can remain compelling, at scale. “Adding fun things to video has 
become a natural extension of putting emoji at the end of your DMs,” he says.

While some point to HoloLens and MagicLeap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/07/magic-leap-headset-design-patent-virtual-reality>
 (another AR headset that accounts for the majority of that $1.7bn in 
investment) as the future of AR, for Fleetwood Snapchat’s lighter, less 
invasive approach is a better vision. “I believe in AR much more than VR, which 
in my view really is a bubble. But we need to get away from the idea that AR 
means wearing a computer on your face. Smartphones have already intervened in 
our social dynamics in ways we’re still coming to terms with. I think faces are 
going to be a big no-go area for most people.”

For AR’s architects, the possibilities of further democratising information, 
and placing relevant facts and directions on to the real world, may be enough 
to convince us to move technology from our palms to our faces. “I consider 
accurate, readily available information a human right,” says Caudell. “Maybe AR 
technology will help spread the information riches to everyone. But, yes, as 
with any invasive technology, I remain concerned about the unintended 
consequences.” As with so many technological breakthroughs and refinements in 
the past decade, humanity’s engineers are realising science fiction’s 
blueprints, without reconciling them with science fiction’s accompanying 
warnings.

In Baum’s The Master Key, which was subtitled with a phrase that offers a 
rather delicious description of Silicon Valley –An Electrical Fairy Tale, 
Founded Upon the Mysteries of Electricity and the Optimism of Its Devotees – 
the protagonist is given the magical spectacles by a demon. After a fortnight’s 
adventuring, he concludes that neither he nor the world is ready for the specs. 
On the third week, he returns the invention until, he says, that time when 
humankind knows how to use them.

“There are competing notions of what AR is going to be,” says Fleetwood. 
“There are the people who think we’re going to be living in some mass consensual
Neal Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/13/seveneves-by-neal-stephenson-disaster-novel>
 novel. I’m very against that. I hope we’ll see those companies that put design 
and empathy at the heart of what they do with AR winning out.”

From star-gazing to bone-labelling... 10 apps that enhance reality
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c1114f63444df4036c120b1a10e811c17ec3fdd%2F0_76_810_924%2F810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20the%20success%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go!%2C%20what%20is%20the%20future%20for%20augmented%20reality%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20the%20success%20of%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%21%2C%20what%20is%20the%20future%20for%20augmented%20reality%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Faugmented-reality-development-future-smartphone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c1114f63444df4036c120b1a10e811c17ec3fdd%2F0_76_810_924%2F810.jpg>
 Quiver lets characters from children’s colouring pages come to life. 
1. Prynt <https://www.prynt.co/#/?_k=3qfd32>

This crowdfunded adaptor attaches to your smartphone, allowing you to 
instantly print out 2x3in photos. Also when you take a picture, thePrynt app  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/28/prynt-smartphone-case-kickstarter-selfies-iphone-android>
automatically records a digital video and creates a link to that photo on your 
phone.

2. Bamzooki <http://www.bbc.co.uk/cbbc/shows/bamzooki>

This CBBC programme, broadcast between 2004 and 2010, provided an early 
large-scale glimpse into the potential of AR. Children could create digital 
creatures on a website that were then pitted against each other in a TV studio, 
while the audience watched via a graphics system that mixed the creatures into 
the real world. There is talk at the BBC of a similar programme returning, one 
that potentially allows children to pit their creatures against each other on 
the kitchen table or in the playground.

3. Lego <http://inkhunter.tattoo/>

Most Lego stores now feature widescreen TV on the wall, relaying a continual 
live feed of the view directly in front of the screen. If you step into the 
camera’s field with a box of Lego, a virtual, animated representation of the 
kit inside the box will come to life in front you.

4. Inkhunter <http://inkhunter.tattoo/>

This simple app lets you see what a tattoo will look like on your body by 
superimposing the image on to the camera feed from your smartphone. The app 
comes with a range of tattoo designs that can be edited and shared with 
friends. It’s also possible to upload your own designs to see how well they 
suit you.

5. Star Chart <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/star-chart/id345542655?mt=8>

An elegant and hugely popular AR app for smartphones that annotates the night 
sky. Simply angle your phone toward the heavens and, by using GPS positioning, 
the app will label the stars, moons and planets above you. A quicker and 
potentially more effective way of learning about our galaxy than any text book.

6. Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/25/how-to-use-snapchat-tips-join-conversation>

In the past year, the social media platform, whose videos are reportedly 
watched more than 6bn times a day, subtly shifted its focus on to AR through a
selection of lenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/16/snapchat-update-in-app-purchases-terrifying-new-lenses>
. These lenses modify the phone’s camera feed in humorous ways, swapping 
people’s faces, “embiggening” their eyes, allowing them, for example, to puke 
rainbows. Snapchat became the first company to make a profit from AR on a large 
scale by selling and allowing companies to sponsor lenses.

7. Google Translate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/14/google-translate-app-update-break-language-barrier>

Google’s revelatory translation technology, underpinned by computer learning 
to constantly improve its interpretation, can now be used to annotate foreign 
text on the fly, using your phone’s camera feed. While the technology isn’t 
great at handling reams of text, particularly in non-roman scripts, it can 
prove invaluable at handling signage.

8. Arnatomy

Perhaps the closest to Tom Caudell’s original vision [see main story] for AR, 
ARnatomy is able to identify and digitally label bones and muscles for medical 
students.

It uses the camera to identify replicas of human bones, and when the user 
places a bone in front of the camera, it identifies which bone it is and adds 
visuals pointing to the parts of the bone, such as where muscles attach.

9. Smartspecs <http://www.va-st.com/smart-specs/>

SmartSpecs enhance the visual appearance of everyday objects to augment vision 
for partially sighted people. By a combination of a 3D camera and 
Android-powered software, the specs highlight the edges and features of nearby 
objects – from walls, tables, doorways, signposts, buggies, and even faces – to 
enhance visibility.

10. Quiver <http://www.quivervision.com/>

This relatively simple yet effective use of AR brings colouring books to life. 
Print out the black and white drawings, colour them in in the traditional 
manner. When you view the completed picture through your phone’s camera using 
the Quiver app the picture comes to animated life on screen. Touch the screen 
and you can interact and play games with the character you have created.
 