
There was a real, honest-to-goodness baseball story in the Bronx on Wednesday, 
and ironically enough it came with an asterisk, the same sort of marking that 
some want to put next to the record-breaking numbers of those who played in the 
so-called steroid era. Except unlike those who sullied baseball's statistical 
pool, there is little doubt over the authenticity of Ichiro Suzuki's 
achievement: 4,000 professional hits over a 21-year career.

It's just that some (1,278) of those hits came in Japan's Nippon Professional 
Baseball <http://www.japaneseballplayers.com/en/player.php?id=ichiro> and some 
(2,722) were struck inMajor League Baseball 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/s/suzukic01.shtml>. So in this case, 
an asterisk makes perfect sense as a descriptive marking that serves simply as 
an explanation, and one that takes nothing away anything from Ichiro.

The Yankees outfielder looked exactly like himself against the Blue Jays 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/9589905/ichiro-suzuki-new-york-yankees-gets-4000th-professional-hit>
, using that patented swing to drive an RA Dickey pitch into left field and 
become just the third player in history to reach the 4,000-hit milestone, Ty 
Cobb and Pete Rose being the others. His Yankees team-mates rushed out of the 
dugout to salute one of the more unique talents of his era, who then waved his 
cap to the cheering crowd, revealing hair far more grey than when he came to 
North America as an unknown quantity in 2001. Then, according tolong-time 
broadcaster Gary Thorne: 
<http://cdn3.mocksession.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/2012-April-27-21-18-32.jpg>

I don't think many people around baseball had any idea what Ichiro was going 
to be as a player. They knew his numbers, and the gold glove awards and batting 
titles and everything that he had done in the Japanese league, but there was a 
big question mark because there is still a big question mark over here about 
comparing Major League Baseball players in the US and comparing Major League
Baseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> players from other 
countries, simply because we they don't see one another that often. So I think 
it was difficult for fans to know and for players to know, and it was a matter 
for him coming and having to prove himself.

That was Thorne speaking to me way back in the winter of 2001, by the way, 
after Ichiro won the American League Rookie of the Year and the Most Valuable 
Player Award. Thorne also said:

Go to the very top of the pile, and to go to the Ty Cobb kind of numbers in a 
season. When you start making comparisons number by number, that's where you 
end up. Well, for somebody in their first major league season to be compared to 
a Ty Cobb is pretty amazing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcLeGHsf-C_w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcLeGHsf-C_w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcLeGHsf-C_w%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Thirteen seasons later, he's up there with the Detroit legend, just 189 hits 
behind Cobb and 256 behind the all-time hit king, Pete Rose – albeit with the 
asterisk. He also owns the single-season hit record, 262, which he picked up in 
2004.

Full disclosure – I've been an an enormous Ichiro fan from the start, back 
when he walked off the plane, all of 5ft 9in and 190lb of him, when I had no 
idea how the first Japanese position player to play inMLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> would perform. Over the years I would 
write emails at random times, charting his hitting prowess for no reason 
whatsoever other than fueling my fascination for his unique career. Here is the 
most recent Ichiro email, written during the 2011 season:

Stat – Ichiro has missed 32 games in 10 seasons in Seattle. That is pretty 
damn good.

He has 2,244 MLB hits, averaging 1.4 hits per game. With the Orix Blue Wave in 
Japan, he averaged 1.3 hits per game, and had 1,278 career NPB hits. Keep in 
mind that the Japanese play 20-odd games a season less than MLB does.

So, Ichiro has 3,522 total career hits, if you combine his stats from NPB with 
MLB – a career average of 1.37 hits per game through 18 career seasons. That 
means, if those Japanese hits were MLB hits (and yes, I know they are not), he 
would be just 734 short of Rose, who has 4,256.

Rose played 24 seasons and averaged 1.19 hits per game, vs Ichiro at 1.37.

There is only a small chance that Ichiro would not have been the all-time hit 
king if he played out his career in MLB.

That never happened – Ichiro finally slowed down. The 2011 season marked the 
end of a 10-season streak of 200-plus base hits. Now he's hitting 46 points 
below his career batting average. The end of his career, which started with 
many questions, is drawing near. Now the only one left is whether or not he can 
hang on to pass Cobb and Rose, and hit the 3,000 Major League hits milestone in 
the process.

Puig is better late than never

Even when Yasiel Puig is wrong he makes things right almost instantaneously – 
such is the charmed life of the Cuban wunderkind who is blowing the minds of 
baseball fans daily. The Dodgers, mired in a two-game losing streak days after 
their run of 42 wins in 50 games came to a close,were bailed out by Puig, 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/2013/08/21/3575799/dodgers-rookie-yasiel-puig-shows.html>
 whose eighth-inning home run on Tuesday night tied the score at four during 
their game Miami – LA would go on to win 6-4. Thing is, Puig wasn't even 
supposed to be playing.

It may be hard to believe at this point but Puig was actually in the middle of 
a 3-24 slump heading into Tuesday's game, and so manager Don Mattingly gave him 
a day off. Then Puig walked in late, 35 minutes late to be precise, leading to 
a closed-door meeting with the 22-year-old, who was subsequently fined.

Here's how I imagine that I'd imagine the discussion would have gone: 
<http://www.truebluela.com/2013/8/20/4641812/don-mattingly-holds-closed-door-meeting-with-yasiel-puig-and-fines>

Hey kid, you can't be late, so I have to have this 'meeting' with you, but you 
and I both know that if it wasn't for your bat I'd be sipping margaritas by my 
pool in Indiana right now, so just be patient here and go through these motions 
with me, OK? Oh, and don't worry about that fine, I got it.Wink.

Puig has had meetings before 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgersnow/la-sp-dn-dodgers-yasiel-puig-20130819,0,1974250.story>
, mostly about his suspect decision-making while running the bases, his missing 
the infield cut-off man on relay throws from the outfield, his arguing with 
umpires – yes, there are issues with the young man, and the Dodgers are intent 
on stamping them out before it gets out of control. Then again, you wouldn't 
want to take away too much of that raw aggression or remove much of that 
swagger, the kind of boundless energy that simply saved 2013 for Los Angeles. 
So perhaps they should think twice about altering his approach 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323980604579026641148080908.html>
 to the game too much.

Piling on

It's too bad that the Phillies' Roy Halladay had to say something negative 
about his former manager, Charlie Manuel 
<http://www.delcotimes.com/articles/2013/08/21/sports/doc52155111dadb7081827670.txt>
, even if he peppered all the right things in among his unflattering 
statements. Manuel, the most successful manager the Phillies have had in their 
mostly sorry existence, was unceremoniously axed last week  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/16/philadelphia-phillies-manager-charlie-manuel>
in a way that was only slightly more polite than the way Terry Francona went 
out in Boston. Now, there weren't any leaks aboutprescription drugs or 
fried-chicken stories 
<http://espn.go.com/boston/mlb/story/_/id/7091574/boston-red-sox-collapse-terry-francona-distracted-pitchers-john-lackey-josh-beckett-jon-lester-party-report-says>
 about Manuel, as there were with Francona and yes,the GM who pulled the 
trigger, Ruben Amaro Jr 
<http://nesn.com/2013/08/charlie-manuels-firing-stakes-ruben-amaro-jr-s-claim-to-worst-gm-in-baseball/>
, actually cried when announcing that Ryne Sandberg would take over, but that 
doesn't make it any better for a skipper who guided the team to their second 
title in franchise history in 2008 and deserved to go out in a more gentle 
fashion.

Halladay, who is currently rehabbing from a shoulder surgery, told the 
Philadelphia Daily News on Tuesday:

From what I've seen, Ryne came in and made some changes and addressed some 
issues that I think were being overlooked. So from that standpoint, as much as 
I miss Charlie, I think that Ryne is going to do a good job, and I think he's 
going to bring back a little more of the Phillie baseball style than we've had 
the last couple of years. We really haven't had that whole team effort and that 
whole team hustle that I think we've had in the prior years.
 Charlie Manuel walks away after being fired as manager of the Philadelphia 
Phillies. Photograph: Chris Szagola/AP 
That's probably true, and probably obvious, considering the team suffered 
through a4-19 record in Manuel's final days as manager. 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/PHI/2013-schedule-scores.shtml> 
Halladayclarified his remarks on Wednesday 
<http://www.nj.com/phillies/index.ssf/2013/08/roy_halladay_clarifies_comments_on_manuel_will_make_another_rehab_start.html>
, but there was no need to throw any more dirt on the skipper who had the class 
to show up for a pre-scheduled autograph session after being fired. It should 
also be noted that Halladay's 2-4 record with a 8.65 ERA 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/gl.cgi?id=hallaro01&t=p&year=> 
couldn't have helped much – awful numbers put up before going down just seven 
starts to the season. Perhaps Halladay should have mentioned that one reason 
the team has the worst staff ERA in the National League is because he's been on 
the sideline all season, but those comments were suspiciously missing from his 
statements.

Miggy battles on 

We all know just how incredible José Miguel Cabrera Torres is as a player, but 
here's something that I didn't realize until recently – the Tigers third 
baseman has never been on the disabled list in his 11-year career. Add that to 
your list of things that are incredible about Detroit's franchise cornerstone, 
the reigning American League Most Valuable Player who isflirting with a second 
consecutive Triple Crown Award 
<http://www.sportingnews.com/mlb/story/2013-08-21/miguel-cabrera-detroit-tigers-mlb-minnesota-twins-joe-mauer-justin-verlander>
 (for leading the league in homers, batting average and runs batted in).

The stat about his lack of time on the DL is particularly interesting because 
in 2013, in addition to the headlines he's made with his bat, we've heard an 
awful lot about the ailments he's been dealing with while powering through the 
season in top form – leading the AL with 161 hits, hitting 40 home runs while 
putting up an OPS of 1.133. Last week he fouled balls off his leg; prior to 
that he suffered through a lower abdominal strain and a sore hip.Now he's hurt 
himself again, this time while at-bat against the Twins on Tuesday 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9587202/miguel-cabrera-detroit-tigers-hurt-end-game>
– either in the groin or stomach area. Regardless, Cabrera, who has missed 
eight games since 1 July, wasin the line-up on Wednesday 
<http://www.freep.com/article/20130821/SPORTS02/308210158/detroit-tigers-miguel-cabrera-update>
, showing us first hand the hallmarks of a tough player who manages to navigate 
a long season without missing significant time in style – Miggy had a three-run 
double in the eighth inning to help Detroit beat the Twins 7-1.

The question is, could Cabrera use a break? His numbers and performances say 
no, but there's still another 36 games for Detroit before the playoffs and the 
Tigers would certainly benefit from a more rested, healthier Cabrera. If I were 
manager Jim Leyland I would see this latest incident as a warning, and make 
sure my top man was as close to 100% as possible before heading into an October 
where only a World Series title will suffice.

This week in the A-Rod saga
 New York Yankees' Alex Rodriguez is promising all baseball all the time from 
here on in. Photograph: Kathy Willens/AP 
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> came out on 
Wednesday to let everyone know that he is all-baseball all-the time from here 
on in, and that he has told his legal team, <one that has been in the news 
constantly this week, to step out of the public eye.

That's behind us now and I've shut everything down. I think it's the most 
important thing for us now – out of respect to my team, my manager and my 
coaches. We're in the middle of a very important pennant race. We're playing 
pretty well right now and we want to keep the focus on the field. Publicly, I 
want everything to be 100% about baseball.

A-Rod has had a busy week, stemming from the larger than (baseball) life 
scandal involving himself, his New York Yankees team and Major League Baseball 
itself. The embattled third baseman was suspended in early August by MLB for 
211 games, for his connection to a defunct wellness clinic, Biogenesis of 
America, which is suspected of providing performance-enhancing drugs to 
athletes. Rodriguez, who is allowed to play as his suspension is appealed, was
thrown at intentionally on Sunday by Boston's Ryan Dempster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/19/alex-rodriguez-ryan-dempster-pitch-yankees-sox>
 (who was subsequently suspended for five games); watched his lawyer be 
ambushed onNBC's The Today Show on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/19/alex-rodriguez-lawyer-nbc-evidence-drugs>
; and also prepared tofile a grievance via the players union against the Yankees
 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/grievance-reveal-juicy-details-alex-article-1.1430742>
, for the way they've handled his hip issues. For now there's silence, until 
there isn't – which won't be long, judging by the way Major League Baseball, 
the Yanks and team A-Rod have continuously leaked information throughout this 
painful process.

Meanwhile the Yankees have some major mojo going in the Bronx, winning 10 of 
13 ballgames.Alfonso Soriano won the American League Player of the Week honor 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/blogs/yankees/2013/08/shocker-soriano-named-al-player-of-the-week>
 for smashing five homers, then went out and hit an eighth inning tie-breaking 
two run round tripper off of RA Dickey on a Wednesday night when Ichiro got 
that 4,000th hit. New York are on one of their best rolls of the season, and 
withDerek Jeter getting closer to returning 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/23252326/derek-jeter-will-play-in-first-minor-league-rehab-game-on-thursday>
, the Yankees would have close to a complete team at just the right time. New 
York are now just6.5 behind the first-place Boston Red Sox in the American 
League East, and four games behind in the wild-card race. 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?tcid=mm_mlb_standings> 

New York have a tradition of succeeding in dark times – the famed Bronx Zoo 
teams of the late 1970s seemingly bought controversy to the Yankees dugout 
almost daily, yet they won two World Series titles under wild circumstances. 
Now with the franchise and the (one-time) franchise player tangled in a legal 
battle,the Bronx Zoo is most definitely back.  
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/i-team/a-rod-telling-handlers-stop-attacking-mlb-yankees-article-1.1433228>
 