
Carved into the cliffs behind Bamiyan town centre in Afghanistan's central 
highlands, massive holes scar the homeland of the Hazara people, a Shia 
minority who live between the Hindu Kush and Koh-i-Baba mountain ranges. The 
hollows once housed statues of Buddha, until the Talibaninfamously set dynamite 
to them in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/mar/03/afghanistan.lukeharding>.

But within a few kilometres of these monuments to tyranny stand symbols of 
renewal – rows of solar panels bringing stable electricity to the homes of 
local people for the first time – and with them the chance of improving their 
lives.

The United Nations Development Programme 
<http://www.undp.org.af/publications/RRERS/Bamiyan%20Provincial%20Profile.pdf> 
identified the lack of stable, affordable power as the largest obstacle to 
development in Bamiyan Province, but it is one of many. The Taliban destroyed 
most of the region's few schools. There is now just one sealed road and 
droughts are common. The deprivation "is hard to put into words," says 
Besmellah Jahed, the director of the Rehabilitation and Social Development 
Organisation, a local NGO.

"They've had 30 years of disappointment, 30 years of failed hope and promises. 
Hospitals, roads and airports - everything you need for a community to develop, 
they've been waiting for it to arrive," says Tony Woods, a New Zealand 
entrepreneur whose companySustainable Energy Services International (Sesi) 
<http://www.sesinter.com/> built the solar power system.

Before the solar installation started operating in December, locals had to 
rely on an expensive, haphazard system of neighbourhood generators, kerosene 
lamps and tiny, private solar panels to access even the most rudimentary power 
supply.
 Solar panels at Mulla Ghulam, Bamiyan. Photograph: Sustainable Energy 
Services International 
The Taliban massacres 
<http://www.hrw.org/reports/2001/afghanistan/afghan101.htm#P67_654> and 
destruction of the Buddhas ensured the province remains deeply antagonistic 
toward the counter-insurgency, making it arelatively stable oasis in the 
fractious countryside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/14/bamiyan-afghanistan-safe-foreign-troops>
. This security has created an environment that encourages investment in 
infrastructure.

Sesi says the 1MW facility is central Asia's largest off-grid solar plant. It 
powers 2500 homes around the provincial capital, Bamiyan. During the winter 
months the cells are backed up for a few hours each night by a diesel 
generator. TheNew Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> 
government, whose army administered the region during the western occupation, 
backed the installation with a US$14.1m grant.

Building in a province surrounded on all sides by war and mountains, with no 
existing power infrastructure, was a huge logistical challenge, says Woods. 
Every pole, wire, panel and frame had to be imported. His team of local and 
foreign workers had to contest with corrupt customs officials, a supply road 
that sporadically fell under the control of insurgents, the closure of the 
Pakistani border for eight months and winters so cold their concrete would not 
set.

The project also had to overcome local scepticism bred by bitter experiences. 
"They wanted to know if we were going to steal all the money [from their power 
bills] and take it back to New Zealand," says Woods. There was also concern 
that electricity rates would be too high, despite the fact that residents were 
paying some of the highest prices in the world.

Overcoming scepticism was a case of build it and they will come, says Woods. 
"When this project was started, people were doubtful about how much electricity 
would cost," agrees Khalil Rahman Anwari an employee of theAgency for 
Assistance and Development of Afghanistan <http://www.aada.org.af/>. "After the 
project started, the demand increased."

Locals still think prices are too high, pointing out that electricity in Kabul 
is significantly cheaper. Most people can only run a few appliances. But Anwari 
says the access to reliable, affordable light makes possible the most simple 
but important of activities, like homework during the dark winter months.

The Afghan government now owns and administers Bamiyan's power supply. Local 
technicians, including many women, have been trained to operate it. The system 
uses pre-paid credit, which users buy from banks. This avoids the risk of meter 
readers being tempted to offer favours to neighbours in the tight-knit 
community. The accountancy of the project is transparent and can be audited by 
Sesi and the New Zealand government remotely.
 Inside the power house, local staff install the equipment. Photograph: 
Sustainable Energy Services International 
Woods says it was important to create a system large enough to become 
self-sufficient and fund its own growth. But New Zealand's aid commitments to 
Bamiyan havenow been scaled back 
<http://www.aid.govt.nz/about-aid-programme/aid-statistics/aid-allocations-201213-201415>
 and only around 5% of the estimated 418,000 people in Bamiyan Province 
currently receive the project's electricity.

Jahed, who was born in Bamiyan, says growth into other parts of the province 
is imperative. People have already started crowding into the areas supplied by 
power. The provincial government had promised those who lack power would be 
supplied by generators, but this has not happened. "Bamiyan people are very 
kind and appreciate any minor development," he says. "But this is not 
sufficient. We suggest the extension of this project."

Read more stories like this: 

• Chile's solar market is leading the way in South America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jun/05/chile-renewable-energy-solar-power>

• Could renewable energy make rural electrification a reality? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/06/rural-electrification-renewables-solar-energy>

• Quiz: what do you know about renewable energy? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/06/rural-electrification-renewables-solar-energy>

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 