
A new three-part BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> adaptation of And 
Then There Were None is imminent. I’d have preferred it to be in 10 parts (to 
correspond with the number of suspicious deaths in the story), but I 
understand: one is not allowed to occupy more than 10 hours of screen time 
unless one is a Scandinavian in a woolly jumper. So be it.

As a longstanding Agatha Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie> lover, I can’t wait. I was 
more excited about the newAnd Then There Were None than I was about Christmas 
Day. Hours of menacing and twisty viewing pleasure. Boxing Day, in our house, 
is already referred to asAnd Then There Were None day, and I predict that this 
will soon becomeNone day for short. “A Christie for Christmas” was a slogan 
that sold the queen of crime’s novels during her lifetime, and it is still my 
idea of the best present ever.

Not everybody shares my uncomplicatedly attitude. A few people, it seems, are 
worried, and in every possible direction. Some fear that this new version will 
not be Christie-ish enough – “What HAS the BBC done to Agatha Christie?” asked 
the Daily Mail. “Christmas viewers will be stunned by controversial new 
adaption featuring drugs, gruesome violence and the F-word.” I was surprised to 
read this; my eyes widened – though being repressed, I said nothing, not even 
to myself. But really … it isn’t as if anybody has turnedAnd Then There Were 
None into a Christmas pantomime, cast the Fimbles in key roles or set it in a 
call centre in Basingstoke instead of on an island off the coast of Devon.

Other people initially feared that the new And Then There Were None would be 
too Christie-ish. “I wasn’t going to watch it until I read an interview with
Sarah Phelps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/13/bbc-and-then-there-were-none-agatha-christie>
,” said one tweeter. (Phelps wrote the screenplay, and I have slightly 
paraphrased the tweet.) “My first thought was ‘Not another Agatha Christie!’” 
Hmm. “That makes no sense. Sarah Phelps spends most of that interview 
describing, with impressive accuracy, all that is brilliant about Christie. How 
can you read that and resolve to watchAnd Then There Were None, but 
simultaneously be someone who once thought, “Not another Christie”?

All of which makes me feel fiercely defensive of this shiny new incarnation of 
the bestselling mystery novel of all time, which is destined to be not 
Christie-ish enough for the six of one on the rock, while being far too 
Christie-ish for the half a dozen of the other in the hard place. More 
important: what does being faithful to the original, or faithful to Christie, 
mean in the context ofAnd Then There Were None? What should it mean?

Even the Daily Mail conceded that “the basic plot is faithful to the novel”. 
Seriously? Great! Break out the hallelujahs – though still I can hardly believe 
it. Most TV adaptations of novels are shockingly unfaithful.Appointment with 
Death <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/appointment-with-death.html> – one of 
my favouritePoirot <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poirot> novels – 
bore little resemblance on television to the brilliant book that it purported 
to represent: the murder victim, an emotional terrorist and one of Christie’s 
finest creations, was made more ordinary and obvious, and less psychologically 
interesting – presumably because somebody was concerned that viewers would be 
unable to handle the subtly sinister horror of the character in the novel.

If the TV adaptation of And Then There Were None is faithful to the book, 
that, for me, will be a crucial point in its favour. In holding this opinion, 
however, I might be guilty of being unfaithful to the spirit of Christie 
herself. Proud though she was of her novel (in the author’s note she wrote: “It 
was well received and reviewed, but the person who was really pleased with it 
was myself, for I knew better than any critic how difficult it had been”), she 
eventually decided that its conclusion was too dark to please theatre 
audiences, and so changed the ending to a happier one for the stage production.

In making this change, she gave serious consideration to the question of 
fidelity – to her story and her idea. She was prepared to countenance the 
alternative ending only because the original nursery rhyme that inspired the 
book also had an alternative ending: “He got married and then there were none”, 
instead of “He went and hanged himself … ”

BBC’s And Then There Were None puts a darker spin on Agatha Christie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/13/bbc-and-then-there-were-none-agatha-christie>
Director Craig Viveiros has said of the new TV version: “It’s about turning 
the idea of a Christie on its head and pushing it forward to a new generation. 
I tried to express to the cast that this was not going to be a typical 
adaptation. This was going to be bold, exciting and very dark.” From this 
comment, I infer that Viveiros knows, as all true Christie fans know, thatAnd 
Then There Were None the novel is all of these things in abundance: bold, 
exciting, very dark. That is why he said what was being turned on its head was 
“the idea of a Christie”. Bizarrely, some people still see Christie as a writer 
of cosies – fun puzzles that are all surface and plot, with little depth or 
substance to them. This could not be further from the truth.

Christie was an intellectual and a novelist of ideas. As well as the best and 
bestselling crime writer of all time, she was also, I believe, a dedicated 
philosopher of the mystery novel. She wanted to test boundaries, to do 
everything that was possible within the genre. Like a scientist, she 
continually asked, “What if I did this, or that? Might it be possible, though 
it seems impossible?”

And Then There Were None is an incredibly ambitious novel that takes an idea 
to an extreme in a way that was surely bound to fail and yet, against the odds, 
succeeds brilliantly. It is high-concept and its premise is instantly gripping 
as well as having a profoundly archetypal feel to it. Ten strangers find 
themselves in a big house on an island, either as the invited guests of a UN 
Owen, whom none of them has met, or as employees of the same shadowy character. 
During their first meal together, a recorded voice is broadcast into the dining 
room, a voice that accuses each of the 10 of having committed a murder that was 
somehow beyond the reach of the law. Then, one by one, the accused start to die 
…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fagatha-christie-bbc1-adaptation-and-then-there-were-none%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcae15e95b4e7e8d53a6b92f37312294eee65581d%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Agatha%20Christie%3A%20with%20drugs%2C%20violence%20and%20swearing%2C%20will%20the%20queen%20of%20crime%20recapture%20Christmas%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fagatha-christie-bbc1-adaptation-and-then-there-were-none%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Agatha%20Christie%3A%20with%20drugs%2C%20violence%20and%20swearing%2C%20will%20the%20queen%20of%20crime%20recapture%20Christmas%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Fagatha-christie-bbc1-adaptation-and-then-there-were-none%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcae15e95b4e7e8d53a6b92f37312294eee65581d%2F0_0_4284_2856%2F4284.jpg>
 Vera Claythorne (Maeve Dermody) and Judge Wargrave (Charles Dance) in a scene 
from the BBC’sAnd Then There Were None. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC/Mammoth 
Screen 
Rereading the novel a few weeks ago, I could not believe how gripped I was by 
it, despite knowing every inch of the story by heart. I had a strong sense of 
being pulled into an eerie dream – and, like the characters on the island, I 
could not escape. There is a powerful inevitability about the story, a sense 
that, somehow, somewhere, it must always have existed. Very few narratives have 
this sort of hypnotic pull; very few have that air of having been always 
present under the surface of things, just waiting to be told and retold. It is 
no wonder thatAnd Then There Were None is among the bestselling novels of all 
time. Unlike most of Christie’s books, which usually blend a dark awareness of 
evil with lighter touches,And Then There Were None offers no light relief. It 
is a stark, unremitting, extraordinary moral fable about the battle between 
good and evil and the limits of the law.

Christie’s novels are full of wisdom about human psychology and behaviour, and 
they tend also to be ethical treatises and thought experiments. Appropriately, 
and perhaps even necessarily, one of her dominant themes is the inability of 
many or even most people to think properly. At the end ofAnd Then There Were 
None, a character reflects – in the space of one sentence – on how someone 
might have solved the mystery, and outlines a thoroughly logical and 
wonderfully paradoxical way in which rational deduction could have led to the 
identification of the killer. It’s one of those, “Ah, yes! Of course! How neat 
and perfect is that?”, moments for which Christie is beloved, and it 
demonstrates how highly she prizes rationality, neat conceptual structures and 
clear thinking. For me this one line (which I can’t tell you, because it would 
be a massive spoiler) is the crux ofAnd Then There Were None; it is its 
manifesto, its purest essence distilled. I will be watching the end of the TV 
adaptation with a pounding heart: if that crucial line is left out then the 
whole thing is ruined.

By contrast, I have no objection to characters using the F-word, snorting 
cocaine, snogging and murdering one another. I suppose every Christie fan’s 
view of what is necessary to preserve the brilliance and what is merely 
contingent will differ, but, for me at least, sex and drugs and swearing cannot 
even make a dent in the fundamental essence ofAnd Then There Were None. What 
matters is the moral, conceptual and narrative structure, and that, I have no 
doubt, will be as it is in the novel. And even if that line is missing, I have 
no doubt that this new adaptation will be gripping and memorable. Why? Because 
I’ve watched the trailers – which you really must watch if you haven’t seen 
them. Just look at all those unsuspecting people in that little boat, sailing 
towards extreme bewilderment that will quickly escalate to terror. And then, go 
and mark 26, 27 and 28 December in your diary. The Daily Mail is right: 
Christmas viewers will be stunned – but in a good way. This is going to be the 
TV event of the year.

• And Then There Were None 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06v2v52?ns_mchannel=YT&> begins on Boxing Day 
on BBC1 at 9pm.A Game for All the Family 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/316034/> by Sophie 
Hannah is published by Hodder in paperback on 31 December, and her new crime 
novelThe Narrow Bed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/375164/> is published 
on 11 February.
 