
Aggreko made a point of saying on Friday that it was supplying temporary power 
supplies to the weekend's Super Bowl spectacular.

So after the gridiron battle between the San Francisco 49ers and the Baltimore 
Ravens suffered a power cut 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2013/feb/04/super-bowl-power-outage-superdome>
, the FTSE 100 company's shares seem to have suffered their own outage, falling 
nearly 1.5% to Â£15.99.

But Seymour Pierce, after speaking to the company, reckons it is in the clear. 
Analyst Caroline de La Soujeole said:
 During last night's Super Bowl, the power went off halting the game for more 
than 30 minutes. Aggreko has a long history of being involved with the Super 
Bowl. We spoke to the company this morning. Aggreko did indeed again provide 
power for the Super Bowl. However, it provided the back-up power for the 
national and international broadcasters and the half time show, all of which 
went smoothly. The power which went off was the stadium power, provided by 
Entergy, which was not backed up. If anything this incident serves as a 
reminder of the need for back-up power at such high profile sporting events. We 
remain buyers of the shares with a 2020p target price. 
Update

The company has now issued its own statement:
 Aggreko, the global leader in the provision of temporary power and 
temperature control services, kept its power running throughout America's 
national football championships in New Orleans despite the power disruption 
elsewhere in the stadium.

Aggreko, which provided power for event for the 23rd time, was responsible for 
the CBS Compound as well as the international broadcast and a large part of the 
halftime show, all of which operated flawlessly and with no reported outages 
throughout the event.  