
One of the UK's biggest companies, the power generator Aggreko, has said that 
Scottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> would lead to 
"years of uncertainty and hiatus" for the business.

Aggreko, which employs about a tenth of its 5,749 employees in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, said in its annual report that 
independence was likely to create "additional administration cost and 
complexity".

The comments from the FTSE 100 firm came after its chief executive, Rupert 
Soames, appeared before Holyrood's economy committee last month and claimed 
that international investors were getting "worried". He predicted businesses 
would cite independence as a risk in their annual reports.

Since then, Lloyds Banking Group, Barclays, Standard Life, Royal Bank of 
Scotland, the Macfarlane Group packaging business and Breedon Aggregates have 
all listed independence in their risk management sections.

But Aggreko <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aggreko> also said it would 
find ways to manage the challenges of independence. It pointed out that the UK 
accounted for less than 10% of its business, so it had "plenty of options".

The report states: "Without wanting in any way to enter the political debate 
on this issue, we have a reporting responsibility to set out in our annual 
report the risks facing the business, and we believe that Scottish independence 
could present a number of risks. At an operational level, it is likely that we 
would have to deal with significant additional administration cost and 
complexity in our UK operations, which we currently run as a completely 
integrated unit, sharing fleet and people without impediment."

Challenges include cross-border disparities in trade, tax and regulation, and 
macro-economic uncertainties in currency options and European Union membership, 
it said.

"It seems that the two options for an independent Scotland are either a 
currency union with the rest of the UK, or a separate Scottish currency â€“ 
neither of these options are without risk for our business," it said.

"There is a risk that an independent Scotland might not be able to continue in 
membership of the EU, and that could impact the terms under which we export 
equipment around the world. At the very least, if Scotland votes for 
independence we will face some years of uncertainty and hiatus.

"We will, of course, find ways to manage around this challenge if it arises. 
The major impact will be in the UK, which accounts for less than 10% of our 
revenues, and as a global business we will have plenty of options."
 