
Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> has suffered yet another 
hitch in the troubled life of its A380 “superjumbo”, as it was forced to 
postpone delivery of 12 aircraft to its largest customer, Emirates.

The double-decker A380, the world’s largest passenger jet, has proved a 
disappointment for Airbus since itsmuch-delayed debut in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/feb/08/theairlineindustry.travel> 
and the firm hasalready been forced to cut production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/airbus-to-cut-back-production-of-a380-aircraft>
 after winning fewer orders than expected.

The latest obstacle to throw the €25bn (£21bn) aircraft programme off course 
has left analysts questioning whether executives at Airbus mightconsider 
cancelling it altogether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/28/airbus-a380-future-in-doubt>.

The Toulouse-based aviation firm said it would delay delivery to Emirates of 
six jets due to arrive next year until 2018, with a further six put back from 
2018 to 2019.

The postponement is said to be linked to technical issues Emirates is having 
with the new Rolls-Royce Trent 900 engines it has ordered for its fleet of 
A380s.

It comes days after Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> 
revealed that anorder from Iran Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/iran-passenger-plane-purchases-airbus-boeing>
 for 100 planes, some of which were expected to be A380s, did not include the 
aircraft at all.

Airbus developed the A380, which can carry 850 passengers, believing that 
airlines would turn to larger jets to feed more people through hub airports 
serving a growing number of “megacities”.

This vision of the future prompted the firm – part-owned by the French, German 
and Spanish governments – to predict huge demand for the giant twin-aisle, 
four-engine planes.

Despite cost overruns and long delays that cost several executives their jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/sep/05/theairlineindustry.travelnews>
, the jet eventually took to the skies for itsfirst public flight in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/oct/25/theairlineindustry.australia> 
to great acclaim from its early passengers.

But stagnant economic growth and a lack of orders from countries such as the 
US and Japan have forced Airbus torein in production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/airbus-to-cut-back-production-of-a380-aircraft>
.

It has delivered just 193 superjumbos and has only a further 126 orders left 
to fulfil, having initially predicted demand for 1,200 over two decades.

At the same time, smaller but longer range twin-engine jets with large cargo 
capacity – such as Boeing’s 777 – have proved popular because airlines see them 
as less risky economically.

John Strickland, a veteran aviation industry analyst and director of JLS 
Consulting, said the A380 was well-liked but that there had not been a 
sufficient market for it so far.

“It’s regarded as a fantastic aircraft by the airlines that have taken it. 
[IAG chief executive] Willie Walsh has praised it, [Emirates chief executive] 
Tim Clark has praised it. They say passengers even choose it, asking to go on 
an A380 if there’s a choice.

“But these days, given the economic climate, airlines are more risk-averse and 
the A380 has a lot of seats to fill.”

Airbus has said that it can break even at an annual production rate of 20 
A380s, which carry an order book price of $430m but are typically sold at a 
discount.

It beat this target in 2015, with 27 rolling off the production line, but a 
slowdown in orders forced the company to slash scheduled annual deliveries to 
just 12 from 2018. The firm is also cutting costs to make up for the shortfall 
in income.

Strickland said Airbus now faced a difficult decision over whether to continue 
making the jet at a loss in the hope that its patience would be rewarded within 
a few years.

“So the question is whether Airbus can get through this challenging period to 
the brighter future which they envision, where airlines are falling over 
themselves to get hold of larger planes,” he said.

“They will have to keep it under continuous review because it’s a commercially 
driven business, even though it’s government-owned.

“They have many other calls on their investment. At the moment it’s a greater 
risk to throw in the towel, but there’s a challenge of how to maintain very low 
levels of production if you’re actually losing money.”

The aviation analyst Alex Macheras said the A380 was highly popular with 
passengers and had created an “overall feeling that this is what all modern day 
airliners should feel like”.

But he also cast doubt on how long Airbus could remain loyal to the aircraft, 
which was conceived and developed before the tenure of the current chief 
executive, Tom Enders.

“There is the sad reality that not enough airlines are ordering A380s to keep 
the production alive for as long as Airbus would have liked,” said Macheras.

“Emirates are taking the majority of the remaining A380s on order, and so with 
a delay to their deliveries, it doesn’t leave a demand for many A380 air frames 
for other carriers.”

But he said Airbus could take solace from the potential success story of its 
new A350-1000 plane, which is due to enter service next year.
 