
Al Gore has said the decision by Australia’s science agency CSIRO to cut 
climate research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/08/csiro-climate-cuts-would-be-attacking-a-national-treasure-when-we-need-it-most>
 should be “re-evaluated at the highest level”, since they limit a source of 
critical information for the entire world as it attempts to solve the 
challenges posed by climate change.

The former US Democratic vice-president also praised the government’s support 
for renewable energy and the Labor party’s recent climate change policy 
announcement.

Paris agreement is a strong signal that 'we will solve climate crisis', Al 
Gore says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/30/paris-agreement-is-a-strong-signal-that-we-will-solve-climate-crisis-al-gore-says>
The comments by Gore, a leading climate change campaigner, were made in a 
wide-ranging conversation in the latest edition of the Australian literary 
quarterly the Griffith Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/30/paris-agreement-is-a-strong-signal-that-we-will-solve-climate-crisis-al-gore-says>
, which has also been published online by Guardian Australia.

“In the face of this harsh new climate reality, there have been political 
forces in your country working to prevent Australia’s ability to act as the 
global leader it once was in the effort to solve the climate crisis,” he said, 
in conversation with Don Henry from the University of Melbourne, and former 
director of the Australian Conservation Foundation.

“The most recent example of this is the announcement of major cuts to 
Australia’sCSIRO <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro>, a global 
leader and reference point for climate science. These cuts will deeply affect 
the source of valuable research for the entire world at a time when such 
information is critical to solving the challenge of our changing climate,” he 
said. “They should be re-evaluated at the highest level.”

The comments follow remarks Gore made in February 
<https://www.algore.com/news/statement-by-former-vice-president-al-gore-on-csiro>
, shortly after the cuts were announced. “Further development of climate 
modelling and observations by CSIRO and colleague scientific organisations is 
essential to planning for climate mitigation and adaptation to global warming,” 
he said at the time. “This effort needs strengthening, not weakening, after the 
Paris Agreement in December.”

Labor proposes two emissions trading schemes costing $355.9m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/labor-proposes-two-emissions-trading-schemes-costing-555m>
Besides praising state governments and businesses that are driving investment 
in solar PV, he also singles out the Australian Labor party’srecent climate 
policy announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/labor-proposes-two-emissions-trading-schemes-costing-555m>
.

“These examples, along with the Labor party’s pledge to adopt a 50% renewable 
energy target by 2030, show that there is a strong support and opportunity for 
climate action in this country.”

In order to solve the challenge, Gore said the world needed “a highly 
functioning global ideology”. He said capitalism needed to find a way to price 
environmental damage and democracy needed to be fixed after it was “hacked by 
large corporations and special interests,”which meant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/larissa-waters-ban-donations-from-mining-companies-and-stop-ministers-working-for-them>
 it was “dominated by the unchecked influence of money in politics”.

But Gore said there was hope all this could be achieved. Previous estimates of 
how quickly renewable energy would be adopted have regularly been far exceeded, 
and the agreement in Paris sent a signal around the world that “we can and we 
will solve the climate crisis,” he said.
 