
Extreme weather events including typhoon Haiyan and superstorm Sandy are 
proving a "gamechanger" for public awareness of the threat posed by climate 
change,Al Gore <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> said on Friday.

The former US vice-president, speaking to delegates at the World Economic 
Forum inDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, said: "I think that 
these extreme weather events which are now a hundred times more common than 30 
years ago are really waking people's awareness all over the world [on climate 
change], and I think that is a gamechanger. It comes about, of course, because 
we continue to put 90 million tonnes of global warming pollution into the 
atmosphere every day, as if it's an open sewer."

But he said the falling price of solar and wind power gave hope for efforts to 
tackle climate change.

"There's a second gamechanger, that is that the cost down-curve for 
photovoltaic electricity and, to a lesser extent, wind. In 13 countries, the 
price of solar is cheaper than or equal to the [electricity] grid average 
price." He claimed that within a decade most people would live in regions where 
that was true, and said of the falling costs of the technologies: "It is very 
impressive and it is opening up great opportunities for the world to solve 
climate change."

Speaking alongside Gore, Bill Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/billgates> said that climate change was 
a very important challenge but still had "an awareness problem." The former 
Microsoft CEO and philantropist said that the issues of climate change and 
development were interlinked, and that a focus on climate change should not 
take away from the development agenda.

But he warned that growing prosperity as a result of development efforts could 
worsen global warming emissions, if energy was not generated in a clean way. 
"As the poorest are being lifted up, as they're getting lights and 
refrigerators, we are going to use more energy. There's not a scenario here 
where we use less energy. We have to make the energy we use not emit any 
greenhouse gases, particularly CO2."

Gore said that businesses were beginning to show leadership on climate change 
but many still do not. He added that support from government was vital for 
business. "Even with business leadership, we will need governmental actions, we 
need to put a price on carbon, we need to put a price on [climate change] 
denial in politics," he said atthe WEF panel on climate change 
<http://wef.ch/53021>, which also included the Nigerian finance minister, Ngozi 
Okonjo-Iweala, and UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon.

In September, for the first time in several years, world leaders will discuss 
efforts to tackle climate change at a meetingconvened by Ki-moon in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/20/climate-change-un-talks>. 
It comes ahead of a key UN summit in Paris in 2015 to agree an international 
deal on cutting carbon emissions.
 