
The former vice president of the US, Al Gore, has called on the British 
government to resume its former leadership on climate change, in order to forge 
a global agreement on greenhouse gas emissions this December ata crunch 
conference in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
.

While saying he would not interfere in other countries’ politics, Gore said he 
was “puzzled” by the Conservative government’s measures to roll back support 
for renewable energy.

Citing a range of recent government actions - such as slashing subsidies for 
solar and wind power, and ending support for energy efficiency in homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/the-9-green-policies-killed-off-by-tory-government>
 - he said he could not understand the rationale for such measures, while 
climate change presents a clear danger to the UK and the rest of the world.

The nine green policies killed off by the Tory government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/the-9-green-policies-killed-off-by-tory-government>
“Will our children ask, why didn’t you act? Or [will they] ask, how did you 
find the moral courage to rise up and change?” he demanded of a business 
audience at a climate change debate in London on Tuesday.

“The UK’s historic legacy of leadership on the most important moral issues 
faced by humanity, including the climate crisis, is long and has been 
recognised with respect by the community of nations,” he said. “It is time for 
the UK government to honour and live up to that legacy, and return to its 
global leadership position, domestically and abroad, by supporting an ambitious 
international agreement in Paris that unleashes the power of the private sector 
to create a global clean energy economy.”


Fossil fuels have enjoyed subsidies at least 44 times as high as those for 
renewable energy, Gore said, in a pointed reference to David Cameron’s 
government’s decisions toeffectively end the building of new onshore wind farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/18/tories-end-onshore-windfarm-subsidies-2016>
, andslashing of support for solar panels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/22/how-will-government-subsidy-cuts-impact-the-uks-solar-industry>
. The UK government has also vowed to increase support for oil and gas, from 
the North Sea and through fracking.

Gore also slammed the idea that developing countries, such as China and India, 
are not interested in a deal on global warming. “What do [Chinese people] 
desire? Clean air, clean water, clean land to grow food,” he said.

His words echoed forceful criticism from the most senior voice in UK business, 
CBI director-general John Cridland,who warned that ministers were discouraging 
investment in the UK’s green economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/cbi-chief-lambasts-government-approach-to-green-economy>
, and endangering billions in potential overseas sales of green goods and 
services.

CBI chief lambasts government approach to green economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/cbi-chief-lambasts-government-approach-to-green-economy>
Ben Goldsmith, chairman of the Conservative Environment Network and a venture 
capital investor in clean technology, said it was “crap” for the government to 
say there was “no money” for renewable energy development. “I hope the 
government has a plan,” he said, “but I’m not sure they do.”

He contrasted the lack of support for renewables with the £2bn loan granted to 
French and Chinese investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/21/george-osborne-chinese-nuclear-power-station-bradwell-essex>
 for the building of a new nuclear power station at Hinkley, which is also 
guaranteed – when it starts generating power – to be allowed to sell its energy 
to UK billpayers for double the current electricity price.

Andrew Bonfield, financial director of National Grid, also called for more 
strategic thinking from government, saying that his company had to think five 
decades ahead about its plans, and would like government to send clear signals 
for long-term policy development. He predicted that within two years, solar 
power could be as cost-efficient as fossil fuels.


John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace UK, said it was notable that the 
UK’s business leaders were critical of the government’s recent actions on 
climate change.

He said: “From Britain’s business leaders to the government’s own advisers [
the climate change committee’s letter to government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/uk-risks-missing-its-carbon-targets-climate-advisers-warn>
], the chorus of opposition against George Osborne’s ideological assault on 
clean energy just keeps growing. His increasingly erratic and capricious 
policies are not only harming UK businesses and ripping off consumers but are 
also isolating Britain ahead of a crucial climate summit.

“When Al Gore <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> ironically remarks 
that Osborne is not the prime minister, he makes a very good point. David 
Cameron should take heed of it and start wresting back control of energy and 
climate policy from the chancellor’s hands.”

UK risks missing its carbon targets, climate advisers warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/uk-risks-missing-its-carbon-targets-climate-advisers-warn>
Matthew Spencer, of the Green Alliance, which convened the conference, called 
on ministers to show leadership on commitments to combat climate change, ahead 
of the Paris meeting.

In response to Cridland, the Department of Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> and Climate Change said: “We 
are pushing for a strong global deal in Paris that creates a level playing 
field for business and drives innovation. Our priorities are to reduce 
emissions in the most cost-effective way and also keeping bills as low as 
possible for hardworking families and businesses. Government support has 
already driven down the cost of renewable energy significantly, helping 
technologies to stand on their own two feet.”
 