
Pharrell Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pharrellwilliams> and Al 
Gore’s promise of a second round of Live Earth concerts on seven continents 
that would be broadcast to an audience of billions has been downgraded to a 
webcast in Paris, organisers have confirmed.

Everything you need to know about the Paris climate summit and UN talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
In January, the duo and producer Kevin Wall used the World Economic Forum in 
Davosto announce a global event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/21/pharrell-williams-announces-live-earth-2015-davos>
 that would reach 2 billion people across 193 television networks, with 
promotional materials promising 100 artists in seven shows.

In May organisers delayed the event 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/wires/afp/article-3093259/Live-Earth-global-climate-change-concerts-delayed.html>
 from a scheduled date of 18 June and said a free, public concert would be held 
in Paris in the autumn instead.

But this week organisers told the Guardian that Live Earth had been reduced to 
an event on the 13 and 14 November at the Champ de Mars inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> that will be closed to the public and 
streamed online instead.

“It is taking a different form this year than the open concert of years past 
but some great musical talent has signed on to the 24 Hours event,” said a 
spokeswoman, referring to an annual 24-hour event held by Gore’s NGO,Climate 
Reality <https://www.climaterealityproject.org/>. She added: “We are partnering 
with several distribution partners worldwide to make sure this is the most 
accessible 24 Hours event in history.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fal-gores-plan-for-huge-global-climate-concerts-downgraded-to-paris-webcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feace4984ffb95ac301b3e93fa24e15305f281db0%2F0_0_4362_2611%2F4362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al%20Gore's%20plan%20for%20huge%20global%20climate%20concerts%20downgraded%20to%20Paris%20webcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fal-gores-plan-for-huge-global-climate-concerts-downgraded-to-paris-webcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al%20Gore%27s%20plan%20for%20huge%20global%20climate%20concerts%20downgraded%20to%20Paris%20webcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fal-gores-plan-for-huge-global-climate-concerts-downgraded-to-paris-webcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feace4984ffb95ac301b3e93fa24e15305f281db0%2F0_0_4362_2611%2F4362.jpg>
 An inflatable pig floats above the Live Earth New York concert during Pink 
Floyd member Roger Waters’ set in 2007. Photograph: Mike Segar/REUTERS 
Details of the webcast distribution and the acts performing are due to be 
announced on Thursday.

Williams, the project’s creative director, had said in January that: “Instead 
of just having people perform, we literally are going to have humanity 
harmonise all at once.” He was one of the performers in the original Live Earth 
concerts in 2007.

Next week’s event, dubbed 24 Hours of Reality and Live Earth: The World Is 
Watching <https://www.climaterealityproject.org/24hoursofreality>, comes just 
weeks before world leaders including Barack Obama and Xi Jinping head to Paris 
fora landmark UN climate change summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
.

Gore said the event is “about mobilising people around the world to help solve 
the climate crisis and making our voices heard in national capitals and at the 
negotiating table in Paris.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fal-gores-plan-for-huge-global-climate-concerts-downgraded-to-paris-webcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4d0d0df5f914adcc1771d42efbabfa6aa7db9b%2F0_0_2800_1943%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al%20Gore's%20plan%20for%20huge%20global%20climate%20concerts%20downgraded%20to%20Paris%20webcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fal-gores-plan-for-huge-global-climate-concerts-downgraded-to-paris-webcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al%20Gore%27s%20plan%20for%20huge%20global%20climate%20concerts%20downgraded%20to%20Paris%20webcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fal-gores-plan-for-huge-global-climate-concerts-downgraded-to-paris-webcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4d0d0df5f914adcc1771d42efbabfa6aa7db9b%2F0_0_2800_1943%2F2800.jpg>
 The Pussycat Dolls perform at the Live Earth concert at Wembley stadium in 
London, July 2007. Photograph: Carl de Souza/AFP/Getty Images 
French president, François Hollande, and the Socialist mayor of Paris, Anne 
Hidalgo, will be taking part in the web event, along with former UN secretary 
general Kofi Annan, journalists, weather presenters, and campaigners.

Wall said of the new plans: “The climate crisis is grave, so we are harnessing 
the best content and the latest in mobile, social media, and online 
distribution to make sure we can connect with people everywhere.”
 