
Some insiders in the Democratic party are discussing having former 
vice-presidentAl Gore <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> make another 
run for US president, BuzzFeed reported on Thursday, adding that the man who 
won the popular vote in the 2000 presidential election has not taken any steps 
toward entering the current race.


 “They’re figuring out if there’s a path financially and politically,” an 
unnamed Democrat told BuzzFeed about the insiders. “It feels more real than it 
has in the past months.“

 Gore, 67, was the Democratic candidate in the 2000 election when the US 
supreme court stopped a vote recount in Florida, which ultimately led to 
Republican George W Bush becoming the country’s 43rd president.

Former secretary of state Hillary Clinton has dominated the small field of 
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> vying to be their 
party’s candidate in the 2016 presidential election. When she ran in 2008, 
Gore, who served as vice-president under her husband, former president Bill 
Clinton, declined to endorse her.

US vice-president Joe Biden is nearing an imminent decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/13/joe-biden-decision-2016-election-clinton>
 on whether to challenge Clinton.

 BuzzFeed reported 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/al-gore-insiders-figuring-out-if-theres-a-path-for-him-to-ru#.tc0PBw0gb>
 that its sources “cautioned not to overstate Gore’s interest”. It said he has 
not made any formal or informal moves to join the race, has not met with 
political advisers about a potential run and did not comment to the media 
outlet about making a bid.

 Still, the environmental activist, Nobel Peace Laureate and founder of 
Current TV enjoys some favor among voters. Arecent Reuters poll 
<http://bit.ly/1Kkba6C> shows 3.3% of Democrats would vote for Gore in the 2016 
election, the same percentage as those who would elect actor George Clooney, 
but far less than the 18.8% who would vote for Gore’s old boss, Bill Clinton, 
who is barred by law from running again.
 