
The point at which I started to worry about AL Kennedy's health – seriously 
worry, as opposed to feeling vague concern when reading her On Writing columns 
for the Guardian and discovering that the sinusitis, labyrinthitis and H. 
pylori were still waxing – was when we met to talk about her latest novel,The 
Blue Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780224091404/the-blue-book>
, about an ill-suited couple crossing the Atlantic on an ocean liner.

Down from Glasgow on promotional duties in the middle of last summer's 
heatwave, Kennedy was staying in a flat at the top of several flights of 
airless stairs. I arrived to find her prone on the sofa, white, wiped and thin 
as a lath. "Picture me,"she wrote in her column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/23/book-launch-letdown-al-kennedy> 
a little later, "in a small, boiling flat somewhere in Soho, lying down, 
throwing up, having panic attacks and listening to helicopters grind overhead. 
And crying if I had to do something complicated – like putting on my shoes, or 
trying to discuss my schedule with my editor. I was a bit tired. Writing a 
novel in 11 months instead of 13 isn't a good thing. I console myself that
writing two books a year gave Muriel Spark hallucinations 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3/johntusainterview/spark_transcript.shtml>."

Nor was that the end of it. "My ulcer and my slowly returning schedule decided 
to engage each other in not altogether positive ways,"she wrote in October's 
column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/25/al-kennedy-writers-need-emotion>
, laid low again. "I am the person you never want to casually ask, 'How are 
you?' I will tell you. At length."And in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/25/alkennedy-creative-writing>: "I 
feel I will disappoint regular readers if I don't mention that I spent this 
morning having an endoscopy and biopsy."

It wasn't until January this year that the corner was turned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/09/putting-everything-into-writing-al-kennedy>
. "Last year began with my being ill, kept on with my being iller, then I was 
unwell, followed by being poorly with a tiny interlude of infirmity. Only in 
December did my bone marrow perk up, my ulcer heal and the H. pylori admit 
defeat … As a properly guilty Scot, it's hardly surprising that I would feel my 
imperfect health was entirely my fault. It wasn't. But my nature did play its 
part."

Did it? A year on, and superficially at least, all is different. Kennedy sits 
upright before me, eating a brownie and as serene as someone in the depths of a 
house purchase can be expected to be. She's healthy again, more or less, but 
the months spent grappling with illness, and with writing about it, have cast a 
long shadow. Practically, there are positives: Jonathan Cape want to turn her 
columns into a book, due out next March;and she's at the Edinburgh book 
festival to talk about it 
<http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/the-festival/whats-on/a-l-kennedy-2>. Emotionally, 
though, the scars are still livid.

"There were two times this year when I freaked out," Kennedy tells me. "The 
first was when I was packing up my house, and I realised everything in the 
kitchen was about seven years out of date – basically, from the time I started 
working manically and stopped cooking. That was shocking. And the second was 
reading my Guardian blogs, and realising the extent of my delusion. I was 
constantly saying, 'I have to do this work, which I love and is nourishing me 
and keeping me cheery,' while simultaneously making it as miserable as possible 
– by not looking after myself, being a bad employer."

The notion of the tortured artist is such a cultural commonplace that we take 
its equation of writer-as-martyr for granted. It's certainly tempting to 
install Kennedy at the head of a line of authors suffering for their work that 
stretches back to, and beyond, the dying Keats, but she rejects the notion. 
"I'd get very angry if I thought I was making that link. Arts activity does not 
make you ill; hyperactivity does. Some writers are obsessive-compulsive, and 
some have come to it because they're ill: sickly kids likeRobert Louis Stevenson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/08/my-hero-robert-stevenson-rankin>
 who lie in bed and make stuff up because that's what they can do. But for me, 
it's overworking. If I were a plumber, I'd do too much plumbing and get sick, 
but nobody ever says plumbing makes you ill; it's always the arts. And 
actually, fuck right off: we've got great jobs. The fact that I do mine like an 
idiot is on me, not the profession."

It's an ethically sound position but, as we talk further, a funny thing 
becomes clear: in Kennedy's case, the profession is very much part of the 
problem. Even during a bout of ill health to which her compulsive writing had 
contributed, there she was, writing about the illness itself. Writing isn't 
just a job for Kennedy: she has pushed all the furniture of her life – sleep, 
food, health – to the edges in order to make space for the central 
creative enterprise.

And even she is willing to admit that writing has its own peculiar pitfalls. 
"The classic things for writers to get are back pain, neck pain, literal loss 
of voice, headaches – partly because you're not sitting properly, or your 
chair's wrong, or you haven't taught yourself to touchtype because you didn't 
have time; but partly also because you haven't learned how to process emotions 
fully and immediately. It's the Hamlet thing. He sees his dead father and the 
first thing he thinks is, 'I'll have to write this down.' And it's like, 
'You're fucked, mate. You're dying at the end of the play – because you can't 
do it that way. Go and throw up or jump around or punch somebody. Don't go and 
write it down.'"

We're lucky, of course, that until now Kennedy has failed to take her own 
advice. Out of the crucible of a year's brutal illness, she has wrung a series 
of brilliant essays – and won the admiration and support of readers online and
on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Writerer>, who inundated her with good wishes 
during the grim days and rejoiced with her on the good. But don't expect more 
of the same down the line: the lesson has been tough, but it's one she's not, 
now, likely to forget.

"It's not that I didn't understand what working like that can do to you," she 
says. "I had chronic back pain from overwork in my 30s, but I didn't learn from 
it. What I do definitely know, though, is that I can't get away with hitting 
another decade and doing something else stupid. I don't want to have a serious 
illness in my late 50s when there's no welfare state left. I don't think that's 
survivable. So I'm finally learning to pace myself."

• The Edinburgh international book festival ends on 27 August. Details: 
edbookfest.co.uk <http://www.edbookfest.co.uk/>; or visit the Guardian's site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edinburgh-book-festival>
 