
Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, the 
leader of al-Qaida, has called on Muslims around the world to support rebels in 
Syria who are seeking to overthrow Bashar al-Assad.

The statement is the most explicit attempt yet by the terrorist group to 
intervene in the ongoing Syrian conflict.

In the eight-minute video titled Onwards, Lions of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, posted on extremist websites on 
Saturday, Zawahiri calls on Muslims in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey to join 
the uprising against Assad's "pernicious, cancerous regime", and warned Syrian 
rebels not to rely on the west for help.

"Wounded Syria still bleeds day after day while the butcher, son of the 
butcher Bashar bin Hafiz [Hafez al-Assad], is not deterred to stop," Zawahiri 
said. "But the resistance of our people in Syria despite all the pain, 
sacrifice and bloodshed escalates and grows."

Al-Qaida, seriously weakened by the loss of its leader Osama bin Laden last 
year, has playedno significant role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/02/al-qaida-irrelevant-arab-spring> 
in the ongoing unrest associated with the Arab spring.

However, the group has made persistent attempts to indirectly influence those 
opposing autocratic regimes across the Middle East, and to intervene directly. 
Late last year senior militants linked to the group travelled from Afghanistan 
to Libya in an effort to boost recruitment in the chaotic aftermath of the fall 
of Muammar Gaddafi.

The Assad regime has repeatedly said Islamic militants are behind the violence 
in Syria, a claim rejected by opposition groups who say it is designed to 
discredit them in the eyes of the international community.

At the weekend, US newspapers cited American officials blaming al-Qaida in 
Iraq, a largely autonomous affiliate of the main group, for two recent bombings 
in the Syrian capital, Damascus, anda suicide attack in Aleppo on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/10/syria-violence-aleppo-blasts> 
that killed at least 28 people.

Zawahiri said: "If we want freedom, we must be liberated from this regime. If 
we want justice, we must retaliate against this regime. Continue your revolt 
and anger, don't accept anything else apart from independent, respectful 
governments."

The revolts of the Arab spring have posed a strategic problem for al-Qaida, 
which has always adamantly rejected democracy and nationalism as western 
inventions that weaken and divide the Islamic world.

In July, Zawahiri urged Syrian protesters to direct their movement also 
against Washington and Israel, denouncing the US as insincere in showing 
solidarity with them.

This month another video featuring Zawahiri appeared on Islamist forums, 
announcing that the Somali militant group al-Shabaab was joining its ranks, in 
an apparent attempt to boost morale and sharpen the threat to western targets.

Since its founding in 1988 al-Qaida has tried to appropriate local struggles 
and fuse them into one broad "global jihad".
 