
Lawmakers in one southern town voted on Tuesday to remove the Confederate flag 
from its official seal, while those in another opted to do the opposite, 
bringing the controversial emblem back to its government buildings.

The Mobile, Alabama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alabama>, city 
council voted to remove the Confederate national flag and four other historic 
flags from the official seal of city government, leaving only the US flag in 
their place.

In Florida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida>, however, the Marion 
county commission voted unanimously to again fly the Confederate flag in front 
of a government building, weeks after it had been taken down.

The interim county administrator in Marion county had removed the flag at the 
McPherson Governmental Complex in Ocala after the 17 June killing of nine black 
people at a Charleston,South Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina>, church. A white man who 
appeared in photos waving Confederate flags is charged.


The Ocala Star-Banner reports <http://bit.ly/1G5BL4T> that several citizens 
spoke in favor of restoring the flag, which was flying again within minutes of 
the vote.


“The fact remains it is part of our common and shared history,” John Horrigh 
told a local television station 
<http://www.mynews13.com/content/news/cfnews13/news/article.html/content/news/articles/cfn/2015/7/7/confederate_flag_marion.html>
 as he watched the flag being raised. “History is not always pretty, but it 
remains as our history. It’s back where it should be.”

State representative Dennis Baxley told a Florida television station 
<http://www.clickorlando.com/news/marion-county-votes-to-reinstate-confederate-flag/34036104>
: “We are all exposed to messages and symbols that may not connect for us, but 
we should all honor our ancestors and protect free expression.”

Communities across the US have taken down or reconsidered Confederate symbols 
in the wake of the Charleston church shooting. On Monday South Carolina 
lawmakerstook the first of several steps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/06/south-carolina-lawmakers-vote-remove-confederate-flag>
 needed to remove the Confederate flag from its capitol in Columbia, with the 
state senate voting 37-3 in favor of taking it down.

The state house of representatives is scheduled to begin debate on Wednesday 
on the bill to take down the flag and its pole and send the banner to the 
state’s Confederate relic room. Governor Nikki Haley and business leaders 
support the proposal.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 