
Alan Cumming has a funny sort of fame. A massive West End and Broadway star, 
his awards include a Tony and an Olivier, while his movie credits stretch all 
the way from arthouse (Stanley Kubrick’s Eyes Wide Shut) through schmaltz 
(Spice World, The Smurfs) to Hollywood blockbuster (X-Men 2).He is currently 
appearing in a sell-out Broadway production of Cabaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/25/cabaret-review-alan-cumming-sam-mendes-revival>
 in the role of Emcee, and he has been nominated for an Emmy for his part as a 
political strategist in the upmarket US TV drama The Good Wife. He is also a 
presenter, screenwriter, producer, director, cabaret performer, novelist and 
gay-rights campaigner.He even has his own fragrance range 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nmdJEjJxYOY> – and an OBE. Nonetheless, in the 
weeks leading up this interview, I had difficulty finding anyone I know who had 
heard of him.

That wouldn’t be the case in New York, and it certainly wasn’t in Edinburgh 
this week, where hundreds packed out a huge hall to hear him talk about his new 
autobiography. Having grown up in Angus,Cumming first made his name on the 
London stage in 1993 playing Hamlet 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/3557703/Charles-Spencer-weighs-up-every-Hamlet-he-has-seen.html?image=4>
, but he has lived in the US for the past 15 years, where he is a card-carrying 
A-lister, and famously best friends with pretty much every celebrity you can 
think of.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F14%2F1415985441754%2F8c66a8d2-7a15-4f89-a9d0-b9743cb876ae-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20always%20told%20I%20was%20nothing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20always%20told%20I%20was%20nothing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F14%2F1415985441754%2F8c66a8d2-7a15-4f89-a9d0-b9743cb876ae-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘I’ve never felt shame about sex. I think that’s the only thing [my father] 
gave me.’ Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
A bisexual Scotsman is not an obvious contender for international stardom; 
that the actor has managed it anyway has something to do with his total 
disregard for the normal rules of reputational discretion.

In the past, Cumming’s media appearances have tended to be raucous affairs, 
cheerfully documenting his adventurous approach to sex and drugs and an 
enthusiasm for promiscuity, which on more than one occasion extended to having 
sex with his interviewer. Having married a female British actor in his 20s, he 
now has an American husband, and has taken conspicuous delight in confounding 
his industry’s traditional anxiety about public bisexuality. Cumming’s candour 
always seemed to suggest an unusually high degree of confidence and self-esteem 
– the kind that comes typically from a secure and loving childhood.

The only aspect of his personal life about which he had been cagey until now 
was his relationship with his father, who died of cancer in late 2010. It was 
well known that the pair had not spoken for 16 years, and Cumming had vaguely 
alluded at times to an abusive history. But the staggering extremes of cruelty 
and violence he reveals in his autobiography, Not My Father’s Son, have come as 
a horrifying shock, even to the author’s closest friends.

There is no trace of the usual mischievous persona when we meet in Edinburgh. 
He is fresh off a flight from New York, and cross with the airline because it 
forgot that he’d pre-requested a vegan meal. “So I tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Alancumming/status/532380578700886016>,” he says with dark 
satisfaction. “That’s the good thing about Twitter – tweet shame.” His PA, who 
looks like a Brooklyn hipster but has the attentive vigilance of a Manhattan 
butler, has had to make a dash to Tesco, and returns bearing green salad, 
balsamic vinegar and root vegetable crisps. I’m hoping this will restore 
Cumming’s good humour, but it’s asking a lot of rocket leaves to brighten a 
conversation about being brutally terrorised by one’s own father.

Cumming, now 49, was the second son of a mother who adored him and a father 
who beat and tyrannised him. The family lived on a rural country estate where 
Alex Cumming was head forester, and the book recounts a childhood of sadistic 
violence so extreme that it wasn’t until Cumming suffered a nervous breakdown 
in his late 20s that his memories of the abuse dared to resurface. After he and 
his brother, Tom, confronted their father about his abuse, he never spoke to 
him again. But, in 2010, he agreed to take part in the BBC showWho Do You Think 
You Are? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IvdvJpAAaU0>, hoping to uncover the 
mystery of exactly how his maternal grandfather had died in “a shooting 
accident” in Malaya shortly after the second world war. On the eve of filming, 
his father contacted his brother and told him that Alan was not, in fact, his 
son. The book relates the actor’s painstaking investigation of both stories, 
neither of which turned out to be true.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIvdvJpAAaU0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIvdvJpAAaU0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIvdvJpAAaU0&media=>
 Cumming delved into his family history for BBC series Who Do You Think You Are?
It had been a terrible shock to learn that he was not his father’s son – but 
even more devastating to discover that this was a lie. “I used to keep 
thinking, ‘When did he decide to make it up that I wasn’t his son, when did 
that happen?’ And then eventually I just thought, ‘You’re never going to find 
out, and, actually, why am I trying to reason with someone who’s unreasonable 
and I believe was mentally ill?’ It wasn’t just rage, it was someone who wasn’t 
dealing with a full deck. And that’s liberating to realise. But it doesn’t make 
it any less infuriating.”

His father took particular pleasure in setting his sons impossible tasks – 
ordering Cumming to drive a tractor, for example, without giving the child the 
first clue how to go about it – and then punishing their inevitable failure 
with a vicious beating. As a consequence, Cumming reflects, “we never really 
felt we’d achieved enough, because we were always told we were nothing. And 
that had affected our adult lives”. Reading the book, it struck me that his 
prolific professional output is probably a legacy of his father’s relentless 
accusation of inadequacy, but when I ask if he agrees, he stiffens.

“Well, I can see why you’d think that.” Am I wide of the mark? “I think so, 
yes. I mean, right now, it’s ridiculous, I’m doing the show on Broadway and a 
fucking TV series and going round the world with my book. That’s a mistake, 
that’s not how I normally live. I’m normally busy, but it’s not normally crazy 
like this. I don’t think I’m a workaholic.”

He does, though, attribute his early talent for acting to his father’s 
malevolent volatility. As a small boy, he learned to eviscerate himself in his 
father’s presence, for fear of provoking him. “Anything we liked or wanted or 
felt joy in,” he writes, “had to be hidden or suppressed,” or his father would 
at once prohibit it. When Cumming made friends with a local doctor’s daughter, 
who played the harp and was interested in art, his father declared she was a 
drug addict and banned all contact. Even fear had to be concealed. “To speed up 
the whole thing, I’d think (he adopts a wearily bored voice), ‘OK, you think 
I’m shit, I’m not doing this well enough for you, I’m never going to be able to 
do this well enough for you, just fucking hit me. Let’s just get this over 
with’. And that became a way of pushing it away.’”

The miracle is how Cumming emerged into adulthood with his apparently 
impregnable self-esteem. He’s not entirely sure how that happened himself, but 
says, “I think it was the balance of my mum and my dad. I saw two people with 
vastly different opinions about me, and I didn’t believe either of them, and so 
I think from very early on I had to make up my own mind.”

It was only after both boys had left home that their mother finally divorced 
their father and left. Cumming is extremely close to her, but I wonder if he 
felt angry with her for failing to protect him. He answers haltingly. “Well, 
when I had the nervous breakdown, and was in the process of going to confront 
my dad, I did have feelings like that. But very quickly they dissolved, because 
just remembering what it was like to live in that house – we were in abject 
fear for our lives. And it was such a feudal existence, the idea of anyone 
getting divorced or leaving their husband was unthinkable. She was so 
financially reliant on him as well as anything. Living with a tyrant, you 
think, ‘Well, why don’t you walk away from the tyrant?’ But you just can’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F14%2F1415986709751%2F93ae3e2e-18a6-42fc-b7ad-dc1c3398bf38-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20always%20told%20I%20was%20nothing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20always%20told%20I%20was%20nothing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Falan-cumming-i-never-felt-achieved-enough-always-told-was-nothing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F14%2F1415986709751%2F93ae3e2e-18a6-42fc-b7ad-dc1c3398bf38-1020x612.jpeg>
 Alan Cumming’s parents, Mary and Alex, at their wedding. Photograph: 
Canongate/Alan Cumming 
He tenses again when I ask if he thinks his father’s rage had anything to do 
with a suspicion that his son was not heterosexual. “No, I don’t think that had 
anything to do with why he hit me. Because he hit my brother as well.” Cumming 
was always aware that he was “the weedy, arty one” compared to his sporty older 
brother. “But I didn’t go into this in the book, because I don’t think it was 
the reason. It doesn’t work, because he used to whack Tom as well.”

His sensitivity makes sense when he goes on. “Some people have said about the 
book, ‘He doesn’t mention that he was first married to a woman and then married 
to a man’. But that’s not what this book is about. It’s not about me being 
bisexual. I get a little tired of everything – you know, if I was straight, you 
wouldn’t think that I should make references to the fact that I was straight, 
so it just feels a little bit double standardy. I didn’t feel it was 
appropriate in this story. The whole bisexual thing keeps coming up, and I just 
think that, eventually, hopefully, we’ll all live in a world where we don’t 
talk about it as much and just get on with it.”

In fact, the only connection he can identify between his sexuality and his 
father is “the most positive thing he gave me”. His father never made the 
slightest attempt to conceal his extra marital affairs, and Cumming thinks that 
explains why “I’ve never felt shame about sex. I think that’s the only thing he 
gave me”.

Eventually, the conversation turns to Scottish politics, a subject he cares 
about deeply.Cumming had campaigned for independence 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/celebrity/scottish-independence-alan-cumming-in-yes-call-1-3534881>
; when he heard the referendum result, in his Broadway dressing room, he wept.

“It’s not just like losing an election. It was about ideals, 
self-determination and being able to live in a world where merit is what’s 
valued rather than privileged people keeping you in your place. For me, that’s 
not just the Scotland and Westminster situation, that feels like me and the 
world. And so it hit me hard.” But he still believes independence will happen 
in his lifetime.

“I truly do. I’ll tell you why. All those people who voted no because they 
thought that devo max was going to happen, they’re now furious, and I think 
there’s a great energy of a lot of people thinking, ‘Dammit, we got screwedagain
’. And, of course, I’m like, ‘Well, what did you think was going to happen, you 
stupid fuckers?’ This is the whole point of independence – so we don’t have to 
deal with these fuckers in Westminster. Did you really think they were going to 
tell the truth? And the fact that the promise came 10 days before the fucking 
vote, the first time that the Yes campaign was in the lead –hell-o? So, there 
will be another referendum, and this time we’ll win.”

It’s curious. Cumming is sufficiently reconciled to his childhood to write a 
book about it, a book he’s here to promote. But he still seems to find the 
whole subject so fraught that I often feel as if I’m trespassing on private 
trauma. It’s only now that the conversation has turned away from his own life 
that he relaxes and becomes recognisable. At last, as he explains the problems 
with devo max, he seems characteristically animated and more like himself – or, 
at any rate, the version that we know.

Not My Father’s Son by Alan Cumming (Canongate, £16.99) is out now. Buy it 
from the Guardian bookshop for £12.99 by phoning 0330 333 6846 or visiting
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/not-my-father-s-son.html>
 