
A key scientific document hand-written by the Enigma codebreaker Alan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> has been sold at auction in 
New York for more than $1m.


The paper, in which he details his work on the foundations of mathematical 
notation and computer science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/20/unseen-alan-turing-notebook-to-fetch-1m>
, was sold for $1,025,000 (£698,000) in a sale of fine books and manuscripts at 
Bonhams auction house.

Turing, frequently referred to as the father of modern computing and 
artificial intelligence, is best known for his contribution to cracking the 
code used by the Germans in their Enigma machines during the second world war 
when he worked for thegovernment code and cypher school at Bletchley Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2014/nov/28/imitation-game-alan-turing-us-intelligence-ian-fleming>
 in Buckinghamshire.

Cassandra Hatton, a senior specialist in fine books and manuscripts at 
Bonhams, said the Turing manuscript was among the papers left in his will to 
his close friend and fellow mathematician,Robin Gandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/feb/05/campaign-to-buy-alan-turings-notebook-for-the-nation>
.

She said it is made up of 56 pages in a simple notebook bought from a 
stationers in Cambridge and is almost certainly the only extensive autograph 
manuscript by Turing in existence. It is thought to date from 1942 when Turing 
was working at Bletchley Park.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Falan-turings-notebook-sells-for-more-than-1m-at-new-york-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3189a4cb9d8dddcadc81c421368ec4e7e4a55ae%2F0_0_2861_3452%2F2861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Turing%20notebook%20sells%20for%20more%20than%20%241m%20at%20New%20York%20auction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Falan-turings-notebook-sells-for-more-than-1m-at-new-york-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Turing%20notebook%20sells%20for%20more%20than%20%241m%20at%20New%20York%20auction&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Falan-turings-notebook-sells-for-more-than-1m-at-new-york-auction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3189a4cb9d8dddcadc81c421368ec4e7e4a55ae%2F0_0_2861_3452%2F2861.jpg>
 A page from Alan Turing’s notebook, which was sold at Bonhams auction house. 
Photograph: Bebeto Matthews/AP 
Part of the manuscript reads: “The Leibniz notation I find extremely difficult 
to understand in spite of it having been the one I understood the best once! It 
certainly implies that some relation between x and y has been laid down eg, 
y=x2+3x...”

Hatton said: “This is a wonderful result and a fitting testament to Alan 
Turing’s impact and legacy. It has been a great privilege to have been involved 
in this sale and we are immensely pleased that all the people who bid for this 
unique item and indeed the wider public have recognised Turing’s importance and 
place in history.”

Turing, whose work cracking the German codes was vital to the British war 
effort, was convicted in 1952 of gross indecency with a 19-year-old man. He was 
chemically castrated and two years later died from cyanide poisoning in an 
apparent suicide.

In 2009, the then prime minister, Gordon Brown, apologised on behalf of the 
British governmentfor the way Turing had been treated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/11/pm-apology-to-alan-turing> and 
he wasgranted a posthumous pardon in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
.


Bonhams said a rare three-rotor German Enigma enciphering machine was sold at 
the same auction for a world record price of $269,000.


A portion of the proceeds from Bonhams and the vendor will be donated to 
charity, the auctioneers said.

 