
The last time Alan Cumming was at the Edinburgh international festival, back 
in 2007, he ended up baring his bum for hundreds of people a night. All in the 
name of high art, naturally. Cumming played Dionysus, the god of booze and 
misrule, in John Tiffany’s rip-roaring production ofEuripides’s The Bacchae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2007/aug/13/edinburghfestival2007.edinburghfestival3>
. There was also a gold kilt, he recalls with a laugh: “Very fetching.”


Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs! at Edinburgh festival review – heart, soul and 
a bit of cheek
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/alan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-review-edinburgh-festival>
Cumming’s reappearance this August will be more low-key, but exposure is still 
involved – albeit of the emotional kind. Having taken New York and numerous 
other cities by storm with his one-man cabaret, the actor is preparing to bring 
the act toa specially adapted venue in Edinburgh 
<http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/cumming>. Called Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs, the 
show has been described by the normally unflappable New York Times as 
“ravenous” and “sexual”.

The actor is quick to point out that while Sappy Songs contains its share of 
sauce – though there is no nudity, audiences should prepare for an extended 
riff on a tattoo in an intimate region – it is by no means un-serious. The tone 
is openly confessional, sometimes bruisingly so: brassy showtunes and lovelorn 
ballads mingled with tales from Cumming’s sometimes troubled life, detailed 
with raw honesty inhis 2014 autobiography, Not My Father’s Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/not-my-fathers-son-alan-cumming-review-actor-difficult-childhood>
. “The songs come from all over the place, but they’re all about me, or things 
that have happened to me. It’s a true cabaret, I guess – funny, but also 
intense.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpkUl8pbEFso&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpkUl8pbEFso>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpkUl8pbEFso&media=>
Alan Cumming sings <https://youtu.be/pkUl8pbEFso> 
The show began life two years ago, during Cumming’s return to Broadway in 
Kander and Ebb’s musical Cabaret. The actor began to invite pals and hangers-on 
tojoin him in his dressing room after 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/05/fashion/alan-cumming-life-isnt-always-a-cabaret-Not-My-Fathers-Son-memoir.html?_r=0>
 the curtain fell: part wind-down, part boutique club night. Zach Braff swung 
by, as did Monica Lewinsky and Vanessa Hudgens. It acquired a pink neon sign 
reading “Club Cumming” then – perhaps not unconnected to its wildfire success 
on the actor’s Instagram feed – a drinks sponsor. Vegan soup was served out of 
paper cups, with Cumming doing double duty as host and resident DJ, pumping out 
tunes from his laptop. “People would ask, ‘Who’s that playing?’ And I would 
say, ‘I’m not going to tell you. Just listen.’”

Some tracks in the Sappy songlist might be blue-blooded Broadway classics by 
Liza Minnelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/01/liza-minnelli-review> or Elaine 
Stritch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/17/elaine-stritch-portrait-personality>
; a number from Weill and Brecht’s The Threepenny Opera; or Stephen Sondheim’s 
The Ladies Who Lunch,done by Cumming with a Scottish lilt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/03/alan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-review>
 that will surely seem even more sardonic in well-to-do Edinburgh. But others 
have raised eyebrows, even among devotees. The actor offers a disconcertingly 
sincere account ofComplicated <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5NPBIwQyPWE> by 
sometime mascara-heavy teen star Avril Lavigne, and there’s also Miley Cyrus’s 
2009 saccharine torch song The Climb, a hit in that long-lost era when Cyrus 
was stillHannah Montana <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NG2zyeVRcbs>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Falan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-cabaret-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde2416cc902af59d497b019c8d13882eb0cd9216%2F0_171_3328_4441%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%20opens%20his%20cabaret%20of%20curiosities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Falan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-cabaret-edinburgh-festival-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%20opens%20his%20cabaret%20of%20curiosities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Falan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-cabaret-edinburgh-festival-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde2416cc902af59d497b019c8d13882eb0cd9216%2F0_171_3328_4441%2F3328.jpg>
 ‘Very fetching’ … Alan Cumming as the gold-kilted Dionysus in The Bacchae in 
Edinburgh in 2007. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
“When I start with the Miley Cyrus, there’s this embarrassed giggle,” he says. 
“People think, ‘God, he’s not really going to singthat, is he?’ Or they think 
I’m going to take the piss out of it. But when I do it seriously, this 
wonderful change comes over the audience. People leave their preconceptions 
behind.” He hints there might be the odd afterparty in Edinburgh, too.

Just getting hold of him to talk through all this has been a challenge. Even 
thoughThe Good Wife is now done and dusted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jun/23/goodbye-to-the-good-wife-a-miracle-of-the-small-screen>
, there hasn’t been much let-up in the Cumming schedule. When we speak he’s 
back in New York for a few days in the middle of filmingBattle of the Sexes 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4622512/>, a biopic of tennis legend Billie Jean 
King, before segueing straight intoAfter Louie 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/afterlouie/after-louie-a-film-by-vincent-gagliostro>
, a Kickstarter-funded film about Aids . He’s about to publish a new book, if 
anything even more confessional than his last, entitledYou Gotta Get Bigger 
Dreams <http://www.rizzoliusa.com/book.php?isbn=9780847849000>. Then there’s 
the little matter of creating a new show for the Metropolitan Museum in New 
York, which has asked him to do a residency in honour of its autumn 
retrospective on the Weimar artistMax Beckmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/jan/30/artsfeatures>. How is he 
approaching it? “I’m calling it Max and Alan,” he declares. “I’ll make 
something up.”

You get the sense that, amid the partying and the hectic work schedule, 
Cumming finds it groundingto stand with a microphone on stage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=StbIPCfvYDA>, with only pianist-arranger Lance 
Horne, cellist Eleanor Norton and drummer Chris Jego for company. “Oh, I love 
it,” he responds. “Every so often, the four of us find ourselves in some weird 
city somewhere in the world, with a room of strangers, and we do this show. 
It’s a lovely little cocoon.”

 * Alan Cumming Sings Sappy Songs is at the Edinburgh international festival, 
6–27 August <http://www.eif.co.uk/2016/cumming#.V4izxzYrKrN>
 