
Early in our conversation, Alan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming> declares that he is not the 
flamboyant extrovert he appears to be on stage – which is, after all, where he 
has given his career-defining performances: a decade ago, as Emcee inSam 
Mendes's Cabaret <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sam-mendes>; and last 
year inhis one-man Macbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/17/macbeth-glasgow-tramway-alan-cumming1>
. Both will be spoken of long after everyone has forgotten his roles in The 
Smurfs, Garfield orThe Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9AyoYLD6_PE>.

At 48, there is certainly an enduring softness about Cumming. It's there in 
his accent (2% New York, but largely Scottish Highlands), his appearance (elfin 
with greying spiky hair) and his sentiments ("It's too easy to be mean in 
life"). And he is as understated as anyone can be while sporting a tomato-red 
shirt open to the chest to reveal a pair of pendants that clank together. He's 
also wearing tweed trousers and hand-stitched red, yellow and white footwear 
with a hint of bowling shoe.

Cumming is in London to promote 1970s-set gay rights drama Any Day Now 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ghwGOuuNy0>, in which he gives a 
floodlight-bright performance as a drag artist who comes to the rescue of a 
neglected child with Down's Syndrome in his LA apartment block. "My character, 
Rudy, has a kind of – what's that thing where you swear? Tourette's! He has 
emotional Tourette's. He can't hold back. Like in the scene where he backchats 
the judge. He can't stop himself. It was the drag stuff that was hardest for 
me, though. I think I look ridiculous in drag. We'd be doing rehearsals and I 
couldn't get the steps. Thank goodness I'm the person everyone else dances 
around."

The star seems suspicious, however, of the cult of personality, possibly even 
resentful of his own persona. "I do feel it's a terrible thing," he sighs, 
kicking up his feet and reclining on a sofa, psychoanalysis-style. "If you're 
an actor you're expected to be good at chat-show stuff. You know, 'Ha-ha-ha, 
hilarious regurgitated anecdote.' It's been that way in America with 
politicians for ages. The last election over here was like that. The 
Gordon-Brown-is-a-weirdo thing. I thought he was great! But policies don't 
matter any more: it's all about PR."
 'I can go to a very deep, dark place' … Alan Cumming. Photograph: Matteo 
Prandoni/REX/BFAnyc.com 
He narrows his eyes and shoots daggers at the film company PRs on the other 
side of the hotel room. "Ha! Look at them! They're not even listening." Perhaps 
not. But they are present. And this is the curious thing. PRs, let alone two 
of them, don't tend to hang around in interviews unless the "talent" is young, 
fractious or heavily medicated. Cumming is none of the above. One PR tells me 
later that her presence was insisted upon by the actor's New York publicists, 
although she adds: "Alan can handle himself." This may be so but, in consenting 
to this arrangement, he can only appear complicit in his own babysitting. I'm 
told later that a previous interviewer was "prying", which does make you 
wonder: how much is there left to pry into?

No one could accuse Cumming of being coy. His tendency toward the candid, even 
indiscreet, is one of his most seductive qualities. He has already burst from 
the closetin a naked cover-shoot for Out magazine in 1999 
<http://www.out.com/out-exclusives/cover-gallery/2011/11/16/1999#slide-11>. He 
also confessed to "accidentally" taking crystal meth. And he admitted to having 
had an ex-boyfriend's name tattooed just above his pubic hair (this has since 
been removed – the tattoo, that is, not the pubic hair).

It transpires that there is one card he is keeping close to his pendant-laden 
chest. Three years ago, he appeared on the genealogy showWho Do You Think You 
Are? <http://www.whodoyouthinkyouaremagazine.com/episode/alan-cumming>, and 
learned that his maternal grandfather died playing Russian roulette in 
Malaysia. He is currently at work on a memoir that incorporates this and 
another more recent family-related shock. It's the latter about which he is 
keeping mum until publication, though he does invite me to guess. "What do you 
reckon? You think my father was a drag queen, don't you?"

In all other respects, though, he is a born beans-spiller. He will even answer 
questions you haven't asked. I thought it might be a tad obvious to quiz him on 
his own plans for fatherhood simply because his character in Any Day Now tries 
to adopt, but he plunges into the topic unprompted. "When I was first withGrant 
<http://www.grantshaffer.com/> [Shaffer, Cumming's husband since 2012], we 
talked about having kids. But we're content now. We love our lives. I really 
did want to have children. Now I don't. I guess I got old. And happy. The time 
has passed. I don't mean that in a sad way. My feeling before was always that a 
child would make me feel complete. Now here I am today, and I am complete."

So what is he looking forward to as his 50s loom? "Not working so much. Which 
is one of those terrible things actors say. When you think about real people, 
normal people … " He struggles for the correct term. "People who are not 
actors. They work longer hours and get fewer holidays. They work every day. 
Sometimes on Saturdays! But you do a few things as an actor and people say, 'Oh 
you do so much, it's crazy!'"
 Alan Cumming in The Flintstones in Viva Rock Vegas Photograph: REX/Moviestore 
In the next breath, he tells me how he is booked up until 2015. His most 
time-consuming commitment is to the political TV dramaThe Good Wife 
<http://www.cbs.com/shows/the_good_wife/>, in which he plays unbending, 
unsmiling campaign manager Eli Gold. But then anyone whose childhood was filled 
with so much backbreaking donkeywork – Cumming and his brother were forced to 
perform heavy manual labour by their tyrannical father – is unlikely to forget 
the meaning of hard graft. Perhaps that's one reason he is so proud of his 
Macbeth. Not only was it an inspired concept (playing a mental patient, Cumming 
became the conduit for the entire dramatis personae), it was physically 
hazardous. "I could feel some nights that the audience was scared, unsettled. 
They were worried. Worried for my health. I'm in a bath at the end and I go 
underwater for a long time. Some of them thought I was really in trouble. I 
could feel they wanted to drag me out. It was palpable!" He gives a devilish 
grin.

One reason for his coming out was the idea that if you dish your own dirt, not 
only is it no longer dirt, but no one else can then use it against you. Cumming 
had had relationships with women – he was married to Hilary Lyon for eight 
years, and datedSaffron Burrows <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/apr/30/2>
. When he started a new relationship with a man in the late 1990s, he wanted to 
avoid becoming tabloid fodder. "It's ridiculous, really. What you're doing 
essentially is issuing a press release about your pants. Welcome to my world."

I wonder how he escaped the fabled curse of the out performer, the one 
that says: "Thou shalt never again play straight." He rolls his eyes. "I guess 
I'm just a really good actor." It's that simple? "Yeah. That stuff is just a 
stick actors who are gay use to beat people who won't give them jobs. If you're 
not convincing in something, that's not necessarily down to prejudice."

So what makes him so good? "I can smile. I have this smile that looks like 
I've got a piano sticking out of my mouth – and I can be charming. But I can go 
to a very deep, dark place." He peers into the mirror over my shoulder, throws 
himself a pout, and adds: "Also, I'm devilishly attractive with abs of steel."

• Any Day Now is on general release on 6 September
 