
Alan McGee may resurrect Creation, the label he founded in 1983. The former 
music mogul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/30/alan-mcgee-retirement-oasis?> 
and self-styled "Presidente" of the label retired from the music industry in 
2008, but is now "seriously thinking about restarting Creation" or launching a 
new label under another name.

"Music needs a kick in the balls and I have got the music buzz back again," 
McGee toldLouder Than War 
<http://louderthanwar.com/exclusive-return-creation-records-alan-mcgee-speaks-us/>
. For much of this summer, the 51-year-old has been helping to programme the 
2013 edition of Tokyo Rocks; Primal Scream played the festival this spring. 
"It's made me realise I do still love [music]" he said.

McGee already has his hands full: he is finishing his first feature film, 
Kubricks, and has agreed to write a new book. "But to be honest I am now 
seriously thinking about restarting Creation," he said, "or maybe [calling] it 
something else if I can find the right people at a label to work with."

Creation Records was one of the UK's most successful independent labels, 
bringing the world such bands as the Jesus and Mary Chain, My Bloody Valentine, 
Teenage Fanclub, Primal Scream and Oasis. McGee managed many of Creation's 
acts, continuing even after he sold half of the company to Sony Music in 1992.

Following Creation's dissolution in 1999, McGee started a new label, Poptones, 
best known for launching the Hives <https://www.theguardian.com/music/hives>. 
That company lasted until 2007. "I think [record labels] are pointless things, 
like dinosaurs or trams or something,"McGee said in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/30/alan-mcgee-retirement-oasis>. "I 
think the prerequisite for being in the music industry is not liking music and 
playing the corporate game, agreeing with your boss."

â€¢ This article was amended on 13 September 2012, because it said incorrectly 
thatAlan McGee <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> manages Primal 
Scream.
 