
Many years ago, the actor Alan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming> happened to attend a 
birthday party atCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/carrie-fisher-in-telluride-im-just-getting-bigger-and-older-thats-not-good>
’s house. He arrived early. He was so early, in fact, that he was the first 
guest to arrive. The second wasElizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/23/elizabeth-taylor-obituary>. 

Rather than drum up small talk with one of the great Hollywood stars of the 
20th century, Cumming told a crowd at the New York Public Library on Wednesday 
night, he chose to slip into another room and get a drink at the bar. Fisher, 
he said, then approached him and hissed, in a sort of stage whisper: “What are 
you doing? Do you know how many homosexuals would like to be in your position?” 
Cumming returned to the living room and promptly he and “Liz” fell into an 
enjoyable conversation.

This is the sort of anecdote Cumming tells in his new book, You Gotta Get 
Bigger Dreams: My Life in Stories and Pictures 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/29093006-you-gotta-get-bigger-dreams>, out 
this week in the US from Rizzoli. “I wanted to give people literal and 
figurative snapshots,” Cumming told the NYPL’s Paul Holdengraber 
<https://twitter.com/holdengraber?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 last night at the first event of the library’sLive at the NYPL 
<https://www.nypl.org/events/live-nypl> series. Probably the most touching of 
these is a shot of himself with his grandmother. On the day the photograph was 
taken, Cumming said, his grandmother defended him from relatives who wanted to 
tease him about his newly bleached blond hair. “If I was young,” she said, “I’d 
be a freak like Alan too.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNhNUIdzhnm4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNhNUIdzhnm4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNhNUIdzhnm4&media=>
On the stage last night Cumming was not much like the characters he plays. He 
was restrained, spoke slowly and carefully and sometimes even sadly. He was 
wearing a T-shirt that earnestly proclaimed him a “Library All Star” and 
implored, “Get in the game, read!” And at least at one point, he was visibly 
annoyed with Holdengraber’s questions. This was when Holdengraber tried to draw 
a parallel between Cumming’s troubled relationship to his father, and his 
troubled relationship with the writer and criticGore Vidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/14/gore-vidal-gripped-a-nation>.

Vidal befriended Cumming in the early 2000s, he told the audience, and he 
ended up having “mixed feelings” about the relationship. He was flattered, at 
first, that Vidal liked him, but the more he got to know the famously caustic 
critic the more he was “saddened” by Vidal’s lack of joy. “I don’t think he was 
a very nice person,” he told Holdengraber. He recalled a visit with Vidal and 
Vidal’s partner, Howard Austen. The pair had been together for 50 years. But 
Cumming said he was shocked to hear Vidal say in front of Austen, “Well, I’ve 
never loved, of course.” This seemed a cruel thing to say.

Still, Vidal had obviously profoundly affected Cumming. He said he had wanted 
to title his book, I Wrote This Book Because Gore Vidal Told Me To, but his 
publishers hadn’t let him. (That title was instead used for the one chapter in 
the book where he discusses the relationship.)

Another of Cumming’s disagreements with Vidal, he said, was over the Monica 
Lewinsky affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/16/monica-lewinsky-shame-sticks-like-tar-jon-ronson>
. Vidal was unsympathetic to Lewinsky and particularly defended Bill Clinton’s 
famous statement that he “did not have sex with that woman”. Cumming is a good 
friend of Lewinsky’s and grew very serious talking about it.

“The way that, you know, the most powerful man in the world and this 
23-year-old girl who was in love with him, this thing happened, this 
unfortunate thing happened, yet she was the one, the weak one …” he said, 
reaching for the words to describe his feelings. “He was the one who abused his 
power, and she was the one who was chastised, and denigrated, and whose life 
was made a misery.”

Cumming also had opinions to share about Donald Trump. “If Donald Trump is the 
president of this country, we are fucked, ladies and gentlemen, seriously,” he 
said.

In the book he writes about the way that Cabaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/cabaret>, the musical whose 1993 London 
revival was Cumming’s big breakout role, gradually immerses the reader in the 
prospect of Nazism. Holdengraber called this passage “prescient” as to the 
present trend of politics. Cumming blanched at the thought. “Six, seven, eight 
months ago, it was funny, now it’s not funny at all,” he said.

“The fact that he has been a candidate of a major party,” Cumming continued, 
“it’s a triumph of the lack of value this country puts on education. We have 
allowed a generation of people to be uneducated, to not be able to analyze, to 
not care about what is happening in the world, to also be in a place where if 
they are told the same thing again and again and again, propaganda basically, 
they believe it to be true.” He citedBrexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/07/north-poor-brexit-myths>
as another example of the same phenomenon.

“The demographics of this country have changed so radically in the last 
generation, and I’m hoping that rich, white, entitled men like Donald Trump, 
their days of being able to say contentious, racist, sexist, xenophobic, 
Islamophobic things, are over,” Cumming said. “But I’m not certain. And that 
fills me with such horror.”
 