
Alan Sillitoe <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-sillitoe>, who died 
today aged 82, was part of a generation of working-class writers who shifted 
the boundaries of taste. Not that Sillitoe, born into the deprived family of a 
tannery labourer, liked to be defined purely by class. He once said of his 1958 
work Saturday Night and Sunday Morning that "the greatest inaccuracy was ever 
to call the book a working-class novel for it is really nothing of the sort. It 
is simply a novel".

The key point about Sillitoe and the generation loosely dubbed Angry Young Men 
was that they were vehemently anti-authority. The hero ofKingsley Amis's Lucky 
Jim <http://www.literature-study-online.com/essays/amis.html> (1954) pulled 
rude faces and mocked the official culture of his academic seniors. John 
Osborne'sJimmy Porter in Look Back in Anger 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/critic/feature/0,,567652,00.html> (1956) 
eloquently savaged anyone in a position of power. Joe Lampton inJohn Braine's 
Room at the Top <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Room_at_the_Top_%28novel%29>
(1958) raged against the "zombies" in authority. And then along came Sillitoe's 
Arthur Seaton in Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, who roundly declared 
himself beyond morality: "That's what all those looney laws are for, yer know: 
to be broken by blokes like me."

None of these 1950s heroes could be defined as socialists. Certainly not 
Sillitoe's Seaton who is, if anything, a truculent individualist and whose 
creed is "Don't let the bastards grind you down." This was brought out 
brilliantly inthe 1960 Karel Reisz movie version, 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0054269/> where Albert Finney embodied the 
anarchic selfhood of Sillitoe's hard-drinking, womanising hero who, in the 
book, beds the wife of an older workmate and then, on the night when she is 
aborting his child, seduces her younger sister.

Sillitoe's hero is defiantly working-class but also an untrammelled egoist who 
rejects all authority. The point comes out clearly in the book when Seaton 
talks of "the big-headed bastard that gets my goat when he asks me to go to 
union meetings or sign a paper against what's happening in Kenya. As if I 
cared!"

This was what made Sillitoe and his generation significant: they pinned down 
the two-fingered attitude to authority of the new, non-deferential 
working-class. Sillitoe pursued the point in his short stories. Famously, in 
The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner (1959), the hero calculatedly 
refuses to complete a race for which he has been entered by the borstal's 
liberal governor.

When the story was filmed by Tony Richardson, with Tom Courtenay as the hero, 
one of the British Board of Film Censor's examiners dismissed it as "blatant 
and very trying communist propaganda". But it was really nothing of the sort: 
simply a symbol of a young generation's contempt for established authority.

It was a theme Sillitoe explored in later novels: not least the underrated A 
Tree on Fire (1967) where the protagonist rejects what he sees as the 
inhumanity of industrial life. There's a revealing passage where the hero's 
friend, a painter, describes how "I was interviewed not long ago by some 
putty-faced, pipe-smoking chubbyguts from that magazine Monthly Upchuck of the 
Arts and all he could do was needle me about 'class' and wonder when my origins 
were going to show more clearly in my work."

That could be Sillitoe himself speaking: an anti-authority figure who 
desperately hated to be pigeonholed simply as a working class writer.

â€¢ This article was amended on 21 May 2010 to clarify the distinction between 
the plots of the book and the film of Saturday Night and Sunday Morning.
 