
If you were dropped into the middle of a conversation with Alan Cumming, this 
is how it might flow: “You knowGeraldine James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jul/11/geraldine-james-actor>? Every 
time we see her… what’s that movie she’s in?45 Years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years>! With Charlotte Rampling – so nice 
to see a movie where they don’t cut back and forth all the time, and you get to 
watch people rather than being bombarded. Anyway, every time we see Geraldine 
James we go: ‘Would you like a bacon sandwich?’, because years ago I sawThe 
Jewel in the Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/sep/17/your-next-box-set-jewel-in-the-crown>
, and there’s a bit where she’s just had an affair with someone, and she comes 
out the next morning and says: ‘Would you like a bacon sandwich?’” He chuckles. 
“I’ve always had shorthand ways to remind Grant [Cumming’s husband] who people 
are, and she’s Bacon Sandwich,” he explains, before dashing on. “There are some 
hilarious ones… who was I doing the other day? He’s British, said he didn’t 
like Madonna, and told a story about getting peed on.”

I never do find out who was peed on because Cumming is rhapsodising on the 
vegan butcher he visited in Minnesota while touring hisSappy Songs roadshow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/08/alan-cumming-shows-some-emotion-on-his-sappy-songs-australian-tour>
. “They had this Porterhouse steak and I got some Canadian ham, and there’s 
these Korean spare ribs, delicious – they’ve got a slightly chewy texture.” 
Talking to Cumming is like being inside his head, a fizzing ball of enquiry 
ping-ponging from subject to subject – his ardent support for Bernie Sanders, 
the time he was replaced in a sci-fi movie by Dame Judi Dench (“I said: ‘That 
bitch is always getting my roles’”), and why he only accepted a career-changing 
part inThe Good Wife  <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-good-wife>
“absolutely under duress”. It’s a quality that helped make his 2014 memoirNot 
My Father’s Son 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/283964/s/not-my-father-s-son/>
 oddly exhilarating in spite of its poignant tale of a merciless, philandering 
father so bent on tormenting his sons that Cumming has “not one memory from our 
childhoods that is not clouded by fear or humiliation or pain”.

He writes like he talks, in a no-holds-barred rush of observation and 
confession. It’s why he enjoys touring the country singing, because for once 
he’s not acting. “I love the connection you get with the audience. There’s 
nothing like it.” He rolls up his sleeve to reveal a tattoo on his arm of EM 
Forster’s famous line fromHoward’s End: “Only Connect.” Sometimes he’ll grab a 
phone or camera from someone in the audience and delete what they’ve been 
recording, because that’s not connection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd0605aa9998a866b72e1d2bb8c442872c8967a%2F218_1552_5215_5688%2F5215.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bd0605aa9998a866b72e1d2bb8c442872c8967a%2F218_1552_5215_5688%2F5215.jpg>
 ‘In Cabaret, I was a semi-clad pixie that was sexually ambiguous, European and 
weird’: Alan Cumming gets to grips with himself. Photograph: Phillip Toledano 
for the Observer 
“Of course you’re going to record me and take a photo when I’m doing a 
concert. But don’t be sitting a metre away from me, holding your arm like 
that…” He mimes a camera in his face. “I had this epiphany,” he says. “I don’t 
have to take my photo with everybody who asks. When you’re picking up your 
dog’s poop and someone says: ‘Can I have a photo?’ and I say: ‘I have shit in 
my hands’ and they go: ‘Oh, once you put it in the bin, can I have a photo?’ I 
will say no.” He says Americans sometimes seemed shocked by his frankness, but 
frankness is part of his appeal. He once took a neon pen to the wall of his 
London flat and wrote out Roosevelt’s Depression-era mantra “The only thing we 
have to fear is fear itself,” a principle he seems determined to live by.

I don’t have to have my photo taken with everybody who asks. There are times 
when I say no

There is one particularly vivid scene in Not My Father’s Son in which the 
13-year-old Cumming buys a dinner service from a stand at the Angus Show in 
Arbroath. It is cold and damp, as it often is in Scotland, and his father has 
disappeared with a woman he has accidentally on purpose run into. Alone, 
shivering in the smirr, Cumming bids for the crockery. It is “beige and bland 
with 70s-style flowers printed on every plate, bowl and cup,” but to the young 
boy it represents escape. “I would be eating off them in a place where there 
were buses and taxis and where I would never have to wait in a public place for 
hours, cold and damp, wondering if my father had concluded his liaison.”

That dinner service, or pieces of it, survived for many years, until Cumming 
moved to New York and the promise it embodied was well and truly met. This 
summer he will perform at the Festival in Edinburgh, the city where it all 
began for him 32 years ago as one half of the trendy Kelvinside thespians 
Victor & Barry (Forbes Masson played Victor). But first there’s a movie to film,
After Louie, more concert dates, another book to complete (You’ve Got to Get 
Bigger Dreams) and the small matter of an iconic TV series to wrap up.

On 1 January 2010, Alan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming> made his New Year’s 
resolutions. “One of them was to wear more suits,” he recalls. A week later he 
was offered the role of Eli Gold, the strait-laced political strategist onThe 
Good Wife, then in its first season. “I was like: ‘What? You’re casting me?” 
recalls Cumming. “I’d never really played a human being before, much less a 
middle-aged man in a suit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad15a47029612b0a9a9ed39a62ed312079583676%2F0_1149_5433_6091%2F5433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad15a47029612b0a9a9ed39a62ed312079583676%2F0_1149_5433_6091%2F5433.jpg>
 Double take: Cumming embraces his smart new self. Photograph: Phillip Toledano 
for the Observer 
It’s safe to say that Cumming was probably not the only one to puzzle over the 
casting director’s instincts. He’d rocketed to fame in the US in Sam Mendes’s 
1998 Broadway revival ofCabaret, playing the emcee – a “semi-clad sexy pixie 
that was sexually ambiguous, and European, and weird,” in Cumming’s words. The 
performance won him a Tony, and the roles that followed were a grab bag of hits 
and misses that played on his outsized personality, from a comic villain inSpy 
Kidsto the voice of Persnikitty in Garfield: The Movie, and Gutsy Smurf in The 
Smurfs <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/24/the-smurfs-review>. 
Evidently European, weird, and sexually ambiguous was fertile ground for 
Cumming.

I was like: ‘What? You’re casting me?’ I’d never really played a human being 
before

The Good Wife, a sophisticated courtroom drama, was different. Loosely 
inspired byEliot Spitzer <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/eliot-spitzer>, 
the New York attorney general forced out of office by a sex scandal in March 
2008, it follows the career of a disgraced politician’s wife, Alicia Florrick 
played by Julianna Margulies, as she rebuilds her life. Eli Gold is the 
blustering Machiavellian fixer who connives to resurrect the political career 
of her husband, Peter Florrick. Ever since its premiere in 2009,The Good Wife 
has been celebrated as a paragon of network television, mostly for not 
resembling network television – the shows of which can be predictable, 
simplistic, safe.The Good Wife, by contrast, is complex, compelling, casually 
cynical at a time when there’s much to be cynical about. But in January 2010 
Cumming was not convinced the show would survive the ruthless economies of the 
slash-and-burn networks. And he hadBurlesque  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137526/burlesque>to film with Cher. A 
one-episode gig with a CBS legal soap didn’t cut it, so he turned it down. His 
agents pushed him to reconsider.

“They said: ‘We really think this could be good for you – they might ask you 
to do more,’” Cumming recalls. Grudgingly he relented. It may have been the 
smartest about-turn he will ever make. One episode led to another, and then 
another, and before long he was a “series regular”, as they say in the trade, 
often stealing the best lines of the show.The Good Wife not only beamed him 
into the living rooms of America, it earned him two Emmy nominations in five 
seasons. Cumming joined a rich ensemble that included old pros such asChristine 
Baranksi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/feb/05/five-workwear-fashion-lessons-the-good-wife-diane-lockhart-power-dressing>
,Michael J Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-j-fox> and Stockard 
Channing, but also some talented newcomers likeArchie Panjabi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/20/archie-panjabi-kalinda-the-good-wife-interview>
andMamie Gummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/01/amazon-fashion-drama-the-collection-mamie-gummer>
. “I always think that’s why you pay your agents and managers all that money,” 
he muses. “Because sometimes they give really good advice.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7205c487e57d025230309013afd38fed702fc469%2F162_650_1008_1234%2F1008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7205c487e57d025230309013afd38fed702fc469%2F162_650_1008_1234%2F1008.jpg>
 Song and dance: on stage in Cabaret. Photograph: Getty Images 
But The Good Wife is ending, after seven seasons. Cumming has appeared in all 
of them. The upcoming finale, which will be shown on 8 May, has fans in 
suspense as 157 episodes of history catch up with Alicia Florrick and her 
husband. When I tell Cumming I’m devastated by the impending absence in my 
life, he scoffs. “You’ll get over it.” He’s right, of course – it’s just 
television. And yet great television leaves a void in its wake. LikeThe Sopranos
, which it resembles in several key ways, the writers have invested as much 
energy in character studies as in plot development. We’ve come to know these 
people onscreen in ways that feel intimate. We’ll miss them.

Like The Sopranos, too, The Good Wife is morally ambivalent, a harder ground 
to occupy in network TV, which tends to be didactic. “Why I think it’s popular, 
and why I think it’s so good, and why I’m really proud to be in it, is that it 
doesn’t tell you what to think,” says Cumming, referring to the show’s formula 
of taking a toxic social issue, such as abortion, and challenging consensus 
views on the right and the left. That ambivalence extends to the characters, 
too. “I mean, Alicia is turning into this kind of bitch,” says Cumming. “So 
it’s constantly challenging your allegiances and changing the partisan nature 
of these TV shows. People you really like do terrible things.” Or asNew Yorker 
TV critic Emily Nussbaum, shrewdly pointed out in areview of season six 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/10/13/shedding-skin>: “On The Good Wife
, there is no success without corruption. The higher Alicia climbs, the more 
compromised she becomes, and the more at ease with compromise.”

Nevertheless Cumming has been ready to move on for a while. “I’m over it,” he 
says. “I was going to leave last year. I said: ‘I’m bored. I do the same thing 
again and again. There’s only so many ways I can raise my eyebrows. I was 
talking to my team. I said that I feel like all I do is come into the room and 
go: ‘Alicia, what the hell is going on?’ and literally the next day I got the 
script and the first line was: ‘Alicia, what the hell is going on?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acbee77bb57f37319799e17d4780f3e1234f7a0%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Cumming%3A%20%E2%80%98Now%20I%20can%20play%20men%20in%20suits%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Falan-cumming-baftas-the-good-wife-men-in-suits%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4acbee77bb57f37319799e17d4780f3e1234f7a0%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 ‘Why I think The Good Wife is so good is that it doesn’t tell you what to 
think’: with Julianna Margulies in The Good Wife. Photograph: Getty Images 
Not that Cumming isn’t thrilled for the ways The Good Wife has enriched his 
life. He knows shows like that don’t come along often. You sense it in the 
sheer energy and enthusiasm and fulfilment that emanates from him.

“The show has changed both my perception and the world’s perception of me as 
an actor,” he says. “Because now I can play men in suits. I’ve become a 
grown-up.”

Alan Cumming wears maroon suit by Valentino; shirt by Sandro; palm tree bomber 
by Paul Smith; shirt by Jil Sander; and tie by Saint Laurent by Hedi Slimane. 
Grey suit and shirt by Jil Sander; tie by Salvatore Ferragamo; shoes by Tom 
Ford; yellow suit and shirt by Calvin Klein; tie by Saint Laurent by Hedi 
Slimane; shoes by Valentino Garavani; and socks by Happy Socks. Styling Seppe 
Tirabassi and grooming Daniella Schacter

The House of Fraser British Academy Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Awards will be shown on Sunday 
8 May, 8pm, BBC One. The Good Wife is nominated for Best International Drama 
Series.
 