
Laura Marling's second album, released earlier this spring, was a breathtaking 
accomplishment. Though her debut, Alas I Cannot Swim, was a beguiling 
collection of songs that suggested a rich and distinctive talent, it offered 
little indication of the furious speed with which her songwriting would mature; 
I Speak Because I Can is the kind of album musicians spend a lifetime hoping to 
make.

There is something about Marling's songwriting that is crisp and unflinching, 
something almost painfully precise. In the album's title track, it's there in 
the needlepoint sharpness: "I speak because I can, to anyone I trust enough to 
listen/You speak because you can to anyone who'll hear what you say." But she 
counterbalances such moments with sudden twists of sentiment, lets the coolness 
of her voice grow rougher, rawer, and brings a kind of gusty, unleashed quality 
to lines such as: "Never rode my bike down to the sea, never quite figured out 
what I could believe, never got up and said anything worthy, for he, for my."

Stand-out tracks include the rollicking Ramblin' Man, the wistful, defiant 
Goodbye, England and the brief, bittersweet Blackberry Stone, the latterÂ a 
quiet rumination on death and appreciating the simpler pleasures of life: "I'd 
be sad that I never held your hand as you were lowered," she sings in one of 
the album's most devastating lyrics. "But I'd understand that I would never let 
you go."

This year, Marling stands quite peerless among not only her own generation of 
songwriters, but also generations before her; a quite extraordinary feat.
Free music - I Speak Because I Can 
<http://www.we7.com/album/I-Speak-Because-I-Can?albumId=450684>  