
"I've got some news for you/Fembots have feelings too." So opens Robyn's third 
album of 2010, a compilation of 10 of the best tracks from the two Body Talk 
mini-albums, alongside five new songs. The lyric sums upRobyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robyn> perfectly: a mainstream pop star with 
attitude, unafraid to promote her sexuality on her own terms.

While guitar bands are praised for daring to use synths in their music, Robyn 
trades rhymes with Snoop Dogg on the frantic U Should Know Better, makes 
bass-heavy doom-pop with Röyksopp in None of Dem and, with Dancing On My Own, 
creates one of the best pop singles of the last 20 years.

But Body Talk isn't just sleek, forward-thinking electro-pop. It's also imbued 
with emotion and soul. Musically, the pace rarely slackens, whereas lyrically 
Body Talk conerns relationship breakups and/or defiance in the face of 
heartache. These are songs to dance to with tears streaming down your cheeks. 
It's not, however, an album mired by a sense of victimhood, with Robyn both 
perpetrator and casualty; the Max Martin-produced Time Machine is a lengthy 
apology to a jilted ex, Love Kills a lengthy warning.

There's an economy on Body Talk that makes the emotional punch all the more 
powerful. Dancing On My Own doesn't waste a second, its metronomic beat the 
epitome of minimalism, while Hang With Me aims to capture the essence of a 
relationship in a single line: "I know what's on your mind, there will be time 
for that too, if you hang with me."

Rather than spending ages in the studio, Robyn recorded Body Talk in short 
bursts, sending tracks to her label as and when they were finished. 
Commercially, it's an experimental approach that has yet to fully pay off – 
only Body Talk Part 2 charted in the UK top 40 – but creatively it's a 
testament to the fact that pop music still has the ability to surprise. As 
Robyn says: "The whole industry knows not to fuck with me."
 