
Is it possible that a feeling of reticence developed towards Arcade Fire in 
their absence between albums? After the grief-stricken Funeral and the 
doom-laden Neon Bible, I approached their third LP thinking I'd heard all they 
had to say. But after a few plays it was clear thatArcade Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> possess a rare magic; for all 
their fixations with death and religion, this is a band with heart.

Nothing sums up their appeal quite like the single We Used to Wait, which the 
band turned into a Google Chrome video project called The Wilderness Downtown, 
in a format (HTML5) allowing people to modify the contents to include images of 
their childhood homes. Tech heads were wetting themselves, but this was more 
than just flash gadgetry. Here was a band, whose aesthetic is the picture of 
austerity, managing to imbue advanced HTML with emotional resonance. Although 
an unlikely project, The Wilderness Downtown was a reminder of the sincerity at 
the heart of Arcade Fire's monumental angst-rock.
The Suburbs begins with the title track in which languid bar-room jangle is 
underpinned by the urgency of the lyrics: "I learned to drive, and you told me 
I'd never survive, grab your mother's keys, we're leaving." Their version ofthe 
suburbs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2010/jul/22/arcade-fire-suburbs> 
holds you hostage, but also provides wonder among the grid-pattern roads and 
vacant sidewalks.

Driving – a necessity when you live in, say, Sidcup, and you want some fun – 
repeatedly crops up in The Suburbs: "Took a drive into the sprawl, to find the 
places we used to play. It was the loneliest day of my life." It is a means of 
escape, but it's an equally subtle way of winding the album's landscape around 
you. And that's what this album does, until any feelings of doubt have been 
conquered and you are once again fully immersed in the band's world.
Free music - The Suburbs <http://www.we7.com/album/The-Suburbs?albumId=513357>  