
At the end of a challenging conversation that, conducted via a translator, 
strains my intellectual faculties to their limit but barely flexes his, 
Aleksandr Sokurov makes an astounding statement. "I'm a very literary person, 
not so much a cinematographic person. I don't really like cinema very much."

Pardon? He doesn't like cinema very much? That's like hearing David 
Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/26/david-attenborough-chasing-armadillo>
 say he's never really liked animals. Here is a man who was persecuted by the 
communists for his films; the man who gave us amiraculous feature 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J--TDEHizVA> conducted in one single, unbroken 
shot, 2002'sRussian Ark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/93978/russian.ark>; the man who is the 
custodian of Russia's great cinematic heritage. What would he have done if hedid
 like cinema?

Sokurov's films are characterised by poetic imagery, spiritual allusions, big, 
big themes and long, long takes. They can be challenging to the point 
of impenetrable, but when they work, the results are undeniably powerful, 
transcendent even. His international breakthrough, 1997'sMother and Son 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RrpmxX158Kw>, struck deep spiritual and 
emotional chords with little more than two actors and a painterly eye for 
landscape. "Ten minutes in, I started quietly crying and continued to do so for 
the 73-minute duration," Nick Cave wrote at the time.

Russian Ark, a virtuoso tour of St Petersburg's Hermitage museum and its 
history <http://arts.theguardian.com/fridayreview/story/0,,922902,00.html>, is 
probably Sokurov's most accessible work; but overshadowing his entire career is 
his "tetralogy of power", a magnum opus conceived in 1980 and only completed 
this year. The first three films focused on 20th-century leaders – Hitler in 
1999'sMoloch <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2vnQvemqnTY>, Lenin in 2001's 
Taurus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/may/18/cannes2001.cannesfilmfestival>, 
and Emperor Hirohito in 2005'sThe Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107540/sun> – pinning them down in 
isolated, almost abstract domestic situations. The final movie, a loose 
adaptation of Goethe'sFaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143052/faust>, is almost a 
complete departure.

Due here next year, Faust is a hallucinatory period piece full of clutter, 
chatter, carnality and the usual unforgettable imagery. In the opening shot, 
the camera descends from the heavens, across a mountainous landscape, into a 
medieval-looking village, before settling on the genitals of a corpse out of 
which our doctor Faust is scooping the organs, searching for the human soul. 
The film, memorable yet demanding, won the top prize at this year'sVenice film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>.

"They're all very serious, significant subjects," says Sokurov, himself the 
subject of atwo-month retrospective 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/whatson/bfi_southbank/film_programme/november_seasons/aleksandr_sokurov_a_spiritual_voice>
 now on at the BFI in London. "It's basically like a big novel, and novels take 
a long time." The Sun alone took 10 years of research, says the film-maker, a 
well-built man with greying hair and mournful blue eyes. "I was travelling to 
Japan regularly. I lived in different parts of the country. I met historians, 
people who were close to politics, to the emperor's family, writers, 
researchers, TV people. Then again, it took Goethe at least 40 years to write 
Faust!"

Why make three movies on historical subjects and one on a fictional one? "Why 
do you think?" I suggest Faust is a sort of prequel to the other three. 
"Maybe," he nods. Or is it that the first three deal with the death of power, 
whereas Faust addresses its acquisition? "But he never gets this power," 
Sokurov says. "It's impossible to have this power, because it doesn't really 
exist. It only exists to the extent to which people are ready to submit to it. 
Power is not material." Do some people have no choice but to submit to power? 
"No. There is always choice. Even during Stalin's terror, people had choices. 
They could betray or not betray, for example." Does he mean that people were 
persuaded, rather than forced, to submit to power?

'We enjoy being forced'

"I would be more precise, even," he replies. "They wanted it. Because it's the 
most comfortable position for most people. We enjoy being forced. It takes 
responsibility off your shoulders. People are more afraid of responsibility 
than anything else. Especially all-encompassing responsibility for your 
country, for the security of your people, for war and peace. Many millions 
survived only because they withdrew from these responsibilities. For example, 
they voted for Hitler, they tolerated Stalin. Millions of people did nothing to 
stop the Cultural Revolution in China. Just like now most of us are refusing to 
think about the conflict going on between Christian and Muslim civilisations."

But weren't these people just victims? He puts his hand on mine. "Of course," 
he says warmly. "Precisely."

We barely see the victims in Sokurov's films. His historic studies focus 
tightly on their subjects, portrayed as frail, fallible, almost ridiculous 
creatures with little power left to wield. In Moloch, Hitler is an arrogant 
hypochondriac, holed up with Eva Braun in his foggy mountain retreat. In 
Taurus, Lenin is irritable and bedridden, exiled to the countryside to live out 
his last days. And Hirohito is a beleaguered ex-deity, dazed by the reality of 
Japan's wartime defeat. In a way, suggests Sokurov, they are victims, too. 
"They submitted as well. They submitted to the desire of their compatriots, to 
their own weakness, to their own delusions. In reality, greatness and power 
are incompatible."

Sokurov's understanding of political power was not acquired solely through 
research. He made two documentaries onBoris Yeltsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/yeltsin/> in the years before he became president, 
which gave him a ringside seat at Russia's post-glasnost political chaos. Then 
there's his personal experience. Born in south-eastern Siberia, he grew up 
moving around the Soviet empire with his military family, before enrolling at 
the prestigious VGIK film school in Moscow. His student films were criticised 
for displaying "formalism and anti-Soviet views"; but his debut feature, 1979's
The Lonely Voice of Man <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qy2ZqEQ1jIY>, earned 
the approval of the greatAndrei Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/24/andrei-tarkovsky-collection-dvd-review>
, who helped him find work. Bizarrely, Sokurov was allowed to continue making 
his "anti-Soviet" films throughout the 1980s.

"The totalitarian state doesn't have the objective of destroying artists but 
of making them submit to its influence," he says. "Dozens of artists gave up 
and did what was expected of them. There were not many who resisted. But I kept 
on fighting. It's happy to play cat and mouse with artists, up to a point." 
Sokurov knew he was reaching that point. He was summoned to KGB interrogations. 
He knew his colleagues in the film industry were writing reports about him. 
"Some of them I still see and say hello to. They don't know that I know." He 
even knows which Siberian labour camp he would have been sent to. "But suddenly 
God sent us Gorbachev. Otherwise I wouldn't be talking to you now."

Ironically, Sokurov finds it harder to make films in today's free market than 
he did in the Soviet era. That's the other reason his tetralogy has taken so 
long. He was preparingFaust <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G4zLlLfYGmU>, his 
most expensive film, just when the economic downturn struck, and couldn't find 
funding. But a surprise saviour stepped in:Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>. Sokurov met Putin at the 
Russian PM's country residence. "I told him, if I don't have this opportunity 
to make this film, it will never happen. A few days later, I was told that the 
amount I needed was going to be allocated. How and why it happened I don't 
know. Maybe because he has a very clear idea of German culture and history. I 
don't think it was because of me. I've never demonstrated my loyalty to his 
party."

Wouldn't Putin himself make a good subject? "I'll never make films about 
people like Putin because they're not of interest to me." Does his 
association with Putin compromise him? "When I met him recently, he asked if 
I was going to dub Faust into Russian. Reading between the lines, you could see 
these words as a sort of order. But I wasn't afraid to say no to him. The money 
allocated by him was the state's, not his own. I don't know whether he has any 
money. According to his official salary, he shouldn't have any money. I can 
only be responsible to my audience, that's all."

Tarkovsky's apprentice

For all his fascination with political power, Sokurov has also presented 
the case for cultural power in his prolific output: his films have adapted 
stories by everyone from Chekhov to Dostoevsky, from Flaubert to George Bernard 
Shaw. And in the course of his many documentaries, he has chronicled some of 
Russia's most influential artists: composerDmitri Shostakovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dmitri-shostakovich>, writer Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn>, cellist Mstislav 
Rostropovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/apr/28/classicalmusic.comment>, 
not to mention, Tarkovsky, whom he lovingly appraised in 1998'sMoscow Elegy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bW47TIZtwzw>.

Sokurov himself could be said to be part of this great Russian tradition, 
although he describes himself as "more of a European". "Dickens, Flaubert, 
Zola, that's my world. That's what brought me up." It's in this context that he 
declares he doesn't like cinema very much. Nor, despite the regular 
comparisons, does he consider himself Tarkovsky's successor. "I never wanted to 
be his student. I loved him as a person. His death was the biggest loss of my 
life. I was half his age, but he treated me as an equal, with unlimited warmth 
and trust. I was embarrassed by it. It felt like admiration I could never 
actually deserve."
 