Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0TxQSYWu61I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0TxQSYWu61I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0TxQSYWu61I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> was hit by a 
fastball in his first at bat and then homered to start a four-run sixth inning 
as theNew York Yankees rallied to a 9-6 win over the Boston Red Sox on Sunday.

The Yankees manager, Joe Girardi, was ejected after storming out of the dugout 
to yell at plate umpire Brian O'Nora, who warned both benches immediately after 
Rodriguez was hit by Ryan Dempster's 3-0 pitch leading off the second inning. 
It struck his left elbow pad and ricocheted off his back. The dustup seemed to 
spark the Yankees, who were trailing 2-0 at the time. Mariano Rivera earned his 
first save since blowing three chances in a row for the first time in his 
career.

Rodriguez is playing under a 211-game suspension imposed by Major League 
Baseball as part of the investigation into the Biogenesis anti-ageing clinic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>
 and the use of performance-enhancing drugs.

Boston's lead in the AL East was cut to one game over Tampa Bay. The game took 
four hours and 12 minutes.

Miguel Cabrera hit his 40th home run and had an RBI single to help Max 
Scherzer become baseball's first 18-game winner this season as theDetroit Tigers
 beat theKansas City Royals 6-3. The reigning Triple Crown winner became the 
third player since 1921 to have at least 40 homers and 120 RBIs while batting 
.350 or better through 116 games, joining Babe Ruth and Jimmie Foxx, according 
to STATS. Cabrera, who has eight homers in 13 games, leads the majors in 
batting (.360) and RBIs (120). His home run pulled him within four of 
Baltimore's Chris Davis.

At Minneapolis, Alexei Ramirez homered and had three RBIs and Hector Santiago 
won for the first time since 21 June as theChicago White Sox beat the Minnesota 
Twins 5-2. Ramirez finished a triple short of the cycle. He homered to lead off 
the fifth inning, giving Chicago a 4-2 lead and helping his team win its first 
road series in more than a month.

Jose Lobaton hit a solo home run in the 10th inning as the Tampa Bay Rays 
edged theToronto Blue Jays 2-1. Lobaton sent a pitch from Brad Lincoln (1-2) 
into the right-field seats. Lobaton had a game-ending triple in the ninth on 
Friday.

In other AL games, the Seattle Mariners edged the Texas Rangers 4-3, the 
Houston Astros downed the Los Angeles Angels 7-5 and the Oakland Athletics were 
7-3 winners over theCleveland Indians. In interleague play, the Chris Davis 
went four for five with his major league-leading 45th home run and Adam Jones 
had a two-run shot among his three hits as theBaltimore Orioles beat the 
Colorado Rockies 7-2.

In the National League, Carlos Ruiz had four hits as the Philadelphia Phillies 
benefited from two ninth-inning errors by shortstop Hanley Ramirez to beat the
Los Angeles Dodgers 3-2 , giving interim manager Ryne Sandberg his first 
victory and ending Los Angeles' 10-game winning streak.Sandberg took over when 
Charlie Manuel, the most successful manager in club history, was fired on Friday
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/16/philadelphia-phillies-manager-charlie-manuel>
. Andre Ethier homered for the Dodgers, who have lost just nine of their last 
51. Darin Ruf hit a home run to begin Philadelphia's comeback from a two-run 
deficit.

Adam Eaton's bloop double in the 16th inning drove in two runs as the Arizona 
Diamondbacks outlasted the Pittsburgh Pirates 4-2. Eaton's career-high fourth 
hit came during his seventh at-bat, with AJ Pollock and Didi Gregorius on and 
two outs. Eaton fought off a 1-0 pitch from Kris Johnson and dunked the ball 
into shallow left-center. Arizona remained five games behind Cincinnati in the 
race for the second NL wild-card spot. Pittsburgh's lead in the NL Central 
dwindled to one game over St Louis.

Homer Bailey allowed one run and three hits in eight innings as the Cincinnati 
Reds routed the Milwaukee Brewers 9-1, while Julio Teheran pitched around 
trouble through six scoreless innings as a tiredAtlanta Braves bullpen held on 
for a 2-1 win over theWashington Nationals. In other games, the Miami Marlins 
beat theSan Francisco Giants 6-5, the St Louis Cardinals downed the Chicago Cubs
 6-1 and theSan Diego Padres rallied to defeat the New York Mets 4-3.
 