
1. Oliver Stone's Alexander 
<http://film.theguardian.com/Film_Page/0,4061,1310359,00.html> has its London 
premiere tonight in Leicester Square. The movie stars Colin Farrell as the
Macedonian warrior king <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alexander_the_Great> from 
the fourth century BC.

2. That's Macedonian from Macedon 
<http://www.macedonia.com/english/history/regions1.html>, an ancient kingdom 
centred on territory now largely in northern Greece. Both Greece and the 
neighbouringRepublic of Macedonia 
<http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/mk.html>, formerly part of 
Yugoslavia, like to claim Alexander as their own, and the new film has only
poured salt in the wound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/fridayreview/story/0,12102,1353954,00.html>. 
Whatever you do, don't tell a Macedonian Alexander was Greek, or vice versa.

3. Of course, that's not the only reason the film has upset people. A group of 
Greek lawyers threatenedlegal action 
<http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,12589,1356746,00.html> over 
insinuations in the film that Alexander might have been homosexual. They hadn't 
seen it at the time, but never let that get in the way of a good lawsuit.

4. Even the Iranians <http://tinyurl.com/6fpy2> have had a bit of a gripe, in 
the name of their ancestors the Persians, whose empire was conquered by the 
Greek/Macedonian gay/straight king/legend*. (*Delete according to your 
preconceptions).

5. And it's not as though Stone hasn't done his best to make his film 
accurate. He hired a number of historical and archaeological consultants, one 
of whom waived his fee so long as he could take part in acavalry charge 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/article/0,,7434-1101601,00.html>.

6. In fact, we should probably congratulate Stone on getting the movie made at 
all. Arival project <http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,1260261,00.html> 
by Australian director Baz Luhrmann was abandoned earlier this year. One 
commentator has speculated that Stone's film may havekilled off the whole 
classical epic genre 
<http://film.theguardian.com/features/featurepages/0,4120,1381937,00.html>.

7. But whatever we unkindly Brits can say about Stone, we are as ever but 
shadows of his compatriots. US criticssavaged 
<http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,12589,1359287,00.html> the movie. 
"Alexander is full of brilliant highlights," said one. "But they're all in 
Colin Farrell's hair."

8. Stone struggled manfully at first to defend his movie, with the pricelessly 
haughty argument that it wastoo complex for "conventional minds" 
<http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,12589,1371013,00.html>.

9. This week, though, the director has conceded that he "let Alexander down" 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/arts/main.jhtml?xml=/arts/2005/01/03/bfstone03.xml&amp;amp;amp;amp;menuId=564&amp;amp;amp;amp;sSheet=/arts/2005/01/03/ixfilmmain.html>
. You have to feel sorry for him: "The gays lambasted me for not making 
Alexander openly homosexual, and in the Bible belt, pastors were up in the 
pulpit saying that to watch this film was to be tempted by Satan."

10. It's a minefield, all right. But before we Brits get too smug about 
everyone else's historical sensibilities, we should look to the dark clouds on 
the horizon. Mel Gibson'snew project 
<http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,12589,1205574,00.html> is reportedly 
a biopic of the British queenBoudicca <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boudicca>. 
That's Britain thefirst century Roman province 
<http://intranet.dalton.org/groups/Rome/RMap.html>, not the 18th century 
<http://encarta.msn.com/encyclopedia_761568020/Act_of_Union.html> union of 
England and Scotland. But don't let's start all that again, eh?
 