
It took nearly a year for Major League Baseball to get their man, but on 
Saturday they hit pay-dirt. The211-game suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>
 ofAlex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-career-peds-steriods>
 for his involvement with an anti-aging clinic accused of distributing 
performance-enhancing drugs to athletes,may have been whittled down to 162 by 
arbitrator Fredric Horowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/11/alex-rodriguez-suspended-for-2014-season-arbitrator-rules>
 following an appeal hearing.But in the eyes of Bud Selig 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20140111&content_id=66493352&vkey=pr_mlb&c_id=mlb>
, the one-season sentence must be seen as a comprehensive victory.

The soon to be retiring commissioner 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/9727367/mlb-commissioner-bud-selig-retire-2014-season>
 is seeking to reverse damage to the game which marred the early part of his 
reign, when the rampant PED use ofthe so-called Steroid 
<http://www.baseballssteroidera.com/> Era muddled one of baseball’s most 
valuable assets - its statistical pool. <http://www.baseball-reference.com/> 
Now he’s swatting flies in a bid to fight off the return of such influences, 
all while attempting to boost a legacy heavily diluted by what took place on 
his watch.

To gain the 14 suspensions of the Biogenesis scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>
, MLB took unprecedented action - maneuvers that included suingAnthony Bosch, 
the former owner of the Biogenesis clinic 
<http://www.newsday.com/entertainment/tv/tv-zone-1.811968/60-minutes-has-details-of-mlb-doping-case-against-a-rod-1.6779713>
, in order to gain access to its records in court. In the end, Bosch became 
their greatest asset in exchange for MLB dropping the suit, helping to secure 
an unprecedented suspension of the games biggest name - Alex Rodriguez. The 
Commissioner must believe he made a statement by singling out a player once on 
the verge of becoming the “clean home run king” in delivering a suspension more 
than double the one Ryan Braun received for his sins.

In doing so the Office of the Commissioner also managed to outmaneuver the 
Major League Baseball Players Association 
<http://mlbplayers.mlb.com/pa/news/article.jsp?ymd=20131120&content_id=64075374&vkey=mlbpa_news&fext=.jsp>
, one of the most powerful unions in the United States, in a fight over a grey 
area inside theJoint Drug Agreement <http://mlb.mlb.com/pa/pdf/jda.pdf> which 
became the battleground between Rodriguez, his large and costly legal team and 
MLB. Despite their being little language in the JDA allowing for a ban north of 
the 50 games for first time offenders, MLB was able to keep Rodriguez off the 
field until 2015. Because confidentiality agreements largely prevent appeal 
hearing transgressions from reaching the public, less some leaks from both 
sides, we still do not have a thorough understanding of just how Horowitz 
justified such a ruling, and we may never learn the whole truth, which includes 
the charges against A-Rod and the evidence against him that was presented.

Despite such perceived victories, MLB’s power brokers are smart to keep their 
celebrations to a murmur. Suspensions or not,athletes are still a step ahead of 
drug testing, 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/mlb-5-391-samples-0-positives-steroids-article-1.1533213>
 as evidenced by the fact that not a single player brought down in the wake of 
Biogenesis tested positive for performance enhancing drugs. Rather, it took a 
disgruntledformer associate of the clinic, Porter Fischer 
<http://www.villagevoice.com/2013-06-19/news/steroids-in-baseball/>, to bring 
their use to light by his handing over its records toThe Miami NewTimes, the 
South Florida publication 
<http://www.miaminewtimes.com/2013-01-31/news/a-rod-and-doping-a-miami-clinic-supplies-drugs-to-sports-biggest-names/>
 that first broke the story in January of 2013. If not for Fischer, this latest 
assault on baseball’s legitimacy might have continued to go undetected. What’s 
more, there’s no sign of players being scathed by their actions - on the 
contrary, some have received pay raises. Jhonny Peralta received a suspension 
of 50 games, and this offseason, signed a contract that pays him $53m over four 
years, that’s nearly double what he made during his first nine seasons in MLB -
it’s hard to say there’s a lesson there for anyone considering the risks of 
dabbling in performance enhancing drugs. 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/11/25/jhonny-peralta-reaction-to-cardinals-contract/3708135/>

As for Rodriguez, the 38-year old third baseman vows to continue to try and 
clear his name by seeking a Federal injunction to get him in uniform in time 
for Spring Training - a long-shot at best according to one-time Assistant 
General Counsel for theMLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> Players 
Association, Jeff Fannell. 

Unless there's fraud or other wrongdoing on the part of the arbitrator, the 
courts are not going to overturn the decision. Very tough. It's a steep hill to 
climb if you're challenging an arbitrator's award in a federal court.

Should his legal challenge fail, there’s no guarantee that A-Rod returns to 
the Yankee lineup in 2015. The third baseman with apair of serious hip 
surgeries behind 
<http://deadspin.com/a-rods-new-lawyer-claims-the-yankees-wanted-his-hip-su-1160389221>
 him, not to mention amajor decline in production 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/r/rodrial01.shtml>, would be pushing 
40 by the time that season rolls around. It is possible that the Yankees would 
consider writing him a check for $61m, the remainder of his contract, and then 
release him. Doing so sooner than later would prevent him from becoming amajor 
distraction at Spring Training 
<http://tracking.si.com/2014/01/11/arod-planning-to-attend-spring-training/>, 
where he is actually entitled to play games despite his suspension. However, 
withDerek Jeter possibly retiring after this coming season 
<http://mlb.si.com/2013/11/01/derek-jeter-yankees-contract/>, the Yankees, an 
organization that have continuously thrived on buzz and title success, may 
welcome him back just to fuel television ratings if not their lineup.
 Barry Bonds put up big numbers as a 42-year-old in 2007 but did not receive 
any offers to play the following season. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
If the Yankees do eventually cut A-Rod he would be eligible to sign with any 
team. However, it’s worth noting that one of the other main faces of the 
Steroid Era, Barry Bonds, who owns the career home run record Rodriguez was 
chasing, played 126 games in 2007 andposted an OPS of 1.045  
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/b/bondsba01.shtml>- he did not 
receive another contract offer.Whether or not the owners of baseball’s 30 teams 
colluded to keep him out of the game in unknown 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2009/writers/michael_mccann/03/16/bonds.collusion/>
, but those are some hefty numbers for anyone to put up, regardless of age (he 
was 42), and not get a new deal. It should serve as a warning to Rodriguez 
should his Bronx employers elect to cut ties with him.

That’s all speculation - what’s not is that A-Rod’s legacy has taken another 
direct hit with this lengthy and unprecedented suspension. With some players 
you wonder, what came first? The statistics or the PED’s?With players such as 
Melky Cabrera, we now know it was the the drugs. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/aug/21/mlb-week-20-melky-cabrera>
With A-Rod it was the stats - two decades ago he was the hebest prospect in the 
history of baseball 
<http://espn.go.com/blog/sweetspot/post/_/id/11482/top-50-prospects-of-the-draft-era>
. He was Mike Trout or Bryce Harper, but better. The numbers followed, and 
thanks to those enormous statistics he earned over $350m, and astonishing sum 
which doesn't even count the roughly $22m he’ll lose from sitting out this 
season or the money he’ll start collecting in 2015. How much of a difference 
those PED’s made to his performance and his bottom line are questions we will 
never be able to answer. But we know enough about theyoung A-Rod 
<http://boydwonder.files.wordpress.com/2010/07/arod-01_ss_full.jpg> to know 
that a clean version would have had every opportunity to enjoy one of the best 
legitimate careers in the history of Major League Baseball. Instead, like Bonds 
and Roger Clemens before him, it’s another scandal choked career, another 
completely avoidable downfall, and another Steroid Era “great”who will likely 
never reach the Hall-of-Fame. <http://bbwaa.com/>

The Biogenesis scandal explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
 