
My Fair Lady came out of the blue. I'd been working with Trevor Nunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/trevor-nunn> at the National, and he asked 
me if I'd be up for taking over fromJonathan Pryce as Henry Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/mar/17/theatre.artsfeatures1>. I jumped 
at the chance because it was a musical I'd grown up with. It was hugely 
challenging – I'd never done a musical before, let alone play the leading role 
in one at Drury Lane.

Joanna Riding was already in the show as Eliza when I started in 2002. We made 
a good team. Jonathan finished on a Saturday and I was on the following Monday. 
I'd never taken over from anybody before. The train has already left the 
station: you just have to jump on board and hope you don't fall off.

I knew the movie, which is very beautiful but a bit slow. I had a recording of 
the 20th-anniversary Broadway production withIan Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/10/guardianobituaries.broadcasting>
, who was a great idol of mine – I'd seen lots of his work with Prospect and 
the RSC. Rex Harrison is marvellous inthe film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/my-fair-lady>, but I was thrilled by the way 
Ian did Higgins – there was such attack and pace to his performance. It's an 
electrifying take. That's the one that inspired and encouraged me, especially 
as Ian also wasn't known for musicals when he did the role.

Jonathan and I didn't discuss the part. It was the same when I took over from 
Douglas Hodge as Willy Wonka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/07/alex-jennings-west-end-willy-wonka>
 this year. I'm a very different kettle of actor from Jonathan and Doug, so you 
get a different Wonka and a different Higgins. I tried to create my own 
version, even though I was in an existing production. Very occasionally someone 
will say: "Oh, is that how you're doing it? That's not how so-and-so used to do 
it." You just have to ride that and try to convince them your way might be 
valid as well.

The designer Anthony Ward invited me to be involved in the costumes. My Fair 
Lady is set in the period it's set in: you're wearing suits or knitwear. But I 
was able to have some influence on which tweed Higgins wore. That's good fun – 
and important for the actor. You need to feel right in what you're wearing.

At the end of the run it felt the same as when I did Hamlet. I don't want to 
overplay this, but I didn't want to let go of the role – it had become a part 
of my life.

In 2010, I got to revisit the part in Paris. I felt slightly disloyal to 
Trevor, but it was a very different show – much grander and more operatic. 
Higgins seemed less romantic to me, which seemed appropriate given that Eliza 
had remained the same age. I was tougher with it and perhaps less sentimental. 
I don't know if that's a good or a bad thing.

And then last year I played Higgins at the National's 50th birthday 
celebration. It was incredibly emotional backstage: there was star after star 
after star. Everyone was willing each other on, watching each other's 
performances. I came on quite late in the evening: I spent the whole night 
watching all these really famous people not fucking up – knowing that I was on 
next …

• Alex Jennings plays Willy Wonka in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory at the 
Theatre Royal Drury Lane, London WC2B, currently booking until 30 May 2015. 
Details:http://www.charlieandthechocolatefactory.com/ 
<http://www.charlieandthechocolatefactory.com/>
 