
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> issued a 
five-paragraph handwritten apology “for the mistakes that led to my suspension” 
on Tuesday without detailing specifics about his use of performance-enhancing 
drugs.

Ready to report back to the Yankees following a season-long suspension for 
violating baseball’s drug agreement and labor contract, Rodriguez apologized to 
team officials in person during a meeting earlier this month. They suggested he 
hold a news conference before the start of spring training this Friday and 
offered the use of Yankee Stadium, but Rodriguez declined.

Rodriguez held an apologetic news conference in 2009 at the team’s facility in 
Tampa, Florida, after he admitted using banned PEDs while with Texas from 
2001-03, before Major LeagueBaseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> had a drug agreement with 
penalties. But he did not want to face questions from the media about his 
latest involvement with PEDs – although he could be required to testify if his 
cousin, Yuri Sucart, and former University of Miami pitching coach Lazaro 
Collazo, go to trial on charges they committed crimes for their involvement 
with the Biogenesis of America drug clinic. Rodriguez admitted in court 
documents he used PEDs.
MLB (@MLB) 
Alex Rodriguez issues hand-written letter of apology to fans: 
http://t.co/oNkSUZeFC5 <http://t.co/oNkSUZeFC5> pic.twitter.com/ThI7AvGDqG 
<http://t.co/ThI7AvGDqG>
 <https://twitter.com/MLB/status/567747270972407810> February 17, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/MLB/status/567747270972407810> 
Commissioner Bud Selig suspended Rodriguez for 211 games in August 2013, 
citing conduct from 2010-12 uncovered during MLB’s investigation of Biogenesis, 
which was based not far from Rodriguez’s Florida home.

Rodriguez directed the players’ association to file a grievance and filed a 
lawsuit against the Yankees’ team doctor, accusing him of mishandling his 
medical care. After a hearing, arbitrator Fredric Horowitz reduced the penalty 
to the 2014 season, finding “clear and convincing evidence” Rodriguez used 
three banned substances and twice tried to obstruct the baseball’s drug 
investigation.

All the while proclaiming his innocence, Rodriguez sued MLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> and the union in an effort to overturn 
the penalty, then dropped the litigation and accepted the suspension. He is due 
to report to the Yankees on 25 February and start workouts the following day.

Rodriguez addressed his statement “to the fans” and said “I take full 
responsibility for the mistakes that led to my suspension for the 2014 season” 
without explaining what those mistakes were.

“I regret that my actions made the situation worse than it needed to be,” he 
said. “To Major League Baseball, the Yankees, the Steinbrenner family, the 
players’ association and you, the fans, I can only say I’m sorry.”

Rodriguez said “I accept the fact that many of you will not believe my apology 
or anything that I say at this point. I understand why, and that’s on me.”

“It was gracious of the Yankees to offer me the use of Yankee Stadium for this 
apology but I decided the next time I am in Yankee Stadium, I should be in 
pinstripes doing my job,” he said.

Anthony Bosch, who supplied PEDs to Alex Rodriguez, sentenced to four years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/17/anthony-bosch-who-supplied-peds-to-alex-rodriguez-sentenced-to-four-years>
Rodriguez made clear he doesn’t intend to publicly explain why he got involved 
with Biogenesis. The clinic’s owner, Anthony Bosch, was sentenced to four years 
in prison on Tuesday after pleading guilty in October to a charge of conspiracy 
to distribute testosterone.

New York says Rodriguez, who turns 40 in July, has been replaced by Chase 
Headley at third base and will have to compete for playing time at designated 
hitter and an infield backup. Rodriguez is owed $61m over the final three 
seasons of his contract, and the Yankees say they do not plan to pay five $6m 
bonuses detailed in a marketing agreement for historic achivements he may reach.

Before apologizing to the Yankees last week, Rodriguez met last month with Rob 
Manfred, who succeeded Selig as baseball commissioner on Jan. 26.

“I served the longest suspension in the history of the league for PED use,” 
Rodriguez said. “The commissioner has said the matter is over. The players’ 
association has said the same. The Yankees have said the next step is to play 
baseball. I’m ready to put this chapter behind me and play some ball. This game 
has been my single biggest passion since I was a teenager. When I go to spring 
training, I will do everything I can to be the best player and teammate 
possible, earn a spot on the Yankees and help us win.”
 