
Major League Baseball's evidence against Alex Rodriguez is so weak he 
shouldn't serve even one inning ofhis 211-game suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>
, the lawyer for the Yankees slugger said on Monday.

Joe Tacopina told NBC's Today show that the case will "never stand up" in 
court or before an arbitrator. The league recently suspended Rodriguez,along 
with more than a dozen other players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2013/aug/05/mlb-players-suspended-biogenesis-ped>
, for their relationship witha clinic accused of distributing 
performance-enhancing drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
. Rodriguez appealed the penalty and can play until there is a ruling. MLB's 
case is based on evidence from Biogenesis clinic founder Anthony Bosch, who 
Tacopina said has "no credibility".

"I know the evidence against Alex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez>, and I will tell you this: 
It will never stand up in a court of law or in an arbitration-panel courtroom. 
Never," Tacopina told host Matt Lauer. "Alex Rodriguez, when we confront this 
evidence, will have been found not responsible to the point where he shouldn't 
serve one inning of a suspension as opposed to 211 games. I know the evidence 
in this case."

Lauer asked Tacopina if A-Rod would have agreed to a 50-game ban, as 12 other 
players did without appealing.

"If he listens to me, if I were advising him based on the evidence and based 
on what I know about the evidence," Tacopina said, "I would tell him, 'Don't 
take one inning, Alex. Forget 50 games. Don't take one inning.'"

Rodriguez and Yankees management have been feuding, too. The club still owes 
him more than $80m through to 2017. Tacopina said the Yankees concealed results 
of an October MRI from Rodriguez that showed he had a torn hip socket.He played 
poorly and was benched in a postseason series against Detroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/oct/19/new-york-yankees-end-of-a-era>
. The Yankees general manager, Brian Cashman, said the team's medical personnel 
"did everything they possibly can to assist Alex". Cashman also said that 
Rodriguez never complained of any problem during the playoffs until manager Joe 
Girardi pulled him for a pinch-hitter in a key spot. "Did he ever say he didn't 
feel right? He never said it," the GM said.

"You see the attorney say what he said and Alex is talking to you guys after 
the game and it seems like when I'm reading the comments, it's like, 'I can't 
really comment.' It's as if he doesn't know anything about it, which we all 
know he really does," Cashman said on Sunday.

Asked why the Yankees would keep the MRI results from Rodriguez, Tacopina 
suggested it could be because they wanted to make Rodriguez into a "scapegoat".

"I don't understand why," Tacopina said. "I don't understand the motivation 
behind it."

The lawyer said the MRI was done on 11 October, after Game 4 of the Yankees' 
series against Baltimore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/11/raul-ibanez-two-home-runs-new-york-yankees>
. The three-time AL MVP went three for 25 with 12 strikeouts in the 2012 
postseason, in which the Yankees were swept in the ALCS by the Tigers.

This season, the 38-year-old was sidelined by a hip injury and a quadriceps 
problem until he made his season debut on 5 August,the same day MLB handed down 
his suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-major-league-baseball-peds>
. Rodriguez is hitting .319 with two homers and six RBIs this season. He went 
three for four with a solo homer in the Yankees' 9-6 win over the Red Sox on 
Sunday night,in which he was hit by a pitch from Ryan Dempster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/19/alex-rodriguez-ryan-dempster-pitch-yankees-sox>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0TxQSYWu61I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0TxQSYWu61I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0TxQSYWu61I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch this video here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0TxQSYWu61I>

After the game, Rodriguez said he had started the process of filing a 
grievance against the Yankees and that it was the responsibility of the 
players' union to file it formally.
 