
Independent arbitrator Fredric Horowitz has ruled that Alex Rodriguez will be 
suspended for the whole of the upcoming 162-game Major League Baseball season 
plus the 2014 playoffs should theNew York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> qualify.

The Yankees' slugger was initially suspended along with 12 other players in 
August for his part inthe Biogenesis scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
, in which MLB players were accused of involvement with performance enhancing 
drugs allegedly supplied by the now defunct South Florida anti-aging clinic.

Rodriguez was originally handed a 211-game suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>
, while11 other players received 50 game suspensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2013/aug/05/mlb-players-suspended-biogenesis-ped>
 and Ryan Braun was suspended for 65 games in late July. A suspension of 50 
games is the punishment listed in baseball's Joint Drug Agreement, a policy 
formed both by MLB and the Players' Union, for first time offenders.

A-Rod appealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/08/alex-rodriguez-appeals-peds-suspension>
 and, unlike the others players who immediately served their suspensions, he 
continued to play in 2013. The case was taken to independent arbitration and 
was heard after the end of the regular season after the Yankees were 
eliminated. Now the independent arbitrator has ruled and the star is still 
unhappy with the decision.

Rodriguez, who stands to lose all $25m of his 2014 salary, will be seeking a 
court injunction in order to allow him to suit up for Spring Training which is 
a month away. However, courts generally yield to arbitrator's rulings to settle 
internal labor disputes, so the three-time Most Valuable Player and his legal 
team now face an uphill battle to get him back on the field.

MLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> said in a statement:

"For more than five decades, the arbitration process under the Basic Agreement 
has been a fair and effective mechanism for resolving disputes and protecting 
player rights. While we believe the original 211-game suspension was 
appropriate, we respect the decision rendered by the Panel and will focus on 
our continuing efforts on eliminating performance-enhancing substances from our 
game."

The players' union responded to the decision:

"The MLBPA strongly disagrees with the award issued today in the grievance of 
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez>, even despite 
the Arbitration Panel’s decision to reduce the duration of Mr. Rodriguez’s 
unprecedented 211-game suspension. We recognize that a final and binding 
decision has been reached, however, and we respect the collectively-bargained 
arbitration process which led to the decision. In accordance with the 
confidentiality provisions of the JDA, the Association will make no further 
comment regarding the decision."

The 38-year third baseman issued a statement following the announcement:

The number of games sadly comes as no surprise, as the deck has been stacked 
against me from day one. This is one man’s decision, that was not put before a 
fair and impartial jury, does not involve me having failed a single drug test, 
is at odds with the facts and is inconsistent with the terms of the Joint Drug 
Agreement and the Basic Agreement, and relies on testimony and documents that 
would never have been allowed in any court in the United States because they 
are false and wholly unreliable. This injustice is MLB’s first step toward 
abolishing guaranteed contracts in the 2016 bargaining round, instituting 
lifetime bans for single violations of drug policy, and further insulating its 
corrupt investigative program from any variety defense by accused players, or 
any variety of objective review.

I have been clear that I did not use performance enhancing substances as 
alleged in the notice of discipline, or violate the Basic Agreement or the 
Joint Drug Agreement in any manner, and in order to prove it I will take this 
fight to federal court. I am confident that when a Federal Judge reviews the 
entirety of the record, the hearsay testimony of a criminal whose own records 
demonstrate that he dealt drugs to minors, and the lack of credible evidence 
put forth by MLB, that the judge will find that the panel blatantly disregarded 
the law and facts, and will overturn the suspension. No player should have to 
go through what I have been dealing with, and I am exhausting all options to 
ensure not only that I get justice, but that players’ contracts and rights are 
protected through the next round of bargaining, and that the MLB investigation 
and arbitration process cannot be used against others in the future the way it 
is currently being used to unjustly punish me.

I will continue to work hard to get back on the field and help the Yankees 
achieve the ultimate goal of winning another championship. I want to sincerely 
thank my family, all of my friends, and of course the fans and many of my 
fellow MLB players for the incredible support I received throughout this entire 
ordeal. 

Rodriguez signed a $275m 10-year contract with the Yankees in 2007. While he 
will be suspended for the whole of the 2014 season under the arbitration 
ruling, he would be expected to return in 2015.

A-Rod is still owed $61m, plus $6m bonus payments for reaching home run 
milestones. The Yankees are believed to be keen to rid themselves of the 
contract in order to reduce their wage bill.

Rodriguez has denied involvement in the Biogenesis scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/biogenesis-scandal> but has admitted to 
using PEDs when playing for the Texas Rangers between 2001 and 2003.

Major League Baseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> had hoped 
that the arbitration hearing would end the saga, but Rodriguez's desire to take 
the fight to federal court, the end hasn't yet been reached.

The Biogenesis scandal explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
 