
The battle between Alex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> and Major League Baseball is 
now heading to the federal courts.

The New York Yankee has launched a lawsuit asking a federal judge to throw out 
an arbitrator's decision to suspend the slugger for the whole of the 2014 
season over his alleged use of performance enhancing drugs.

Arbitrator Fredric Horowitz ruled on Saturday that baseball's highest paid 
player should miss all 162 games this year plus the playoffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/11/alex-rodriguez-suspended-for-2014-season-arbitrator-rules>
 should the Yankees reach them. The decision was a slight reduction of the 
211-game ban imposed by MLB last August over A-Rod's involvement withFlorida 
clinic Biogenesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
.

A-Rod is suing Major League Baseball and his own players' union, seeking to 
overturn the suspension which would cost him $25 million in salary, as well as 
severely affecting the slugger's attempt to break baseball's home run records. 

As part of the lawsuit filed in federal court in Manhattan, the Yankees third 
baseman made public Saturday's 33-decision by the arbitrator.

The arbitrator ruled there was "clear and convincing evidence" Rodriguez used 
three banned substances and twice tried to obstruct the sport's drug 
investigation.

"While this length of suspension may be unprecedented for a MLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> player, so is the misconduct he 
committed," Horowitz wrote in his decision.

On Sunday Anthony Bosch, the owner of Biogenesis, revealed details of his 
relationship with baseball's biggest star, claiming he even personally injected 
Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/12/biogenesis-owner-says-he-injected-peds-into-alex-rodriguez>
.

The sportsman claimed in his suit that the MLB Players Association "completely 
abdicated its responsibility to Mr. Rodriguez to protect his rights" and "this 
inaction by MLBPA created a climate in which MLB felt free to trample" on his 
confidentiality rights.

Rodriguez asked for the court to find MLB violated its agreements with the 
union, that the union breached its duty to represent him and to throw out 
Horowitz's decision.

When MLB commissioner Bud Selig acted against more than a dozen players last 
summer Rodriguez was the only one to be given a suspension of more than 65 games
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2013/aug/05/mlb-players-suspended-biogenesis-ped>
. The Yankee was the only player to appeal against his ban.

Rodriguez's lawsuit claims Horowitz exhibited "blatant partiality" toward MLB 
and that the league's initial 211-game ban was impermissibly long under the 
terms of baseball's labor agreement. Baseball's rules call for a 50-game ban 
for first-time offenders, but MLB lengthened Rodriguez's suspension for 
allegedly using drugs over several years and interfering with the 
investigation. 

The 38-year-old baseball star is currently fifth on baseball's all-time home 
run list with 654 and was once widely expected to challenge Barry Bonds' record 
of 762 home runs. Bonds was also repeatedly linked to doping. 

Monday's complaint represents a long-shot bid given that MLB and the players' 
union agreed on the arbitration process. Federal judges typically afford 
independent arbitrators deference under such circumstances. 

In his appeal Rodriguez said he did not use any illicit drugs supplied by 
Biogenesis and claimed he had been made a scapegoat. 

Rodriguez also filed another lawsuit against MLB in October, asserting that 
its investigators had acted unethically in the Biogenesis probe, including 
intimidating witnesses and buying evidence. That case is separate from the 
petition filed on Monday. 

The Yankees said in a statement on Saturday that they accepted Horowitz's 
decision. Under Rodriguez's contract, the team will still owe him $61 million 
for three more seasons after this year as well as potential bonus payments when 
he reaches certain home run milestones. 

Rodriguez has previously acknowledged using performance-enhancing drugs more 
than a decade ago when he was a member of the Texas Rangers, but has denied 
doing so since then. 

The Biogenesis scandal explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
 