
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> – locked in 
a secret hearing with Major League Baseball over his 211-game suspension over a 
doping scandal – is taking his fight to the courts.

Rodriguez launched a legal action on Thursday accusing MLB of buying the 
cooperation of Anthony Bosch, the head of the Biogenesis anti-aging clinic at 
the heart of the PEDs scandal, as part of a "witch hunt" to force him out of 
the game,the New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/05/sports/baseball/rodriguez-sues-mlb-claiming-a-witch-hunt.html?_r=0>
.

A-Rod, as the New York Yankees star is known, has been in a 
behind-closed-doors arbitration hearing at MLB HQ all week fighting his 
suspension - by far the biggest ofa series of bans handed out to a dozen 
players in August. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>

Now Rodriguez has decided to sue MLB, possibly indicating that the arbitration 
hearing may not reduce the length of the player's suspension, which threatens 
to end his career. Other players implicated inthe Biogenesis scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
 were suspended for less than 100 games, and mostly for 50 games.

The lawsuit, lodged at the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, claims: "MLB 
commissioner Allan H "Bud" Selig and other officials have - throughout at least 
all of 2013 - been engaged in tortiuous and egregious conduct with one, and 
only one, goal: to improperly marshall evidence that they hope to use to 
destroy the reputation and career of Alex Rodriguez, one of the most 
accomplished Major LeagueBaseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> 
players of all time."

Rodriguez's lawyers claim an investigator paid $150,000 in cash for records 
related to Rodriguez, which were allegedly stolen. Some of the cash was handed 
over in a bag in a Florida restaurant,the lawsuit says 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2013/10/04/sports/baseball/05rodriguez-document.html?ref=baseball>
.

The lawsuit does not address whether Rodriguez used banned substances. MLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> did not comment. The hearing and 
lawsuit come at a particularly inopportune time for baseball, threatening to 
overshadow the playoffs which also started this week.

Rodriguez said in a statement: "The entire legal dynamic is very complex, and 
my legal team is doing what they need to in order to vindicate me and pursue 
all of my rights. This matter is entirely separate from the ongoing 
arbitration. I look forward to the arbitration proceedings continuing, and for 
the day to come when I can share my story with the public and my supporters."

Rodriguez was sidelined with injuries for most of the season and, ironically, 
made his season debut on the day his drugs ban was handed down - against which 
he immediately appealed. Throughout the season Rodriguez has been involved in 
battles with both MLB and his team. Rodriguez is in the final years of a $275 
million contract with the Yankees. The club and the league have both repeatedly 
denied allegations that they are aiming to end the slugger's career.

Rodriguez's lawyers claim that MLB paid Bosch, the head of the now-closed 
Biogenesis clinic, a total of $5 million in monthly installments "to buy his 
cooperation". The lawyers said that baseball also promised to provide security 
for Bosch, cover his legal bills and indemnify him from civil liability over 
the case.

Commissioner Bud Selig was named as a defendant in the lawsuit, but the 
Yankees, who still owe Rodriguez $86 million, are not named.

The Biogenesis Scandal explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
 