
It was one of Channel 4's most reliable ratings winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/oct/18/come-dine-with-me-change-recipe>
 but aCome Dine With Me Halloween special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/oct/31/review-come-dine-with-me-halloween>
 could only manage just over 1 million viewers.

Not even the presence of cross-dressing cage fighter Alex Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lostinshowbiz/2012/oct/30/chantelle-houghton-sex-dungeon-twitter>
 could help the Channel 4 home cooking show put up a better fight against 
BBC2's Autumnwatch.

Come Dine With Me attracted an average of 1 million viewers on Channel 4 
between 8pm and 9pm on Wednesday, rising to 1.1 million, a 5.2% share, with 
Channel 4+1.

The second of BBC2's four-part Autumnwatch drew 2.4 million viewers including 
180,000 on BBC HD, also between 8pm and 9pm.

ITV1's All Star Mr & Mrs was the most-watched show in the 8pm hour, pulling in 
4.6 million viewers, a 21% share, ahead of BBC1's Watchdog, which drew 4.1 
million (18.8%).

The penultimate episode of the new incarnation of Dallas on Channel 5 picked 
up 967,000 viewers, a 4.2% share.

Channel 5's Southfork drama returned to UK TV with 2.9 million viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/06/who-watched-jr-dallas-channel-5?INTCMP=SRCH>
 (13.1%) back in September, but is likely to end its 10-apart run with a third 
of that.

Also at 9pm, BBC1's Brazil with Michael Palin and ITV1's Stephen Tompkinson 
drama DCI Banks were neck and neck with 4.2 million viewers apiece, the ITV1 
show nudging ahead when ITV1+1 is included, with a total of 4.4 million.

Grand Designs was by some distance Channel 4's most popular show of the night 
with 2.8 million viewers, a 12.2% share, between 9pm and 10pm.

It beat BBC2's How Safe Are Britain's Roads?, which drew 1.7 million viewers, 
a 7.3% share, including 127,000 on BBC HD.

Chelsea's thrilling 5-4 win over Manchester United in the Capital One Cup 
proved a big draw for Sky Sports 1. Coverage of the match, won in extra time, 
averaged 1.56 million viewers from 7pm, peaking with 2.28 million.

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk/> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC and some other channels including Sky1) and same day 
timeshifted (recorded) viewing, but excluding on demand, or other – unless 
otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, ITV1, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally 
include ratings for their HD simulcast services, unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 