
Much has been said and written recently about both the salacious aspects of 
Alexander McQueen’s lifestyle and about the complex, densely referenced mind 
which conceived some of the most beautiful dresses of our times.


Preview night of Savage Beauty by Alexander McQueen – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/mar/12/preview-night-of-savage-beauty-by-alexander-mcqueen-in-pictures>
Both these angles miss the point. The Savage Beauty exhibition, which opens at 
the V&A on Saturday, doesn’t. Which is why it is not just an accomplished show 
or a beautiful one, but – much more importantly – a brilliant and absorbing 
experience. Because it doesn’t really matter whether McQueen was a tawdry 
tabloid figure or some kind of wise sartorial truthsayer. What matters is that 
McQueen was a larger-than-life character who had not only a loud voice but 
something original to say, who made clothes so beautiful they make you want to 
laugh out loud, so exquisite you want to stroke them, and yet so fierce that 
sometimes, walking around this exhibition, the mannequins look just a tiny bit 
like they might bite.

This is categorically not the sort of fashion exhibition in which clothes are 
placed reverentially onto pedestals with long captions explaining craftsmanship 
and history. (Thank god for that, because McQueen would have hated it.) The 
rooms are categorised by visual theme (exoticism, nature, Victorian gothic) and 
tell two stories side by side: that of McQueen’s career, and of what it was 
like to go to a McQueen catwalk show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Falexander-mcqueen-grab-attendees-v-and-a-victoria-albert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426181999777%2F55d80e92-22e0-4be1-9664-251f1d95e7e0-1574x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20McQueen's%20Savage%20Beauty%3A%20the%20best-dressed%20haunted%20house%20you%20will%20ever%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Falexander-mcqueen-grab-attendees-v-and-a-victoria-albert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20McQueen%27s%20Savage%20Beauty%3A%20the%20best-dressed%20haunted%20house%20you%20will%20ever%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Falexander-mcqueen-grab-attendees-v-and-a-victoria-albert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426181999777%2F55d80e92-22e0-4be1-9664-251f1d95e7e0-1574x2040.jpeg>
 From the Savage Beauty press preview, 12 March 2015. Photograph: Rex 
McQueen’s life story begins and is rooted in London. The first room is 
sheathed in huge concrete blocks that recall the Gatliff Road warehouse where 
his first shows were staged; the second, all grey walls and skylights, 
resembles the dingy Hoxton studio of his early days. (Next to the infamous 
bumster trousers is a McQueen quote: “You take inspiration from the street, 
with the trousers so low. You don’t need to go to India, you can find it in 
places like Bethnal Green and Brick Lane.”) The rooms become grander and more 
sumptuous as the show tracks McQueen’s rise, designing Givenchy haute couture 
and showing at Paris fashion week: the concrete and grey morphs into wood 
panelling and gilt frames, the industrial skylights are replaced by stagey 
spotlights.

The heart of this show are two rooms in the middle, the Cabinet of Curiosities 
and Pepper’s Ghost. The Cabinet of Curiosities is a double-height room divided 
into a multitude of box frames for individual showpieces. At the centre of the 
room, the Spray Paint Dress in which Shalom Harlow was decorated/defaced by 
robots at the finale of a show rotates on a mannequin, like a tiny ballerina in 
a child’s jewellery box. The walls are stacked with wonders: a headpiece in the 
shape of a peacock, with a wooden body and coral tail; a skirt constructed like 
a foldable wooden fan, with layered shards of birch plywood, embroidered with 
intricate punch-holes; a medieval suit of armour made of crystal. It is an 
immensely powerful room in telling the McQueen story, because standing in it 
you feel both the thrill of a soaring imagination, and the terror of descent 
into madness. There is something oppressive, almost nightmarish, about a head 
rattling with so many visions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Falexander-mcqueen-grab-attendees-v-and-a-victoria-albert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426182653448%2F83e2634c-7842-4e93-9e35-ccf36c52e05b-2060x1213.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexander%20McQueen's%20Savage%20Beauty%3A%20the%20best-dressed%20haunted%20house%20you%20will%20ever%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Falexander-mcqueen-grab-attendees-v-and-a-victoria-albert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexander%20McQueen%27s%20Savage%20Beauty%3A%20the%20best-dressed%20haunted%20house%20you%20will%20ever%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Falexander-mcqueen-grab-attendees-v-and-a-victoria-albert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F12%2F1426182653448%2F83e2634c-7842-4e93-9e35-ccf36c52e05b-2060x1213.jpeg>
 A member of staff puts last-minute touches to a mannequin during a media 
preview, 12 March 2015. Photograph: Alastair Grant/AP 
Pepper’s Ghost recreates the finale to the Widows of Culloden collection. It 
is an illusion, in which a fairy-sized vision of Kate Moss is conjured up out 
of thin air by a Victorian technique using projectors and mirrors, which at the 
time tricked viewers into believing they were seeing ghosts. It is especially 
poignant now, as a reminder of the other character who is here but not here: 
that of McQueen himself.

In the entrance hall, before the first room, there is a black box dominated by 
a vast hologram in which McQueen’s face morphs back and forth into a human 
skull. The image was first used as an invite to one of his shows, and there is 
a cacophony of backstage noise: chattering, music, clattering footsteps, the 
sound of McQueen himself shouting over the top. The sinister atmosphere that he 
loved to create is conjured up at every turn. There are walls plastered with 
bones, as if built brick-by-brick out of skeletons; there are mannequins 
wearing leather balaclavas with zippered smiles. There are walls of show 
videos, which give a sense of their unique atmosphere: the football-terrace 
racket of photographers shouting at models as they snarl and strut.


The clothes themselves are displayed with wit and charm. Frock coats from 
McQueen’s student collection sit on simple metal stands: this tailoring, after 
all, is the spine on which the McQueen world was built. Seen up close, what 
strikes you about many of the clothes is how beautiful, howsexy, they are. A 
leather bodice with fox fur sleeves overlain with a leather harness looks less 
harsh, and more sensual, than you can imagine from photographs. And there are 
pieces which are mind-blowing simply in the fact of someone having conceived of 
them: for instance, an American football helmet and shoulderpiece, made from 
fibreglass painted with Japanese koi fish and blue-and-white waves and 
snow-capped mountains, like a kimono.

Savage Beauty is the best-dressed haunted house you will ever visit. A ghost 
train ride in terrifyingly high heels, with Kate Moss as Tinkerbell as the 
train’s conductor. Seventy thousand advance tickets have already been sold, 
beating the previous V&A record set by the David Bowie exhibition. But even if 
you have to get up unfashionably early to get in, you should go.
 