
Alexander Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev> has 
asked the founder of the Independent to seek a buyer for the newspaper, its 
Sunday sister and their cut-price stablemate, the i, 28 years after the daily 
title was launched.

Andreas Whittam Smith, recently appointed as chairman of the publishing 
company behind the three papers, has been asked to quietly sound out 
prospective suitors. The titles currently make a loss estimated at £10m a year.

They have informally been available for a deal since late 2012, when Lebedev, 
a former KGB agent, stated publicly that he was looking foran investor to take 
a minority stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/29/alexander-lebedev-backer-independent-profit>
. However it is understood that Whittam Smith's new mandate includes seeking an 
outright sale of all, or parts, of the portfolio.

Any deal would not include the London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>, which is 76.1% 
owned by Lebedev, or London Live, the paper's soon-to-launch TV channel for the 
capital.

The jewel in the crown is the profitable i. It was launched in October 2010 
and now has a circulation of 300,000. The company is thought to be open to 
discussions about selling thei <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> 
separately. But it is not clear what impact its sale would have on the 
economics of the Independents.

Plummeting sales have put the Independent titles in the most precarious 
position of all the UK's national newspapers.

The Independent's average daily sale is about 68,000 copies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/06/daily-mail-overtakes-sun-sales>, 
but only 50,000 are sold at the full cover price of £1.40. Similarly the 
Independent on Sunday sells 105,000 copies, but only half of those are at full 
price.

Losses at all three newspapers have been slashed from close to £30m when 
Lebedev acquired the titles from Irish owner Independent News & Media in 2010, 
to just under £10m last year.

There is understood to have been some interest from foreign suitors in the 
past, particularly from the Middle East and Russia, but none have progressed to 
serious talks over the last 18 months.

None of the most obvious potential trade buyers in the UK are thought to be 
particularly keen on the Independent or theIndependent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday>. Daily Mirror parent 
Trinity Mirror and Guardian Media Group, parent of the Guardian, are primarily 
concentrating on a digital strategy. And Daily Mail & General Trust, which 
publishes the Daily Mail, has been more focused on selling print assets, such 
as regional group Northcliffe, and building Mail Online.

"It is clear and it is true that both Alexander and [his son and co-owner] 
Evgeny Lebedev would welcome additional investment in [parent] Independent 
Print Limited," said Andrew Mullins, managing director of the Independent, 
Evening Standard and head of London Live. "A long shot scenario could be that a 
new purchaser could be found … however, the most likely investment scenario is 
that someone may partner with the Lebedevs."

Mullins added that he believed that the best option was to keep the portfolio, 
including the Evening Standard and London Live, intact. "The Independent's best 
chance of thriving is to be tied into a multi-platform, multi-brand offering 
where it can share costs and benefit from trading scale," he said. "I wouldn't 
recommend changing this model."

Neither Alexander Lebedev nor his Moscow spokesperson could be reached for 
comment on the sale plans. It is believed that the businessman is currently in 
Africa with Evgeny Lebedev.
 