
Alex Rodriguez passed Willie Mays for fourth on the career home run list, 
connecting for No 661 Thursday night and helping theNew York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> beat the Baltimore Orioles 
4-3.


The Yankees star hit a liner off Chris Tillman into a secure area just to the 
left of Monument Park in center field in the third inning to give New York a 
3-2 lead. A-Rod sent a soaring shot in the first that Delmon Young caught by 
reaching over the top of the wall in right field for a sacrifice fly.

Next up for Rodriguez: Babe Ruth at 714 home runs.

The Yankees, who said they will not pay a $6m bonus after he matched Mays on 
Friday in Boston, put a message on the main videoboard saying, “661 Home Runs.
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> just 
surpassed Willie Mays for sole possession of 4th place on baseball’s all-time 
home runs list.”

The slugger pumped his fist as he rounded first base, and fans gave Rodriguez 
a standing ovation as he was greeted warmly in the dugout by his team-mates. 
Mark Teixeira stepped out of the batter’s box as the cheers swelled. Rodriguez 
briefly emerged from the dugout and waved to the crowd with both hands above 
his head.

Rodriguez, who turns 40 in July, moved into a tie for fourth in the AL this 
season with seven home runs. He didn’t play last year while serving a drug 
suspension.

The Yankees and A-Rod have a marketing agreement that calls for $6m each for 
up to five achievements, payable within 15 days of designation by the team. But 
New York has said the marketing possibilities were ruined after Rodriguez 
served his performance-enhancing drug penalty for his involvement in the 
Biogenesis scandal.

The accomplishments were contemplated to be homers 660, 714, 755 (Hank Aaron), 
762 (Barry Bonds) and 763 as he moved up baseball’s list.

No payment likely would trigger a grievance on Rodriguez’s behalf by the 
players’ union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/04/meet-alex-rodriguez-the-savior-of-the-little-man>
. Without a settlement, the case would be heard by an arbitrator.
 