

Alex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/08/alex-jennings-monologue-my-fair-lady-henry-higgins>
 is Alan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview>
. That’s what the film posters for The Lady in the Van would say if Jennings 
had the profile he deserves. But he doesn’t,so Maggie Smith gets top billing 
<http://www.impawards.com/intl/uk/2015/lady_in_the_van.html> – while Jennings 
gets to push the custard-coloured van.

He accepts that this is just the way of the world: when it comes to fame, film 
and TV always trump theatre. “I’m grown up about it,” he says, “though it’s 
slightly galling when you see ‘The Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/lady-in-the-van-review-maggie-smith-makes-pitstop-at-oscars-drive-thru>
, starring Maggie Smith andJames Corden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden>’.” Corden only appears in 
one brief scene. But it’s impossible for Jennings to resent Smith’s star 
billing. “She’s a great actress and makes you want to up your game. I’ve grown 
up revering her and Alan. I have to pinch myself that we’ve become friends.”

Lady in the Van review: Maggie Smith makes another pitstop at Oscars drive-thru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/lady-in-the-van-review-maggie-smith-makes-pitstop-at-oscars-drive-thru>
Everyone must know this story by now. How the irascible sixtysomething Miss 
Shepherd – plus her van – pitched up outside Alan Bennett’s house in Camden, 
north London, in the early 1970s and stayed, mostly in his driveway, for the 
best part of two decades until her death. Bennett related the story and their 
relationship (an enigmatic, edgy friendship of two lonely misfits) in theLondon 
Review of Books in 1989 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v11/n20/alan-bennett/the-lady-in-the-van>. It was then 
published as a slim volume, was turned into a play (with Smith garlanded for 
her Miss Shepherd), and has now re-emerged as a film – directed, like the play, 
by Nicholas Hytner.

Shooting took place in Bennett’s old house in Camden, and Jennings says he was 
around a great deal, changing lines and giving occasional pieces of advice. 
“He’d come cycling down Gloucester Crescent. Sometimes Jonathan Miller [a 
long-time neighbour] would wander into shot. And everybody in the crescent had 
their own stories.”


When you watch the film, it’s hard to imagine how Shepherd could have lived in 
the back of a van for 15 years; and hard to understand how Bennett could have 
borne her spectral presence for so long. The film is mostly played as comedy, 
but underpinning it is a tragedy of sorts. Do we celebrate Shepherd’s unbending 
independence or pity the degradation of her final years?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff93d55333a03aed77ddc7f57c5d3775701805d03%2F0_92_4450_2671%2F4450.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alex%20Jennings%20on%20playing%20Alan%20Bennett%3A%20'He%20wanted%20me%20to%20be%20tougher'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alex%20Jennings%20on%20playing%20Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%27He%20wanted%20me%20to%20be%20tougher%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff93d55333a03aed77ddc7f57c5d3775701805d03%2F0_92_4450_2671%2F4450.jpg>
 Alex Jennings as Alan Bennett with Maggie Smith in The Lady in the Van. 
“We did two weeks’ rehearsal early on – just me, Nick, Alan and Maggie – and 
it was shocking just talking about it,” says Jennings. “We asked Alan, ‘How did 
you allow this to happen?’ He said, ‘Well, she didn’t really impinge.’” But how 
did she bear those conditions? “I don’t think anybody knows. She was scary and 
railing at the world. There’s a great bit in the book when she terrified 
Vincent Price [who was paying Bennett a visit].” She turned her powerlessness 
into a strange sort of tyranny that helped make her life bearable.

Jennings was offered the part of Bennett in the play, but turned it down. He 
did, however, go on to portray the author in 2012’s Untold Stories,two short 
plays based on Bennett’s boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/17/hymn-cocktail-sticks-review>. 
“When we did that, Alan was on at me not to be too plaintive or cosy. He 
doesn’t want to be seen as the sort of Wind in the Willows, moley kind of 
person some people think he is. He wanted me to be tougher with it.” Bennett, 
as he has got older, has also been more willing to open up: in the film, Miss 
Shepherd is very suspicious of the young men he occasionally has round for 
unexplained meetings. I don’t recall that being in the book.

Jennings has become something of a specialist at portraying real people. He 
gave a revelatory performance as a politically astute George Bush inDavid 
Hare’s Stuff Happens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/sep/11/theatre.politicaltheatre> in 
2004 and was a surprisingly sympathetic Prince Charles in Stephen Frears’s film 
The Queen in 2006. He says the key is to act, not impersonate: the characters 
mustn’t be “Spitting Image puppets”. He researches carefully (his next 
real-life role is the Duke of Windsor inPeter Morgan’s monumental Netflix 
series The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/13/netflix-crown-drama-buckingham-palace>
), but then tries to “let it go” and allow the character to take flight.

Why now, in his late 50s, is he playing so many real people? “I suppose I’ve 
always had vocal dexterity. Early on in my career, I did 18 months in BBC radio 
drama, where you’re just playing with your voice. I think I’ve got a good ear.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbaeffbcf6053456db2ebb9ed43b05c4365c2d58%2F0_0_1250_600%2F1250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alex%20Jennings%20on%20playing%20Alan%20Bennett%3A%20'He%20wanted%20me%20to%20be%20tougher'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alex%20Jennings%20on%20playing%20Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%27He%20wanted%20me%20to%20be%20tougher%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbaeffbcf6053456db2ebb9ed43b05c4365c2d58%2F0_0_1250_600%2F1250.jpg>
 Alex Jennings as Hamlet with Susannah York as Gertrude in the RSC’s New York 
production of the tragedy. 
Jennings’s great theatrical claim to fame is that he is the only person to 
have won Olivier best actor awards for comedy (Too Clever By Half in 1988), 
drama (Peer Gynt, 1996), and a musical (My Fair Lady, 2003). But it may be that 
his theatre success has held back his film career. “If I’d held out for a bit 
more film work, perhaps I could have done more,” he says. “But I wanted to play 
Hamlet.”

In the late 1990s, soon after he had played Hamlet (in a controversial Royal 
Shakespeare Company production in New York 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/05/23/theater/theater-review-trying-to-make-hamlet-less-depressing.html>
 that tried to make the tragedy more upbeat), Jennings had a go at breaking 
into Hollywood and madeThe Hunley <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0162897/>, a TV 
movie set in the American civil war. Starring Donald Sutherland, it told the 
true story of the manually propelled submarine CSS Hunley, during the 1864 
siege of Charleston. The film was well received and Jennings loved Los Angeles 
– he says he’s a sucker for film-star chic – but his partner, Lesley Moors, was 
less enamoured of the lifestyle, and he was being sent to do screen tests for 
“completely ridiculous stuff – things like Chicago gangsters”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6061d1622da0a2eed555de8b3f08138f5c30a59%2F0_71_2464_1480%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alex%20Jennings%20on%20playing%20Alan%20Bennett%3A%20'He%20wanted%20me%20to%20be%20tougher'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alex%20Jennings%20on%20playing%20Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%27He%20wanted%20me%20to%20be%20tougher%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Falex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6061d1622da0a2eed555de8b3f08138f5c30a59%2F0_71_2464_1480%2F2464.jpg>
 Alex Jennings as George W Bush in Stuff Happens at the Olivier in 2004. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Jennings is hoping more film parts will now follow, and is being cautious 
about taking on any long runs in the theatre. He recently finished a year-long 
stint as Willy Wonka in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory in the West End, 
taking a two-month break to shootThe Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lady-in-the-van>. At the theatre’s request, 
he did the show at half-term, which he says did not go down well with Smith, 
who felt he was spreading himself too thinly.

“I love to keep working,” he says, “but you have to wait and you have to be 
brave. There’s a bit of Willy Wonka money left, but my life has always been 
like that. At every level, it’s precarious. You can be the biggest star, but if 
you have a couple of turkeys it can all go a bit wobbly.”

Jennings manages to be both unassuming and intensely competitive. He has said 
his ambition is to appear on Desert Island Discs: he tells me (I assume 
seriously) that he’d also like to be on Strictly Come Dancing – and he realises 
these great accolades (worth more now than a knighthood or peerage) will only 
come if he becomes a bankable film name. Being a triple Olivier winner is 
lovely, but Ibsen can only get you so far.

 * The Lady in the Van goes on general release on 13 November.
 