
Pokey LaFarge <http://youtu.be/rOzmOZQdcYY> looks and sounds like a man whose 
watch stopped in 1936. But not only is he the only person on the Womadelaide 
bill to be wearing a collar and tie, he’s possibly the most erudite artist on 
site. He’s keen to talk guitars (he’s cradling the 1946 arch-top that inspired 
the songs on hisself-titled album released on Jack White’s Third Man label 
<http://thirdmanrecords.com/video/pokey-lafarge>) but he’s equally at home 
discussing Norman Mailer.

LaFarge hasn’t seen Matthew Barney’s River of Fundament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/matthew-barneys-river-of-fundament-what-was-that-all-about-then>
 – the seven-hour cloacal movie that polarised opinion at this year’s Adelaide 
festival – but he has, remarkably, read Mailer’s epic novel Ancient Evenings, 
which inspired it. Or at least attempted to. “I wasn’t quite so keen on that 
one,” he admits. “But The Executioner’s Song is one of my favourite novels of 
all time.’

The St Louis-based singer first became obsessed by beat writing, then worked 
his way backwards, via Mailer, to Steinbeck and Hemingway. His music traces a 
similar line through jazz, blues and Western swing and a storming set on the 
Speaker’s Corner stage causes a minor revolution. Bizarrely, he’s been booked 
into a corner of the site usually reserved for political discussion and where 
dancing is not allowed. The security guards have a battle trying to prevent 
people standing up. It takes approximately 32 bars of LaFarge’s irresistible 
dust-bowl swing before security admits defeat.

Aboriginal culture goes back many thousands of years; Aboriginal rock not 
quite so far. But the pioneers of the genre,Coloured Stone 
<https://www.facebook.com/ColouredStoneOfficialPage>, celebrate their 35th 
anniversary this year as the longest established Indigenous rock band in 
Australia. Their afternoon set was the perfect soundtrack to the fierce heat, 
combining sparkling guitar with earth-shaking didgeridoo to create a sound that 
is both danceably sunny and deeply spiritual at the same time.

Azadoota <http://www.azadoota.com/bio.html>, a remarkable Sydney-based 
Australian-Iraqi fusion outfit, have not missed a single Womadelaide since the 
event was launched 21 years ago. As members of the audience, that is. The band, 
led by the irrepressible 60-year old singer-percussionist Robin Zirwanda, 
deserved their moment in the sun, instantly connecting with the crowd despite 
singing in ancient Assyrian.

Brooklyn-based Red Baraat <http://www.redbaraat.com/news.html> must surely be 
the only Punjabi rock band to feature a sousaphone in the line-up – think of 
Bellowhead doing Bhangra and you’re halfway there. They’ve left sub-zero 
temperatures in the US to perform to an appreciative crowd who have done the 
sensible thing and are wearing hats. The hard core at the front do the most 
sensible thing of all, which is to pour a bottle of water into it first.
 