
Algeria’s government has published two significant draft constitutional 
reforms that seem intended to send out a message to critics of the country’s 
commitment to democracy.

Last Monday the Algerian presidency published plans to restrict serving 
presidents to two terms of office; it also wants to make Amazigh, spoken by the 
country’s indigenous Berber minority, an official language.

The government said the plans were intended to round off a series of reforms 
announced in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/15/algeria-arab-and-middle-east-protests>
, following theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2011/mar/22/middle-east-protest-interactive-timeline>
. The restrictions on the presidency will cancel out a change made in 2008 that 
enabled Algeria’s long-serving president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, to stand for a 
third term. Bouteflika won afourth term of office in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/28/abdelaziz-bouteflika-algerian-president-election>
, amid widespreadallegations of electoral fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/17/algeria-president-elections-arab-spring>
.

Amazigh was granted “national language” status in 2002 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/mar/21/languages.highereducation> 
and its recognition rewards the efforts of a long campaign hinging on the 
definition of Algeria’s national identity. In 1949 the issue triggered a 
serious crisis in the Algerian independence movement. The controversy was 
papered over when the war of independence started shortly afterwards, but 
resurfaced when independence was proclaimed in 1962.Hocine Aït Ahmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/hocine-ait-ahmed-burial-of-algerian-independence-leader>
, one of the original leaders of the independence movement, advocated a 
democratic state guaranteeing political pluralism. But his ideas were soon 
thwarted by the authoritarian Pan-Arab credo that prevailed under presidents
Ahmed Ben Bella <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/11/ahmed-ben-bella> 
(1963-65) and Houari Boumédiène (1965-1976).

Libya's Berbers join the revolution in fight to reclaim ancient identity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/28/libya-amazigh-identity-tribes-gaddafi>
The campaign in favour of the Amazigh language dovetailed naturally with the 
broader struggle for civil liberties, gaining fresh impetus in the 1980s with 
theBerber cultural movement <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jun/20/1>. 
In the early 1990s the authorities grudgingly started to acknowledge its 
importance. “It took almost half a century, starting from the crisis in 1949, 
for the Algerian constitution [of 1996] to begin to draw up a more balanced, 
realistic map of the nation’s identity, though there is still a great deal of 
ambiguity,” the nationalist militant, then leader of the Algerian Communist 
party, Sadek Hadjeres, wrote in 1998.

The plans for constitutional reform include setting up an Algerian Academy of 
Berber Language, tasked with consolidating its new status as an official 
tongue. Supporters say it would put an end to a pointless source of division, 
giving rise to various political ills the country could well do without.

Some opposition parties have voiced doubts about the reform, but the overall 
feeling is any form of progress is worth having.

Although there is a consensus on Amazigh, the move to restrict presidential 
powers was greeted with cynicism. The new article in the constitution would 
only allow the incumbent to be re-elected once and rules out any further 
changes to the rules.

Explaining the reform, Ahmed Ouyahia, the former Algerian prime minister and 
now Bouteflika’s principal private secretary, claimed that the previous 
extension, in 2008, had come in response to “demands from civil society”. 
Bouteflika’s candidacy in 2009, and again in 2014, had, he asserted, 
represented a “sacrifice” on the president’s part.

The reform will also enlarge parliament’s powers and set up an independent 
body to supervise elections, headed by a non-aligned public figure. But the 
opposition is unconvinced.

Ali Benflis, a former prime minister who twice stood against Bouteflika in 
elections, condemned the constitutional changes as a ploy “simply to buy time 
and stay in power”.

This article appeared in Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>, 
which incorporates material from Le Monde
 