
Paris, November 1
There was a sudden flare-up of terrorism last night in Algeria, which had 
hitherto seemed immune to the infection on its two flanks in both Tunisia and
Morocco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>. There were about thirty 
outrages in the course of the night, causing seven deaths. A good many of them 
seemed to have been amateurish affairs in which home-made bombs of small 
efficacy were used, but a number were obviously much more serious.

All the incidents occurred within an hour or two from one end of Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> to the other, proving that the 
whole outburst had been competently organised. The Governor-General immediately 
asked for reinforcements from France and these were granted without the 
slightest delay. Three companies of Public Security Guards, i.e. about six 
hundred men, are on their way out by air and three battalions of parachutists.

The most serious incident was an attack on a police post at Batna, south of 
Constantine. Here an officer and two policemen were killed. Near Algiers two 
night watchmen were killed and a number of buildings set on fire. In Algiers 
itself a bomb exploded outside the local headquarters of the French 
Broadcasting System and others at a power station in the neighbourhood of the 
town.

Population Calm
The first communiqué issued by the Ministry of the Interior (which is 
responsible for Algeria) obviously understated the gravity of the outbreak, 
which it attributed to “individuals or small isolated groups.” A communiqué 
issued later in the day had a rather more realistic note. Even if, as this 
communiqué states, “the most complete calm reigns among the entire population” 
it remains true that a bold and effective organisation is at work.

The trouble is that even those sections of the Moslem population which 
disapprove of the outrages may hesitate about helping the authorities to 
suppress them, either through fear or because they consider the terrorists 
patriots, even if misguided ones. No scheme for furtherpolitical change in 
Algeria <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algerian_War> is at the moment under 
consideration. The country is still living under the regime of autonomy 
established shortly after the war, with an Assembly consisting half of members 
elected by the European community and half elected by the Moslem community.


In point of fact, however, the elections in the Moslem colleges outside the 
big towns are obviously quite unrepresentative. It was believed that Algeria 
would remain quiet for the time being largely owing to the fact that since the 
war emigration from Algeria toFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> 
has been free, and this provides a substantial outlet for the surplus 
population.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZFl_xU6HCvI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZFl_xU6HCvI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZFl_xU6HCvI&media=>
 A documentary on the Algerian war of independence 
Meanwhile in Tunisia the situation is still dominated by the fact that the 
fellaghas continue to carry on guerrilla warfare in various parts of the 
provinces, even though theNéo-Destour 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neo_Destour> is joining in the Tunisian 
Government, which is engaged in fairly hopeful negotiations with the French 
Government for the establishment of a regime of complete internal autonomy. The 
Néo-Destour does not approve of the fellaghas but also dares not treat them as 
enemies of the public peace.


The Resident-General in Tunis, General De La Tour, is in Paris for 
consultation on new schemes to induce the fellaghas to lay down their arms. New 
proposals for an amnesty combined with public works in the disturbed 
neighbourhood are under discussion. Two of the Tunisian ministers who were in 
Paris for the negotiations have returned to Tunis to discuss this and other 
problems with their colleagues in the Government.

An Outbreak in Morocco
In Morocco there has been a renewed outbreak of indiscriminate terrorism in 
Casablanca. Two Moroccans opened fire yesterday on a French business man as he 
was supervising the loading of a lorry. He and his Algerian chauffeur were 
wounded and the two Moroccans who were loading were killed. Elsewhere in the 
town a Moroccan notary was shot dead in his office and the son of a sheikh (i 
e., of a Moroccan official working under the orders of the present regime) was 
shot at from behind and wounded. Three of the eighteen Moroccans wounded in a 
bomb outrage in the public market have died.

Fourteen arrests were carried out two days ago in connection with arms 
smuggling from Spanish to French Morocco and 22 more have been made in Agadir 
in connection with a recent attack.


The Resident-General to Morocco, M Lacoste, has just returned to Rabat from 
Paris to renew his attempt to get conversations going about political reform, 
in spite of the failure so far to make any advance towards a solution of the 
dynastic question. The dethroned Sultan, now in Madagascar, will not begin to 
discuss a solution unless he is brought back to Europe. Hitherto some solution 
of the dynastic question has seemed to be the necessary condition for any 
political progress in Morocco.


The disastrous error committed by the Laniel Government 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Laniel>, and in particular M. Bidault, in 
first tolerating the agitation against the Sultan and then dethroning him under 
pressure from those responsible for it, is more and more apparent. This makes 
it the more strange that M. Bidault himself is demanding a debate on the 
Moroccan question.

 