
The Baileys prize-winning novelist Ali Smith has defended the Human Rights 
Act, describing government plans to replace it with aUK bill of rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/uk-bill-of-rights> as “evolution going 
backwards”.

Delivering the second annual English PEN HG Wells lecture, the Scottish writer 
spoke of her despair at the treatment of migrants and told her audience at the
Edinburgh international book festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edinburgh-book-festival> that the abolition 
of the act should be “on everyone’s watch”.

Speaking 100 days after David Cameron’s election victory, Smith recalled her 
feelings when the government said it intended to scrap theHuman Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>.

“That’s the word they always use,” she said. “But God help me, I find it an 
obscenity, those words ‘scrap’ and ‘human’ and ‘rights’ all together in any 
sentence. That’s what I call evolution going backwards.

“The government keeps calling it Labour’s Human Rights Act. It’s not. It’s 
ours. It was a cross-party formation. It belongs to all of us. They want to 
replace it with a British bill of rights, as if all nationalities are equal, 
but some are more equal than others.”

Cameron’s description of migrants attempting to reach the UK via Calais as a 
“swarm of people” part of wider “governmental xenophobia and moral immaturity”.

Offering “to be HG Wells’s voice today”, Smith raced through her 50-minute 
lecture to highlight how many of his predictions came to pass, ranging from 
mass surveillance to global warming. He even outlined a version of the internet 
in the 1930s, Smith continued, though she confessed the contemporary version of 
Wells’s World Brain often leaves her “staring in disbelief at my computer 
screen”.

Wells’s vision of a new and free world encyclopaedia intended to ultimately 
bring about world peace has not come to pass exactly as he imagined, Smith 
continued, but “he was as human beings are: mistaken and messy about lots of 
things”.

Neither Wells nor Smith could have predicted the year she has had. Appointed 
CBE in theNew Year honours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/30/new-year-honours-2015-damehoods-rantzen>
 list, the Inverness-born writer has won a hat-trick of awards for her novel 
How To Be Both, taking home theCosta novel award 
<http://www.scotsman.com/lifestyle/books/ali-smith-wins-costa-novel-of-year-prize-1-3652205>
, theGoldsmiths prize <http://www.gold.ac.uk/goldsmiths-prize/> and, in June, 
the £30,000Baileys women’s prize for fiction 
<http://www.womensprizeforfiction.co.uk/2015/ali-smith-wins-the-2015-baileys-womens-prize-for-fiction>
.


It is a novel that Baileys judge and Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti 
predicted “people will devour and explore and re-read long after I am dead.”

Liberty itself, Smith pointed out, was formed in 1934 by a group including HG 
Wells, originally named the Council of Civil Liberties. He was also a president 
of PEN, which set up the lectures in his honour last year.

On a personal note, Smith said she vividly remembered being 16 years old and 
plucking The History of Mr Polly by HG Wells from the shelf of her local 
bookshop.


“‘A living did not matter, unless there were things to live for.’ I knew that 
paragraph off by heart,” Smith said. “It had struck home with me at 16. It was 
to do with having your own voice and not accepting a life that wasn’t for you. 
And here’s another one: ‘Nothing can pull our minds together as powerfully as 
books.’”
 