
Ali Smith’s door is ajar. She lives in Cambridge, on a half-hidden terrace of 
tiny Victorian cottages. The gardens are opposite, the fences between them long 
since removed. It’s late September, and Smith’s beloved apple tree is still 
swagged with fruit. Inside, a green sweater slung over her shoulders, she 
beckons me upstairs to her studio to catch the last of the sun.

She’s only just finished her new novel, Autumn, the first in a shape-shifting 
seasonal quartet about time and history, art and love and the state the state 
is in. Its now is right now: turbulentBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> Britain, where people scan 
the papers on their phones “to catch up on the usual huge changes there’ve been 
in the last half hour”.

Maybe an accelerated news cycle requires accelerated art. A manuscript usually 
takes a good year to be birthed into the world as a book, butAutumn sped 
through the presses in a matter of weeks. I can’t remember reading a novel that 
felt so firmly footed in the present. Thestabbing of MP Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
,children’s bodies washing on to beaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/shocking-image-of-drowned-syrian-boy-shows-tragic-plight-of-refugees>
: all the nightmarish news of this summer has filtered into a narrative Smith 
initially planned as a farce about an antique shop.

How can we live in the world and not put our hand across a divide? How can we 
live with ourselves?

“All across the country,” she writes of the referendum, riffing on A Tale of 
Two Cities, “people felt it was the wrong thing. All across the country, people 
felt it was the right thing. All across the country, people felt they’d really 
lost. All across the country, people felt they’d really won… All across the 
country, people felt history at their shoulder. All across the country, people 
felt history meant nothing.”

But for all its immediacy, Autumn also sets the congested present in 
perspective. Everywhere there are unlikely friendships and enriching, 
practically Socratic dialogues. People fall in love and conduct bedside vigils. 
A painter is rediscovered. A young woman in 1940s France refuses internment. 
Time turns tricks; time flies; a man flings a watch into a canal. The 
cumulative effect is liberatory, expansive, like stepping out of a fetid room 
and finding yourself in a field.

I can’t pretend total objectivity here. I’ve known Smith since I was 17 (her 
partner, the artist and film-maker Sarah Wood, is my cousin). In the 1990s we 
used to write each other letters. Recently I unearthed a blurry photograph she 
sent me 20 years ago of a cat’s tail dangling over a sofa. “I have a long-term 
plan to write a novella for each season,” she’d written on the back. “It seems 
to me the seasons are so gifted to us that it’s a kind of duty, a very nice 
one.”

Autumn by Ali Smith review – a beautiful, transient symphony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/12/autumn-ali-smith-review> 
Though she jokes now that she sounds like Katherine Mansfield pretending to be 
charming, this talk of gifts and duties gets to something essential about 
Smith. She believes in unselfish communal values such as altruism and 
generosity and has an infectious faith in hospitality, be it to new ideas or 
strangers. In addition to writing eight novels and five collections of short 
stories, she has foughtagainst the mass closure of public libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/12/public-library-other-stories-ali-smith-review>
 (“libraries matter because we’re living in an age of disinformation”) and the
proposed scrapping of the Human Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/ali-smith-hits-out-at-obscenity-of-scrapping-human-rights-act>
; is a patron ofthe charity Refugee Tales  <http://refugeetales.org/>and a 
staunch advocate for young writers and writers who have fallen out of fashion. 
She’s not, in short, an artist who seeks to wall herself off from the world.

Listening to the radio in the run-up to the referendum, she was appalled by 
the collapse of dialogue, the creep of lies, the resurgence of a kind of 
bullying language – “go home”; “we’re coming after you” – she hadn’t heard 
since she was a schoolgirl back in the 1970s. “Human beings need to take in all 
the possibilities of rhetoric, all the varieties and versatilities and here was 
coming a loggerhead,” she says now.

“The notion of a referendum is in any case a divisory line: you choose one 
side. Meanwhile, you’ve got the mass division of 65 million people crossing the 
world from parts of it which are untenable, unliveable and in flames. And 
what’s left of the world deciding whether or not to open the gates or the walls 
or to build more gates or walls. How can we live in the world and not put our 
hand across a divide? How can we live with ourselves? It isn’t either/or. It’s 
and/and/and. That’s what life is.”

The time itself is tearing itself apart because a massive lie has dissolved 
itself through the country

The and/and/and of life is what her fiction is so artful at revealing. It’s 
hard to think of another contemporary writer so adept at splicing the ordinary 
and the marvellous, cracking open possibilities for exuberant invention and 
transformation in spaces as dismally quotidian as a care home reception or Post 
Office queue. Words migrate and morph; perspectives slip and skew; things 
change. “Language is like poppies,” a character observes inAutumn. “It just 
takes something to churn the earth round them up, and when it does up come the 
sleeping words, bright red, fresh, blowing about.”

Smith’s previous novel, the wonderfully double-jointed How to Be Both  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/07/how-to-be-both-review-ali-smith-dual-narrative-francesco-del-cossa>
(which was shortlisted for the 2014 Man Booker, and won the Baileys prize for 
women’s fiction, the Goldsmiths prize and the Costa novel award), imagined a 
possible life for a real artist, the Italian Renaissance painter Francesco del 
Cossa, whose irrepressibly lively frescoes in the city of Ferrara have 
withstood earthquakes and wars. She’s fascinated by the stubbornness of art, 
its capacity to outlive its creator, to “float”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fali-smith-autumn-interview-how-can-we-live-ina-world-and-not-put-a-hand-across-a-divide-brexit-profu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7969d1190d6917134f6365ff4cfc258d8fef8f80%2F0_0_5226_3439%2F5226.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20Smith%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20pivotal%20moment%E2%80%A6%20a%20question%20of%20what%20happens%20culturally%20when%20something%20is%20built%20on%20a%20lie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fali-smith-autumn-interview-how-can-we-live-ina-world-and-not-put-a-hand-across-a-divide-brexit-profu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20Smith%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20pivotal%20moment%E2%80%A6%20a%20question%20of%20what%20happens%20culturally%20when%20something%20is%20built%20on%20a%20lie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fali-smith-autumn-interview-how-can-we-live-ina-world-and-not-put-a-hand-across-a-divide-brexit-profu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7969d1190d6917134f6365ff4cfc258d8fef8f80%2F0_0_5226_3439%2F5226.jpg>
 British pop artist Pauline Boty, photographed at home in 1963. Photograph: 
Tony Evans/ Getty Images 
Autumn is likewise concerned with an artist whose work survives despite long 
odds.Pauline Boty, nicknamed the Wimbledon Bardot, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/apr/27/pauline-boty-pictures>
 was a heart-stoppingly gorgeous proto-feminist pop-art pioneer. She painted 
the sexy, violent world around her with a sly, wry eye. In a surviving 
photograph, she lounges naked with an armful of roses against her own painting 
of Jean-Paul Belmondo, an oozy vaginal flower crowning his hat. (“I’m an 
intelligent nakedness,” Smith has her say. “An intellectual body. I’m a bodily 
intelligence. Art’s full of nudes and I’m a thinking, choosing nude.”)

Witty, clever and electrifying, Boty was at the centre of swinging London: 
dancing onReady, Steady, Go!, making a luminous cameo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n-KAxVNSti8> as a love interest in Alfie. In 
1965, she became pregnant and was diagnosed with cancer during a routine 
examination. She refused chemotherapy, worried it would harm the foetus, and 
died at the age of 28, a few months after the birth of her daughter. With that, 
she sank from history until, decades later, some of her radiant, riotous 
canvases were rediscovered, mildewed and covered in cobwebs, in an outhouse on 
her brother’s farm.

Pauline Boty: life and works - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/apr/27/pauline-boty-pictures>
Smith was knocked for six when she first saw one. “There are people who stand 
for their times and oh my God, Boty stands for her time.” Her interest 
quickened when she discovered Boty had been commissioned by an unknown person 
to paint Christine Keeler, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/04/profumo-affair-christine-keeler-stephen-ward>
 the model at the heart of the Profumo affair (the painting,Scandal ‘63, which 
can be seen in several photographs, has been missing ever since 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/27/pauline-boty-hunt-lost-art>
).

Autumn interleaves the schisms of 2016 with the trial of 1963. Both are key 
years, Smith thinks, in which a lie in the political sphere had dramatic 
consequences for society at large. Like Brexit, like the invasion of Iraq, the 
Profumo affair marked a turning point. “Meanwhile, the time itself is tearing 
itself apart because there has been a massive lie and the lie has come from 
parliament and dissolved itself right the way through the country and things 
change. It’s a pivotal moment. We were dealing with a kind of mass culture of 
lies. And it’s a question of what happens culturally when something is built on 
a lie.”

One of the things she loves about Boty’s playful, probing work is that it 
looks at how governing cultural myths are formed and perpetuated by way of 
images. She didn’t paint people so much as pictures of people already in wide 
circulation: Marilyn Monroe tottering in furs; the Beatles, Elvis, JFK being 
shot in the motorcade in Dallas. Like fiction itself, Smith thinks, “it reminds 
you to read the world as a construct. And if you can read the world as a 
construct, you can ask questions of the construct and you can suggest ways to 
change the construct. You understand that things aren’t fixed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fali-smith-autumn-interview-how-can-we-live-ina-world-and-not-put-a-hand-across-a-divide-brexit-profu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c3e918aa3bee40b335bb0c3bcf9309b4ee80e73%2F0_13_2480_3051%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20Smith%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20pivotal%20moment%E2%80%A6%20a%20question%20of%20what%20happens%20culturally%20when%20something%20is%20built%20on%20a%20lie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fali-smith-autumn-interview-how-can-we-live-ina-world-and-not-put-a-hand-across-a-divide-brexit-profu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20Smith%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20pivotal%20moment%E2%80%A6%20a%20question%20of%20what%20happens%20culturally%20when%20something%20is%20built%20on%20a%20lie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fali-smith-autumn-interview-how-can-we-live-ina-world-and-not-put-a-hand-across-a-divide-brexit-profu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c3e918aa3bee40b335bb0c3bcf9309b4ee80e73%2F0_13_2480_3051%2F2480.jpg>
 BUM, 1966 by Pauline Boty. Photograph: Pallant House Gallery 
On the wall above Smith’s desk is a porcelain branch breaking into leaf, 
surrounded by dozens of pictures. There are lots of Boty, with her panda eyes 
and swishing corn-coloured hair, alongside reproductions of her paintings. One 
of Smith’s favourites is of a woman’s spectacularly shapely arse, framed by a 
proscenium arch. Underneath, in huge red letters, Boty has painted the word BUM.

The light is fading. Downstairs, Smith brings us a plate of apples from her 
tree and two clasp knives. There are great piles of books and records 
everywhere, paintings propped casually on stacks of art magazines and proofs: 
an iceberg, a bowl of lemons, a watercolour of a pink lily against a wash of 
dense black. The lily is byJohn Berger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-berger>, another writer dogged in his 
faith in art as a force for forging connections, illuminating and resisting what
 Shakespeare’s Thomas More calls “mountainish inhumanity”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/15/william-shakespeare-handwritten-plea-for-refugees-online-sir-thomas-more-script-play-british-library-exhibition>

Where do we end up if we wall ourselves in, Smith wonders. Insist on 
fortifications, and you create a kind of prison for yourself. InAutumn an 
electric fence appears around a plot of common land, patrolled by the fictive 
security agency SA4A. It’s such an ugly, absurd spectacle: “Prison for trees. 
Prison for gorse, for flies, for cabbage whites, for small blues. Oystercatcher 
detention centre.” Far better to yank them down, to learn how to communicate in 
a different tongue, to welcome the stranger as a friend.

She knows something of what’s coming next in the quartet, if not what material 
the future will fling her way. Winter, she thinks, is a place where you can see 
really clearly, while summer is the luscious moment when the light kicks in and 
the leaves are fully spread. But ask about individual characters and she clams 
up. I’m particularly keen onAutumn’s puckish songwriter Daniel Gluck: a limber 
101, his life spanning the sweep of a century. Many of Smith’s most memorable 
characters have been disrupters, fromLike 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/like.html>’s Ash and The Accidental 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/11/bookerprize2005.bookerprize>’s 
Amber to Miles, the stubborn bedroom squatter ofThere But for The 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/01/ali-smith-there-but-for-the-review>
. Daniel, on the other hand, is a repairer: a good person, who makes being good 
seem sexy, elegant and fun.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
In one of the novel’s most memorable scenes, he plays a storytelling game, 
with Elisabeth Demand, the precocious, unhappy girl who lives next door. When 
she insists on a character who wants war, he conjures up a killing field of 
pantomime characters, from Aladdin to Cinderella, “a surrealist vision of 
hell”. And then he lets time get to work on them, grass growing through ribs 
and eyeholes, costumes nibbled away, until there’s nothing left but bones in 
flower. I don’t want to give away the exchange that follows, but I found it at 
once more stringent and more consoling than anything I’ve read this year.

Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> can do that: can make a 
space for reflecting, for generating novel ways of responding and reacting to 
lies and guns and walls alike. The mere act of cracking open a book, Smith 
thinks, is creative in itself, capable of inculcating kindness and agility in 
the reader. “Art is one of the prime ways we have of opening ourselves and 
going beyond ourselves. That’s what art is, it’s the product of the human being 
in the world and imagination, all coming together. The irrepressibility of the 
life in the works, regardless of the times, the histories, the life stories, 
it’s like being given the world, its darks and lights. At which point we can go 
about the darks and lights with our imagination energised.”

 * Autumn by Ali Smith is published by Hamish Hamilton (£16.99). Click here to 
order a copy for £13.93 from Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/autumn-436441.html>
 