
Way back in 1977 something amazing happened (apart from the release of Star 
Wars 
<http://www.starwars.com/news/star-wars-in-ihe-uk-1977-the-first-star-wars-christmas>
 obviously). Astronomer Jerry Ehman was using the Ohio State University’sBig 
Ear radio telescope <http://www.bigear.org/> to sweep the sky for possible 
signals from extraterrestrial civilisations. He found something.

While pointing towards a grouping of stars called Chi Sagittarii on 15 August, 
he received a powerful blast of radio waves that lasted for 72 seconds. He 
circled it on the readout and wrote: “Wow!”

Analysis of the signal showed that it displayed all the hallmarks of coming 
from interstellar space, and it became something of a cause célèbre for those 
involved in SETI, the search for extraterrestrial intelligence.

The trouble is that despite numerous attempts, the signal has never been 
observed again and so remains unexplained. Until now perhaps, thanks to the 
work ofProfessor Antonio Paris 
<https://web.spcollege.edu/instructors/id/paris.antonio> of St Petersburg 
College, Florida.

‘Alien megastructure’ could explain mysterious new Kepler results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/oct/16/alien-megastructure-could-explain-mysterious-new-kepler-results>
Before he was an astrophysicist at the St Petersburg College, Paris was an 
analyst for the US Department of Defence. “I have this investigative 
background, so I approached the ‘Wow!’ signal as I’m going back to the crime 
scene,” he told me over Skype. “It’s a cold case, so I went to various 
[astronomical] databases to find culprits or suspects that were at this crime 
scene at the time.”

He didn’t find aliens but he did find two suspicious looking comets.

Known as 266P/Christensen and 335P/Gibbs, they have never been investigated 
before because they were only discovered in 2006 and 2008 respectively. Paris 
found that they were both in the vicinity of Chi Sagittarii on the day that the 
‘Wow!’ signal was detected.

This could be significant because comets are surrounded by clouds of hydrogen 
gas that are millions of kilometres in diameter. The ‘Wow!’ signal itself was 
detected by Ehman at 1420MHz, which is a radio frequency that hydrogen 
naturally emits. Hepublished his idea 
<http://planetary-science.org/hydrogen-clouds-from-comets-266p-christensen-and-p2008-y2-gibbs-are-candidates-for-the-source-of-the-1977-wow-signal/>
 at the beginning of this year.

But before the case can be closed, Paris must test his hypothesis and for this 
he needs public support.

Comet 266P/Christensen will pass the Chi Sagittarii star group again on 25 
January 2017, while 335P/Gibbs will make its passage on 7 January 2018. Paris 
plans to observe these events to look for a recurrence of the mystery signal. 
But time is not on his side for using an existing radio telescope – they are 
all booked out.

So, he has launched a crowdfunding campaign on gofundme 
<https://www.gofundme.com/wow-experiment> to raise the $13,000 he needs to buy 
a radio telescope to make the observation. Donations are rolling in and he is 
already most of the way to his target.

“I would like to [be fully funded] in May, order the stuff so that I can have 
it by October,” he says. This would give him time to construct the dish, test 
it and prepare for the January encounter.

Although some other astronomers have voiced scepticism at his hypothesis 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn28747-famous-wow-signal-might-have-been-from-comets-not-aliens/>
, Paris points out that even if he turns out to be wrong, it’s still good 
science because we are learning something about comets, and he and his 
colleagues have a new radio telescope that they can use for further research.

Also on the plus side; if it isn’t comets, SETI scientists still have their 
best candidate for an extraterrestrial signal.

Stuart Clark <http://www.stuartclark.com/> is the author of The Unknown 
Universe 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Unknown-Universe-About-Chapters/dp/1781855749/ref=tmm_hrd_title_0>
 (Head of Zeus), and co-host of the podcastThe Stuniverse 
<https://www.acast.com/stuniverse> (Bingo Productions). He is teaching the 
Guardian Masterclass ‘Understand the Universe in an Evening 
<http://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/physics-understand-the-universe-in-an-evening-tickets-23045622076>
’ on 23 May.
 