
Skins and Midsomer Murders maker All3Media has been sold to US media giants 
Discovery andLiberty Global <https://www.theguardian.com/media/liberty-global> 
in a deal thought to be worth more than £500m.

Discovery Communications, which last month pulled out of the Channel 5 
auction, and Virgin Media-owner Liberty Global will be joint owners ofAll3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>.

The sale price is significantly less than the £750m-plus that All3Media had 
originally sought when itwent up for sale in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/01/shameless-producer-all3media-review?INTCMP=SRCH&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.

The company's majority shareholder Permira had to stop the sale process after 
failing to receive bidsanywhere near the asking price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/19/all3media-calls-off-sale>.

All3Media made profits of £65m in the year to 31 August 2012, the most recent 
publicly available results. This means it sold for about nine-times earnings, 
an industry average, but far less than the overly optimistic 12-times earnings 
sought in 2011.

All3Media's production company subsidaries make a wide range of the UK's best 
known shows including The Only Way is Essex, Geordie Shore, Derren Brown, Peep 
Show, and Gordon Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares.

The company is run by Farah Ramzan Golant, the former executive chairwoman of 
the UK's biggest ad agency AMV BBDO, who made theunexpected move to All3Media 
in July 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jul/26/all3media-appoints-ad-boss-new-ceo>
.

Although the deal has been struck by Virgin Media's parent company Liberty 
Global, as one of the biggest production houses in the UK All3Media's 
acquisition marks something of a return to the content business for Virgin.

The company sold its 50% stake in UKTV, home to channels including Dave and 
Gold, to US company Scrippsfor £339m in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/15/virgin-sells-uktv-stake-to-scripps-networks>
.

A year earlier it had sold off the Virgin Media TV business, which included 
channels such as Living,to Sky for £160m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jun/04/bskyb-buys-virgin-media-channels>
.

All3Media was formed in 2003 by Morrison and his former ITV colleagues, David 
Liddiment and Jules Burns, after they bought Chrysalis's TV business for £45m. 
The group is organised into a much-prized federal system.

The joint deal between Discovery and Liberty Global has come due to the John 
Malone connection.

Malone, the chairman of Virgin Media's parent company Liberty Global, is one 
of the largest shareholders in Discovery Communications. Malone, chief 
executive of Discovery from 2005 until 2008 when the company was taken public 
in the US, holds a stake which gives him almost 30% of the voting power.

A spokeswoman for Discovery Communications said: "We never comment on market 
rumours."

Liberty Global, Permira and All3Media declined to comment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 