
All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, the UK super indie 
behind Peep Show and The Only Way is Essex, has outlined aggressive expansion 
plans with Stephen Lambert, the creator of shows including Wife Swap and 
Undercover Boss, named as chairman of a new US venture.

The expansion marks the first major strategic move by new chief executive 
Farah Ramzan Golant,who started last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jul/26/all3media-appoints-ad-boss-new-ceo?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and is a key step in moving the production group towards a possible sale.

Lambert, founder of production company Studio Lambert which is owned by 
All3Media, has been named chairman of newly created All3Media America.

All3Media America will be based in Los Angeles and serve as a hub to help 
build a US presence for the remaining 11 production companies under the 
All3Media banner that are yet to launch in the market.

All3Media has launched five of its production companies in the US with Studio 
Lambert the most successful.

"Stephen has the biggest relationships in the US and the best track record," 
said Ramzan Golant. "This will accelerate growth in the US and provide a hub 
that will enable the production companies not there yet to launch."

All3Media is aiming to build its international business, which accounted for 
51% of £450m total group revenues in 2011.

The US accounts for about 23% of the £450m, and grew by almost quarter last 
year.

All3Media's US business is thought to have continued its strong growth in 2012.

Last year the company put itself up for sale but suitors balked at the £750m 
pricetag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/29/all3media-possible-sale-apollo-sony>
, based on earnings of £62m to £65m last year.

"The USA as our fastest growing market and All3Media companies have already 
enjoyed considerable success with hits such as Undercover Boss, Kitchen 
Nightmares and Hotel Hell," Golant added. "Now we are bringing ... creative 
companies in our group to the US market and supporting them with a high 
quality, fully resourced production capability."

As part of the new setup, Eli Holzman, the former head of Miramax Television 
who is president of Studio Lambert, has been named president of the US 
operation.

As part of the restructure, Studio Lambert USA will cease operating as a 
separate company, becoming one of the production company brands under All3Media.

Current subsidiaries and joint ventures operating in New York will not have to 
shift to the new base in Los Angeles.

All3Media companies make shows including The Only Way is Essex, Hollyoaks, 
Embarrassing Bodies and Peep Show.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian>.
 