
To: Michelle Obama <firstlady@whitehouse.gov> Cc: Hillary Clinton 
<secretary@state.gov>, Malia Obama <hypoallergenic_puppies_are_cute@yahoo.com>, 
Sasha Obama <nickjonasfan@yahoo.com>, Rahm Emanuel 
<rahm@rahmformayorofmotherfuckingchicago.com>, VPOTUS 
<joe.biden@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: Big news from Egypt!


 Yeah, whatever. Never mind Egypt. Listen, guys. This is extraordinary. I've 
just discovered, in a sealed envelope at the back of my desk drawer in the Oval 
Office, a more-secret-than-top-secret intelligence document. No idea how it got 
there, but it's basically the whole secret history of the US. Stunning. The 
truth about the "moon landings". The never-before-revealed investigation into 
who really shot JFK. The whole Elvis Presley thing. Stuff on Bin Laden. How 
Bush really won the 2000 election. Just breathtaking. I'm going to send you a 
full, point-by-point summary by email, in a moment. Just want to check that 
I've got no urgent new messages to deal with. Give me a minute or two. Stand 
by. Barack



To: White House Cybersecurity Team Subject: Re: Mr President – Guardian 
running your private emails in its G2 features section?? Are you aware of this??


 What the hell? For two whole years, every week? Of course I didn't give my 
permission. I just called Daley in here to get this shut down – and then he's 
coming to yell at you. How did we not pick up on this? How could you have let 
this happen? And if our email system's so insecure, why are you sending me an 
email about it, dumbasses? And who do the goddamn Guardian think they are? That 
Julian Assange must be involved somehow. Unbelievable. UNBELIEVABLE. 
Unbelievable. Frankly I'm tempted to take Air Force One over there tonight, 
find the editor-in-chief, and shove <some text missing>

Editor's note: This was the final email received from President Obama's 
BlackBerry, marking the end of All the president's emails. G2regrets any 
misunderstanding that may have led us to publish these emails without 
authorisation. Efforts to contact the White House to discuss the continuation 
of this feature were met with no response, other than the appearance outside 
the editor's office window of an armed CIA drone, which hovered briefly in a 
sinister fashion, then turned and vanished.
 