
To: General James Jones, National Security Advisor <j.jones@nsc.eop.gov>, 
David Gompert, Acting Director of National Intelligence <director@dni.gov> 
Subject: Re: Re: How to stop further military intelligence leaks, immediately

 I've gotta say, Jim, your "reassurance" that you'll be changing the password 
on the main CENTCOM intelligence database from "password" to "password54321" 
didn't have the reassuring effect you were intending. Partly because I wasn't 
too thrilled to hear you'd got the thing about adding numerals from a USA Today 
feature headlined "Are YOU at risk from identity theft?", but mainly because . 
. . well, look. I'm a calm man, not easily moved to anger, but as I write this, 
we have the White House maintenance guys repairing the two holes I punched in 
the wall of the Oval Office when I got your note. And those are structural 
walls, not partitions. You're going to need to come and see me right away. Now. 
And, yes, Rahm will be present. Barack



To: Sonia Sotomayor <ssotomayor@earthlink.net> Subject: Fw: Hilarious YouTube 
video of two squirrels having sex in a baseball stadium while this drunk guy in 
a mullet does an AWESOME parody of that song by Katy Perry (via Joe Biden)

 No. No. Listen, when I went on The View this week and jokingly complained 
that nobody ever sends me the "juicy stuff" by email because they worry it'll 
be covered by the Presidential Records Act, I was *joking*. Don't send me 
anything like this ever again. Barack PS. Or if it's REALLY funny â€“ you have my 
Gmail address, right?



To: Robert Gibbs <press.secretary@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Line to take on 
WikiLeaks story

 Our position will be that these leaks pose grave danger to the security 
interests of the US, and that they contain nothing new or interesting 
whatsoever. Remember to say "and", not "but", so people don't notice the 
contradiction. Also, at this point, you should point to the back wall of the 
briefing room and say "what the hell is THAT?", then, while the press have 
their heads turned, leave rapidly by one of the side doors. OK? BHO
 