
To: Hillary Clinton <secretary@state.gov> Subject: Re: spies like us

 First priority, cease all cables from embassies until further notice. Second, 
make amends to UN. Tell them we never intended for our diplomats to snoop. Say 
we just wanted to get hold of their frequent flyer numbers so that – this is 
off the top of my head – we could add more miles to their accounts, as a gift, 
but anonymously, so it's not a bribe. Say it's something we do every Christmas. 
Lastly, promise Ban Ki Moon we'll never spy on him again, and then find out 
from our spies whether he buys it. We can weather this. Keep me posted, with 
full deniability. B


To: John Boehner <john.boehner@mail.house.gov Subject: Russian nuclear treaty

 I'm glad we're working together on this thing at last. As we've all learned 
this week, Russia is basically a dysfunctional kleptocracy controlled by the 
mafia and led by a psychopath hellbent on enriching himself at the expense of 
world stability. We need to nail them to some kind of promise while they're 
still in a position to keep it. This is bigger than politics. America needs us, 
John. Warmly, Barack.


To: Vladimir Putin <bigman@premmier.gov.ru Subject: warning

 Vlad – any minute now your intel people are going to flag up an email from me 
to Boehner. Ignore it – it's just political stuff. He's scared stiff, and I 
want to keep it that way. Best, Barack.


To: Louis Susman <ambassador.london@state.gov> Subject: Re: UK going to 
totally lose world cup bid, btw . . .

 Louis – while I appreciate that the normal channels have been compromised, I 
don't think email is the best way to send stuff like this. We'll sort something 
else out. In the meantime, if you're sure about it, I'll go $500 on the World 
Cup venue for 2018, and $200 for 2022 (Qatar? Really? Isn't it, like, the size 
of Connecticut?). Are you OK placing the bets for me? Michelle hates this kind 
of thing. B 