
To: Sasha Obama <nickjonasfan@yahoo.com> Subject: Re: OMG AMAZING NEWS!!!

 It is amazing news, isn't it, sweetie? We've finally managed to pass a 
comprehensive financial regulation act that will give the American consumer the 
protection they deserve in their dealings with the banking industry. I'm so 
relieved! And pleasantly surprised that you're interested, actually. Come find 
me if you'd like to chat a bit more on this. xxDad

 To: Sasha Obama <nickjonasfan@yahoo.com> Subject: Re: Re: Re: OMG AMAZING 
NEWS!!!

 Oh. Right. You meant about Bristol Palin and Levi Johnston announcing their 
engagement. Yes, I guess that's kind of amazing. I'm serious about that 
financial regulation chat though. Hey, come to think of it, you know our plan 
to go whale-watching while we're in Maine this weekend? Why don't we do that 
another time, and have a really good discussion about bank regulation instead? 
xxDad


To: Robert Gibbs <press.secretary@ whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: I know you 
won't like this, but...

 Well, if you're convinced it's the only way to get any media coverage then I 
guess we have no freaking choice. So we'll hold a major event in the Rose 
Garden to celebrate the passage of financial regulation and the fixing of the 
oil spill, but with Bristol and Levi as opening speakers. Can't. Believe. I'm. 
Agreeing. To. This.

Barack|

To: Levi Johnston <levi@wasillanet.com>
Subject: Re: Congratulations on the passage of the Dodd-Frank financial 
regulatory reform act!

Um . . . Thanks, I guess! Your email came as a bit of a surprise, to be 
honest. But seriously â€“ thanks. I'm glad you think "the creation of a financial 
stability oversight council is a long overdue measure". Me too. And your 
thoughts on executive compensation are actually . . . really perceptive. So, 
that's great. So, um, yeah. Thanks again! Barack
 