
To: Craig Venter, J Craig Venter <https://www.theguardian.com/science/venter> 
Institute <callmedrfrankenstein@jcvi.org> Subject: Creation of first synthetic 
lifeform — well done sir!

 A quick note to say congratulations! Let me know if you want to borrow one of 
my speechwriters – they're pretty good at the whole "standing on the threshold 
of history" thing. I also wanted to apologise: I understand you've been deluged 
with emails from Joe suggesting that if we fast-tracked the funding, you might 
be able to create a group of artificial Democratic senators to help push our 
legislation through. Or even Democratic voters, to help us out in the midterms! 
Believe me, that's just Joe's twisted sense of humour – please ignore him! I 
mean, unless you think you could actually do it. No, I'm kidding! Still, do let 
me know if you think you could. Warmly, Barack PS. I'm just joking of course! 
PPS. But obviously do get in touch if you think it might be viable.

 To: Dennis Blair, director of national intelligence <dblair@dni.gov> Subject: 
Your resignation

 Dennis, I assume by now you've taken the hint and are working on your 
"resignation" letter, so I'm emailing just to make sure there's no hard 
feelings between us. I see the press are reporting that I thought you seemed 
"out of the loop" and that your intelligence briefings were off-base and 
unreliable. And, truth be told, I wasn't too impressed by your claim to be 
basing your stance on interrogation policies on "something [you] read on Gawker 
the other day". It was simply time for a change of personnel. Or, as you always 
liked to say, when explaining the rationale behind each new change in US 
counterterrorism strategy, "I just sort of felt it in my bones, you know?"See 
you around, Barack

 To: Dennis Blair, director of national intelligence <dblair@dni.gov> Subject: 
Re: Re: Your resignation

 Wait, you hadn't heard you were being forced out of office? Man, you *are* 
out of the loop. Disregard my last email. And clear your desk. B

To: Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
<secretary@state.gov> Subject: Re: Britain now represented by two ridiculous, 
cartoonish figures

 Are we talking about the Olympic mascots or the coalition? It's hard to keep 
up. BHO
 