
To: Peter Rouse, chief of staff <peter.rouse@whitehouse.gov> Subject: Re: I 
know you used to live there, but try not to look so at home

What do you want me to do, Peter? I speak Indonesian. Just a little, but it's 
friendly, you know? And I'm sorry, but Indonesia's a Muslim country. It's full 
of mosques. Any time they take a picture of me, chances are I'll be standing in 
front of one, next to a Muslim, if not between two Muslims. And I have to smile 
– it's polite. I know how the rightwing bloggers are gonna have a field day, 
but I can't keep mentioning that I'm a Christian over and over again. It's 
beginning to sound weird: "Hi there. I'm a Christian, by the way." *Sigh* I'll 
bring you back a mango. Barack

To: Timothy Geithner <secretary@treasury.gov> Subject: Re: How's the G20 so 
far?

Tim - don't worry about what you hear coming out of the summit. The "currency 
war" isn't going to affect policy. I've told everyone here that even if the 
$600bn we're pumping in drives the dollar down in the short term, the 
corresponding growth in the US economy will be better for everyone in the long 
term. This sounds slightly more upbeat than the actual truth, which is that we 
have no idea what's going to happen.

Otherwise it's going pretty well. Weather OK. The goody bags aren't as nice as 
last time – like I need another mug with "G20" written on it – but there were 
some cool sunglasses, and a pen. First pick is yours, and I'll give what's left 
to Biden. B

To: Malia Obama <hypoallergenic_puppies_are_cute@yahoo.com Subject: Re: 
rebalancing trade

Yes, honey – obviously we need to avoid protectionism, and trade balance is 
important, but what about China? They've been undervaluing their currency for 
ages, and they've got this huge trade surplus just, you know, sitting there. 
When is this assignment due, by the way? It's just that I wouldn't mind one 
last swim in the pool before I pack. Dadx
 