
With the recent opening of Kenneth Branagh in Harlequinade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/08/harlequinade-all-on-her-own-review-kenneth-branagh-zoe-wanamaker-garrick>
 and the impending arrival of a revival of Funny Girl with Sheridan Smith, 
there will be more than a dozen shows in London that are about showbiz itself.

That’s not including The Woman in Black, which uses the structural conceit of 
a drama being staged, and Chekhov’sThe Seagull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/25/young-chekhov-review-platonov-ivanov-seagull-chichester-david-hare>
 (the superb current Chichester revival is expected to arrive in London next 
year), in which the creation of a piece of theatre is simply a plot strand. 
It’s a disqualification that also applies to Duncan Macmillan’sPeople, Places 
and Things <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/people-places-and-things>, 
which examines addiction through a protagonist who is an actress, andRachel 
Cusk’s rewrite of Medea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/03/rachel-cusk-interview-medea-divorce-almeida-theatre-london-feminist-euripides>
, in which the title character’s husband is reimagined as a movie star.

But, even with strict admission criteria, shows about theatrical performance 
easily reach double figures. As the numbers reduce - with Gypsy and 
Showstopper! about to end their runs - they are soon replaced by others. 
Lights! Camera! Improvise!, in which a movie is ad-libbed each night, opens 
next month, and Wallace Shawn’s new play, Evening at the Talk House, about to 
be world-premiered at theNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>, is set in a bar 
frequented by entertainment celebrities. Three more productions that put the 
stage on stage in various ways – The Entertainer, Red Velvet and Mrs Henderson 
Presents – are already announced for next year.

 So why does it seem that, in London theatre at the moment, there is no 
business except showbusiness?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce1486ac541318ad79e23d15487ec052c0963356%2F0_236_3542_2126%2F3542.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20the%20world's%20a%20stage%3A%20how%20theatre%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20the%20world%27s%20a%20stage%3A%20how%20theatre%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce1486ac541318ad79e23d15487ec052c0963356%2F0_236_3542_2126%2F3542.jpg>
 Zoë Wanamaker in Harlequinade. Photograph: Johan Persson 
 It’s true that these behind-the-curtain works were written over a long period 
– Terence Rattigan’s Harlequinade dates from 1948 – but, even among 2015 
scripts, there are enough for a trend. Claire Van Kampen’sFarinelli and the King
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/23/farinelli-and-the-king-review-mark-rylance>
, Ian Kelly’sMr Foote’s Other Leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/22/mr-footes-other-leg-review-simon-russell-beale>
 and David Hare’sThe Moderate Soprano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/30/moderate-soprano-review-glyndebourne-opera-david-hare-play>
 – three of the most warmly received new plays of the year – feature the 
performance or rehearsal of classical music, music hall and opera respectively. 
Farinelli and the King also forms with another recent new play –Carmen 
Disruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/19/carmen-disruption-simon-stephens-almeida-london-review>
 by Simon Stephens – an emerging subgenre incorporating live performance by an 
opera singer within a drama.

 The nervousness that theatre-about-theatre raises in critics and audiences is 
similar to the prejudice among literary critics towards novels that have 
novelists as their protagonists: a fear of professional special pleading and 
jokes that mean more to producers than consumers.

 Mr Foote’s Other Leg is guiltiest of this – sometimes feeling, in its 
indulgent theatricality, like a skit for the Equity Christmas party – but the 
other examples use behind-the-scenes stories to other ends.

 Van Kampen and Hare, who like Kelly are dramatising bizarre historical 
episodes, explore the ability of art to transform and transcend damaged lives. 
In Farinelli and the King, Phillip IV of Spain is lifted from depressive 
illness by the voice of a castrato; in The Moderate Soprano, an ageing bachelor 
businessman, John Christie, falls in love with a singer and, through the 
cathartic involvement of musicians who are refugees from Nazi Germany, 
paradoxically constructs an opera house, Glyndebourne, that has come to stand 
as a symbol of Englishness. Although showing the transformative power of art, 
neither of these plays is self-congratulatory about the art of performance.

 Even less so was Stephens’ Carmen Disruption, which concentrated on the 
potential of art to damage a personality: a soprano, during a pre-performance 
siesta before singing Bizet’s Carmen in yet another European city, suffers a 
nightmare in which the people and plot of the opera entwine with her life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa72972a90f0b6d9a1548123f415cf9f6619cb4aa%2F0_259_4464_2678%2F4464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20the%20world's%20a%20stage%3A%20how%20theatre%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20the%20world%27s%20a%20stage%3A%20how%20theatre%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa72972a90f0b6d9a1548123f415cf9f6619cb4aa%2F0_259_4464_2678%2F4464.jpg>
 Sharon Small in Carmen Disruption by Simon Stephens at the Almeida. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 By showing showbiz going wrong, Stephens’ play is a tragic twist on a genre 
that generally tends towards farce, as, for example, in Harlequinade. Although 
inventively and entertainingly done in the current revival by Branagh and Rob 
Ashford, Rattigan’s squib about a touring company who are too old or too pissed 
to give their best Romeo and Juliet still feels hopelessly trumped by Michael 
Frayn’s later farce about theatrical disaster, Noises Off.

 But, as Frayn’s play unfortunately can’t be permanently available to 
audiences in the way that The Mousetrap is, there will always be a market for 
pale imitations, whether Harlequinade orThe Play That Goes Wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/17/the-play-that-goes-wrong-west-end-hit>
, a piece of backstage slapstick that has proved so popular in the West End 
that it is about to be joined by another prop-dropping comedy, Peter Pan Goes 
Wrong.

 The other end of the spectrum, backstage back-slapping, is most common in the 
musical, typified by A Chorus Line and Annie Get Your Gun, in which 
entertainers are presented as a superior breed – Annie’s anthem is “There’s no 
business like show business!” It’s also a risk to some extent in Kiss Me Kate, 
although dissipated by the astringency of Cole Porter’s lyrics.

 One of the fascinations of Gypsy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/16/gypsy-review-imelda-staunton-momma-rose-stephen-sondheim-jonathan-kent-peter-davison>
, though, is that, while the score by Jule Styne keeps threatening to add 
another hymn to the magnificence of theatre people, dramatist Arthur Laurents 
and lyricist Stephen Sondheim constantly undercut any note of celebration. The 
numbers that end the two acts, Everything’s Coming Up Roses and Rose’s Turn, 
both deny the character the triumphant notes that usually dispatch musical 
audiences to their interval drinks and homes. Among musicals featuring showbiz 
folk, only Cabaret so often dims the spotlight of optimism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19ea2a705eab6d1213fe35f56d7e8808f2785d34%2F148_285_2528_1518%2F2528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20the%20world's%20a%20stage%3A%20how%20theatre%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20the%20world%27s%20a%20stage%3A%20how%20theatre%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20itself&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fmark-lawson-theatre-gypsy-harlequinade-moderate-soprano%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19ea2a705eab6d1213fe35f56d7e8808f2785d34%2F148_285_2528_1518%2F2528.jpg>
 Roger Allam, Nancy Carroll and George Taylor in The Moderate Soprano by David 
Hare at Hampstead theatre. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 Where Gypsy and Cabaret have more company is in using a performer-character 
as a solution to the often awkward moment of transition in a musical from 
dialogue to song. This excuse for crooning was used more recently by The 
Bodyguard and by three current West End musical biographies of singers or 
songwriters:Beautiful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/24/beautiful-the-carole-king-musical-review>
, Jersey Boys andSunny Afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/28/sunny-afternoon-kinks-musical>. 
In all those shows, someone sitting down at a piano and singing can be 
presented as social realism.

A repeat offender in this area is Kenneth Branagh, who once made the movie In 
the Bleak Midwinter about travelling thespians, and three among the half-dozen 
plays in the opening season of theKenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh> Theatre Company contain 
some element of theatrical self-examination.

Lawrence and Chekhov: reimagined or violated?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/03/lawrence-and-chekhov-reimagined-or-violated>
 The defence of this repertoire would be that the trio encompass the main 
types of plays about players. While Harlequinade is a self-loving send-up, 
Lolita Chakrabarti’s Red Velvet uses a theatre story to explore the history of 
racism, and Osborne’s The Entertainer found in the image of a ruined old 
showman a metaphor for post-Suez Britain.

 Even so, more than a dozen productions about productions feels too many. The 
subject can be fruitful: the Guardian’s theatre writers are currently choosing 
their end-of-year top 10s, to be published here, and my longlist includes 
Carmen Disrupted, The Moderate Soprano, Beautiful and Gypsy. I’d be worried, 
though, if the anthem of next year’s theatre also turns out to be: everything’s 
coming up showbiz.
 