
We're back! It's clickalong time again, and for those of you who aren't 
familiar with the concept - it's a unique online experience in which I 
instruct, and we all cook an exclusive recipe in real time, from the comfort of 
your own home, just in time for a lateish supper. You just need to be in 
shouting distance of your computer and follow our livestep-by-step guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2009/apr/15/allegra-mcevedy-clickalong>
 until culinary success is achieved (usually around 9pm).

Clickalong has grown and grown since we started it last year, and we now have 
people joining in from around the world - Spain to Hong Kong, via Australia. 
It's loads of fun, if a bit frenetic sometimes, with people setting fire to 
things, occasionally cutting their fingers, and often defying me by adding 
substitute ingredients. Clickhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/allegra-mcevedy-online-clickalong>
 to read more about the clickalong experience and find some of our previous 
efforts (you can also join us on Facebook 
<http://en-gb.facebook.com/people/Word-OfMouth/1612328910>, or, indeed, on 
Twitter <http://twitter.com/guardianfood> for more updates and bits and bobs).

Back to this month - we'll post the ingredients in good time for you to go out 
and gather them, I'll tell you about any preparation you need to do beforehand, 
and then on kitchen clickalong night, I'll start posting the instructions and 
pictures from 8pm.

June is a wonderful time to cook: our skies are lighter and higher, and our 
islands are beginning to yield summer treats. My kitchen clickalong recipe for 
the month reflects the best of British at this time - a fish stew of local 
marine life. We'll be incorporating a lightness into the dish to mirror those 
skies and a few choice ingredients from the soil, as well as the shorelines.

Fish stews are one of my favourite meals, and I've been widely assured that 
they command a reasonable fear factor for the less experienced cook. However, 
with a bit of hand-holding I'm confident that we can mosey through it together, 
flanked by a crisp bottle of white, and have our usual recipe of fun, mess, a 
drop of tension andoccasional moments of stress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2009/mar/19/allegras-clickalong-your-pictures?picture=344812647http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2009/mar/19/allegras-clickalong-your-pictures?picture=344812647>
, to get your supper on the table.

A little heads up: our recipe calls for large tiger prawns (MSC-approved, if 
possible) and you need to buy them in the shell and peel them before the bell 
goes at 8pm (you'll also be using the shells and heads, so don't be ditching 
them, as you'll find plenty of flavour in there to be drawn out).

So have a look next Monday for the full ingredients list, and me, Susi and 
some fishy friends will be ready and waiting for you on the 23rd.

Lots of love,
Allegra x
 