
The internet's original and best interactive cookery class returns on the 
evening of 18 February when our resident chef Allegra McEvedy will be guiding 
the ravenous masses to another delicious dinner from ingredients to greediness 
in one hour.

From now on, clickalong will be a quarterly event, giving Allegra greater 
scope to focus her recipes on what's in season and what we'll want to see on 
our dinner plates at a particular time of year, and with talk ofan early spring 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/environment/climatechange/4306880/Spring-is-coming-earlier-according-to-study.html>
 around February's recipe will help us shake off the last of the winter and 
look ahead to the green shoots of March. Even more excitingly, we're moving 
from one dish to two, so if you're one of the many who have amazed themselves 
with what can be achieved in a single hour, stand by to be rendered agog.
For anyone who's new to the game, here's an idea of how it works. We'll post a 
full list of ingredients well ahead of the big day so everyone can get the 
necessary in. Then you'll need an eager volunteer with computer operating 
skills (and a computer) within earshot of the cooker, or if you're a seasoned 
multi-tasker just a computer in the kitchen (keyboard protectors are available 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?hl=en&client=firefox-a&rls=org.mozilla%3Aen-GB%3Aofficial&hs=Mvf&q=computer+keyboard+protector&btnG=Search&meta=&aq=f&oq=>
). If you've some device which will let you take pics as you progress, have it 
to hand as we'll be compiling the traditionalinterweb gallery of everyone's 
efforts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2009/nov/13/allegra-clickalong-moroccan-filo-pie>
. Even if you're not able to cook with us on the night (although quite what you 
could be doing that would be more important is nigh-on unimaginable) the live 
session will become a step-by-step recipe with timings once the dust has 
settled.

On the menu for the early spring is lemon, sage and mascarpone chicken with 
Jerusalem extra virgin mash and robust greens, with tarte tatin to follow. Oh 
yes. Allegra hopes anyone who's a little unsure of the Jerusalem artichoke will 
be persuaded to give it a try in combination with some waxy spuds, and the 
choice of greens is pretty much up to you - anything harvested at this time of 
year is going to be pretty robust, and whether you fancy sprouting broccoli or 
cavalo nero or something else it's going to fit the bill.

Be ready at 8pm on 18 February with a friend or three (the recipes usually 
serve 4) and a bottle of something you enjoy, and we'll see you there.
 