
The Clickalong is coming round again with a speed that must mean it's summer, 
and it's nearly time for y'all to go a-foraging for the ingredients for this 
month's marvel, which is happening on Thursday 27 August.

If you've never joined in with our unique, all-singing, all-dancing online 
real-time cookery extravaganza before, you can have a look at ourprevious 
adventures here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/series/allegra-mcevedy-kitchen-clickalong>
. Each month we post a shopping list of ingredients in good time for everyone 
to be standing by their computers at 8pm, ready to cook along (geddit?) with me 
and our hungry WoMers all over the world. Stay within shouting distance of your 
laptop and within the hour you'll have a meal for four worthy ofrecording for 
posterity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2009/jul/30/allegra-mcevedy-meze-clickalong-photos>
.


After making the meze spread 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2009/jul/28/allegra-mcevedy-meze-clickalong>
 in the spirit of whirling dervishes last month, August's session is going to 
be more akin to a drive along the Amalfi coast: exhilarating, a breath of fresh 
air and just a little bit edgy. And the food we make will be a sunshine classic 
from that great peninsula: fishy and delishy, and one of my top ten Italian 
summer eats. We're going to be making fritto misto di mare with anchovy aioli, 
tomato and basil sourdough bruschetta and a leaf salad.

Come rain or shine on the 27th, this will be the kind of food that takes you 
back to your favourite holiday, so please dress accordingly: shorts, 'kini's 
and even going topless under those aprons ... and there'll be extra points for 
photographic evidence! The ingredients will be posted on Word of Mouth next 
Monday - there are no hard-to-gets on it, but plan to hit your fishmonger or 
fish counter next Wednesday or Thursday.

Arrivederci!
Allegra x

PS: We've had to move to Thursday as there's this little show that I need to 
watch on Wednesdays calledEconomy Gastronomy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2009/aug/05/allegra-mcevedy-economy-gastronomy-television>
 - apologies for the disruption, but we'll be back to Wednesdays for the next 
one, which will be in October. We're in China in September, which is why I'm 
firmly putting the last of my summer eggs in this month's basket.
 