
A couple of over-excitingly hot days still fresh in the memory and the promise 
of rain over a bank holiday weekend can only mean one thing - here comes May!

For this month's cookalong (on Thursday 13 May) our menu is not only based 
around what's good to eat now but it also covers how I like to eat once the 
soil warms up and the days grow longer. And for all the vociferous veggies out 
there, now that we've broken the monotony of root veg for another year this one 
is for you. There's so much excitement in the new array of veg, leaves and 
fruit in the shops that it's guaranteed even the most ardent carnivore won't 
miss the meat: like the shoots pushing through the soil and heading sun-ward, 
our meal is delicate but robust.
So what are we cooking? Well, this is food for spring - a good supper, with 
leftovers lending themselves nicely for snacks and weekday lunches in the park. 
Within our allotted hour we will make, from scratch including the pastry, an 
English quiche of wild garlic, Jersey royals and asparagus with a bit of cheese 
for added protein and yum, and on the side a salad of seasonal leaves and soft 
herbs. Then for pudding (because we're going to have so much spare time) we're 
going to knock up creamy lemon curd pots.

Full ingredients and an equipment list will be posted well in advance, but 
here's a first heads-up: you'll need a tart ring about 25cm across and 3-4cm 
deep with a push up base (mine's fluted, but that's not essential!). Or you can 
just use a ring and sit it on a baking tray, which is fine but can be a bit 
more stressful. The recipe will make 6 happy slices or 4 monsters, but as I say 
this is food that's made for leftovers.

So get hunting to beg, borrow or buy a tart ring, and we'll all reconvene in a 
couple of weeks!
 