
Katherine Garrett-Cox, one of the City’s most high-profile women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/12/garrett-cox-help-mothers-return-work-veuve-clicquot-award>
, will leave Alliance Trust after nine years at the investment firm, which 
settled a long dispute with its activist investor last year.

Garrett-Cox will step down as chief executive of its fund management arm, 
Alliance Trust Investments, on 11 March. Shequit the company’s main board in 
October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/01/katherine-garrett-cox-steps-down-alliance-trust-board>
 after losing out in a dispute with Elliott Advisors, Alliance Trust’s largest 
shareholder.

The US hedge fund pushed for change at the top of Alliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>, one of Britain’s oldest 
investment firms. Elliott accused the Dundee-based company of paying executives 
too much for poor performance under Garrett-Cox’s leadership.

After rejecting Elliott as an opportunist agitator, Alliance Trust crumbled 
under shareholder pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/apr/28/alliance-trust-takes-least-embarrassing-option-over-board-appointments>
 in April and appointed two of Elliott’s nominees to the board last April.

Alliance Trust spent £3m trying to repel Elliott but later agreed to cut 
costs, split fund management from its wealth management operation and buy back 
shares to increase shareholder returns.

Karin Forseke, who led the fight against Elliott, stepped down as chairwoman 
at the start of this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/27/alliance-trust-chairwoman-to-step-down>
. Garrett-Cox, 48, is leaving by mutual agreement after her job became obsolete 
under the restructuring plan, the company said. She joined Alliance Trust in 
2007 and became chief executive in 2008.

Alliance Trust said Garrett-Cox, nicknamed Katherine the Great for her 
prominence in financial circles, was paid £1.4m for 2015, up from £1.3m the 
year before. She will be paid her salary of £450,000 for this year. She will 
also hold on to about 800,000 shares in the company’s long-term incentive plan. 
Those shares will pay out, depending on financial performance, over the next 
three years.

Lord Smith of Kelvin, Alliance Trust’s chairman, said: “Alliance Trust is now 
moving swiftly to implement the changes announced last year which are designed 
to enhance shareholder returns. This process is well under way and it is clear 
to us all that the role of chief executive of Alliance Trust Investments has 
changed significantly. I and the rest of the board wish Katherine every success 
in the future.”

The company said Garrett-Cox’s responsibilities would be shared out between 
other senior employees. Alliance Trust Investment manages about £5.3bn, 
including £2bn of third-party funds brought in by Garrett-Cox.

Garrett-Cox said she had represented and protected the long-term interests of 
Alliance Trust’s shareholders.

“I am very proud of the significant achievements that my team has delivered 
over the past nine years at Alliance Trust. I leave Alliance Trust Investments 
with a strong team who are already delivering improved investment returns and 
driving down costs,” she said.
 