
The chair of the embattled investment firm Alliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>, Karin Forseke, has said 
she will step down from her role at the start of next year, the latest 
high-profile change at the company amid reforms prompted by pressure from 
activist shareholders.

The Dundee-based investment trust, one of the oldest in the UK, announced last 
month it would implement “significant changes” to deliver better performance, 
partly by creating a wholly independent board.


Katherine Garrett-Cox, chief executive of the trust, said at the beginning of 
Octobershe was resigning her position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/01/katherine-garrett-cox-steps-down-alliance-trust-board>
 on the trust’s board to focus on tackling the firm’s underperformance, in the 
aftermath of the bitter spat with its top shareholder Elliott Advisors.


Forseke said she was stepping down on 1 January. A non-executive director, 
Gregor Stewart, will take on the role of interim chair until a new chair is 
chosen. “We are making good progress implementing changes announced in October 
to accelerate our long-term strategy and we expect the new governance structure 
to be in place in early 2016,” Forseke said in a statement.

Alliance Trust develops a talent for compromise, at last
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/oct/01/alliance-trust-develops-a-talent-for-compromise-at-last>
The company said it is “reorganising its governance structure to create a 
wholly independent board and Karin believes that, as this process nears 
completion, it is the appropriate time for her to step down”.

Alastair Kerr, senior independent director, will also stand down from the 
board on 1 January, earlier than planned. Karl Sternberg will take on his role 
and lead the search for a new external candidate to chair the board.


In April, the investment firm reached an 11th-hour compromise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/28/alliance-trust-strikes-a-deal-with-elliott-advisors>
 with Elliott Advisors, which had been pushing for change at the company. 
Alliance Trust said it was appointing to the board two of the three independent 
directors nominated by the US hedge fund.



 