
Alliance Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> has 
confirmed that it has received an informal approach about a £5bn merger with 
RIT Capital Partners, which is chaired by the British financier Jacob 
Rothschild.

Alliance Trust chairman says all-male board will change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/04/alliance-trust-chair-lord-smith-all-male-board-change>
The investment group, which manages £3.4bn assets on behalf of its clients, 
said it was yet to received a detailed proposal from RIT about how the two 
listed companies might combine, but a tie-up would create a firm worth about 
£5bn, with Alliance worth £2.6bn and RIT valued at £2.4bn.

Alliance will now consult shareholders including the activist investor Elliott 
Advisors, which triumphed in abattle with the firm’s chief executive and chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/oct/01/alliance-trust-develops-a-talent-for-compromise-at-last>
 last year. Elliott, a US hedge fund which owns 16% of Alliance, took issue 
with the company’s under-performing share price and begancalling for a change 
of leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/16/hedge-fund-seeks-boardroom-shakeup-at-alliance-trust-elliott-advisors>
 in spring 2015. That ended in thedeparture of the company’s chair Karin Forseke
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/27/alliance-trust-chairwoman-to-step-down>
 andchief executive Katherine Garrett-Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/15/alliance-trust-katherine-garrett-cox-to-leave-in-march>
, a nine-year veteran of the company and one of the City’s most high-profile 
women.

Elliott had also criticised Garrett-Cox’s £1.3m pay package. She initially 
stepped down as company chief executive and remained in charge of the group’s 
fund management arm, until announcing in February she was to leave the company 
altogether in March.

Alliance Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> has since 
appointed the City adviser Canaccord Genuity to guide on a strategic review, 
which it said would take the merger proposal into account. It said the review 
would reveal a “broad range of potential courses of action which the company 
might choose to take for the benefit of its shareholders”.

The Dundee-based company, formed in 1888, has been left with an all-male board 
after the battle with Elliott Advisors. The new chairman, Robert Smith, 
appointed after Elliott’s boardroom shake-up, has said he was acutely aware of 
the lack of gender diversity on the company’s board.
 