

Sir Anthony O’Reilly, once one of Ireland’s most distinguished businessmen and 
the former global boss of Heinz, could be questioned in court over his 
financial means.

One of Ireland’s bailed-out banks, Allied Irish Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> (AIB), wants to 
cross-examine the former Lions rugby star on his ability to pay back €14.3m 
(£10.3m) in debt, the commercial court in Dublin has heard.

The hearing followed a €22.6m judgment against two of his companies, forcing 
him to sell his 300-hectare Castlemartin estate in Kildare.

The 18th-century mansion was reportedly sold to the US media mogul John Malone 
in January and the court heard that most of the €7.4m proceeds went towards the 
outstanding AIB debt.


O’Reilly was three times declared Ireland’s richest man, but lost his fortune 
in an attempt to revive the glass and china manufacturer Waterford Wedgwood and 
as a result of debts at the newspaper group Independent News & Media (INM), 
which he controlled before a boardroom bust-up with the telecoms tycoon Denis 
O’Brien.

INM, which owned about 200 titles, was worth up to €1bn during the Celtic 
Tiger boom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fallied-irish-banks-pursues-former-media-tycoon-tony-oreilly-over-14m-debt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431443755030%2F5de4ce72-256a-4517-ac85-91fe8da62362-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Allied%20Irish%20Banks%20pursues%20former%20media%20tycoon%20Tony%20O'Reilly%20over%20%E2%82%AC14m%20debt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fallied-irish-banks-pursues-former-media-tycoon-tony-oreilly-over-14m-debt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Allied%20Irish%20Banks%20pursues%20former%20media%20tycoon%20Tony%20O%27Reilly%20over%20%E2%82%AC14m%20debt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Fallied-irish-banks-pursues-former-media-tycoon-tony-oreilly-over-14m-debt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431443755030%2F5de4ce72-256a-4517-ac85-91fe8da62362-1020x612.jpeg>
 Shorecliffe House in Glandore, Co Cork. O’Reilly’s holiday home was once 
valued at €4.3m but is now up for sale at €1,750,000. Photograph: Sherry 
Fitzgerald 
AIB, which has refused to comment on the proceedings, moved against him last 
June with judgments against two of his companies, Indexia Holdings and 
Brookside Investments, for €18.6m and €4.1m respectively.

The commercial court was reportedly told that AIB wanted to question O’Reilly 
in court as to whether he had any further means of paying off his debt.

It also heard that he is to participate in a personal insolvency arrangement 
in the Bahamas, where O’Reilly also has a home.


According to a report in the Irish Times last year, 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/the-stellar-rise-and-crushing-fall-of-tony-o-reilly-1.1957534>
 the banks had agreed behind closed doors on a debt-reduction programme with 
O’Reilly. He had sold his shares in Heinz and other companies and a further 
private residence in one of Dublin’s most prestigious addresses, Fitzwilliam 
Square.

After the judgment, O’Reilly also put Castlemartin, famed for its art work and 
its stud farm and related lands, up for sale. A third home in Glandore, west 
Cork, was also put on the market.

Mark Harris, a senior manager at AIB, said receivers were appointed to sell 
the Cork property, Shorecliffe, but it remained on the market and it was hoped 
a buyer would be found in the near future.

It was reported that O’Reilly re-mortgaged the Glandore property 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/spectacular-oreilly-glandore-holiday-home-for-sale-30293064.html>
 with AIB in early 2009 at the height of the financial crisis. He had the 
property valued at €4.3m and AIB lent him almost €4m, secured on the house and 
Brookside’s then bank balance of €278,000.

Harris sought an order in the commercial court in Dublin on Monday to get 
further disclosure about the two companies.

The case was adjourned to next month. 
 