
Alliance Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>, Britain's 
largest investment trust, never used to buy back shares on the open market; 
buy-backs were reserved for special cases, such as the bundle Dundee corporate 
neighbour DC Thomson, the Beano people, wished to liquidate a couple of years 
ago.

Then, after activist investor Laxey Partners starting lobbying for formal 
buy-back arrangements to try to close the gap between the share price and value 
of the fund's assets, Alliance discovered a taste for its own equity.

Nothing too serious, you understand – just a few million here and there, and 
certainly not the automatic discount control mechanism (DCM) Laxey wishes to 
see. Katherine Garrett-Cox, Alliance's chief executive, remains firmly opposed 
to accepting a rigid obligation to ensure the discount-to-asset value never 
goes beyond a fixed figure of, say, 10%. She prefers the freedom to conduct 
buy-backs on an ad hoc basis.

Shareholders will be able to vote of Laxey's proposal next month. The activist 
tried to crank up the pressure on Thursday by publishing research it claimed 
demonstrated that DCMs work. It was hardly a concrete case, however, since 
there are usually many reasons why investment trusts trade at discounts to 
asset value. As Garrett-Cox argues, improving Alliance's investment performance 
would probably help matters.

All the same, her recent dabbling with buy-backs looks like an admission that 
Alliance's wide discount – up to 18% at times, and 15% on Thursday – is 
embarrassing. Some three years after her arrival, there is frustration that 
120-year-old Alliance looks only slightly less dull than it used to. She will 
probably win the big vote on 20 May; Alliance's army of small investors have 
not shown rebellious tendencies in the past. But she could help her case by 
talking more openly about the role of buy-backs at Alliance – this issue is 
core stuff at most big investment trusts. More effort required.
 