
Almost half of young Australian adults engage in binge-drinking on at least a 
monthly basis, a new report shows –but across the board rates of alcohol 
consumption are falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/global-drug-survey-many-australians-say-theyre-drinking-too-much-and-want-help>
.

Findings from the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/more-australians-seeking-treatment-for-alcohol-consumption-than-any-other-drug>
on trends in alcohol availability, use and treatment show that 18- to 
24-year-olds are most likely to report risky drinking behaviour.

The report says 47% reported drinking more than four standard drinks on a 
single occasion on at least a monthly basis, 33% consumed 11 or more standard 
drinks on a single occasion at least yearly, and 18% at least monthly.

The Truth About Alcohol review – it’s still not especially good for you, 
shockingly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/27/the-truth-about-alcohol-review-its-still-not-especially-good-for-you-shockingly>
But older Australians were more likely to have more than an average of two 
standard drinks a day, with 23% of respondents aged from 40 to 49 reporting 
what was defined as a “lifetime” risk.


Similarly, nearly half (49%) of respondents receiving treatment were aged in 
their forties. Overall, treatment for alcohol had increased by 20% from a 
decade ago, with patients in 2014-15 most likely to be males aged over 40 and 
living in major cities.

Researchers said it was possible that problems related to drinking did not 
develop until later in life or that people simply did not seek treatment for 
them until then.

The report, released on Friday, assessed trends in alcohol availability, use 
and treatment.
Volume of alcohol consumed per capita 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-07T01:08:56/embed.html>
Tim Beard, a spokesman for the AIHW, said binge-drinking – particularly among 
younger Australians and those living in rural or very remote areas – was at 
odds with the downward trend of consumption rates overall.

“That contrast really jumped out at us.”

He said drinking alcohol in significant quantities became less socially 
acceptable as people aged, and those who reported receiving treatment was “an 
ageing cohort”, seeking help for “habits they formed sometimes 20, 30 years 
ago”.

“They might have been receiving treatment for years.”

In 2013, just over 15 million Australians, about 78% of the population, had 
consumed alcohol in the past year – but the apparent consumption of alcohol as 
determined through sales and taxation data has decreased nationally from 
2003-04 to 2013-14.


Global Drug Survey: many Australians say they're drinking too much and want 
help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/global-drug-survey-many-australians-say-theyre-drinking-too-much-and-want-help>
The proportion of people abstaining – who had never consumed a full serving of 
alcohol – had risen from 17% in 2004 to 22% in 2013; the rate of ex-drinkers 
had also increased.

Alcohol <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> consumption per person 
had also fallen to 9.7 litres in 2013-14 from 10.8l in 2008-9.

The increasing price of alcohol, restrictions on trading hours, and fewer 
outlets were understood to be effective in reducing harms.

“I think there’s a lot more public awareness of the impact of all sorts of 
behaviours on health,” said Beard, noting the National Drug Strategy aimed to 
reduce rates of smoking, drinking and drug abuse across the board through 
prevention.

“It’s not just younger people who aren’t taking it up – it’s a lot of people 
who are giving it up.”

But despite some emerging positive patterns, risky drinking and alcohol 
dependence continued to be significant issues in Australia, particularly among 
some groups.

Remote and very remote areas were more likely to engage in risky drinking than 
people living in major cities, said Beard.
Interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-07T01:03:43/embed.html>
“They’re sort of bucking the trend, unfortunately, when you look at them as a 
group. It’s a small pocket but a notable one.”

The report found 15% of people who identified as lesbian, gay or bisexual 
reported drinking at very high levels each month, compared to 7% of people who 
identified as heterosexual.

Indigenous Australians were more likely than non-Indigenous Australians to 
report risky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/20/alcohol-abuse-behind-high-rates-of-early-death-among-indigenous-study-finds>
 drinking on single occasions, and more than three times as likely to drink at 
very high levels every week – though the gap was decreasing over time.

Alcohol abuse behind high rates of early death among Indigenous, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/20/alcohol-abuse-behind-high-rates-of-early-death-among-indigenous-study-finds>
Alcohol was the leading cause of burden of disease for Australians under the 
age of 45 in 2011; alcohol-use disorders were responsible for 1.5% of the total 
burden of disease.

Research published by the University of Adelaide last week highlighted the 
difficulties experienced by Australians to cut back on their alcohol intake or 
quit altogether.

Ashlea Bartram, a PhD researcher at the university’s School of Public Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, found that people routinely made 
excuses to remove themselves from situations where others were drinking, or 
provided accepted excuses for abstaining such as being unwell or needing to 
drive.

She said it was “quite clear there is a stigma attached” to people attempting 
to change their drinking habits. “It’s as though some kind of social code has 
been violated.”

People tended to make excuses not to attend social gatherings, and instead 
found “new ways to spend time with their peers that weren’t focused on 
alcohol,” Bartram said.
 