
The migrants who pass through this desert outpost seek invisibility even 
before they begin the great trek north. After dusk they flit around the stores 
lining the plaza to stock up on camouflage backpacks, black water bottles and 
special slippers to cover their tracks in the Sonora desert. Then they vanish 
down side streets, heads down, avoiding eye contact.

Mexico's migration crackdown escalates dangers for Central Americans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/mexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown>
It makes no difference. There is no escaping scrutiny. The old man on a bench 
half-reading his paper, the teenagers on bicycles, the men with sunglasses in 
parked SUVs, all silent, all watching.

Altar, a dusty, sun-baked town near Mexico’s border with Arizona, is a staging 
post for those seeking to enter the United States illegally, a wilderness 
Walmart offering guides, transport and supplies ranging from boots to snake 
bite kits.

It has been dubbed a migrant “oasis” 
<http://www.vice.com/video/mexicos-immigrant-oasis>. Times change. These days 
it feels more like a trap.

Organized crime groups routinely extort, kidnap and kill migrants, turning the 
town and surrounding desert into a high-stakes gamble. One roll of the dice 
gets you into the US. Another leaves your bones bleaching in the sand.

“They took my shoes and my phone, left me out there with nothing. I thought, 
man, I’m dead,” said one migrant, “Miguel”, who asked not to use his real name. 
Desperate to rejoin his family in California, from where he had been deported, 
but with no money to pay smugglers, he accepted a Faustian bargain: haul drugs 
on a moonlit desert trek in return for $1,500 and entry to the US.

“The pack was so heavy I could barely carry it. Then I sprained my ankle. So 
they took the pack and ordered me to cross back intoMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>,” said Miguel, back in Altar, 
limping and blistered. “I don’t feel safe here. I’m just prey for them.”

He felt lucky to escape with his life. Gunmen recently ambushed a group of 
Central American migrants 
<http://tucson.com/news/local/border/migrants-ambushed-by-armed-men-in-sonora-officials-told/article_7eafc77d-0b51-526f-88ba-a309bde7defb.html>
 on a border trail, killing three, including two men found in a charred vehicle.

Two rival factions of the Sinaloa cartel known as Los Memos and Los Salazar 
are waging a murderous war for control, leaving dozens dead this year in and 
around the town of Sonoyta, down the highway from Altar. Grisly photographs in 
the local press show their latest innovation: dynamiting captives.

Drug trafficking entwines human trafficking here like desert mistletoe around 
mesquite trees, a remorseless, asphyxiating parasite. “La mafia”, as it is 
called locally, controls a web of hustlers, transporters, flophouses, guides, 
lookouts, enforcers and informants. They are widely perceived to have 
infiltrated police and government agencies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0da9d613bf132882d61e6b370fa22abf1d95f57d%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20'migrant%20oasis'%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20%27migrant%20oasis%27%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0da9d613bf132882d61e6b370fa22abf1d95f57d%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Father Prisciliano Peraza, a Catholic priest and migrant advocate, in front of 
Altar’s church. Photograph: Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
“You pay them or they kill you,” said Prisciliano Peraza, Altar’s priest and 
an outspoken migrant advocate <http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-26870723>. “The 
routes and prices change but the mafia endures.”

The airless heat and the single road in and out of town adds to the sense of 
cloying menace. Instead of camping out in the plaza and shopping around for 
guides, as did their predecessors, migrants lie low hoping to minimise contact 
with predators, including the authorities, who are waging a crackdown on 
US-bound migrants from Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador.

“You can’t trust anyone,” said Carlos Velásquez, 37, slumped in a chair at a 
Catholic church-run migrant shelter. He and three other Mexican would-be border 
crossers had just arrived, filthy, sunburned, thirsty and exhausted. Their 
guide had abandoned them in the desert two days earlier, leaving them wandering 
in circles. Someone – a lookout, they assumed – observed from a distance but 
did not approach. Eventually they found a road and a lift back to Altar.

“People warned us about this place,” said Velásquez. They risked it anyway, 
each agreeing to pay a 5,000-peso ($320) tax to the mafia plus $3,000 to be 
taken to Phoenix, Arizona. Foreigners pay double.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6527d11a55005476e2374e4312a0666ac25ab2ed%2F0_54_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20'migrant%20oasis'%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20%27migrant%20oasis%27%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6527d11a55005476e2374e4312a0666ac25ab2ed%2F0_54_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Carlos Velásquez, a Mexican migrant, rehydrates at a church-run shelter in 
Altar, Mexico, after returning from the desert. Photograph: Rory Carroll for 
the Guardian 
Manuel Cruz, 29, lips chapped, eyes glassy and so worn out he dozed off twice 
during the interview, said his family borrowed the cash so he could join 
relatives working in restaurants in Los Angeles. Three months ago his wife gave 
birth to their first child, a girl. “I want to support them,” said Cruz.

The group felt marooned in Altar, unwilling to trust police, bus drivers or 
government officials lest they feed information to the mafia. “It’s a game of 
mice. Running and hiding,” said Velásquez. “To advance we need to trust 
someone. But who?”

It was not always like this. In the 1980s and early 1990s local smugglers 
known as coyotes would lead groups through the thinly guarded border around 
Mexicali, Nogales and other urban centres, making small detours into wilderness.

‘Flee or die’: violence drives Central America’s child migrants to US border
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/09/central-america-child-migrants-us-border-crisis>
When the US ramped up border security after 9/11, coyotes switched to remoter 
routes through the desert, turning Altar, 60 miles from Arizona, into a major 
migrant hub. By 2007 several thousand reportedly passed through daily, a human 
wave which transformed the sleepy agricultural town.

Instead of tilling fields of cucumber, melon and asparagus locals catered to 
the influx with minivans, hotels, flophouses, packed lunches and hiking 
supplies. The mafia promptly muscled in, demanding a cut.

“The plaza was packed. At night people slept on the pavement, the road, 
everywhere. You wouldn’t believe how busy it was,” Alfredo Triana, 65, a 
store-owner, recalled fondly. In addition to camouflage gear and black water 
bottles (to avoid reflecting sunlight) he sold water tablets and electrolyte as 
well as combs, razors and deodorant – grooming kits to avoid attention upon 
arrival in US cities. Pharmacies also sold birth control kits to female 
migrants who feared rape.

But business has evaporated, Triana sighed. He gestured to the near-empty 
plaza. “Look. Nobody.” Nearby flophouses with optimistic names like Hotel 
Arizona and House of Dreams were quiet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f19768ec85e66da2c4f22826ff652a83150f521%2F0_101_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20'migrant%20oasis'%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20%27migrant%20oasis%27%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f19768ec85e66da2c4f22826ff652a83150f521%2F0_101_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Camouflage clothing, caps and supposedly footprint-erasing slippers on sale in 
Altar. Photograph: Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
The number of migrants has plunged, halting construction of new businesses and 
forcing many hostels and shops to close, said Adrián Caldera, an official with 
Integral Family Development, a government agency. “It’s a recession.”

Apprehensions by US border authorities – an indicator of overall border 
crossings – exceeded 1 million in 2006, after which numbers dropped to 340,252 
by 2011, a dramatic fall attributed to the US recession and massively expanded 
border security, which now includes 4,000 border patrol agents in the Tucson 
sector alone.

Apprehensions have begun to climb again, to 486,651 last year 
<http://www.politifact.com/florida/statements/2014/nov/25/barack-obama/obama-says-illegal-border-crossings-lowest-it-has-/>
, but it remains unclear how much Altar will profit from any rebound in 
migration.

Townspeople confide that the mafia has become too greedy, ratcheting up prices 
and violence and breaking too many “eggs” – a euphemism for migrants. “Word 
gets out,” said one local government official, shaking his head. “It’s ‘watch 
out, don’t come here.’”

But if not here, where? The mafia is entrenched along the 2,000-mile border. 
And US border security whittles down options to desolate, perilous areas such 
as the Sonora desert.

Additionally, years of record deportations under the Obama administration have 
created a generation of hyper-motivated border crossers who will run seemingly 
any risk to rejoin families in the US.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18ebb47cf2a9278c21df2b14eb54dfbc133ccd9c%2F329_0_640_960%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20'migrant%20oasis'%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Altar%2C%20Mexico%3A%20how%20the%20%27migrant%20oasis%27%20for%20would-be%20border%20crossers%20became%20a%20trap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F14%2Faltar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18ebb47cf2a9278c21df2b14eb54dfbc133ccd9c%2F329_0_640_960%2F640.jpg>
 Byron Pineda. Photograph: Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
Byron Pineda, 40, a tow-trucker who spent 28 years in the US, speaks English 
like a gringo and has a wife and two teenage children waiting for him back in 
Los Angeles.

The account of his odyssey from Guatemala through Mexico included rafting 
across one river, wading across another, hiking over mountains to evade police 
patrols, collapsing from hunger, witnessing the rape of a female Honduran 
migrant, losing a friend from a moving train, being stabbed by a mugger, 
joining a circus and finally ending up in Altar, alone and broke, not knowing 
how or when or where he will cross the border, just that somehow, some day, he 
must. “My life is over there. I want to see my kids.”

On Thursday in our series on America’s refugee crisis: Fewer people cross the 
Arizona desert – but more of them die
 