
“There is a well known definition of plot,” Susan Wyndham says at one point 
during theAM Homes  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/am-homes>event at Sydney 
Writers Festival, “‘Things get worse.’ And you do that well.”

Wyndham had just outlined the violence and murkiness in Homes’s dark satires 
of American life: a jailed paedophile, a girl who picks up used condoms and 
inseminates herself, car crashes, adultery, murder. Homes replies, “I think I 
write emotional science fiction. I push at the edges of experience.”


Homes has published eleven works, but it was her latest novel May We Be 
Forgiven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/19/may-we-be-forgiven-am-homes-review>
 that consolidated her prominence, after winning the 2013 women’s prize for 
fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2013/jun/07/am-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview>
 (formerly the Orange prize).

Homes has a slow American drawl. She is funny and sarcastic, and as with much 
of her writing, rarely makes a serious point without injecting some moment of 
humour. This becomes the rhythm of the session, difficult themes and then the 
release of a quip.

Indeed, Homes seems to relish her contrariness, her initials, AM, stand for 
Amy Michael, “I’m so not an Amy. Amys are nice and polite and that’s not me.”

Homes published a memoir in 2007, The Mistresses Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/02/society>, and she is candid in 
the session about the childhood knowledge of her adoption, and then eventually 
meeting with her biological mother. “Being given up and given away I found 
profoundly insulting, and then I met my biological mother and I thought, fine. 
I get it.

“It was such a yank of the rug out from under me, but I wrote it to find 
language for a very primitive emotional experience that might have resonance 
for others.

“For years, my grip on life seemed so tenuous. I wouldn’t buy tickets to 
concerts because I didn’t think I’d be around that long. I wouldn’t buy a big 
pack of toilet paper, because the four pack seemed like enough. Now I feel like 
it’s OK for me to exist. And it sounds traumatic, but it really was traumatic.”

She breaks the mood by quipping “I’m available for adoption again. I have a 
child and pets, I’m the whole package.

“When I wanted to have a child of my own my mother got offended: ‘What, is 
adoption not good enough?’” She laughs. “It’s a fairly common desire!”

Homes discusses her writing process – “I think in imagery, I don’t think in 
words at all” – and notes that she centres her work on such morally ambiguous 
questions because “moral dilemmas interest me a lot, but right and wrong is not 
something I can answer.” She wants her readers to be challenged to answer the 
questions themselves. “There has to be a reason you ask your reader to stop 
living their life and read your book.

“The thing about being a writer is that you can never get promoted. You can 
never become CEO of your company. Whenever you finish a book you just go back 
to being a writer.”
 