
We are rapidly entering into an era where massive computing power, digital 
storage and global network connections can be deployed by anyone as quickly and 
easily as turning on the light. This is the promise – and the reality – ofcloud 
computing <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/cloud> which is driving 
tremendous change in the technology industry and transforming how we do 
business in Europe and around the world.

Europe's fastest growing start-ups, like Hailo, JustEat and WeTransfer, some 
of the largest enterprises, like Royal Dutch Shell, SAP and Unilever, 
governments, education and research institutes, all are using cloud 
technologies to innovate faster and better serve their customers and the 
citizens of Europe.

The Centre for Economic and Business Research <http://www.cebr.com/> computed 
thecumulative economic effects of cloud between 2010 and 2015 in the five 
largest European economies alone to be around €763bn 
<http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=4935>
 (£623bn). IDC notes thecloud economy is growing by more than 20% 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=240634> and could generate nearly 
€1tn (£0.82tn) in GDP and 4m jobs by 2020 
<http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ssai/docs/study45-d2-interim-report.pdf>. This 
is so significant that Europe's policymakers want to enable economic success 
with cloud computing.

The European commission has taken the lead in this discussion. It set up the 
European Cloud Partnership (ECP 
<http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/european-cloud-partnership>) to 
recommend how to promote and shape cloud computing in the region. As a member 
of the steering board of the ECP, I feel privileged to contribute to this 
important work.

With the recent publication of the ECP's Trusted Cloud Europe vision 
<http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/news/trusted-cloud-europe>, I wanted to 
give my view about what's needed to continue to drive adoption of cloud across 
Europe. I believe that what is needed for cloud to be successful relates to 
Europe's core values. As a Dutchman, I hold these values in close regard – such 
as the right to a fair and democratic society and a strong protection of 
privacy and freedom. Cloud – done right – enables broad expression and 
realisation of these values.

For cloud computing to be successful in Europe, providers must hold exceeding 
customer needs as a core value. This is about putting the power in the hands of 
the customer. This means the freedom to walk away at any time when customers 
don't get the service that they expect. For too long customers have been locked 
in to long-term service contracts and expensive software licensing fees. Being 
customer focused means ridding European organisations of these handcuffs and 
democratising technology so that anyone has access to the same, world-class 
technology services on demand.

Some antiquated thinking is attempting to undermine the important work that 
the ECP is doing. In some corners there are calls to develop a cloud framework 
in Europe to protect vested interests and the way that IT "used to be", 
disguised as cloud. I disagree and think this goes against the ethos of the 
ECP, that cloud should serve the customers and citizens of Europe, not 
shareholders of technology companies. Focusing on lowering prices will boost 
the economy and prosperity of local businesses as more capital can be allocated 
to innovation. As a result of this we are already seeing centres of excellence 
emerging in London, Berlin and Barcelona that are beginning to rival Silicon 
Valley. If we focus cloud on lowering the barrier of entry and cost of failure 
we will see more companies experimenting and exploring things previously not 
possible.More experimentation ultimately drives more innovation. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/feb/20/cloud-computing-future-proof-business>

Another core value is putting data protection, ownership, and control, in the 
hands of cloud users. It is essential that customers own and control their data 
at all times. Customers, governments and businesses, large and small alike, 
have concerns about this. If they are not addressed, they will undermine the 
pervasive adoption of cloud and the resulting benefits to European businesses. 
AtAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> Web Services (AWS) we 
decided on day one to put control in the hands of our customers. They own the 
data – they choose where to store it. European customers using the AWS cloud 
can choose to keep their data in Europe.

Cloud computing <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/cloud-computing> must 
benefit the many, not the few. We have seen this with the rapid rise of the 
internet. We will also see this with cloud if we put the power in the hands of 
the customer. I echo the ECP's call to focus the cloud policy framework on 
customers and removing barriers and restrictions to adoption. This will pave 
the way to increased prosperity of European businesses and provide access to 
high quality, secure, and trustworthy cloud services across Europe.

Werner Vogels is vice president and chief technology officer at Amazon.com 
<http://www.amazon.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 