
Top tax officials are exploring whether Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> and eBay can be forced to foot 
the bill for ballooning VAT fraud associated with an army of small overseas 
sellers who are rapidly coming to dominate sales of many popular items on 
Britain’s leading shopping websites.

A Guardian investigation has found that hundreds of high-value gifts including 
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> watches, iPads, Fitbits 
and Panasonic cameras are being sold on Amazon’s UK website without VAT being 
charged.


In recent months, record numbers of small overseas sellers have imported goods 
into Britain in advance of the Christmas rush, arranging for Amazon to dispatch 
the stock from its UK warehouses. Many of these VAT-free sellers give virtual 
office or residential addresses in China,Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> and the US. Little is known about 
them by HM Revenue & Customs.

Last month, eBay said it would report a number of sellers on its site to HMRC 
after theGuardian showed it evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/01/uk-losing-millions-vat-non-eu-sellers-amazon-ebay>
 of Chinese traders giving invalid VAT numbers as well as sharing, or cloning, 
numbers belonging to other businesses.


A Treasury spokesman told the House of Lords 
<http://myparliament.info/Debates/Lords/2015-12-21/12946#contribution-685759> 
that HMRC had set up a taskforce to investigate VAT evasion by overseas 
internet sellers. Urgent meetings with senior figures at Amazon and eBay took 
place last month.

During a short debate on Monday evening this week, Conservative peer Lord 
Lucas claimed 
<http://myparliament.info/Debates/Lords/2015-12-21/12946#contribution-685759> 
Amazon and eBay had been “collaborating with hundreds of overseas retailers to 
defraud the taxman of millions of pounds every day”. The allegation is 
vehemently denied by both.

The firms have insisted responsibility for charging the correct VAT lies with 
sellers using their sites. Amazon andeBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> have said they help sellers 
understand their tax obligations, but have no duty to police compliance. Both 
said they cannot be held liable in cases of evasion.


But Treasury spokesperson Lord Ashton said HMRC was now “looking at all 
possible options”, including “whether online platforms should be made liable 
for VAT”.

In Brussels, senior sources said the current VAT rules belong to a 
pre-internet era and were now open to widespread abuse. One said: “Transport 
costs are going down, logistics are quite easy, the postal market is open to 
everybody – all these factors [have created] a huge increase in trade. And it’s 
very difficult to control … The system is so complicated, it’s open to abuse.”

The number of small packages imported into Europe has more than quadrupled in 
13 years, up from 26m in 2000 to 115m in 2013.

Prices available on Amazon.co.uk <http://amazon.co.uk/> are sometimes 
dramatically cheaper than those offered by high street retailers, which charge 
VAT. In other instances, small overseas sellers offer prices that match, or are 
close to, those available in stores, keeping the missing VAT.

An iPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> Air, sold by Apple and 
Argos for £319 (including VAT of £53.17), is offered on Amazon by a Chinese 
seller for £282. The Guardian contacted the seller asking if it could provide a 
VAT receipt. The seller responded: “We are sorry that we are not VAT 
registered.”

A Fitbit wristband, sold by John Lewis for £93.95, is offered by another 
overseas company for £92.89. Asked if it could provide a VAT receipt, the 
selling firm, which gives as its address a six-bedroom residential house in 
upstate New York, said in an email: “I apolgize [sic] but we do not supply VAT 
invoices.”

The iPad and Fitbit wristband were among 24 popular items in a £1,818.20 
sample order placed on Amazon as part of the Guardian’s investigation. The 
order total included VAT of £0.00.

 Sample order of 24 items shows no VAT being charged. The items are held in 
stock at Amazon’s UK warehouses by Chinese, Hong Kong and US sellers. 
As well as high-value items, the list included lower-priced everyday products 
such as a bike light, corkscrew, memory card and a mobile phone case.

The items were being sold by 23 different sellers that appeared to conduct 
little or no business activity in the UK. Nine gave addresses in Hong Kong, 
eight inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, and six in the US. All 
had arranged for Amazon to hold their stock in the UK, pack and send parcels 
and deal with payment and returns queries.

Most retail businesses with stock in the UK dispatching goods to British 
customers are required to register for VAT with HMRC. Ordinarily, companies 
have an incentive to charge VAT on sales and pass the tax on to HMRC. 
Businesses can then claim back from HMRC the VAT paid on goods bought in the 
course of trading. VAT on most goods is charged at 20% in the UK.

All businesses, whether incorporated in Britain or elsewhere, that supply 
goods from locations in the UK – which includes Amazon warehouses – are 
required to register with HMRC for VAT if they have annual UK sales of more 
than £82,000 a year.

British traders said HMRC can quickly identify UK businesses that must 
register for VAT because they have each company’s corporate tax return. HMRC 
has no information on the UK sales of overseas Amazon traders.

Angry British traders point to signs they say suggest that many overseas 
VAT-free sellers are taking sales well in excess of £82,000 but are not 
registered with HMRC. The signs include having many hundreds of customer 
reviews posted on Amazon each month, or achieving “bestseller” status in 
popular goods categories.

Amazon declined to answer several questions regarding potential VAT abuse by 
overseas sellers using its website and warehouses. In a statement, it said: 
“Marketplace sellers are independent businesses responsible for complying with 
their own VAT obligations. We do offer tools and information to assist sellers 
with their compliance, but we don’t have the authority to review their tax 
affairs. Naturally, we cooperate with HMRC as we are required to by law.”

eBay said it too helps sellers with VAT compliance. “We are committed to 
working with HMRC to ensure our sellers are complying with their legal 
obligations,” it said.


Pressure group Retailers Against VAT Abuse <http://www.ravas.org.uk/> said: 
“Amazon should not be able to abdicate responsibility for handling and 
profiting from fraudulent VAT transactions in the same way that members of the 
public cannot abdicate responsibility for handling stolen goods.”
 