
Huge numbers of VAT fraudsters are illegally selling goods tax-free to British 
shoppers onAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> and eBay this 
Christmas, despite new government efforts to crack down on this ballooning £1bn 
VAT evasion crisis.

A Guardian investigation found a wide variety of popular goods being illegally 
sold without VAT on Britain’s leading shopping sites. They range from cheap 
Christmas tree lights, electric toothbrushes and thermal socks to expensive 
laptops, iPads, music keyboards, violins and pingpong tables.

In some cases, VAT fraudsters offer unbeatable prices. Mostly, however, their 
prices remain in line with law-abiding competitors and the proceeds of evasion 
disappear overseas, often to China.

Black Friday online frenzy as John Lewis sales beat expectations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/black-friday-john-lewis-sales-deals-argos-currys-pc-world>
Guardian investigations found many tax-evading sellers were trading without 
displaying VAT numbers on Amazon oreBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay>. Others were showing made up 
numbers, or numbers cloned, without authorisation, from unsuspecting legitimate 
businesses.

Several sellers purported to be operating through UK trading companies, but 
checks showed these firms had been dissolved, sometimes years earlier. None 
responded to questions about VAT.

HMRC estimates the explosion in VAT fraud on Britain’s shopping websites will 
cost £1bn to £1.5bn in lost VAT revenues this year 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwi_4czJosnQAhWJIcAKHd5HDvYQFgghMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.uk%2Fgovernment%2Fuploads%2Fsystem%2Fuploads%2Fattachment_data%2Ffile%2F507610%2FFulfilment_House_Due_Diligence_Scheme_-_HMRC_consultation.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGD7SsiWWPSY3b972kGldqoXeeTsQ&sig2=AopNipWW70xWhrS3002gmA&bvm=bv.139782543,d.ZGg>
, with much of it going missing in the current festive period.

By the end of “Cyber Monday”. UK shoppers will have spent £6.77bn on the web 
in a seven-day shopping binge that peaked on Black Friday, according to online 
retail associationIMRG 
<https://www.imrg.org/media-and-comment/press-releases/imrg-black-friday-online-retail-forecast-2016/>
. The number of parcels ordered online will beup 12% on last year, it estimates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/road-safety-risk-tired-black-friday-delivery-drivers-health-and-safety-executive>
.

The market for many goods is now dominated by overseas sellers. On eBay, for 
example, 40% of UK sales of Android phones are to firms registered in China. 
Meanwhile, Chinese-based companies account for more than 60% of sales of 
Christmas tree fairy lights on eBay.co.uk.

There is no suggestion that Amazon or eBay have themselves evaded tax, but 
critics claim they could make some basic changes – such as requiring sellers to 
display valid VAT numbers – that would help to stop their websites being used 
by many overseas companies as a platform for industrial-scale fraud.

Both eBay and Amazon insist that it is not their responsibility to police tax 
compliance among sellers. VAT rules are complex but the tax generally applies 
to most goods supplied from locations in the UK even if the seller company is 
incorporated overseas. Shoppers typically see prices that include VAT, charged 
on most goods at the standard rate of 20%.

Amazon told the Guardian: “Marketplace sellers are independent businesses 
responsible for complying with their own VAT obligations.” It added that Amazon 
does offer tools sellers can use to help with tax compliance, but “we don’t 
have the authority to review their tax affairs”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Famazon-ebay-sellers-vat-fraud-ipads-tax-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef40b8699b6e36df8232f3ca3e5c58deb34c136e%2F0_138_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amazon%20and%20eBay%20sellers'%20VAT%20fraud%20rife%20despite%20crackdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Famazon-ebay-sellers-vat-fraud-ipads-tax-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amazon%20and%20eBay%20sellers%27%20VAT%20fraud%20rife%20despite%20crackdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Famazon-ebay-sellers-vat-fraud-ipads-tax-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef40b8699b6e36df8232f3ca3e5c58deb34c136e%2F0_138_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 EBay said it ‘continually reminds’ sellers of their need to comply with the 
law. Photograph: eBay/PA 
EBay said it would pass information from the Guardian’s investigation to HMRC: 
“If we are informed by HMRC that a seller is not complying with requirements 
then we will take appropriate action.” A spokesperson said eBay “continually 
reminds” sellers of their need to comply with the law and had recently warned 
overseas firms of the UK government’s efforts to deal with VAT fraud.

After the Guardian first highlighted rife VAT evasion on online shopping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/01/uk-losing-millions-vat-non-eu-sellers-amazon-ebay>
 sites, HMRC launched aseries of warehouse raids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/14/tax-inspectors-raid-warehouse-containing-500000-of-illegal-goods>
, seizing £500,000 of goods. Months later, the then chancellor George Osborne 
gave tax inspectors new powers whichhe said demonstrated “firm action to 
protect the UK market from unfair online competition 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/508193/HMT_Budget_2016_Web_Accessible.pdf>
 [from overseas VAT evaders]”.

Under the new rules, HMRC now has the power to issue Amazon and eBay with 
warning notices about suspected VAT fraudsters using their sites. If they then 
fail to take action, Amazon and eBay can be held liable for any VAT that later 
goes missing.

In reality, however, these changes have had little impact and VAT evasion 
remains widespread. A spokesperson forVATfraud.org <http://www.vatfraud.org/>, 
a campaign group set up by UK-based sellers, said: “Despite the new laws, HMRC 
have shown a woeful lack of action. There are many fraudsters who were reported 
to HMRC years ago but are still trading, and evading VAT, today.”

Guardian investigations found Amazon even offering extensive support services 
at its British warehouses to overseas sellers that were doing little to mask 
their VAT evasion.

As well as advertising these sellers’ goods on Amazon.co.uk, it holds items in 
Amazon UK warehouses, arranges delivery to addresses across Britain, and deals 
with complaints and returned goods.

Amazon warehouse staff even offer gift-wrapping services on behalf of the 
fraudster sellers.

There is no suggestion Amazon or eBay knowingly facilitate specific fraudulent 
VAT-free sales, but the two US groups are nevertheless well aware that evasion 
in online shopping is a major problem.

Meanwhile, the sellers themselves are often based overseas, with little or 
nothing known about their UK sales activities by HMRC.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Famazon-ebay-sellers-vat-fraud-ipads-tax-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a6dfdde4fc1d230c84c741dd845eff4109ee581%2F9_0_970_582%2F970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amazon%20and%20eBay%20sellers'%20VAT%20fraud%20rife%20despite%20crackdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Famazon-ebay-sellers-vat-fraud-ipads-tax-free%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amazon%20and%20eBay%20sellers%27%20VAT%20fraud%20rife%20despite%20crackdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Famazon-ebay-sellers-vat-fraud-ipads-tax-free%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a6dfdde4fc1d230c84c741dd845eff4109ee581%2F9_0_970_582%2F970.jpg>
 Checkout windows for an iPad Air 2 from the Apple Store (left) and an Amazon 
seller 
One such seller, a company based in Dubai, offered an iPad Air 2 for sale on 
Amazon.co.uk.


The iPad was sold at £456.68, which was a similar price to that on offer at 
Apple’s own online store. However, the Apple store price included a £78.17 VAT 
charge while the Dubai-based Amazon seller charged no VAT at all.

Asked for a VAT receipt, the iPad seller said in an email: “We don’t supply UK 
VAT receipt, sorry.”

Many sellers contacted by the Guardian were similarly open about not charging 
VAT. “Thank you for your letter and sorry to tell you we do not have UK VAT 
receipt. We are located in China,” said one. “Our VAT is still in the 
application,” said another.

 A third seller even offered to cut a deal, offering to share part of the 
proceeds of the VAT fraud. “If you want the VAT receipt, it will be after your 
purchase a week later. Otherwise, we will offer some discount to you directly,” 
the seller said in an email. “Looking forward to your reply.”
 