
Amazon plans to create more than 100,000 jobs in the United States, from 
software development to warehouse work, becoming the latest company to boast a 
hiring spree sinceDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 won the US presidential election in November.

The world’s largest online retailer announced on Thursday that it would grow 
its full-time US workforce by more than 50% to more than 280,000 in the next 18 
months.

Amazon is spending heavily on new warehouses so it can stock goods closer to 
customers and fulfill orders quickly and cheaply. The new hires, from Florida 
to Texas to California, will be key to the company’s promise of two-day 
shipping to members of itsAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>
 Prime shopping club, which has given it an edge over rivals.

Amazon removes Indian flag doormat after minister threatens visa ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/india-amazon-flag-doormats-canada>
A BGC Partners analyst, Colin Gillis, said hiring was expected. “Amazon 
continues to meaningfully grow above e-commerce rates and continues to take 
share from traditional retailers,” he said.

The e-commerce giant said in October it would add 26 fulfillment centers in 
2016, mostly in North America. More are under construction.

The new jobs will extend beyond Amazon’s Seattle headquarters to communities 
across the United States, CEO Jeff Bezos said in the release. Amazon did not 
break down what share of jobs would go to corporate roles versus fulfillment 
work.
A spokesman for Trump’s transition team gave the president-elect partial 
credit for the announcement.

“The president-elect met with heads of several of the tech companies and urged 
them to keep their jobs and production inside the United States,” spokesman 
Sean Spicer told reporters.

Job creation has become a hot-button political issue since the 8 November 
election. Ford Motor Co last week reversed plans for a$1.6bn factory in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/donald-trump-general-motors-tax-chevrolet-cruz>
 and said it would add 700 jobs in Michigan after receiving criticism from 
Trump.
The president-elect on Wednesday said he would be “the greatest jobs producer 
that God ever created”.

Trump had criticized Amazon during his campaign, saying the technology giant 
did not pay its fair share of taxes.

Amazon shares were up less than 1% in early afternoon trading.
 