
Amazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> says it has 
successfully trialled its Prime Air drone delivery service in Cambridge, UK, by 
delivering a TV streaming stick and bag of popcorn directly to the garden of a 
nearby customer.

The breakthrough suggests that autonomous aerial delivery could become a 
viable business sooner than thought, albeit only for customers with huge 
gardens, who live close to the delivery depot, and want items weighing less 
than 2.6kg.

Additionally, while deliveries will be available seven days a week, the drones 
can only fly in daylight hours and clement weather. Currently, the trial is 
only open to two customers, but Amazon says it hopes to expand that to dozens 
in the coming months. For those customers, Prime Air is available for no extra 
cost.

The company says the delivery, which took place last week, involved fully 
autonomous flight, with no human pilot involved in the process. The success was 
announced by Amazon chief executive Jeff Bezos,who tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/JeffBezos/status/809034847121350657>: “first ever 
#AmazonPrimeAir customer delivery is in the books. 13 min—click to delivery.” 
Amazon released a video of the flight but no press were invited to witness the 
test.
Jeff Bezos (@JeffBezos) 
First-ever #AmazonPrimeAir 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AmazonPrimeAir?src=hash> customer delivery is in 
the books. 13 min—click to delivery. Check out the video:https://t.co/Xl8HiQMA1S
 <https://t.co/Xl8HiQMA1S> pic.twitter.com/5HGsmHvPlE <https://t.co/5HGsmHvPlE>
 <https://twitter.com/JeffBezos/status/809034847121350657> December 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JeffBezos/status/809034847121350657> 
Amazon’s drone testing facility on the outskirts of Cambridge has been 
operating since summer 2015,according to documents revealed under a freedom of 
information request 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/amazon-drones-tested-uk-for-longer-than-thought-2016-11>
. That was when the company invited the Civil Aviation Authority to witness its 
first test flight.

Government regulations in the UK are generally considered favourable to 
companies wanting to experiment with autonomous aircraft, but the restrictions 
still heavily limit what Amazon can test. The company is allowed to test drones 
that fly beyond line-of-sight in rural and suburban areas; flights where one 
person operates multiple largely autonomous drones; and sensor performance 
associated with sense-and-avoid technology.

Amazon first announced its intention to deliver packages by drone in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/02/amazon-drone-delivery-jeff-bezos-hype>
, in a lavishly-produced special on US TV show 60 Minutes. At the time, Bezos 
suggested that the company would begin delivery in 2018, a timescale 
commentators called “hugely optimistic”, citing a number of concerns around 
theft, liability and safety. The latest limited trials suggest that Amazon 
still intends to hit that 2018 target, albeit by sidestepping many of the 
concerns through the limited nature of the rollout.

Amazon isn’t alone in the field: Google’s experimental sibling, X, has a 
long-running drone delivery project of its own,Project Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/03/alphabet-testing-project-wing-delivery-drones-us>
. Its prototypes use a fixed-wing drone, and are aimed at deliveries to 
particularly isolated rural customers.
 