
Comic book writer Harvey Pekar, creator of the acclaimed autobiographical 
seriesAmerican Splendor <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-splendor>, 
died early yesterday morning aged 70.

The Cleveland resident's local paper reported <> that his wife discovered him 
dead at home. Pekar was recently diagnosed with prostate cancer, and also 
suffered from high blood pressure, clinical depression and asthma, according to 
local media. An autopsy was to determine the cause of death, the paper said.

Pekar chronicled the mundane trials and tribulations of his everyday life as a 
hospital file clerk in the American Splendor series, first illustrated by the 
controversial cartoonist Robert Crumb, a friend whose work inspired Pekar to 
begin writing his own dry take on American life. 
<http://www.amazon.com/reader/0345468309?_encoding=UTF8&ref_=sib_dp_bod_ex&page=8#reader_0345468309>
"My name has been a matter of some concern to me over the years," Pekar wrote 
in one edition of the comic. "When I was younger my acquaintances would tease 
me because of my name. They'd say, 'Harvey pees in his car.' Once my best 
friend made an admittedly witty remark about my name. He said, 'What comes 
after the dining car? â€“ the pee car!' Despite this we remained friends ..."

The first anthology of American Splendor won the American Book Award in 1987. 
The Guardian called Pekar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/aug/19/johnpatterson.edinburghfilmfestival2003>
 "a comic-book hero who is a lot easier to identify with than any X-Person, 
Hulk, Daredevil, Terminatrix or Governator", and said that "if he were an 
X-Man, his special power would be a pronounced ability to bitch and moan on 
cue".

"The humour of everyday life is way funnier than what the comedians do on TV," 
Pekar once said. "It's the stuff that happens right in front of your face when 
there's no routine and everything is unexpected. That's what I want to write 
about."

The series was adapted into a film starring Paul Giamatti in 2003. "Harvey was 
one of the most compassionate and empathetic human beings I've ever met,"
Giamatti said in a statement to the Associated Press 
<http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/us_obit_harvey_pekar>. "He had a huge brain and an 
even bigger soul. And he was hilarious. He was a great artist, a true American 
poet, and there is no one to replace him."
 