
The US war hero profiled in the highest-grossing war movie of all time, 
American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/american-sniper-review-clint-eastwood-bradley-cooper>
, lied about the medals he received for bravery on the battlefield,The 
Intercept website has reported 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/05/25/american-sniper-chris-kyle-distorted-his-military-record-documents-show/>
.

Chris Kyle, who died in 2013 and was portrayed by Bradley Cooper in Clint 
Eastwood’s 2014 film, wrote in his autobiography that he received two silver 
stars and five bronze stars for valour during his service with the Navy Seals 
during the Iraq war.

But The Intercept states the US Navy’s official record for Kyle, known as the 
deadliest sniper in US military history, confirms he in fact received one 
silver star and three bronze stars for valour. The website obtained the 
information through a data request application.

Clint Eastwood: American Sniper and I are anti-war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/17/clint-eastwood-american-sniper-anti-war>
American Sniper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper> grossed 
$517m worldwide, overtaking Saving Private Ryan to become the highest-grossing 
war movie ever. Eastwood’s film was also the highest-grossing film of 2014 at 
the US box office, where it cultivated huge popularity among US military 
communities and supporters.

The Intercept notes that Kyle’s official separation document, known as a 
DD214, lists two Silver Stars and six Bronze Stars with Valour, a tally higher 
than the sniper cited in his autobiography. However, the site quotes a 
spokesperson for the Navy Personnel Command, Cullen James, who confirms that the
navy’s official record 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2841171-Kyle-Citations.html> is the 
“authoritative” source “for verifying entitlement to decorations and awards”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Famerican-sniper-hero-chris-kyle-medal-tally%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03ce863c08534fe08b721fb6421efe7884b6aaa8%2F0_9_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Sniper%20hero%20Chris%20Kyle%20'lied%20about%20medal%20tally'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Famerican-sniper-hero-chris-kyle-medal-tally%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Sniper%20hero%20Chris%20Kyle%20%27lied%20about%20medal%20tally%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Famerican-sniper-hero-chris-kyle-medal-tally%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03ce863c08534fe08b721fb6421efe7884b6aaa8%2F0_9_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Bradley Cooper as Chris Kyle with Sienna Miller in American Sniper, 2014. 
Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
Kyle was shot dead by the former US marine Eddie Ray Routh at a gun range in 
Stephenville, Texas, in 2013. Kyle and his friend Chad Littlefield, who also 
died in the shooting, had taken Routh there to try and help him overcome 
personal issues, including suspected post-traumatic stress disorder.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Famerican-sniper-chris-kyle-killer-eddie-ray-routh-sentenced-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424855740513%2Fcrop_KP_103687_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Sniper%20Chris%20Kyle%E2%80%99s%20killer%2C%20Eddie%20Ray%20Routh%2C%20gets%20life%20sentence%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Famerican-sniper-chris-kyle-killer-eddie-ray-routh-sentenced-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Sniper%20Chris%20Kyle%E2%80%99s%20killer%2C%20Eddie%20Ray%20Routh%2C%20gets%20life%20sentence%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F25%2Famerican-sniper-chris-kyle-killer-eddie-ray-routh-sentenced-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F25%2F1424855740513%2Fcrop_KP_103687_640x360.jpeg>
American Sniper Chris Kyle’s killer, Eddie Ray Routh, gets life sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/feb/25/american-sniper-chris-kyle-killer-eddie-ray-routh-sentenced-video>
Routh was found guilty of murder and sentenced to life in prison without parole
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/american-sniper-trial-eddie-ray-routh-found-guilty-and-sentenced-to-life-in-prison-without-parole>
 in February 2015. More than 7,000 people attended a memorial service for Kyle 
at Cowboys Stadium near Dallas, a scene depicted in Eastwood’s film.

The real American Sniper was a hate-filled killer. Why are simplistic patriots 
treating him as a hero? | Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/06/real-american-sniper-hate-filled-killer-why-patriots-calling-hero-chris-kyle>
As the Guardian’s Alex von Tunzelman wrote last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jan/20/why-american-snipers-historical-dishonesty-misleads>
, it’s not the first time Kyle has been accused of manipulating the truth for 
the purposes of self-aggrandisement: “In 2014, wrestler-turned-politician Jesse 
Venturawon more than $1.8m (£1.2m) in damages 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/checkpoint/wp/2014/07/29/jesse-ventura-wins-1-8-million-in-damages-against-chris-kyle-slain-navy-seal-sniper/>
 from the former Navy Seal’s estate after a jury decided he had been defamed. 
Kyle claimed he had punched Ventura in a bar after Ventura said Navy Seals 
‘deserved to lose some’ for their actions in Iraq. Ventura said he had never 
even met Kyle.”

Kyle also told a writer he killed two armed men who attempted to carjack him 
in Dallas – but reporters could not confirm this with officials, who stated the 
incident had never occurred. Kyle’s additional claim that he and a fellow 
sniper killed 30 armed civilians he thought were making trouble during the 
aftermath of Hurricane Katrina could not be confirmed by any of the relevant 
authorities either.

Kyle’s widow, Tara Kyle, has not yet made any public comment on the claims in 
the Intercept article.
 