
Just days after the man who shot and killed American Sniper subject Chris Kyle 
and his comrade Chad Littlefield wasfound guilty of murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/feb/25/american-sniper-chris-kyle-killer-eddie-ray-routh-sentenced-video>
, a tribute song recorded by one of Kyle’s own team-mates is taking the country 
by storm.


The song, Hearts I Leave Behind, was written by Travis Meadows 
<http://travismeadows.com/> (the soulful writer behind current hits Riser and 
What We Ain’t Got) and recorded by Kyle’s friend, former Navy SealPete Scobell 
<http://petescobell.com/>. Scobell also enlisted Wynonna Judd 
<http://www.wynonna.com/> to provide vocals to the ballad, which has quickly 
reached the No 1 spot on the iTunes country chart. “I’ll never have to say 
goodbye/I’ll live in the hearts I leave behind,” they sing tenderly over light 
acoustic instrumentation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz7iWRiIf3T8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz7iWRiIf3T8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz7iWRiIf3T8&media=>
Kyle’s late wife, Taya, posted on his official Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/HonorChrisKyle/photos/a.608968559164379.1073741831.401933139867923/850307188363847/?type=1>
 on Wednesday to announce the track. “On the Patriot Tour last year the crew on 
the bus included our good friend and Chris’s teammate Pete Scobell who was the 
musician on tour with us,” she wrote. “He played The Hearts I Leave Behind. 
With tears rolling down my face, I looked at Pete and said, ‘You have to record 
this song.’ This song is Chris. It is me. It is all the people who carry Chris 
in the hearts he left behind.”

Aaron Watson's success proves that country radio is out of touch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/feb/26/aaron-watson-country-radio-gary-overton>
All proceeds from the song are being donated to the Chris Kyle Frog Foundation 
<https://www.chriskylefrogfoundation.org/about/the-foundation/>, an 
organization whose goal is “to provide meaningful, interactive experiences to 
service members, first responders and their families, aimed at enriching their 
family relationships”.
 