
Over the course of more than a decade, the US government spent in excess of 
$41bn (£33bn) on HIV prevention and treatment without investing in targeted 
prevention for adolescent girls and young women abroad.

Adolescent girls were instead lumped in with adult women in prevention 
programmes such asprevention of mother to child transmission 
<http://www.who.int/hiv/topics/mtct/en/>, which was a critical intervention but 
did not address the unique health needs and risk factors for girls. In parts of 
Africa, 90% ofnew infections in adolescents occur in girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/un-calls-for-urgent-action-to-protect-young-women-from-hivaids-in-africa>
, so this left an enormous gap.

 The US investment mainly supported life-saving antiretroviral treatment for 
7.7 million men, women and children, as well as HIV testing and counselling for 
more than 14.2 million pregnant women (leading to 240,000 infants born 
HIV-free), and HIV testing and counselling for almost 58 million people.

But when it came to young adults, pressure from conservative religious 
organisations and policymakers prompted the US tospend $1.4bn on 
abstinence-only and fidelity-in-marriage programmes 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-u-s-blew-1-4-billion-on-abstinence-education-in-africa/>
. These initiatives have had no impact whatsoever on reducing new HIV 
infections, regardless of where they have been implemented.

 But in 2014, America turned a corner with the advent of a two-year programme 
<https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/global-health/hiv-and-aids/technical-areas/dreams>
 for HIV prevention in adolescent girls and young women. The scheme prioritises 
social and educational tools in addition to biomedical interventions in 10 
countries across sub-Saharan Africa. About $385m has been allocated for this 
programme through theDreams partnership 
<http://www.genderhealth.org/files/uploads/The_DREAMS_Partnership_EN.pdf>, a 
public-private collaboration with other aid organisations.

 Through the partnership, girls have access to adolescent-friendly 
reproductive health services and information about consistent use of male and 
female condoms, pre-exposure prophylaxis, HIV testing and counselling, and 
other contraceptive choices. As sexual violence is a contributor to the spread 
of HIV among girls and women, there is also a focus on learning about violence 
prevention and post-violence care, including post-exposure prophylactics that 
can prevent HIV infection after rape.

The programme has put into use the Girl Roster 
<http://www.popcouncil.org/uploads/pdfs/Girl_Roster_flyer.POPCOUNCIL.2015.pdf>, 
a new tool created by the Population Council to identify girls who are 
particularly at risk of HIV and hard to find, with prevention efforts focused 
accordingly. Dreams also provides girls and their families with access to 
financial literacy and savings education programmes.

We must all fight harder than ever for continued investment in HIV prevention 
for adolescent girls and young women

 Implemented by medical providers, community-based organisations and schools, 
the scheme promises real progress for girls. But while it could have 
far-reaching effects in combating HIV, it cannot survive on private backing 
alone.

Funding cuts to US foreign aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/12/us-aid-women-sexual-health-worldwide-could-be-cut-drastically-under-trump>
 are not the only danger. The threatenedreinstatement of the “global gag” rule 
<http://pai.org/30-years-of-the-global-gag-rule/> – an executive order that 
restricts US foreign aid from supporting any organisation that provides 
abortion-related activities, even with non-US funds – could have potentially 
devastating consequences for the Dreams programme. If the policy is reinstated 
by the incoming Republican administration, funding could end for some of the 
most innovative and promising partners for adolescent girls, who need a variety 
of services to prevent HIV, including access to contraceptives and violence 
screening services. This only hurts the fight to combat HIV.

 While Donald Trump may not yet have a governing record on the health and 
rights of women and girls, vice-president-elect Mike Pence’s record is long and 
vexing. Pence, the outgoing governor of Indiana and former Republican 
congressman who is heading up the Trump transition team, has an extensive 
record ofchampioning policies that are hostile to women, science, and human 
rights 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/judystone/2016/10/09/elections-matter-why-pence-is-a-scary-option-for-women-and-public-health/#1ed3028f6e25>
.

 Pence is a fierce proponent of abstinence-only education as part of domestic 
and foreign HIV funding. As a member of Congress, Pence supported legislation 
to reinstate the gag rule and, as a governor, he spearheaded the closure of
Planned Parenthood clinics in his state 
<https://www.plannedparenthoodaction.org/blog/8-outrageous-facts-about-mike-pencerecord-reproductive-rights>
. These clinics did not perform abortions but did provide testing for sexually 
transmitted diseases such as HIV. Under his administration, Indiana experienced 
the largest documented outbreak of HIV infections in two decades.

US aid for women’s sexual health worldwide under threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/12/us-aid-women-sexual-health-worldwide-could-be-cut-drastically-under-trump>
 Other Trump hires seem similarly unpromising for women’s health policy. As 
governor of South Carolina,Nikki Haley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/nikki-haley-named-us-ambassador-to-united-nations>
, who has been named ambassador to the UN,rejected state-level matched funds 
through the Affordable Care Act 
<https://thinkprogress.org/south-carolina-gov-haley-rejects-millions-of-federal-dollars-to-help-state-create-health-care-3e4eda70a8d4#.v9e2a2xon>
 that would have contributed to HIV treatment for low-income people. This 
despite South Carolina’s high rate of new HIV infections, which has had a 
devastating effect on African American women.

 Just last week, Michele Sidibé, the UNAids executive director, called for 
action in helping to prevent HIV infections among girls and young women in 
Africa. He said that thousands are still infected each week, making the UN 
target of reducing new infections to fewer than 100,000 a year by 2020 way off 
course.

 As we mark World Aids Day <https://www.worldaidsday.org/> with a Trump-Pence 
administration looming, we must redouble our commitment to advancing the health 
and rights of women and girls. Advocates, donors and NGOs must work harder than 
ever to fight for continued investment in HIV prevention for adolescent girls 
and young women.

 Moreover, we must be vigilant in our fight against policies that pull the rug 
out from under women and girls and threaten global public health outcomes.

 The bottom line is that we can’t turn the tide on HIV without women and girls.
 