
As a “pretentious 17-year-old” Amit Chaudhuri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amit-chaudhuri> read, “from cover to 
cover”, bothJames Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>’s 
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man-11.html> 
andUlysses <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/ulysses-12.html>. “What I wanted 
was for great literature to provide me with serious thoughts and serious 
subjects,” he recalls. “But what I got was Bloom frying kidneys and Stephen 
Dedalus overhearing the sound of a cricket match in the distance and I was left 
bored and resentful.” Seven years later, Chaudhuri, having by then been a 
student in London and finding himself convalescing from a dose of jaundice, 
re-read Joyce alongside a first reading ofTolstoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/leonikolaevichtolstoy>’s Anna Karenina. “Of 
course I admired what a remarkable bookAnna Karenina is. But I realised my 
heart was with Joyce. When I was younger I didn’t see what he was doing with 
the everyday and the mundane. When I re-read him, I realised that is where the 
achievement is, and that is what appealed to me.”

Chaudhuri has had a wide-ranging literary career – in addition to being an 
acclaimed musician – as an anthologist, critic, essayist, poet and as a 
novelist, of whomHilary Mantel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel>
, picking up on his fascination with, and facility for, depicting the everyday, 
said that he has, “like Proust, perfected the art of the moment”. His sixth and 
latest novel,Odysseus Abroad, follows a young Indian student, Ananda, over the 
course of one day in 1980s London. Living in identical circumstances, and 
sharing much the same worldview as Chaudhuri, he is anxious about books and his 
separation from the culture around him as he travels from his bedsit in Warren 
Street to visit his uncle in Belsize Park. Chaudhuri’s publisher draws 
comparison with the detailed minutiae ofKarl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard>, but the primary 
influence on the book isUlysses, and behind that Homer’s Odyssey.

“It is based on my experiences as a miserable undergraduate when my only real 
contact was an unmarried uncle,” says Chaudhuri. “He’d lived in London for 
about 30 years, deeply alienated and miserable himself, partly because of 
self-imposed conditions of exile and fake penury.” The genesis of the novel 
came years later, back in India, when Chaudhuri bought a charcoal self-portrait 
by the Indian artist FN Souza. “My uncle came to visit when he heard I had 
spent 55,000 rupees [about £700 then] on a painting. When he saw it, he said I 
might as well have paid him 55,000 rupees for farting.”

Souza looked a little like his uncle, says Chaudhuri, “and they also were 
similar in both being great ranters. Souza had called his figure Ulysses. Joyce 
had already taught me that it was possible to see people around you as mythical 
figures and so for the first time I thought about my uncle being a kind of 
Odysseus, and also a kind of parody of Odysseus in the sense that Joyce had 
created a parody of Odysseus.”

Amit Chaudhuri: travelling between genres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/04/amit-chaudhuri-travelling-between-genres>
He “circled round” the idea for about a decade before the elements began to 
fit together. “My journey in London that so often ended up in my uncle’s 
kitchenette could be seen like a journey Telemachus had made, with all the 
spoof elements of that statement intact. Then I remembered – how could I 
forget! – the noisy neighbours who had made my life hell in Warren Street. 
These people could be the suitors. My own sense of misery in trying to make 
sense of oneself in a city where you were looked at according to certain 
stereotypes and parameters could structure the beginning of the book, in terms 
of both Telemachus’s alienation and also Joyce’s Stephen’s alienation. In 
addition to all this, I was studying English literature and trying to make 
sense of that as well.”

The backdrop to the novel is saturated with the detail of Chaudhuri’s world: 
the TV he watched –Mr Benn, Terry and June, Rising Damp; the hum of low-level 
racist threat on the streets; the Lit Crit theory wars of the academy and even 
the ongoing implications of Indian partition with key scenes taking place in a 
Sylheti-owned restaurant, the region in what became Bangladesh from where both 
sides of his family were displaced in 1947. “I’d taken my cue from Joyce’s 
incorporation of what he knew and his own life. Once you decide that, then 
something like partition, which was so important to my family, was always going 
to be part of a story about a man based on my uncle.”

Chaudhuri was born in Calcutta – as he still calls it – in 1962, but was 
brought up in the “sterile, corporate world of Bombay”, where his father was 
the first Indian CEO of the Britannia Biscuits Company: “the name tells the 
story”. From an early age, Chaudhuri’s ambitions – “fantasies, really” – were 
both musical and literary. For a long time he wanted to be a “Canadian 
singer-songwriter”, until, under the influence and tutelage of his mother, he 
became interested in Indian classical music. All the while, he also harboured 
plans to be “a famous poet”. By the time he did his A-levels, by a 
correspondence course, “I was leading a very peculiar life. All my time was 
taken up practicing, so the only people I would hang out with were either these 
very traditional musicians or my parents.”

When he won a place studying English at University College London – helped by 
the personal intervention, it emerged years later, of editor and UCL professor 
Karl Miller, who, on the basis of Chaudhuri writing about the books he was 
reading, dispensed with the need for an interview – he found himself equally 
isolated in London. “I hardly went to college; I hung out with no one, apart 
from my uncle, and was kind of in hiding. At home in Warren Street I felt 
threatened by neighbours, so I would go into the streets were I felt very 
visible, exhibiting what Naipaul called the colonial’s ‘raw nerves’, but also 
invisible in terms of who I thought I really was. My grand sense of myself was 
not being appeased. I was generally out of sorts and unhappy until I met my 
third-year tutor Dan Jacobson, who made me see that, despite all my misery, 
there was also intellectual generosity in London.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Famit-chaudhuri-i-use-real-memoirists-throw-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423762058443%2Fdc0f59a8-7853-4e50-843a-f996f0a2020b-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amit%20Chaudhuri%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20use%20the%20things%20that%20real%20memoirists%20throw%20out%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Famit-chaudhuri-i-use-real-memoirists-throw-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amit%20Chaudhuri%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20use%20the%20things%20that%20real%20memoirists%20throw%20out%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F14%2Famit-chaudhuri-i-use-real-memoirists-throw-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423762058443%2Fdc0f59a8-7853-4e50-843a-f996f0a2020b-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Chaudhuri in Oxford in 1993. Photograph: Martin Argles for Guardian 
The novelist and critic Jacobson appears in Odysseus Abroad as Nestor 
Davidson, a version of the wise elder Nestor in the Odyssey. “But I think my 
tribute to someone who guides Ananda on his journey is far more affectionate 
than Joyce’s, or even Homer’s.”

Chaudhuri’s own journey took to him to the pages of the London Review of 
Books, via Miller – as a poet, then later as a critic – and to Oxford 
University for post-graduate study ofDH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence>’s poetry. But his “real priority 
was still to become a famous poet”. However, as soon as he did manage to 
publish some poems, he changed tack to write a “novel without a story”,A 
Strange and Sublime Address 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/strange-and-sublime-address.html>, which 
featured another of his uncles – “I once told Colm Tóibín about my family and 
he said I would never be short of material” – before embarking on a second 
novel about a musically inclined Indian student at Oxford. His course ended in 
the “bizarre situation” of him taking his viva for his DPhil in the same week 
that the reviews for his second novel came out. “But in a sense the project had 
worked in that I had become a published writer while pretending to be a 
student.”

Those reviews were good, and Chaudhuri’s career began in earnest. Two more 
well-received novels were published, along with short stories and criticism. 
But, he says, beyond “a few LRB parties”, he never really joined in London 
literary life, and by the end of the 90s, he actively wanted to escape it. “I 
felt it was being shaped, curtailed and changed by Thatcher’s legacy in the 
time of Tony Blair. It was becoming less literary as it became more 
metropolitan. Figures that interested me, such asTed Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tedhughes> and Philip Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiplarkin>, had shown it was quite 
possible to be in the mainstream and influential without being part of it. That 
seemed to change with the emergence of megacities in the globalised world, 
whether New York, Delhi or London. It was problematic enough to want to move. 
To stop me feeling I was drying up as a writer.”

He moved to Calcutta in 1999 for practical reasons – his ageing parents were 
there, he and his wife, whom he had met at Oxford, thought it would be a good 
place to bring up their daughter – and literary ones. “I’d always romanticised 
Calcutta. Although the city had been in decline for decades, it still had the 
residues of an intellectual history and I felt I could access the unexpected 
there. And although I am quite cut off in Calcutta – it’s just the way I am. 
The people closest to me are immediate family and a few others – I do encounter 
a world where the everyday rhythms of life contain an amazing animation.”

The move did spark his creativity, but not initially as a novelist. “I edited 
an anthology, I wrote criticism and essays and short stories and I made music. 
It was probably suicidal in career terms, but I didn’t want be too closely 
identified with a genre, the novel, I thought was becoming too dominant. I 
wanted to escape the rules of publishing we were being discreetly instructed 
in: that you produce a novel every two or three years, your backlist has a 
fresh life and then you produce another novel; and everything you think, see or 
do has to be channelled into the novel. Everything I think, see or do cannot 
produce just another novel. I wanted to get out of that, and music was one 
means of doing that.”

I wanted to escape the rules of publishing: everything I think, see or do 
cannot produce just another novel

After pushing the Canadian singer-songwriters to one side as anachronisms in 
the late 70s – “no one thought we would still be listening toNeil Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/neilyoung> or Joni Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonimitchell> today” – he got back into his 
record collection and began a new project of experimental music that takes in 
classical, rock and electronica and has now spawned two albums, with another 
planned. Chaudhuri didn’t return to novels untilThe Immortals 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/immortals-258077.html> in 2009, a story set in 
Bombay during the 1970s and 80s featuring mother and son musicians. Has he ever 
been reticent about using aspects of his own biography?

“The things I use are the things that real memoirists, especially today, would 
throw out of the window. The moment I realised I could talk about not only 
myself, but something totally unimportant such as the experience of looking at 
the sunshine on a street, and bring these completely inconsequential things 
into this hallowed domain, that energised me and took me out of literature and 
its legitimate subjects into something new.”

In respect of the new novel he says he did pause “for a few seconds” in 
anticipation of people making comparisons between him and Joyce. “But when 
something is parodied or made use of, it is usually something canonical. And 
the very fact that it is canonical means that it has helped you in some way 
read other books and read life. So now you bring your own life to bear on those 
texts and there is a moment of taking stock of something that has been 
formative for you. You just don’t do that with marginal books; you only do that 
with central books. But at the same time as I was, hopefully unobtrusively, 
embedding the novel with references toThe Odyssey and Ulysses to galvanise the 
work, they are also there to be fun and to be made fun of. What you want is a 
retranslation, another take, not simply a cover version by a tribute band.”
 