
Artists choose non-fiction over fiction for a variety of reasons. The most 
singular case I've come across involves a film-maker from Kerala,Joshy Joseph 
<http://myagic.wordpress.com/2009/04/18/journeying-with-mahasweta-devi/>, who, 
when I met him years ago, handed me a DVD of his first documentary, which had 
won a national award. When I finally saw the documentary, it seemed to me like 
a hybrid rather than a purely factual work – surreal, off-kilter and quietly 
anarchic. When I put this to Joseph, he confessed that he wanted to make 
feature films ("fiction" was the term he used to describe them), but had been 
forbidden to do so by his wife, who was a devout Christian. She had instructed 
him that feature films were taboo according to the Bible. So he had smuggled 
some of his fictionalising instincts into the documentary.

When I asked him recently, having let the question rest for a decade, "Where, 
in the Bible, are movies proscribed?", he pointed me, as his wife had him, to 
the Old Testament, Zechariah, chapter five, where it was written: "Again I 
looked up and saw a flying scroll. And he said to me, 'What do you see?' I 
answered, 'I see a flying scroll.' Then he said to me, 'This is the curse that 
goes out over the face of the whole land […] I have sent it out says the Lord 
of hosts, and it shall enter the house of the thief and the house of anyone who 
swears falsely by my name; and it shall abide in that house and consume it, 
both timber and stones.'"

Joseph's wife saw "flying scrolls" as a metaphor for the reels of cinema. 
Pursuing film as a vocation risked "consuming the house" – but documentaries 
were permissible, since they told the "truth". In this way, Joseph's wife 
created a slightly crazy, but compelling, fiction herself that would shape, 
constrain and, in some ways, make her husband's career. Perhaps Joseph wanted, 
secretly, to obey his wife. Perhaps all artists need some absurd impediment in 
order to create; they require, asStevie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/07/hilary-mantel> once said, their 
person from Porlock.

I observed Joseph with interest because I was inclined, by the end of the last 
millennium, to move surreptitiously, if occasionally, in the opposite 
direction: from fiction to non-fiction; to the essay, especially. It wouldn't 
be a permanent emigration, but I wanted to introduce a greater sense of 
commuting and shunting back and forth in the genres I dealt with, a kind 
of commuting that informed me physically, given that I'd long been dividing 
time between England and India.

When I finally decided to move formally to India in 1999, having published 
three novels and being about to publish another the following year, I already 
knew that I didn't want to be too closely and exclusively identified with the 
novel as a form; that, more than travelling between countries (a wrenching 
experience), I wished to travel between genres. There were a number of reasons 
for this restiveness.

Part of it was innate: that ingrained uneasiness with being identified too 
completely with one's vocation that human beings, and especially novelists, are 
encouraged to deny, and which a writer such asGeoff Dyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/21/geoff-dyer-jeff-in-venice> 
exemplifies in his oeuvre, but also makes his principal subject. So a book such 
asOut of Sheer Rage <http://geoffdyer.com/2011/04/06/out-of-sheer-rage/>, about 
wanting to write a book about DH Lawrence but failing to do so, revolves around 
the seriocomic Beckettian paradox that producing nothing in the end is a kind 
of achievement – granted, an achievement of a very peculiar kind, that 
relatively few novels (Beckett's are an example) can fulfil, and which the 
essay and a certain kind of non-fiction might be better equipped for.

Dyer's book, and its incompatible registers of suffocation, panic, joy and 
liberation, captures the contradiction of the utopian impulse that informs it: 
the idea that happiness would come if one only wrote the perfect book about 
Lawrence; instantly accompanied by the idea that happiness will only come if 
one doesn't write such a book.

Some such utopianism – that is, a longing for the conditions that lead 
to complete happiness and a lack of clarity about what those conditions are – 
gives momentum to a certain kind of essayist and non-fiction writer, especially 
one who is also known to be a novelist. It is what is behindVS Naipaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vsnaipaul>'s constant, grumbling 
provocation, "The novel is dead", and his confession that he is fed up with 
writing "made-up stories". For one who predominantly, or even occasionally, 
writes novels, it is as if the change of genre is more than just a sideshow to, 
or byproduct of, the fiction: it is a radical overhaul of values.

What kind of constraints, then, does the novel represent? Partly, it has to do 
with its objectives and technique. The sense of entrapment in relation to 
realist fiction began with modernism, and is summed up byVirginia Woolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>'s despairing throwaway remark 
about "this appalling narrative business of the realist: getting on from lunch 
to dinner". There is a deep need in the novelist, contrary to the conventions 
of their chosen form, to not present a complete picture of a life or an event, 
not dutifully serve up fleshed-out characters, not explain everything: to do 
business, aesthetically, with unfinishedness.

In Mrs Dalloway <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/may/24/virginiawoolf>, 
Woolf prefiguredWalter Benjamin 
<http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/yale/summary/v014/14.2limon.html>'s words on Kafka
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/franzkafka> – "the purity and beauty of a 
failure" – with her own, after Clarissa hears of Septimus Smith's suicide: 
"There was an embrace in death." Such a sensibility will not see the drawing as 
a less-developed version of a painting, or the essay as an incipient form in 
comparison with the novel, but "embrace" the slighter genres. It was the urge 
towards leaving things incomplete – to not finish projects (including life 
itself) properly – that led Woolf to write a very particular kind of fiction, 
and that led both her and Benjamin to the essay, the perennially unfinished 
form.

In my case, there was a desire not only to escape the genre intermittently, 
but the role of the novelist. Writers are people who congenitally prefer not to 
hold jobs, and the novelist's vocation is the closest thing writers have to a 
profession. By the end of the 90s (and this is still true today), the novelist 
was defined professionally by producing a novel every two years: a function that
Ian McEwan <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianmcewan>, after his avant-garde 
beginnings, embodied par excellence. At least some of us wanted to be more 
wayward.

Joseph's wife permitted him to make documentaries because they dealt with the 
"truth"; Joseph replied, as creative artists often have since Plato, that 
fiction presents its own truth. Truth is crucial, in different ways, to the 
imaginative and factual writer; but even more important is the impossible 
ambition to make writing, with its departures and transitions, synonymous with 
freedom. It is what engenders our creative endeavours, and then compels us to 
move on opportunely before we become complicit with what we're doing.

• Amit Chaudhuri <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/amit-chaudhuri>'s 
Telling Tales: Selected Writings 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908526243>
, 1993-2013 is published by Union Books.
 