
It wasn't until I was a graduate student, in Oxford, in the late 1980s, that I 
began to discover Hindi cinema. (The word "Bollywood" existed then, but it 
wasn't a catch-all term to describe a cinematic tradition of great, 
contradictory variety, and one that was only a strand – albeit the most 
publicised one – in Indian cinema as a whole.)

What drew me were the black-and-white movies of the 50s and 60s; movies I 
hadn't seen either because they'd been made before I was born or when I was too 
small, or because my middle-class upbringing prohibited me from taking them 
seriously. I grew up on Hollywood movies. When I was a teenager, I became aware 
of the astonishing work ofSatyajit Ray 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jul/22/satyajit-ray-artifice-honesty-film>
, who stood at the source of an arthouse cinema that was seen as a serious – or 
tedious, depending on your point of view – counterpoint to the absurdities of 
Hindi cinema. To deliberately set about discovering the Hindi popular cinema of 
the 50s in Oxford in 1987 was to, really, go against the grain of what I knew. 
I didn't do this for nationalistic reasons: yet the movies – especially the 
great artists in that disreputable lineage, such asGuru Dutt 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guru_Dutt>, Bimal Roy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bimal_Roy>, Kamal Amrohi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kamal_Amrohi>, and early Raj Kapoor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raj_Kapoor> – told me what no other document 
could about the India I'd left behind, both physically and in time. When I say 
"told me", I don't mean information: I mean that the way they dealt with light, 
setting, Indian faces, and especially their sui generis, startlingly innovative 
music, was deeply revealing. I studied them as a young monk in another age 
might have pored over old manuscripts.

What made these films astonishing was the mix of people behind them, who had 
made their way to Mumbai from various locations – the Bengali and South Indian 
directors; the Muslim storytellers and poets who wrote the scripts and composed 
lyrics for the songs to make a living; the music arrangers of Christian, 
"Anglo-Indian" origin. There was a strange inappropriateness about my moment of 
discovery: Bollywood cinema was, by the late 80s, at a nadir. The disappearance 
of the old craft and lyricism, the substitution of musical innovation with 
assembly-line noise, the rise of the VCR, the waning of Nehruvian pieties, and 
the gradual rise of the Hindu right had combined to create conditions in which
Bollywood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bollywood> lost both its magic and 
its confidence, and fewer and fewer people were watching what were increasingly 
commercially driven but irrelevant movies.

Not that people had turned to more artistic options: endless and baffling 
soap-opera versions of the Hindu epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, were 
what gripped a new and socially diverse television audience. Meanwhile, Ray's 
kind of film-making – now diluted into a middlebrow, socially relevant 
"parallel" cinema, largely uninterested, unlike Ray or Guru Dutt, in the 
luminous image – was also, decisively, dying out. Though "experimental" 
filmmakers, to the chagrin of many, would continue to be funded for films that 
had no distributors by the KafkaesqueNational Film Development Corporation 
<http://www.nfdcindia.com/>: a funding body that was largely a failure, as all 
state-driven initiatives for the arts have generally been in India. By the end 
of the 80s, it seemed that neither Bollywood nor "parallel" Hindi cinema were 
viable or living entities.

Something happened in the 90s that gradually brought Bollywood back to 
centre-stage: firstly, the curious mix engendered by economic liberalisation, 
and a new globalised class – including NRIs (non-resident Indians) – that was 
anglophone but, unlike the earlier educated bourgeoisie, wanted to see its 
fantasies portrayed in Hindi cinema. This class now included people from film 
families, such as the (still fairly young) director Karan Johar: people who had 
grown up watching Bollywood films, speaking in English and readingArchie comics 
<http://www.archiecomics.com/>. Johar made glossy, melodious, middle-class 
epics for homegrown Indians and affluent expatriates alike; the curiously mixed 
provenance of some of his films – American fantasy, Indian values and a 
sweeping sense of his class's new aspirations and disappointments – resulted in 
work that wasn't entirely unconvincing or uninteresting. As with much of 
Bollywood, it was its own untranslatable language, and, sometimes, it 
miraculously worked.

My own prejudices meant that I was slow to notice that this cinema had crept 
up again on India. But when I lighted on it after officially returning to India 
in 1999, mainly when switching from channel to channel on cable television, I 
found it both contained and expressed the ambivalence of present-day, capitalist
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> in a way that neither the old 
social realist films could have, nor the Indian novel in English was doing. 
However, at its heart (as in the hearts, often, of Indian expatriates) there 
was, sometimes, a conservative core, which – as with the Hindu nationalist BJP 
– didn't seem to be at odds, paradoxically, with embracing America and 
capitalism.
 Maqbool is based on Shakespeare's Macbeth 
Early in the new millennium, just as Bollywood seemed to become all gloss and 
syrup, there was another development. It was signalled to me by the release of 
a reworking of Macbeth, calledMaqbool 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWriwPaBbbY>, starring Irrfan Khan, which set 
the Shakespeare play in the Mumbai underworld. Reworkings and recycling are 
unsurprising in Hindi cinema; in the 70s, Bollywood film and music directors 
were seen to be incorrigible plagiarists of Hollywood movies and American pop 
tunes. In fact, recycling is a great strength of pre-modern Indian culture, and 
episodes of the Mahabharata and Ramayana are the subject of infinite variations 
in poetry, drama, and dance. But Maqbool represented an approach to a western 
work, and a canonical literary text, that was unprecedentedly liberated, 
inventive, artistic, and irreverent; and it did this without any of the 
postcolonial mannerisms of modern Indian novels in English, of "writing back" 
to the Empire.

It was a considerable work of art, and was made by a burly, moustached 
film-maker called Vishal Bharadwaj who, if he were in a white uniform, wouldn't 
look out of place as a customs official. Bharadwaj followed this extraordinary 
film with another one:Omkara 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G4Gwo3RtyJE&feature=relover>, his version of 
Othello, closely based on Shakespeare's play, but relocated to the depressing, 
small-town gangland politics of Uttar Pradesh, reminding us that the sort of 
people that Shakespeare had once portrayed were also a species of warlord and 
hooligan. The semi-comprehensible North Indian dialect in which the characters 
spoke also brilliantly approximated Shakespeare's own intricate, poetic and 
unfamiliar language. The fact that these films didn't figure in a recent list 
put together by Philip French of the 10 best cinematic versions of Shakespeare 
indicates that the new independent Hindi cinema, and its power, still hasn't 
quite penetrated the western consciousness.

By "independent" I not only mean a cinema taking advantage of the new 
mutliplexes, and surviving on smaller city audiences, but one that has made a 
departure from a familiar "feelgood" sweetness. At its best, it is a young 
tradition of genuine, nervous irreverence – nervous, because, given Bollywood 
was increasingly identified with the exuberance and self-worship of the "new 
India", it was always going to be difficult for it to be neurotic, cussed, and 
even scatological. Yet this seems to have happened.

A few years after Omkara, Anurag Kashyap, who had once rescued himself from 
descending irretrievably into alcoholism, presented a contemporary version of 
one of the Bengali novelist Sarat Chandra Chatterjee's artistically lesser but 
most popular novels,Devdas <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/92453/devdas>, 
calling itDev D 
<http://zoomtv.indiatimes.com/shows/shows-on-zoom/bollywood-gamechangers/dev-d-gives-classic-devdas-shocking-flavour/videoshow/20242550.cms>
. Devdas has been filmed several times in Bengali and Hindi, and the name (of 
the eponymous protagonist) has become a slang term meaning lovelorn drunkard. 
Kashyap situated this person first in a small town, then in Delhi, and, by a 
slight but startlingly effective modulation, transformed Devdas from the 
romantic lush of the classic to a person with a serious alcohol problem, 
incapable of stable relationships. In other words, Kashyap did to Chatterjee's 
story what John Coltrane had once done toMy Favourite Things 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qWG2dsXV5HI>. This sense of anarchy in relation 
to the canonical is what I would characterise as one of the features of the new 
Hindi independent cinema.

The departure one associates with this tradition is also evident in its shift 
of locale from Mumbai to Delhi – a bureaucratic capital city transformed by 
liberalisation into a fervid zone for thieves and scamsters. Of course, thieves 
and scamsters are what many of today's politicians in India are, but that's not 
how, despite a recent Supreme Court ruling meant to restrain people with 
criminal records from contesting elections, the "world's largest democracy" 
sees itself.
 Delhi Belly combines gemstones, gangsters and gastrointestinal disorders 
Dibakar Banerjee, in his first two delightful comedies, Khosla ka ghosla 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xc3XQLrHOuc> and Oye Lucky Lucky Oye 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x7upfj_watch-oye-lucky-lucky-oye-part-1-hi_shortfilms>
, doesn't portray the political class directly. But, in these great Delhi 
movies, he explores the desire, chicanery, and putative quick-wittedness that 
animates that city in the new millennium. Abhinay Deo'sDelhi Belly 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcKn9BxTg1A>, also set in the capital, makes 
literal the Americanism "shit happens" (a message emblazoned on the film's 
poster) by giving us a narrative in which a package of diamonds originating 
from a Russian gangster gets mixed up with another containing a stool sample 
originating from an Indian one with a gastrointestinal problem.Slumdog 
Millionaire <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/126911/slumdog-millionaire> 
features faeces too, but in a way that plays its part in, and confirms, the 
indomitable India story. This shit is different. Its unseemly trail provides us 
with an alternative to Danny Boyle's winning spectacle and to everything that 
preceded it in Bollywood.

• Amit Chaudhuri's Calcutta was published this year, and Telling Tales, his 
collection of essays, is out in August from Union Books
 