
An emotional Amtrak CEO pledged to lawmakers Tuesday that safety technology 
that could have prevented a deadly derailment last month in Philadelphia will 
be put into operation, while Democrats and Republicans exchanged barbs over 
whether Congress or theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> is most to blame for 
railroads not installing the technology.

“We are responsible for the incident and its consequences,” Joseph Boardman 
told a House transportation committee hearing. His voice breaking, Boardman 
said equipping trains with positive train control, a technology that can 
prevent trains from derailing because of excessive speed, is the “single 
greatest contribution my generation of railroaders can make”.

Amtrak had already installed the technology on tracks it owns in the Northeast 
Corridor from Boston to Washington, but it wasn’t in operation whenAmtrak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> Northeast Regional train 188 
entered a curve in Philadelphia at 106 mph on 12 May. The speed limit for the 
curve is 50 mph. Eight people were killed and about 200 injured in the 
derailment.

Several lawmakers raised questions about the train cars involved in the 
derailment, which were severely mangled. The cars were purchased beginning in 
1975 and weren’t built to modern occupant protection standards, Boardman said. 
They haven’t been replaced because the railroad is still trying to replace cars 
built in the 1940s, he said.

Accident investigators are looking at whether improved train cars could have 
prevented injuries or deaths in the Philadelphia crash, said Chris Hart, 
chairman of the National Transportation Safety Board.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Famtrak-ceo-crash-safety-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433273665110%2F15c84e60-6a76-48bb-8647-44bd3960d740-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amtrak%20CEO%20on%20crash%20cause%3A%20'We%20are%20responsible%20for%20the%20incident'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Famtrak-ceo-crash-safety-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amtrak%20CEO%20on%20crash%20cause%3A%20%27We%20are%20responsible%20for%20the%20incident%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjun%2F02%2Famtrak-ceo-crash-safety-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F2%2F1433273665110%2F15c84e60-6a76-48bb-8647-44bd3960d740-1020x612.jpeg>
 Emergency personnel work at the scene of a deadly train wreck in Philadelphia 
on 13 May 2015. Photograph: Patrick Semansky/AP 
At the start of the hearing, the NTSB released a preliminary report that says 
investigators still don’t know whether the engineer involved in the 
Philadelphia derailment was on his cellphone before the speeding train crashed. 
It also remains unclear whether damage to the windshield was caused by the 
wreck or an object thrown at the train, the report said.

The NTSB has said engineer Brandon Bostian, who suffered a head injury in the 
crash, has been cooperative but says he cannot recall the moments before the 
accident. The two-page preliminary report estimates damage from the crash at 
more than $9.2m.

Several Republicans, including Rep Jeff Denham, a Republican from California, 
told Hart that they were baffled that three weeks after the crash, accident 
investigators still could not say for certain whether Bostian was using the 
cellphone while the train was in operation.

The phone was used to make calls and send text messages the day of the 
accident, but inconsistencies in phone records were presenting difficulties, 
Hart said. The voice and text messages were recorded in different time zones 
and may not have been calibrated to the exact time used by other equipment on 
the train, such as a camera focused on the tracks and a recorder that registers 
how fast the train was moving and actions by the engineer, he said.

“We were surprised at the complexity of that ourselves, and we’re experts at 
this,” Hart said. “It’s very crucial to get that fact right. We will not be 
hurried into giving an answer.”

Congress mandated in 2008 that Amtrak, commuter railroads and freight 
railroads install positive train control by the end of this year. Amtrak still 
has to do extensive testing of the system, but will meet the deadline, Boardman 
said. Most other railroads will not. Only Burlington Northern-Santa Fe has 
submitted paperwork saying it has completed a positive train control system. At 
least two commuter railroads are also expected to meet the deadline.

Amtrak could have installed positive train control sooner if it had had more 
money from Congress years ago, when it first began work on the system, Boardman 
said. Amtrak’s positive train control system relies on transponders, while most 
other railroads are installing systems that use GPS and wireless technology. 
The systems automatically slow or stop trains if they are travelling too fast, 
are about to collide with another train, disobey signals or enter an area where 
crews are working.

Sarah Feinberg, the acting Federal Railroad Administration administrator, told 
the committee that the agency intends to enforce the 31 December deadline for 
all railroads to install positive train control. Last week, railroad 
administration officials told a special advisory committee that enforcement 
could include fines and even a shutdown of operations for railroads that don’t 
comply.

Obama administration officials have repeatedly asked Congress to give them the 
power to extend the deadline on a case-by-case basis for railroads that 
demonstrate a sincere effort to install the technology. However, legislation 
introduced by Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee chairman 
John Thune, a Republican from South Dakota, and other members of the committee 
would grant railroads a blanket extension of another five to seven years.
 