
Families of eight Amtrak crash victims mourn loved ones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/15/families-eight-amtrak-crash-victims-mourn-loved-ones>
Amtrak has been ordered to improve safety and increase signage informing of 
maximum speeds on its Northeast Corridor route, the Federal Railroad 
Administration (FRA)said on Saturday 
<http://news.yahoo.com/u-regulators-order-amtrak-actions-improve-safety-173841573--finance.html>
.

On Tuesday night, an Amtrak train traveling from Washington DC to New York 
derailed moments after leavingPhiladelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia>. Five crew members and 238 
passengers were on board. Eight people were killed.

On Friday, National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigators asked the 
FBI to examine a remnant of theAmtrak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> locomotive’s shattered 
windshield, in order to determine if the train had beenstruck by an object 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/amtrak-train-may-have-been-struck-by-object-before-derailment>
 prior to its derailment.

In a statement on Saturday, Amtrak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> said its “overarching goal is to 
provide safe and secure rail passenger travel. We will immediately implement 
the Federal Railroad Administration’s directives to further improve passenger 
train safety along the Northeast Corridor”.

Regional Train 188 was traveling at about 106mph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/13/philadelphia-amtrak-crash-train-black-box>
 as it approached a left-hand turn where it derailed, according to NTSB 
investigators. According to the NTSB’s Robert Sumwalt, the speed limit before 
the curve was 80mph, dropping to 50mph at the curve. In the three seconds after 
the emergency break was activated by the train’s engineer, the train slowed to 
about 102mph.


“We are pretty confident that the train was traveling within one to two miles 
of those speeds,” Sumwalt said on Wednesday.

According to Sumwalt, the track where the accident occurred was not fitted 
with the Advanced Civil Speed Enforcement System (ACSES). ACSES is part of the 
Positive Train Control (PTC) system, which automatically enforces speed limits 
by slowing down or stopping trains that are going too fast or heading into 
danger zones.

“It’s on our most-wanted list,” Sumwalt said of the ACSES system. “Congress 
has mandated that it be installed by the end of this year … based on what we 
know right now, we feel that had such a system been installed in this section 
of track, this accident would not have occurred.”
map of the Amtrak Train 188 crash 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/05/philadelphia_train_crash-zip/giv-21277KMknNl2zZe2R/>
On Saturday, the FRA ordered Amtrak to ensure that an automatic speed control 
system was put into use on northbound trains on the corridor, which stretches 
from Washington to Boston. The regulators also ordered the railroad to assess 
the risk on curves in the track and to increase signage regarding maximum 
speeds.

In its statement, Amtrak said it was “also reviewing whether it can partially 
activate some of the capabilities of the Advanced Civil Speed Enforcement 
System … components already installed in the Northeast Corridor. Amtrak will 
evaluate whether such an option can be undertaken without delaying the complete 
activation of PTC in the Northeast Corridor later this year.”

Amtrak's Northeast Corridor: train crash occurred on America's busiest network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/13/amtrak-northeast-corridor-train-crash-philadelphia>
The northeastern regional service is Amtrak’s busiest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/13/amtrak-northeast-corridor-train-crash-philadelphia>
, running about 22 hourly departures daily;more than 2,200 trains operate on 
the Washington-Boston route each day 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2014/10/15/travel/irpt-train-comeback/>. In 2014, about 
11.6 million passengers traveled the corridor, up 3.3% from 2013.

“Although our current focus is on the passengers and employees affected by 
this incident and the resulting service disruption along the Northeast 
Corridor, we must also take time to learn from this event,” Joe Boardman, 
president and chief executive of Amtrak, wrote in an email to Amtrak customers 
on Saturday.

“Passenger railroading is at its core about people; the safety of our 
passengers and employees was, is and always will be our number one priority.

Our goal is to fully understand what happened and how we can prevent a similar 
tragedy from occurring in the future.”


 