
Today T, for timeline... which looked like this:



 * October 2005: Start detailed planning of Travel section. Involved about 12 
people from Guardian and ThoughtWorks. Much preparation needs to take place 
before work can begin. 

 * February 2006: Start building the Travel section, initially focusing on the 
servers, development environment and build pipeline. 

 * May 2006: Launch first visible item on Travel section, a keyword component. 

 * November 2006: Launch entire Travel section. From a technical standpoint it 
was then the biggest single launch in the website's history, and one of the 
smoothest then known. 

 * January 2007: Start planning phase two. Involved around 20 people fulltime 
for six weeks, but sufficient clarity was achieved after three weeks to start 
one stream of work then. 

 * May 2007: Launch new theguardian.com home page. Within hours of the launch, 
Tony Blair obligingly announces his resignation as prime minister, allowing us 
to make full use of our flexible templates as the story develops throughout the 
day. 

 * July 2007: Launch Science, Technology and Environment sections. Included a 
new feature: series. This allows special navigation back and forth through 
items in a series such asBad Science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/series/badscience> or Nature Notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/naturenotes>. 

 * August 2007: Launch integrated video. Includes reskinned Brightcove player 
with dynamically-inserted pre-roll advertising. 

 * October 2007: Launch sections for Business, Society, Media, Money and 
Guardian America. 

 * February 2008: Launch Observer, News, and Politics sections, plus 
integrated audio. 

 * April 2008: Launch Sport and Football sections. Includes live scores and 
fixtures <https://www.theguardian.com/football/matches>, and match facts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/1203756> among other features. 

 * June 2008: Launch Comment is Free. Includes community features from Pluck. 

 * August 2008: Launch of Culture, Education and Life & Style sections, plus 
14 blogs moving over from the old Movable Type system. 

 * September 2008. Launch the remaining 21 blogs onto the new platform. Some 
of these blogs didn't go in August due to the key part they played in August 
news events, and some because they were awaiting additional features such as 
remote working tools. 
 