
Today B, for business analysis... which means different things to different 
people. In our case it meant extracting requirements and turning them into 
something that could be implemented.

Business analysis is often misunderstood when it's used in an Agile context. 
Agile people often think it's not necessary -- after all, they say, the 
analysis is best performed by the developers working closely with the customer 
as they go along. Many non-Agile people often think the analysis should be done 
up-front, written down, and then the workload on the business analysts (BAs) 
eases off as everyone else goes off to implement what they've written.

In fact business analysis was one of the most demanding jobs on R2. Analysis 
was indeed done up-front, at the start of the project, but only to a level 
sufficient to estimate the work, not to a level sufficient to implement it. 
Ahead of each fortnightly iteration the BAs would specify the forthcoming 
fortnight's tasks in much greater detail, sufficient to be implemented. At the 
same time they would be dealing with queries about the iteration currently in 
flight. Thus at any one time they had to deal with work being planned and work 
being implemented.

In both cases they would be working with a very diverse group of people. For 
work being detailed the business analyst would take requirements from our 
business users and present them to the technologists for estimation; for work 
being implemented they would often take queries from the technologists and 
present them to the business users for guidance.

You could say the process of business analysis was often like being piggy in 
the middle, yet the personal skills of the individual business analysts 
(technical insight, strategic understanding, and not a little diplomacy) was 
key to the success of the project. The cohesiveness of theguardian.com -- both 
from the outside and the inside -- is in no small part due to the talents of 
our business analysts.
 