
Today Z, for zones... which are a top navigation level of theguardian.com. 
However the navigational structure was designed to be quite fluid, and the 
concept of a zone is really more of an internal reference point than a phrase 
that's intended to be used by our site's users.

The ebb and flow of the online media marketplace meant that while we were 
working on R2 Times Online in the UK launched a redesign of their own. At the 
time I was interested to readan interview with their Information Architect 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/letters/feedback/article1184010.ece> 
who said that they had constructed a three-level navigation hierarchy. For 
theguardian.com we had considered and rejected implementing such an explicit 
scheme for three primary reasons.

First we recognise that the breadth of our content wasn't equal across all 
subjects -- we have many more journalists working on news stories than travel 
stories, for example, so a second-level of navigation under news might have a 
couple of dozen subjects, which is impossible to display conveniently on a 
navbar. Second not all subjects break down neatly into three levels -- some 
topics have more depth and complexity than others. Third,Guardian values 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/ScottTrust/TheScottTrustvalues/tabid/194/Default.aspx> 
mean that certain subjects need to be given more prominence than a formal 
encyclopaedic breakdown allows -- for example, in any formal scheme 
environmental issues would be part of the news or the science section, but the 
reality is that our planet's environmental state is far too important to 
relegate to anything but the highest level.

So R2 was designed to allow fluidity and flexibility in our navigation, and we 
created words to describe its different aspects. A zone is one of the top-level 
categories that appear along the top navigation bar: News, Sport, Comment, 
Culture, etc. At the bottom level of categorisation are very specific subjects 
such asinterest rates <https://www.theguardian.com/business/interestrates>, war 
crimes <https://www.theguardian.com/world/warcrimes>, Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kate-moss> and thousands of others. 
If you're reading about one of these subjects it doesn't matter how many levels 
deep you might be as long as there's some clear signposting to find your way to 
your next point of interest. The navigation should give you some kind of 
orientation, and importantly act as a guide to jumping off to similar subjects 
or to begin a new journey elsewhere entirely. But exposing any internal 
classification system is less important. R2 has given us a system that 
separates the visual navigation from the way content is organised internally.
 