
See Rob's Arctic diary 
<http://travel.theguardian.com/gallery/2007/apr/27/green.climatechange?picture=329795847>
 in pictures


Rob Bell goes 15m under to explore the depths of the Longyearbyen Glacier

Stepping out of the oversized people-carrier and on to the Longyearbyen 
glacier, it all seemed strangely familiar. The snow called out for an 
exhilarating knee-deep powder run but I didn't have my skis. Instead I'd been 
given a hard hat and a headlamp. I had no idea how much I would appreciate this 
little gift from Erik, our glacial guide. We would not be standing on the 
surface of this vast mass of ice for long: we were going inside.

The Longyearbyen glacier is roughly 3km long and in summer a glacial river of 
melted snow flows right through its centre. The water rushing through has, over 
thousands of years, carved out a deep passage that is water-free in winter and 
provides a superb afternoon's hands-on learning of how a glacier works and 
lives. And that's where we went - down inside the glacier and along the 
"riverbed".

Inside, it's pitch black and simply amazing. All around is finely polished 
crystal ice and you can clearly see all the rocks, pebbles and debris that the 
glacier has picked up and carried with it on its travels. The ice holds a 
wealth of information about the past and this is what many scientists are using 
today to study the climatic history of the region.

We were about 15m under the surface of the ice and roughly 1km along the 
passage from where we entered, when things started to get a little cramped. 
There are points along the riverbed where the walls close in tight and you need 
to crouch down and distort your body into all sorts of shapes and angles to 
slide through to the next chamber.

It's a little disconcerting at first but once you get the hang of the sliding 
it's amazing fun and pretty spectacular. You're continuously entertained by the 
almost disco-style effect of the headlamp reflecting on the ice crystals and 
formations.

Once we'd resurfaced I had a good chat with Erik over a cup of hot coffee and 
a chocolate chip cookie (these Norwegians know how to visit a glacier in 
style). He's extremely proud of the beauty of Svalbard and is passionate about 
keeping it that way. I asked him about the tourists he brings up here and if 
many of them actually relate the retreat of glaciers to global climate change. 
Apparently, more and more, they do.

His aim is for visitors to understand what they're seeing here, relate it to 
climate change and understand the steps they can take to reduce their 
contribution to it back home. If being aware of climate change is a first step, 
it's knowing what you can do about it, right now in your own life, that will 
make a difference.

Â· Rob Bell has been selected as a Ben & Jerry's Climate Change College

Ambassador in partnership with WWF and is running his own campaign to cut down 
energy waste from charging mobile phones. To find out more check out 
climatechangecollege.org <http://www.climatechangecollege.org> and

unpluggit.co.uk <http://www.unpluggit.co.uk>
 