
When Sharon Sullivan told her students that Albert Roux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/albert-roux> was coming to college to 
lead them in preparing a five-course dinner, their response was: "Albert who?"

Her colleague Justin McNamara says: "They had all heard of Jamie Oliver, 
Gordon Ramsey and Marco Pierre White, but few had heard of Albert Roux. They 
only became impressed when they found out that both Ramsey and White had been 
students of his."

Sullivan remembers queueing in London's Oxford Street to get a copy of Roux's 
book signed more than 20 years ago, when she herself was a catering student. To 
her, the celebrity chefs who have become household names by their regular 
television appearances are mere imposters to the "godfather" of British cuisine.

In 1982, Roux's Le Gavroche became the first restaurant in Britain to win 
three Michelin stars. Why has such an illustrious chef agreed to share his 
expertise with students at Redbridge College in east London free of charge?

"I owe it to them," he says. "I think this college is an example to all of us 
in the catering industry of how to participate and give something to the local 
community. I am so impressed, I cannot tell you.

"In the kitchen next door, eight women were taking an evening class, learning 
how to ice cakes. It was wonderful. It is an expression of love to make a cake 
or a good soup for your family."

Does he therefore disagree with the assertion made by Marco Pierre White 
earlier this year that catering colleges are "the biggest waste of time" and do 
not prepare people for jobs in the industry? White said in an interview with 
Caterer magazine that the best way to develop skills is to "knock on back 
doors" and learn on the job, as he did.

"Marco was lucky - he knocked on the right doors," Roux replies. "He is right 
if you have the choice of doing an apprenticeship in a good restaurant, but not 
everybody can be so lucky. Here, tonight, one of the students is a lady of 27 
who has a baby. She wants to learn to cook and make a profession of it. What 
chance would she have if this college were not here?"

Roux allowed two of his senior chefs to spend two days with the students 
helping them to prepare a menu he designed, using his recipes. He arrived four 
hours before the dinner to help with the finishing touches.

Roux says he likes to visit three or four colleges a year, preferably ones he 
hasn't heard of: "I had not heard of Redbridge College before I was invited 
here, but now I have seen it, I definitely want to come back."

Nearly Â£500,000 has been spent in the last 18 months on revamping the 
college's catering facilities. In addition to the 60-seat restaurant and bar, 
named Rouge, there is a new refectory and two kitchens, one to provide training 
and one to service the restaurant, both fitted with hand-built Charvet ovens. 
Now more than 40 people regularly lunch there - many, local business people. 
This year there are 75 full-time students enrolled on catering and hospitality 
courses, almost double the previous year's figure.

It is part of the drive by the principal, Theresa Drowley, to turn Redbridge 
from what had been a primarily academic college into a purely vocational one.

"When I came here three years ago, more than 70% of the provision was 
academic, but now we do not offer a single GCSE or A-level," she says.

"There are 17 schools in Redbridge with sixth forms, and what this college was 
aiming to do was give a second chance to people who failed to get places in 
those, but it was not particularly successful at doing so.

"Now, all our students who apply to university get in, but by a vocational 
route. We want to show that the vocational route is equally valid."

Not everyone agreed with her mission for the college. She says: "We had a few 
governors who quit. They decided it wasn't a place they wanted to be governors."

The new restaurant is one part of that mission. Similar upgrades to provide 
industry-standard environments have taken place in hair and beauty therapy and 
music and media.

"My aim," she says, "is to make this college a leading-light college in all 
our vocational areas."
 