
Anatomy and physiology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/anatomyandphysiology> degrees are 
closely allied to medicine. They are often popular with students who are 
interested in the academic side of medicine, but don't wish to be doctors, 
rather seeing themselves ultimately either as technicians in the biomedical 
sciences, researchers in the public or private sector, paramedical staff, or in 
careers unrelated to their degree. Durham, however, reports that around 10% of 
their graduates go on to take medicine as a second degree.

But it is worth pointing out that it could be a mistake, or at least be taking 
an expensive route, to study anatomy or physiology in the hope that it might be 
a way into medicine at a later date. You would then have to pay tuition fees 
for your second (much longer) medical degree.

Also, many medical schools, particularly St George's Hospital Medical School, 
are now starting to run postgraduate medical courses for students from a wide 
range of academic backgrounds, including the humanities.

The numbers of students studying physiology, and particularly anatomy, can be 
quite small in many universities. Roger Booth, of Durham University's anatomy 
department, says that this makes for a friendlier and more personable student 
environment.

Some of the teaching on physiology and anatomy courses may also be alongside 
medical students, especially since the teaching and research staff are 
essentially drawn from the same pool.

However, Professor John Stein, of the Oxford physiology department, was keen 
to emphasise that physiology students were not just seen as second class 
medics. "Often our physiology students come out as better scientists because, 
unlike medical students, they have time to think.

"They have all the advantages of learning physiology on a preclinical medical 
course without having to cram in every last morsel of anatomy and 
biochemistry." It is also, he says, a popular degree amongst employers: "I 
think the majority of our graduates go into scientifically related careers, 
particularly the pharmaceutical industry, but as with any degree our students 
can end up in all walks of life.

"The city seems to be particularly keen on people with physiology degrees, 
because they know they will be sharp, and they hope they will be able to tell 
them about medically oriented technologies."

In the era following the human genome project, there has been a resurgence in 
both industry and academia of the more old fashioned "systems physiology" 
approach, as people come to realise that genes are not the whole story. "The 
genome itself tells us nothing about function," says Professor Max Headley, 
from the physiology department of Bristol University. "We need to use the 
wealth of information from the human genome project and molecular biology, and 
marry it up with the more traditional experimental work of systems physiology."

Professor Stein also emphasised the degree to which they had stuck with 
systems physiology. "What we need is a body of people who understand molecular 
biology, but who can also cope with more practical physiology, or techniques 
like patch clamping, and understand how the many regulatory systems in an 
organism can contribute to the overall picture: because any number of genes can 
never tell you how the regulation of blood pressure works in a real animal."

Indeed, these more traditional skills are becoming so sought after in the 
private sector that some people have expressed concern that the traditional 
skills base in academia is being eroded by migration to more lucrative work in 
the private sector, in all but the most prestigious research centres.

Aside from differences in emphases on traditional systems, physiology and 
modern techniques, the main way that courses tend to vary is in the degree of 
modularisation, or how much of a free hand you are given to bolt together your 
own physiology degree.

Also, in many universities the physiology department has come to be closely 
allied with psychology. Most universities will let you take papers from fields 
related to physiology, such as biochemistry and psychology, in the course of 
your degree, and many will even allow candidates to change to a different 
degree within the biomedical sciences (although generally not to medicine) any 
time in the first year.

Most courses include a significant research project, which is generally in the 
last year, and occasionally this can lead to those crucial academic 
publications which will look so fabulous on your CV.

By the time you are working at this level, the quality of the teaching and the 
experience as a whole is very much dependent on your relationship with your 
supervisor, rather than the course.

This can often be where the familiarity of working in a small department can 
come into its own, and often students find this to be the most rewarding period 
of their degree.

Â• Ben Goldacre studied physiology at Oxford and medicine at UCL. He is now a 
junior doctor in London
 