
Large flights of steps were a Lutyens hallmark. Conveniently, Jekyll liked to 
terrace the gardens, so everyone was happy A favourite plant for Jekyll was the 
bergenia. Some people think it ugly, while others love it for its good value: 
it has a big, bold, evergreen leaf, winter colour, and flowers in spring A key 
part of a Jekyll design was a carefully shaped lawn. Her planting, meanwhile, 
as with these irises, would never seek to disguise or soften Lutyens' 
landscaping Jekyll's planting was often complex, yet she rarely visited sites 
and often worked from only a handful of photos. Clients or the atmosphere of 
the place were rarely given consideration

This 230ft-long pergola, with round and square pillars, was designed to be 
hung with roses, clematis and even Russsian vine. But Jekyll insisted that 
plants should not take over and hide the structures

Hestercombe, lying on the southern slopes of the Quantock Hills in Somerset, 
has the unique combination of three period gardens in one. There is a typical 
Georgian landscape created with a series of lakes and buildings, and a 
Victorian terrace. But Hestercombe really burst on to the gardening scene at 
the beginning of the last century, when this formal Edwardian garden was laid 
out by Edwin Lutyens and Gertrude Jekyll. It is widely regarded as the finest 
example of their work.

Lutyens was a young architect who had embraced the Arts and Crafts Movement. 
Jekyll, on the other hand, was an artist and plantswoman who adopted only some 
of its elements, such as the use of local materials. The success of their 
collaboration can be attributed to the fact that each understood the other's 
ideas, resulting in houses and gardens that looked as though they were designed 
by one person.

Lutyens' use of geometry was always bold and dramatic, and Jekyll complemented 
this with a planting style that used lots of structural specimens, such as box 
topiary balls and plenty of shrubs. Today, unfortunately, this is often 
overlooked and she is primarily remembered for her use of colour, often 
described as creating pictures with plants.

Â· (Open all year; hestercombegardens.com, 01823 413923).
 