
1) Stereoscopic hair


Baz Luhrmann <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baz-luhrmann> may have had the 
novel's kinetic climax in mind when he decided to film The Great Gatsby in 3D, 
but the star of the show will undeniably beLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>'s hair. Imagine it flicking 
and swishing at you in three dimensions. Part L'Oréal ad and part manic octopus 
attack, it should be astonishing to witness.

2) Mulligan as Mulligan

It doesn't matter that Carey Mulligan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/carey-mulligan> is playing Daisy Buchanan 
here, because in reality she is just playing the same role as she did in Shame 
and Drive. There's sadness. There's superficial glamour. There's underlying 
desperation. There's a surprisingly competent American accent. She can do this 
in her sleep.

3) Jazz-age headwear

If The Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/116337/great-gatsby> is the success it 
promises to be, expect to see elaborately patterned headscarves popping up 
everywhere this Christmas. In other news, expect to see hundreds of 
confused-looking women getting their elaborately patterned headscarves trapped 
in train doors this Christmas.

4) Thumbs aloft

Curiously, both DiCaprio and Mulligan are presented with their thumbs pointing 
upwards in this picture. Is this a coincidence? An indication of the lead 
character's ineffable optimism? Or a sign that there's going to be a 20-minute 
medley of Paul McCartney songs in the middle? Here's hoping – it is a Baz 
Luhrmann film, after all.

5) Lovely jumper

It's far too early to talk about any accolades that The Great Gatsby might 
win, but the film already looks like a frontrunner for those snuggliest-looking 
jumper categories. This truly is a wooly jumper for the ages, up there with 
Nicholas Hoult's jumper from A Single Man and, well, no other jumpers. It 
really is a very nice looking jumper.
 