
The Observer associate editor, Andrew Rawnsley, today resigned as 
editor-in-chief ofPoliticsHome.com <http://www.politicshome.com/> after the 
website was sold to Lord Ashcroft, the deputy chairman of the Conservative 
party.

Rawnsley said that the politics website's non-partisan policy was incompatible 
with being owned by Ashcroft.

"I became editor-in-chief on the basis that PoliticsHome was dedicated to 
being a non-partisan site clearly independent of any party both editorially and 
financially," said Rawnsley, who is associate editor and chief political 
commentator of the Observer.

"It was essential for users of the site that they could feel absolute 
confidence in the political independence of PoliticsHome. I do not believe that 
can be compatible with being under the ownership of the deputy chairman of the 
Conservative party."

"I therefore greatly regret the decision made by Stephan Shakespeare, the 
chairman, to do a deal which places PoliticsHome under the ownership of Michael 
Ashcroft, the deputy chairman of the Conservative party. The site has been 
folded along with ConservativeHome into a new entity in whichLord Ashcroft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-ashcroft> is the majority 
shareholder."

Rawnsley added that the PoliticsHome had been an "outstanding editorial 
success". "The site has attracted plaudits from many other media organisations 
and across the political spectrum. That praise has been generated by its 
ground-breaking methods of surveying opinion at Westminster, Whitehall and 
beyond along with its impartial reporting of all strands of news and 
commentary," he said.

Ashcroft, who owns a stake in Total Politics, the magazine run by Iain Dale, 
and Shakespeare have formed a new company 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/thetorydiary/2009/09/the-future-of-conservativehome.html>
 and PoliticsHome will become a unit in it.

Ashcroft will take a 57.5% stake in the new company and Shakespeare, who will 
also have a stake, will be its chairman. Rawnsley, who had a financial interest 
in PoliticsHome, will exit the company.

PoliticsHome said it had "secured additional investment" to expand its 
coverage of political news and that there would be "no editorial crossover 
whatsoever" with ConservativeHome and ConservativeIntelligence.

"PH will of course remain strictly non-partisan in all aspects of its 
coverage, and readers can continue to have absolute confidence in its editorial 
independence. This will be obvious in the weeks and months and years ahead," 
Shakespeare said.

Shakespeare, co-founder of the pollsters YouGov, and commentator Freddie 
Sayers set up PoliticsHome in April 2008, aiming to make it the definitive 
source of political news and research.

Last week Ashcroft also bought a stake 
<http://blogs.mirror.co.uk/maguire/2009/09/michael-ashcroft-the-media-mog.html> 
in Tim Montgomerie'sConservativeHome 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/thetorydiary/> blog.

"I have been given solid assurances by Michael that he does not wish to 
interfere with ConservativeHome's editorial policy in any way. I am completely 
satisfied with those assurances and am delighted that such a major figure in 
the Conservative party is willing to invest in the future of this website," 
Montgomerie said.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 