
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, the 
director of England cricket, has stated his belief that Alastair Cook will 
continue his role as Test captain into next summer.

Cook chalked up an English record 55th appearance in the role during last 
week’s drawn first Test with India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/india-draw-england-first-test-cricket>
 in Rajkot and has previously spoken of his intention to return to the playing 
ranks before his eventual retirement. It has raised the question of whether 
this might even occur after the current series.

Strauss, Cook’s predecessor in the job and current line manager, will continue 
to discuss the matter with the 31-year-old periodically but sees little reason 
for a change given both the lengthy breaks afforded by his five-day specialism 
– England’s next Test series is against South Africa in July 2017 – and the 
progress of the current team.

Farage’s canvassing shows English cricket must embrace other cultures | The 
Spin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/nov/16/nigel-farage-english-cricket-zafar-ansari>
“From what I’ve seen he is in a really good place,” said Strauss, on the eve 
of Thursday’s second Test in Visakhapatnam. “I think he is very comfortable 
leading this team as he has been for a while now, so it probably takes less out 
of him now than it used to. He’s batting well and he’s still young. It is quite 
scary how young he is really and I have every faith that he will carry on past 
this series and into the summer.

“Every indication he has given me is he is driven, he’s passionate, he’s 
motivated, he’s loving this environment and he’s excited about some of the 
young players coming through, and that is not a bad place for him to be.”

Asked whether part of any future decision will factor in what is also best for 
Joe Root, Cook’s vice-captain and expected successor, Strauss replied: “Yes, 
but ultimately it is about whether Alastair is the right person to take the 
team forward. If we decide that is not the case then we think about who his 
replacement is.”

While Test specialists such as Cook will have six months away from 
international cricket from the end of the year, Strauss is wary of the problem 
of burnout for multi‑format cricketers such as Root, Ben Stokes and Moeen Ali, 
with England’s longest and busiest ever summer looming in 2017 and the 
following set of winter tours to Australia and New Zealand that could span five 
months in total.

Rest and rotation between formats has, to date, meant one-day cricket is 
predominantly treated as the secondary format, but afterStrauss introduced 
white-ball central contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/england-central-contract-structure-one-day-cricket-andrew-strauss>
 at the end of the summer, and with the dual goal of winning the 2017 Champions 
Trophy and the 2019 World Cup – both of which are on home soil – he concedes 
Test cricket may yet have to give in this regard.

Jimmy Anderson may be fit but England have reason to resist change in India | 
Vic Marks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/15/jimmy-anderson-england-india-second-test-cricket>
“The all-format players are the ones affected most by this and we need to be 
careful about them,” said Strauss. “We have to be cognisant to the fact that if 
we just think people are OK then that is when we get into difficulty.”

Strauss also confirmed that he will look into the future use of a spin-bowling 
coach in the current management setup following positive feedback regarding 
Saqlain Mushtaq, the former Pakistan international,who has worked with 
England’s slow bowlers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/26/england-set-rehire-saqlain-mushtaq-spin-bowling-coach-trevor-bayliss-cricket>
 during the current series and seen an initial one-Test contract extended up to 
and including the third Test against India in Mohali, which begins on 26 
November.

A full-time role is unlikely to be created, however, with the former England 
captain adding: “Personally I’m not convinced you need one there every single 
game that you play but I think you need someone there enough that they develop 
strong relationships with players and be there at important times in series and 
on tours.

“It is an obvious area we need to have the right support for players in, while 
also bearing in mind that we don’t want people there for the sake of it and we 
also want players to think for themselves and not become too reliant on coaches 
to do their thinking for them.”
 