
In general, people would prefer not to have their homes knocked down. You 
wouldn’t and neither would I. They would sooner not to be told to pack their 
bags and move out to make way for the wrecking ball, perhaps to some unfamiliar 
and quite distant neighbourhood where everyone’s a stranger. Often, they’d 
rather stay put even if their home is leaky, cold and overcrowded on a council 
estate that outsiders casually despise and they might not be all that keen on 
themselves. They might feel that way even if very sincere politicians have 
promised them a better, brand new replacement home in the same place as the one 
to be demolished, along with better streets, improved transport and new 
schools. The thing is, change can be a very risky thing. Who can be sure that 
it will turn out for the best?


That is item number one on a long, forbidding list of problems with what is 
variously, sometimes euphemistically, called estate regeneration, rebuilding or 
renewal. This has now been reframed in the neat coinage of Labour policy 
thinker Andrew Adonis as the creation of “city villages”. Adonis, a senior 
policy chief and minister under prime ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, 
has co-editeda collection of essays on the theme 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/city-villages-more-homes-better-communities> 
for theInstitute for Public Policy Research <http://www.ippr.org/>. He wants 
building city villages to be “a new urban movement”, which he contends could go 
a long way to solving the housing shortage, especially in London.

Under Adonis’s plans, many hundreds of estates across the capital containing 
low density housing and high percentages of people who aren’t very well off 
would be replaced with higher density “socially-mixed, multi-tenure housing” 
and better amenities which would create “better communities” too. He stresses 
as key principles that this “densification” or “intensification” should result 
in no reduction in the amount of social housing on the sites and give existing 
residents the option to move into one of the new homes. LikeLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> politicians of several shades, he looks 
across the city and sees precious, local authority-owned, investment-friendly 
space underused by often shoddy, badly laid out properties cut off from their 
surrounding neighbourhoods. Redeveloping these along the lines he desires seems 
to him a clear win-win.

Adonis is no dunce. He’s an impressive man 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Adonis,_Baron_Adonis> in many ways. In 
parts, the arguments he marshals are persuasive, but in others they are 
credulous and incomplete. The pros of estate regeneration are expounded in some 
detail, complete with case studies from Southwark and Hackney. But though some 
of the main cons are acknowledged and addressed, they aren’t given enough 
weight.


The most alarming thing about City Villages is that Gary Yardley 
<http://www.capitalandcounties.com/biography/gary-yardley>, managing director 
of property giant Capital and Counties (Capco) is given space to advertise the
Earls Court Project <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/earls-court-project>, 
a huge and widely-opposed redevelopment scheme cooked up with the now ousted 
Conservative administration of Hammersmith and Fulham Council (H&F), the most 
right wing local authority regime the capital has seen since the days of 
Shirley Porter and a big favourite of Eric Pickles, David Cameron and Boris 
Johnson. The project as a whole, whose value Capco puts at £12bn, has already 
led to the closure of the historic Earls Court exhibition centre and envisages 
the destruction of 760 homes on two adjoining estates against the wishes of the 
vast majority of residents. Replacements have been promised but the amount of 
additional (only relatively) affordable housing pledged is pitifully low.

City Villages was launched at the Royal Institute of British Architects 
<http://www.architecture.com/Explore/Home.aspx> (RIBA) on Tuesday. A visitor to 
RIBA spotted that evening by opponents of the estates’ possible demolition 
demonstrating outside was PR manChris Rumfitt 
<http://crccommunications.co.uk/whoweare/chris-rumfitt/>, a Labour Party member 
<https://twitter.com/chrisrumfitt> and formerly part of Blair’s Number 10 press 
office. Rumfitt, who was actually attending a separate event at the same venue, 
has been a significant figure in the Earls Court story. He’s led Capco’s 
extensive spin operation in support of the scheme, which will colonise the area 
for speculators, drain it of life and should betreated with grave suspicion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/oct/16/earls-court-questions-of-viability>
 by every Labour politician. Adonis is supporting fellow former Labour minister 
Tessa Jowell’s bid to become London’s next mayor. Jowell, who was one of 
Blair’s most loyal colleagues, is the bookies’ favourite to succeed Johnson in 
2016. As H&F’s new Labour leadership istrying to rescue the threatened estates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/oct/13/earls-court-uneven-progress>
, more than one Labour mayoral hopeful has been the subject of Capco lobbying 
over Earls Court. It’s all rather worrying.

On the plus side, City Villages takes on some of the head-bending housing 
supply issues that much of London’s current, high-profile, oppositional housing 
activism hasn’t much to say about. Many call for more social housing, but don’t 
say where it should be built or how it would be paid for (the thing about 
council-owned land is that it doesn’t have to be bought from someone else). 
They want more money spent on the refurbishment of often poorly constructed 
estates, but don’t say which other council tenants should get a smaller slice 
of shrinking council budgets as a result.

They denounce “poor doors” as segregationist, but don’t consider that without 
those doors the homes behind them wouldn’t exist. Sometimes developers offer 
cash for larger quantities of “affordable” homes built on a separate site. 
Activists are against that too. If people don’t want existing inner London 
council sites disturbed at all, perhaps they’d sooner cheaper homes were built 
in the suburbs or out in the Home Counties instead. But, hang on, wouldn’t that 
be “social cleansing” or “exporting the poor”?

The City Villages essays include contributions from London borough leaders 
who’ve travelled down Regeneration Road. These are useful, but unsurprisingly 
tend to talk down the problems they’ve run into on the way. The IPPR’s Bill 
Davies, Adonis’s co-editor, acknowledges important findings of a recentLondon 
Assembly report 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/mayor-assembly/london-assembly/publications/knock-it-down-or-do-it-up>
 (which I wrote abouthere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/feb/15/estate-regeneration-should-put-estate-residents-first>
). This showed that recent estate regenerations have resulted in significant 
net losses of social rented homes on individual sites – the opposite of what 
both Adonis and Jowell say they want. As the Assembly heard from expert 
witnesses, when private developers are involved in regeneration schemes their 
progress becomes dependent on the state of the market and at risk from the 
erosion of original “affordable” commitments when developers plead “viability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/17/truth-property-developers-builders-exploit-planning-cities>
”. There are examples of that all over town. Adonis sees the problem. How would 
he solve it, though?


Davies echoes the Assembly in noting major concerns about engagement with 
estate residents and the vital need for trust and transparency. He recognises 
too that serious damage can be done by uprooting families and disrupting 
informal community networks - the very social fabric of a place - and that the 
financial complexities of redeveloping estates are daunting. A comprehensive 
snag list, though, would also include the failure of promises made at the start 
of such schemes to be kept as politicians and policies as well as market 
conditions change, the exhaustingly long time regenerations with all their 
associated disruptions can take to complete and a recognition that using 
planning policy to create “mixed communities”may not produce the social benefits
 <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mixed-communities-evidence-review> 
that politicians across the mainstream spectrum seem to so uncritically assume. 
In some cases, the pursuit of mix has been used to dignify the unacceptable. 
Again,see Earls Court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/apr/06/earls-court-decent-neighbourhoods-hammersmith-fulham>
.

The most notable absence from City Villages is the direct perspective of 
estate residents themselves, the people who would be most profoundly affected 
if Adonis’s urban movement gathered pace – the ones whose homes would be 
knocked down as it progressed. Hard line opponents of estate redevelopment tend 
to romanticise these as seamless, monochrome communities united in resistance, 
but there is always a spectrum of views. This can include a readiness to accept 
and even help bring about major change if people believe they have serious 
power over the process and that they and their friends and families will 
benefit. Estate regeneration involves a complex balance sheet which isn’t only 
about units and finance. If the interests of residents aren’t fully represented 
there, the losses can too easily outweigh the gains.

Update, 0835: This article originally said that Chris Rumfitt attended the 
launch of City Villages at RIBA. He has since told me he was attending a 
separate event at the same venue and I’ve amended the text accordingly.

 