
I have only one personal memory of Andrew Breitbart: it was around five years 
ago, and he was in my office withhis longtime colleague Larry Solov 
<http://biggovernment.com/author/lsolov/>, explaining how he helped create the 
Huffington Post. He did it, he said, for two reasons: first, to make a decent 
wage off the effort; and second, to give the crazy Hollywood left a place to 
gather and air their thoughts.

Americans will be appalled when they see what these guys think.

On both counts, mission accomplished.

But Breitbart had something else in mind on that visit: creating a new arena 
that would take the fiscal and social capital he'd accumulated over the 
preceding years, and repay the cultural left in its own coin. They trafficked 
in self-assured righteousness, a vibrant network of transmitters and 
supporters, and a belief in the moral inferiority of their opposites.

With these things, they crafted and pushed narratives that crushed 
conservatives every time.Andrew Breitbart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrew-breitbart> was going to bring those 
methods, and more important, that aesthetic to the right – and see which side 
won when it was main force on main force.

I thought it was a vain hope, said so politely, and wished him well.

In the succeeding years, as Acorn 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_of_Community_Organizations_for_Reform_Now#Controversies>
,Anthony Wiener <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anthony-weiner>, the 
National Endowment for the Arts, and other totems of the American left fell 
before his sprawling apparatus of websites and activists, I saw how wrong I'd 
been – and I was glad for it.

Andrew Breitbart wasn't the man standing athwart history, yelling, "Stop!" He 
was the guy retaking the airplane cockpit from the terrorists. He perceived a 
sclerotic cultural-left establishment, and kicked out its supports, laughing as 
he went.

Oh, how they hated him for it. Oh, how he loved them for hating him.

For those of us working in the conservative movement, and especially in its 
media arm, the legacy of Breitbart is simple. He reminded us of things that 
should never be forgotten: that the truth has more power than the lie, that 
freedom defeats oppression, and that we must fight for both every waking day. 
He was a genius of the communicative art, and a pioneer in the marriage of new 
media to enduring principle.

We walk in his footsteps, and our only regret is that we can no longer stand 
in his shadow.
 