
Andrew Breen, who has died aged 47 after heart surgery, was a world-leading 
space scientist. I first met Andy in the late 1980s when he was a PhD student at
Aberystwyth University <http://www.aber.ac.uk/en/>. Born and brought up in 
Sunderland, he had been educated atMonkwearmouth school  
<http://moodle.monkwearmouth.sunderland.sch.uk/>there. At Aberystwyth, he 
quickly formed an effective team with his PhD supervisor,Professor Phil Williams
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jun/13/guardianobituaries.highereducation>
, initially studying the physics of the upper atmosphere during aurorae, using 
data from the Eiscat radars in northern Scandinavia.

But then, they began to forge some novel and unique research. They used the 
"twinkling" of radio stars to study the acceleration of the solar wind outflow 
from the sun. They realised that Eiscat allowed them to make measurements 
closer to the sun than anybody else.

This was exciting and cutting-edge science. Phil may have supplied the initial 
idea but it was Andy who worked through the details and made it work. By the 
time Phil moved on in 1999 to become a member of parliament in Cardiff, Andy 
had become a world leader in his field.

This success did not come easily. Early in his career, Andy's immune system 
began attacking his own nervous system.Myasthenia gravis  
<http://www.mga-charity.org/>is exceptionally rare in young men and it, and a 
host of complications, very nearly killed him. It is hard to convey the scale 
of his struggle. Often he would support his head in a specially made frame so 
he could keep working even though he was too weak to hold up his own head. That 
he achieved so much is testament to his extraordinary willpower and bravery, as 
well as his talent.

He survived to become the most amiable of eccentrics. He had eclectic tastes, 
championing the unknown in music, literature and art, as well as science – 
because he understood that good things have small origins. It was the same with 
people and politics – he fought for the young, the struggling and the 
oppressed, whilst never needing to despise the powerful, the rich or the 
successful, unless they misused their power, their wealth or their influence: 
then they would incur his formidable and witty wrath.

He was kind to those who deserved or needed it and especially to his students. 
His wit, spirit, humanity, courage and decency will be greatly missed by his 
friends and colleagues. He is survived by his mother, Joan.
 