 Talking Points Memo logo 
I was … I am stunned to hear of the death of Andrew Breitbart 
<http://livewire.talkingpointsmemo.com/entries/tpm-confirms-andrew-breitbart-dead-at-43>
. I don't think there's much of anything I agreed with him about, which is an 
understatement. My interactions with him were first friendly, then later heated 
and vexed, though maybe not unfriendly even then. He tweeted something at me 
yesterday <https://twitter.com/#!/AndrewBreitbart/status/174904101786755074>, 
which I ignored.

There are some people who live for the fight. It's something I try not to be 
part of. Yet it's a big, punchy, vivid and outrageously honorable tradition in 
the American public square. I cannot think of many people who lived more out 
loud than he did, more in primary colors. I remember thinking at some points 
even the name – the way it rolls off your tongue – has this rough, brickbat, 
unsmoothable sound: Breit /Bart.

I noticed on my Facebook feed this morning this comment from my friend Hilary 
Rosen <https://twitter.com/#!/hilaryr/status/175226820554272768>: 
"‎#AndrewBreitbart RIP you big crazy rabble-rousing bundle of contradictions, 
loathsome actions and a giant heart. You have made your mark." I don't think I 
can say anything more fitting.

He left his mark.

Beneath all the layers of our public life, we're sons, daughters; parents to 
sons and daughters: naked people at our most vulnerable, true moments. This is 
way, way too young to die – something I know palpably since Breitbart was only 
a week or so older than I am.

Others knew him better, can memorialize him better. But for myself, I wish the 
very best to his wife and children in this moment of unbearable grief and send 
my condolences to all his friends, of whom there were many.

The original version of this story was published on Talking Points Memo 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/archives/2012/03/breitbart_rip.php?ref=fpblg>.

Talking Points Memo is an innovative news organization that provides breaking 
news, investigative reporting and smart analysis of politics. For more stories 
visitwww.talkingpointsmemo.com <http://talkingpointsmemo.com/>. (c) 2011 TPM 
Media LLC
 