
Check the questions readers wanted Andrew Rawnsley to ask Kenneth Clarke here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/oct/05/conservative-conference-ken-clarke-interview>
.

5.26pm: This is the fringe meeting that the Tory press officers will be 
dreading: Ken Clarke, in conversation. Anyone who has attended one of Andrew 
Rawnsley's party conference interviews will know that they are a delight and 
tonight he will be putting the questions to the most outspoken man in the 
shadow cabinet. Can Clarke get through the hour without one of his infamous 
gaffes (to use the word we journalists like to deploy when a politician answers 
a question with uncharacteristic honesty)? We'll soon find out.

5.56pm: Clarke has arrived early and he's sitting on stage with Rawnsley as 
the hall fills up. The organisers have left a bottle of wine (a red) on the 
table. Last week,when Rawnsley was interviewing Lord Mandelson at the Labour 
conference, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/blog/2009/sep/29/labourconference-labour> 
the wine went untouched. But Clarke is not so abstemious. He opens the bottle 
and pours himself a glass. This prompts the audience to respond with a 
spontaneous round of applause.

6.04pm: Gaby Hinsliff, the Observer's political editor, starts by reminding 
Clarke about his last leadership campaign, which started with Clarke heading to 
Vietnam to flog cigarettes while denying that he was going to be a candidate. 
She says this seemed to do his prospects a great deal of good. It was only when 
he started campaigning actively that it all went wrong.

Now we're watching a video profile of Clarke produced by the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/video/2009/oct/06/kenneth-clarke-conservatives>
. Do watch it. It's good.

6.13pm: The film ends with that famous footage of Clarke in a racing car, 
unable to get out, around the time of his first leadership contest, in 1997. 
How did he get out, Rawnsley asks. Clarke says he was not stuck because his 
waist was too big. He just could not find the foothold he needed.

And does he still go to Ronnie Scott's? (Another anecdote in the film.) No, 
says Clarke. That's a myth. When he was a junior minister he used to go 
regularly, before going home to do his red boxes at 2 in the morning. But he 
stopped when he was health secretary and he could not take the pace now.

Politicians are "remarkably puritan" now, says Clarke. The audience laughs, 
because Rawnsley is pouring him a second glass of red.

Clarke describes himself as "so laid back he's sometimes horizontal". This has 
helped to keep him sane. The earnest approach - up at 7 and orange juice for 
lunch - is "crazy", he says.

Rawnsley says Clarke once said jogging was for people too stupid to be able to 
read the papers. What does he think of Cameron jogging? Clarke says Andy 
Coulson has not made jogging compulsory.

6.21pm: They're talking about Clarke's childhood now. Clarke says his maternal 
grandfather was a pacifist who called himself a communist. His mother voted 
Labour. His father only started voting Conservative when he opened a shop after 
the war. His father had been an electrician before. The family used to get the 
Daily Mail and it was reading the Mail that got him interested in politics.

When he went to Cambridge he joined all the political groups. He was active in 
the Gaitskellite Campaign for Democratic Socialism. Being in that environment 
helped him to form his political views and he came out of Cambridge a 
Conservative.

Rawnsely points out that many of his contemporaries were grammar school boys. 
Clarke says Thatcher's cabinet had more grammar school boys in it than any 
other.

Rawnsley asks if things have changed now. Clarke says class does not matter 
now. There used to be a time when being an Etonian was seen as a disadvantage. 
But in the David Cameron/David Davis leadership contest, background did not 
matter in the least, Clarke says.

Did grammar school teach him confidence? Clarke says politicians acquire 
confidence. "If you are not reasonably sure what you want to do, you should not 
be trying to persuade other people to do it," Clarke says.

He has never suffered "acute attacks of nerves".

He's a barrister, he says. Barristers are like actors and clergymen. They all 
"tread the boards".

Clarke read law. But he wishes now he had done history. He did law because he 
knew then that he wanted to be an MP and he saw that as a good training for it.

6.31pm: Clarke is reminiscing now about his university days. When he was a 
student, most of his contemporaries spent their time on their outside interests 
(like politics, sport, acting or journalism) because they were preparing for 
their careers.

Clarke says his law degree was quite useless. He learnt things like how to 
free a Roman slave.

He borrowed a correspondence course for the bar finals from Michael Howard and 
crash-revised for the exams.

Now things have gone "insanely in the other direction". Everything is 
"over-complicated".

Rawnsley asks about Clarke's decision to invite Oswald Mosley, the British 
fascist, to speak to the CambridgeConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

Clarke says that Mosley had been invited to Cambridge before. He invited 
Mosley so that he could take on his arguments. Mosley was one of the best 
speakers he had ever heard. But he had difficulty defending his record in the 
1930s. "He was a class act as a persuasive mass orator." Clarke and John Gummer 
took him on in debate.

Clarke thought his politics were "poisonous". But it was worth taking him on. 
Mosley had charm and talent. And "dangerous charisma". He was an amazing 
historical figure. After the debate, Clarke took him out for dinner.

Rawnsely says Clarke also proposed the motion that "the monarchy has outlived 
its usefulness" in the Cambridge Union. Clarke says that was probably because 
no one else was prepared to do so. He's a monarchist, he says.

6.41pm: Rawnsley asks about Clarke's wife, Gillian. They have been married 46 
years. Clarke says he's not sure why she has put up with him for so long. She's 
more political than people realise and she's active in the constituency. When 
they married, she knew that he wanted a career in politics.

If he had ever become prime minister, he would have urged his wife to follow 
the Denis Thatcher model, ie, to avoid becoming a public figure. Cherie Blair 
wanted to be a public figure, but also complained about having her privacy 
invaded, Clarke says.

Politicians should not try to have it both ways, he goes on.

But he also criticises the media for being too intrusive.

6.47pm: We're on Europe now. Clarke says he's always been pro-European, ever 
since Harold Macmillan announced that he wanted to take Britain into the EEC in 
the early 1960s. The Heath government was in many ways not a very distinguished 
government, but it did take Britain into the EEC. As a PPS, Clarke had helped 
to draft some of the legislation. When the bill was going through parliament he 
was a whip, so he did not speak in any of the debates.

Rawnsley asks the audience if they think joining the Common Market was a good 
thing or a bad thing. Most people think it's a good thing. But I suppose 
they're here because they like Ken Clarke, so that's not a surprise.

In 1979 Clarke was not invited to join the cabinet. Junior ministers in those 
days were paid very little, around Â£9,000. Thatcher rang him up and and invited 
him to be a junior transport minister. He told her he did not know anything 
about transport. She replied: "My dear boy, you'll soon pick it up."

Clarke says when he was first elected the expectation was that MPs would earn 
their income from a second job (either in government, or elsewhere.). The only 
people in the Conservative party who did not have outside jobs were the landed 
gentry. In the Labour party some MPs had second jobs. Others had to live in 
bedsits when they were in London.

6.55pm: On the subject of MPs' pay now, Clarke says he thinks media intrusion 
is more likely to stop people wanting to go into politics than the level of the 
salary.

But he is concerned about people being put off.

On Thatcher, Clarke says he thinks she ran a "great government". He was always 
sent to departments where she wanted someone with a "rumbustious approach". It 
was a "reforming government".

"Nothing we did was popular." Every policy he put through was unpopular with 
voters. But ministers did what they thought was best for the country.

Clarke says he has always believed in the representative form of government. 
Voters choose a government to do what they think is best for the country.

Rawnsley says the public sector reductions being proposed now are more severe 
than those put through by Thatcher.

But people have different expectations, Clarke says.

7.01pm: Rawnsley wants to know what the Tories would privatise. Clarke says he 
only mentions asset sales when he can't think of anything else to say about how 
the Tories will make savings. Rawnsley presses him on the Highways Agency, but 
Clarke says he does not know what George Osborne's plans are for that.

When in government, he did try to privatise the Royal Mail. He failed. At the 
time he thought the company would not survive for another 10 years. It's still 
in a desperate plight, he says.

Rawnsley asks a question submitted online. Does Clarke regret the damage done 
to Britain's industrial base from 1979 to 1997?

Yes, says Clarke.

He recalls shadowing Alan Williams, the current father of the house, when 
Williams was a minister in the 1970s and in charge of subsidies to failing 
companies. That was indefensible. But good companies also failed in the early 
1980s because of the exchange rate.

Rawnsely asks about banks. Clarke says he always thought the City needed 
proper regulation. But Gordon Brown did not accept that.

7.09pm: A question from the audience. Does Clarke think there are not enough 
"characters" in politics now?

No, says Clarke. Look at Boris Johnson.

Clarke also says MPs are more rebellious now than they used to be. In the 
1950s and 1960s the Tory knights of the shires would not rebel on anything. The 
first major rebellion came with the Common Market legislation, he says.

But when New Labour came in some MPs were far too slavish. Clarke recalls 
trying to explain to a Labour MP after 1997 that MPs were allowed to ask 
questions that had not been written out by the whips. The MP thought that he 
was trying to wind her up.

Another question. Does he think he would do a better job than George Osborne?

Clarke says he's a big fan of Osborne's. He would not have come back if he did 
not admire Osborne. He does not think he could go back to being chancellor.

Does he expect to stay in cabinet for the whole of a parliament?

Clarke says that's up to David Cameron. But he jokes that, if anyone tries to 
get rid of him, it'll be "God help them".

Would he like to be foreign secretary? Clarke has been chancellor and home 
secretary, so that's the one big job he has not done. Clarke says he would have 
liked to have been foreign secretary, but his European views would have made it 
impossible for John Major to have appointed him to that post.

7.19pm: On Europe, what does Clarke think of having Tony Blair as president of 
Europe?

Clarke says he does not think Blair will get it. He thinks the smaller EU 
states would rather have someone different. And he would like somone different 
too, although he says Blair would not be the worst candidate.

International bodies with a job like this always end up with a Scandanavian, 
he jokes. That might happen this time too.

Also, "it's not the role that Tony will try to make it". 

Another question, on human rights. How does abolishing the Human Rights Act 
improve human rights?

"I don't think it does," Clarke replies.

People have protection under the European Convention on Human Rights. Passing 
the HRA did not give people these rights. It just affected where they could 
enforce them. There are issues to be addressed with the way the HRA works. But 
no one is ever going to repudiate the convention.

Without naming any of them, he says some Labour home secretaries were more 
concerned with tabloid headlines than human rights.

7.26pm: Would debt be lower if Britain had joined the euro?

Clarke says it would not have made any difference.

He won't comment on the merits of the euro. But he says Britain is not going 
to join anyway, so it's irrelevant.

If he gets into government, will he campaign for an end to the ban on smoking 
in public places?

Clarke says he's given up on that fight. If he thought Tory MPs would rally, 
he might be tempted to get involved in this. But he does not think it would 
happen because the Commons is too puritan.

Clarke says he can understand why people wanted no-smoking areas. But he 
cannot understand why smokers should not be able to have their own smoking 
areas.

He has a go at pressure groups. Once they win one campaign, they have to find 
another, otherwise they get disbanded.

Clarke says he's more liberal than younger MPs.

He quotes Lord Melbourne, a Regency prime minister surrounded by Victorian 
zealots. Melbourne said: "Why do you want to change things? Aren't they bad 
enough already." Clarke says that he believes in change - the Thatcher 
government was a reforming government - but that sometimes he shares a 
Melbournite bemusement at the passion some of his younger colleagues feel about 
some causes.

7.39pm: That's it. It's over. At one point, talking about the press, Clarke 
said that there were journalists on constant alert looking for "two words" that 
might contradict something being said by another shadow cabinet member on the 
fringe.

Well, we did not really get them tonight. At various points he seemed about to 
amble into gaffe territory - he almost did an Alan Duncan, and complained about 
MPs being badly paid, and he doesn't seem to think that there is much point 
scrapping the Human Rights Act - but every time he neatly managed swerve out of 
trouble. He did make an odd joke about not letting David Cameron sack him, but 
that did not amount to much either.

So, after an hour and a half, a couple of glasses of wine, and some good 
questions, Ken Clarke stayed on message.

At least we've learnt something. The Tories really are serious about forming a 
government.
 