
In 2005, when the British film producer Jonathan Cavendish 
<http://www.imaginariumuk.com/mobile/our-people-john.html> took his children to 
the local cinema to see Peter Jackson’s remake ofKing Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/dec/09/1>, he was not fully aware of 
the hi-tech wizardry behind its astounding special effects. Among the millions 
who sawThe Lord of the Rings, there was, it’s true, a devoted sub-section who 
had become highly conscious of the science that turnedAndy Serkis 
<http://www.serkis.com/> into Gollum and which was now being brought to his 
starring part inKing Kong. But Cavendish was not one of them, and was 
blissfully ignorant of “performance capture” and its artistic scope.

“I came across King Kong as a punter,” he recalls. “But I was really moved by 
the relationship between the digital creature [King Kong] and the character 
played by Naomi Watts. I was so moved that, embarrassingly, I cried in front of 
my children. I just didn’t understand what was happening, because a collection 
of pixels does not usually achieve that kind of emotion.”

Then his producer’s brain kicked in. “I went away and looked up how King Kong 
had been made. I was amazed to discover that insideKing Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/king-kong> was Gollum [Serkis]. I mean, I had 
no idea.”

Cavendish, a laidback 50-something, has the kind of insouciant charm you often 
find in the movie business. He might relish being “a punter” (a favourite term 
of his), but he’s also a quintessentially English enthusiast for cinema, best 
known for theBridget Jones films. He says he was looking for a movie-making 
collaborator when, by chance, mutual friends introduced him to Serkis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129208ea0ef8dcad47c48ce8c737ba8b849edc1b%2F0_295_6358_3815%2F6358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129208ea0ef8dcad47c48ce8c737ba8b849edc1b%2F0_295_6358_3815%2F6358.jpg>
 Slimy characters: Timothy Spall reflected in the mirror as Fungus, the 
dirt-dwelling, filth-eating monster 
“My father once told me: either be the best in the world at something or find 
somebody who is the best in the world at something – and work with them.” He 
looks affectionately across the table atAndy Serkis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-serkis>. “I chose the latter route.”

For Serkis, a former stage and television actor, Gollum had changed 
everything, placing him at the leading edge of a revolution in cinematic 
production. The technology exploited byPeter Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peterjackson> inspired a new way of 
representing fantasy figures from classic fiction: if the director could now 
record almost every aspect of an actor’s performance and transform it into a 
screen character through digital magic, the actor was also liberated – albeit 
wearing a hi-tech special-effects suit – to fully inhabit the role he or she 
was playing.

When The Lord of the Rings ended, Serkis imagined returning to the life of a 
jobbing actor. Up until then he had mainly worked as a character actor in 
British TV, with a string of good but not spectacular credits, includingThe 
Darling Buds of May, Finney and Oliver Twist. “I thought Lord of the Rings was 
the end of the line,” he recalls. “But then Peter asked if I wanted to play 
King Kong. It was only at that moment that I went: ‘Wow! This new technology 
enables you to go from playing an ex-hobbit to a 25ft gorilla.’ That was the 
turning point. Up until then Gollum was just the next stage from John Hurt in a 
prosthetic costume as the Elephant Man.”

Cavendish vividly remembers the first time they got together to discuss film: 
“In the smoky and mildly debauched atmosphere of Blacks [a members’ club] in 
Soho, west London, we bonded over vodka martinis.” He laughs: “We talked for 
hours about films and music and books we both loved and quickly realised we 
shared a passionate desire to tell stories, in new and different ways. We were 
very close from that first moment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448990255519%2F466212ff-bb0b-411c-aab9-5c319f47e68c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448990255519%2F466212ff-bb0b-411c-aab9-5c319f47e68c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Before the magic: (from left) Andy Serkis wearing a special high-tech suit; 
and as Gollum after the performance capture had been added. Photograph: REX 
Shutterstock; NewLine Cinema 
The upshot was the Imaginarium <http://www.imaginariumuk.com/>, a creative 
laboratory based in Ealing, west London, founded in 2011. The name was derived 
by Serkis from the “vivarium” of Victorian times, in which animals were kept in 
a semi-natural state. In reality the office is a highly “virtual” landscape, a 
grotty-looking rehearsal space ringed with some 50 cameras, a battery of 
computers, and strewn with bottles of mineral water. There are few other staff 
visible, only a view over the studio lot. And here, together, they have created 
something magnificent and unique in the former home of those classicEaling 
Comedies <http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/445526/>(Kind Hearts and 
Coronets, Passport to Pimlico and The Man in the White Suit).

Cavendish says it’s a “relatively unique operation. We don’t really have an 
American counterpart. We are a technology company, and a service company and a 
production company creating our own shows.” And it’s quite a line-up of 
projects. They are currently working onAnimal Farm and The Jungle Book.

“We’re very British,” says Cavendish. “But also international, with 
outward-looking, global ambitions. And I think the Andy [Serkis] factor is 
vital to our success. Andy is internationally recognised and has given his name 
to a cutting-edge production company that’s dedicated to developing new 
technology and new stories.”

 I’m here to talk to them about the project that will be on our television 
screens this Christmas: Raymond Briggs’s 1970s cartoon classicFungus the 
Bogeyman, starring Timothy Spall, Victoria Wood, Keeley Hawes and Marc Warren. 
The Imaginarium’s version falls somewhere between a digital extravaganza, an 
animated film and state-of-the-art prosthetic pyrotechnics, but with all the 
emotional and crowd-pleasing heft of traditional film – Ealing entertainment in 
its purest form.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448990502106%2F541e7849-99de-4d87-b3c3-efdd8cda10d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448990502106%2F541e7849-99de-4d87-b3c3-efdd8cda10d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Caught in the act: (from left) Andy Serkis monkeying around; and in Dawn of 
the Planet of the Apes. Photograph: Photoshot; Sportsphoto; Allstar 
Fungus has been made before, by the BBC in 2004, starring Mak Wilson as Fungus 
with a Mark Haddon script. “But the technology did not allow it to work to its 
full potential,” Cavendish says. “It had prosthetic heads, but there’s a very 
limited amount of movement you can have with a prosthetic head.”

Fungus is emblematic of the projects that excite the Imaginarium’s 
co-founders. It’s distinctively British, drawn from Raymond Briggs’s memories 
of working-class life in the 40s and 50s, and grounded in storytelling. The 
original book, a prototype of the graphic novel, remained a one-off that was 
never developed into a series, and depends on character, jokes and word-play 
set in a highly distinctive imaginary world of grime and slime. The script by 
Tom MacRae and Guy Andrews explores the natural comedy of the gulf between the 
classes. “It’s not big on narrative,” adds Serkis, “it’s very funny and a great 
thing to adapt, and we’ve found the story.”

For the Imaginarium, the role of Fungus, whose daily task is to terrify the 
terrestrial world of “dry cleaners” (Bogeyman slang for humans), is performed 
by Timothy Spall, who cheerfully embodies the dirt-dwelling, filth-eating 
monster who moves in next door to the “dry cleaners” of Daventry with bizarre, 
slimy, and entertaining consequences. “A year ago,” says Cavendish, “the wisdom 
in the industry was that the kind of detailed effects we’ve achieved with 
Fungus couldn’t be done, but we’ve found a way to do it. Yes, it’s still a 
laborious process, but it’s getting less laborious all the time.”

At the time of our interview, the film was still a work in progress with the 
CGI team atDouble Negative <http://www.dneg.com/>, who have partnered with The 
Imaginarium Studios on this project, but a sneak preview reveals a vivid 
underworld of slime and snot, a colourful and exceedingly lifelike version of 
Briggs’s cartoon, in which Fungus, his wife Mildew and their yukky son Mould 
happily terrorise the “topside”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87667f10d793435ecc51ec28c06358de9be4f48e%2F408_1334_3960_4692%2F3960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Serkis%20and%20the%20marvel%20of%20%E2%80%98performance%20capture%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fandy-serkis-film-hobbit-king-kong-fungus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87667f10d793435ecc51ec28c06358de9be4f48e%2F408_1334_3960_4692%2F3960.jpg>
 ‘The key to the new technology is its fidelity to the actor’s performance’: 
the Imaginarium’s Jonathan Cavendish (left) and Andy Serkis. Photograph: Pål 
Hansen for the Observer 
Since launching the Imaginarium, Serkis and Cavendish have made huge strides 
in educating their profession in the possibilities of performance capture, and 
in allaying actors’ fears that CGI meant the death of their trade. “There was a 
lot of resistance when we started,” says Serkis. “But that’s now completely 
gone. Actors are queueing up to explore this new world, and extend their range.”

Benedict Cumberbatch, Cate Blanchett, Tom Hollander and Naomie Harris turned 
up for an intense two-week session in the Imaginarium’s virtual landscape for
The Jungle Book. Christian Bale is also in it, but could not leave LA – though 
such is the adaptability of the Imaginarium that Serkis and Cavendish were able 
to “capture” Bale’s contribution separately in Hollywood and seamlessly insert 
it into the film. “[For the actors] it’s like being on stage,” says Serkis. “Or 
like being in rehearsal. They say the same thing: that there’s no limit. Once 
they’ve got used to the technology, they feel they can do anything. The key to 
the new technology is its fidelity to the actor’s performance, to the 
character. It’s not a question of the actor being smothered by special effects. 
The exciting thing is that it liberates them, creatively.”

Despite its very British sensibility, the Imaginarium is looking for global 
audiences. Cavendish and Serkis are making new inroads across Asia. “There’s 
huge storytelling potential [for us] in China,” explains Cavendish. “They have 
the stories of course, but they’re still behind on the technology. So they come 
to us and we help them realise their ambitions. Fundamentally, we still work in 
English, but in southeast Asia we are about to start working in local 
languages.”

Serkis, once so fully committed as an actor, seems completely at home here. 
Would he, who trained in the theatre, ever go back on stage, thus giving up the 
power of cinematic effects, if offered a tempting opportunity? “Funnily enough, 
“he says, “being in the Imaginarium is a bit like being in a rehearsal room. 
The West End?” He thinks for a moment. “Well, I suppose if it was a truly 
extraordinary part. But it’s not really my focus at the moment. Here, at the 
Imaginarium, there are just so many things we want to do.”

They are now on the hunt for more British classics to translate . Their Jungle 
Book (with Serkis playing Baloo) is, if all goes well, due for release in 
cinemas next year, and will compete with a 3D version from Disney. This doesn’t 
faze them; Cavendish only emphasises that their version is based on “Kipling’s 
original”.

Other projects – notably an Animal Farm approved by the Orwell estate – come 
next. There are some nice little earners like the new Coldplay video out this 
Christmas. It does not require much imagination to see a Frankenstein, or a 
Gulliver, or a version of Lewis Carroll’sAlice emerging from these studios in 
the near future. Entertaining the audience with noises in the attic, monsters 
under the bed, a squeaky door, a bump in the night – is as old as Shakespeare. 
What would he have made of them, I ask. “Shakespeare, who would certainly have 
been working in movies, would understand what we’re doing,” says Serkis, 
laughing with quiet satisfaction at what he’s created.

Fungus The Bogeyman, a three-part original drama, will broadcast on Sky 1 this 
Christmas

 * This article was amended on 10 December 2015 to include a reference to the 
CGI team at Double Negative.
 