
Andrew Mullins, managing director of the group that runs The Independent 
titles and theLondon Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>, is to leave the 
publisher after seven years.

According to a press release issued by the group, Mullins is moving to 
Informa, the London-based multinational publishing and events company, to 
become chief executive of its knowledge and networking division.

He will continue in his current role, it says, "to ensure an effective hand 
over to his successor" who will be named shortly.

He will also remain as a non-executive director on the boards of Independent 
Print <https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-print>, the Evening 
Standard and its TV stablemate.

Mullins spoke of his "incredible seven years" and the "privilege" of working 
with the papers and on the launch ofLondon Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-live>, the local TV outlet that went 
to air in March.

He said: "Some truly remarkable commercial and editorial people have achieved 
truly astonishing results over those years and I will genuinely miss working 
with such brilliant people. I know I leave the business in very capable hands."

The newspapers' overall controller, Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, said he was "very grateful" 
to Mullins for "his exceptional leadership." He pointed out that during 
Mullins's time in office the Standard has turned a £20m operating loss into a 
profit."

He has also overseen the launch of the Independent's sister title, i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/i>, and also reduced losses for Independent 
Print from over £20m "to its target of £5m this year."

Lebedev said: "These undertakings - both hugely ambitious and difficult - 
would not have happened without him. As a result of our hard work, both the 
Evening Standard and the Independent titles are on a stable footing."

Lebedev, son of the Russian oligarch, Alexander, added: "My family has spent 
close to £100m on British journalism and we are committed to taking this 
exciting group of brands from strength to strength."

Comment: On a personal note, over the years of dealing with Andy Mullins I 
found him to be candid and courteous, two qualities that are rare in media 
executives.

Even when my articles and comments have upset him, he has always preferred to 
explain rather than complain. So I will miss him and wish him the best at 
Informa.

Full disclosure: I write a weekly column for the Standard
 