
An automatic legal pardon should be given to all men convicted under 
historical homosexuality laws without the need for families or individuals to 
apply to the government, the Labour leadership contenderAndy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> has proposed. His pledge, 
following consultation with Sir Keir Starmer, the former director of public 
prosecutions and current Labour MP, means it would be possible to quash up to 
50,000 convictions for acts that would be not be illegal today.

Burnham, who currently shares roughly the same number of constituency 
nominations as Jeremy Corbyn, said he will press prime minister David Cameron 
to make a relatively simple change to the law, but if he does not do so, it 
would form part of the first legislative programme of a Burnham-led government. 
The move comes two years after the royal pardon granted to second world war 
codebreakerAlan Turing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>.

Benedict Cumberbatch: broaden Turing’s pardon to other gay men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/30/benedict-cumberbatch-pardon-gay-men-alan-turing>
Burnham will call for all men to receive the same honour regardless of their 
status or living family. The current law requires living individuals to apply 
to the Home Office for their conviction to be overturned. In March this year, 
Ed Miliband announced that if he won the general election, aLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government would review how to 
apply this rule to family and friends who proactively apply to have records 
erased.

Turing, whose work cracking the German military codes was vital to the British 
war effort, was convicted in 1952 of gross indecency with a 19-year-old man, 
was chemically castrated, and two years later died from cyanide poisoning in an 
apparent suicide. He was given aposthumous royal pardon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
 in 2013 and campaigners want the government to pardon all the men convicted 
under the outdated law.

Burnham has received legal advice that a formal statutory pardon through a 
bill of parliament would be workable and removes the need for applications from 
descendants and lengthy case-by-case decisions. He said: “Alan Turing made a 
remarkable contribution to our country, but it is not only national heroes that 
deserve to have their suffering atoned for. Tens of thousands of men were 
treated appallingly, and every one of these convictions is equally shameful.

“I was one of the first Labour frontbenchers to call for equal marriage, and I 
believe the next frontier is a law to remove this shadow from our national 
history. It would send a strong message to millions of LGBT individuals around 
the world, who still live in fear of persecution, and to the governments and 
national leaders that refuse to recognise equal rights.”

Starmer said: “Automatic pardons are appropriate in these cases not only to 
mark the grossly unjust basis of the convictions, but also to send a powerful 
message to the world about the unacceptability of similar anti-gay laws still 
in existence.”

 