
James Earl Jones, actor

I have two favourite characters in literature: Lennie in Of Mice and Men 
<http://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/o/of-mice-and-men/character-analysis/lennie-small>
; andHoke <http://www.imdb.com/character/ch0014096/>, the chauffeur, in Driving 
Miss Daisy. They're both men without language: they have to start from scratch 
when it comes to communicating. As a result, what they say comes from deep 
within.

I was struck by the wonderful film version of Driving Miss Daisy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BR0oZ2pnhyg>, with Morgan Freeman as Hoke. 
Like Hoke, I'm from the south – Arkabutla in Mississippi – where there's not a 
lot of formal education. I thought: "I know Hoke. He's like so many people back 
home." Ever since, I longed to play him on stage.

The play had never been produced on Broadway: it was done so satisfactorily 
off-Broadway in 1987, and then turned into a movie, that that was considered 
the end of it. But the writer, Alfred Uhry, wanted to take it to Broadway 
so, in October 2010, that's where we opened. I was acting alongsideVanessa 
Redgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/sep/10/vanessa-redgrave-interview>
 as Daisy Wertham, the elderly Jewish lady Hoke chauffeurs. Daisy is defined by 
the fact that she's suddenly unable to drive herself and is forced to give up a 
bit of control. This will happen to all of us one day. I'm 83 – so for me it 
will probably come soon.

When the play toured Australia in 2013, Angela Lansbury took over as Daisy. 
They were very different. Vanessa wants to get into the interior of a character;
sometimes she finds riches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/06/driving-miss-daisy-theatre-review>
 and sometimes, probably,she doesn't 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/09/driving-miss-daisy-vanessa-redgrave>
. Angela, meanwhile, is a crafter. She may have had a harder time approaching 
her character's ugly side – Daisy can be quite acid, quite cruel, and it wasn't 
as easy for Angela to find these things. But when she did, her performance was 
wonderful.

Australian audiences totally got the play. I shook hands with "jackeroos", or 
cowboys, whose hands were rougher than mine, but they were sitting watching 
with everybody else. It's almost 30 years since Driving Miss Daisy was written, 
but its examination of issues around race still resonates. We live with the 
same conditions, the same problems. And they still hurt.

Angela Lansbury, actor

I saw the original stage production of Driving Miss Daisy in New York and 
loved it. Afterwards, I met Alfred Uhry, and we came to an agreement that some 
day I would play Daisy. Years passed. Then it was suggested that I do it in 
Australia, of all places, alongsideJames Earl Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-earl-jones>. I'm not exactly a 
spring chicken [Lansbury is 88], but I thought: "Australia – why not? What a 
wonderful place to go and try something."

The great thing about theatre, you see, is that it's all about illusion. At 
my age, I simply can't get away with playing a 72-year-old woman like Daisy in 
the movies. But on stage, with make-up, I can. So the theatre, really, is the 
only place older actresses can still work.

Perth was the high point of the tour. I discovered I had relatives there 
who'd emigrated from London in the 1950s, so we held a sort of jamboree 
of Lansburys. And His Majesty's is a perfect theatre: standing on that stage 
seemed to echo the days of the great English actors who toured to Australia in 
the 1930s and 40s. We went down to the basement and saw that many of them had 
signed their names on the bricks –Vivien Leigh 
<http://life.time.com/culture/vivien-leigh-on-her-100th-birthday-portraits-of-a-movie-legend/>
,Robert Morley <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0605923/>, Laurence Olivier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/olivier>. Naturally, I had to add my own 
name.

• Driving Miss Daisy: The Play is being shown in cinemas on 25 May, followed 
by a live Q&A with Angela Lansbury. Details:cinestage.co.uk/daisy 
<http://cinestage.co.uk/daisy>.
 