
Angela Lansbury <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury> 
will make her first appearance on the London stage for almost 40 years in a 
revival ofNoel Coward <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/noelcoward>'s Blithe 
Spirit.

Lansbury, 88, will resurrect her Broadway performance as the muddled medium 
Madame Arcati, for which she won best featured actress at the 2009 Tony Awards, 
in a West End production. Former National Theatre associateMichael Blakemore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/15/stage-blood-michael-blakemore-review>
 will return to the play to direct a British cast, with previews set to start 
at the Gielgud theatre in March.

Lansbury, best loved as the amateur sleuth Jessica Fletcher in Murder She 
Wrote, was last seen onstage in London playing Gertrude to Albert Finney's 
Hamlet in Peter Hall's 1975 production at the National Theatre. She had 
previously starred in the legendary West End production ofStephen Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sondheim>'s Gypsy and performed with the 
Royal Shakespeare Company.

Coward's comedy, which premiered in 1941, is about a married couple, Charles 
and Ruth Condomine, who invite friends over for a séance with Madame Arcati, 
only to summon the spirit of Elvira, Charles's first wife, who refuses to leave.

The Condomines will be played by Charles Edwards, recently seen in This House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/09/this-house-review-cottesloe> at 
the National Theatre, and the Olivier Award winnerJanie Dee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/aug/09/theatre.artsfeatures4>. Further 
casting will be announced in due course.

In a career spanning more than half a century, Lansbury has won a total of 
five Tony Awards – four of them for leading roles. Reviewing Blakemore's 
Broadway Blithe Spirit in 2009, the New York Times theatre criticBen Brantley 
wrote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/16/theater/reviews/16blit.html?pagewanted=all> 
that Lansbury "gleefully makes [the role of Arcati] her own".
 