
She is the Sophia Loren of our age, a Hollywood star of hyperreal beauty, 
statuesque presence and queenly hauteur. She had been away from the screen for 
a few years, facing down a bit of snarkery for her UN ambassador work and the 
alleged trouser-wearing prerogative in her relationship with Brad Pitt. But she 
stunned everyone with her courage and candour in announcing pre-emptive surgery 
in light of a genetic predisposition to breast cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/14/angelina-jolie-double-mastectomy>
. Then this month Angelina Jolie made that sensational return with the new 
Disney fantasy Maleficent –smacking those uppity X-Men down to second place at 
the US box office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jun/02/angelina-jolie-maleficent-x-men-us-box-office>
, and showing beguiling new touches of humour and self-awareness that made her 
more of an icon than ever.

Yet now, at the moment of her comeback triumph, she hints that after one more 
film, a Cleopatra biopic,her acting career might be over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/02/angelina-jolie-cleopatra-acting-retirement>
, and she's concentrating on being a director and UN ambassador. It's the Queen 
of the Nile – and then that's it. Oh Ange! Oh no! Say it ain't so!

Jolie has been an A-list movie star for 15 years, although it's true to say a 
recent couple of movie credits haven't met with great acclaim. In 2010, inThe 
Tourist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137987/tourist>, she played a 
woman of mystery in a supposedly glamorous caper set in Venice co-starring 
Johnny Depp; it looked in danger of sinking into the lagoon. Another movie was
Wanted <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124869/wanted>, in 2008 – an 
aggressive boys-own action picture with unlovely touches of misogyny. But I 
very much enjoyed her spy thriller Salt, in which she played secret agent 
Evelyn Salt – a role originally conceived for Tom Cruise. I see that Salt 2 is 
scheduled for production. It won't be the same without Jolie.

She made her break in 1999 with two terrific performances in pretty good 
movies. She won a Golden Globe and a best supporting actress Oscar for her turn 
as the super-cool bad girl Lisa in James Mangold'sGirl, Interrupted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82506/girl.interrupted>, the inmate of 
a psychiatric care facility whose exuberant defiance inspires her fellow 
patient Susanna, played by Winona Ryder. That same year she was excellent in 
Mike Newell's comedy dramaPushing Tin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,97014,00.html>
, as the beautiful young wife of an air-traffic controller (Billy Bob 
Thornton); she has an affair with her husband's colleague, Nick (John Cusack). 
There is a lovely, relaxed spark between feline-sexy Jolie and 
goofy-unthreatening Cusack.

As her career began, the resulting movies were a mixed bag. She was inspired 
casting as Lara Croft, the action heroine whose screen career predated the 
modern predominance of superheroes and Marvel studios. If Jolie were starting 
out now, she would almost certainly have to don the lycra – and probably find 
herself playing second fiddle to some superhero male.

In Oliver Stone's Alexander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander> 
(2004) she played the imperious and oedipally sexy mother to the great warrior 
himself, Alexander the Great, played by Colin Farrell. Farrell looked a little 
out of his depth next to Jolie, like she might at any moment order him up to 
his room with no supper.

Then the second breakthrough: Doug Liman's comedy thriller Mr and Mrs Smith  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/105955/mr.and.mrs.smith>in 2005, with 
Jolie and Pitt playing professional assassins who learn that their next 
assignment is to kill each other. It's a movie I didn't like much on first 
release, but every time I see it on television, its energy and knockabout 
humour keeps me watching. The much-yearned-for "chemistry" is there; it looked 
very much as if Jolie and Pitt really did fancy the bejeepers out of each 
other. They got together in real life, their mutual celebrity went supernova, 
and the cheeky title "Brangelina" was applied to them, like "Bennifer" to Ben 
Affleck and Jennifer Lopez. (Some incidentally claim the couple-combo handle 
was invented by celebrity journalists in the noughties. Not true. It was 
invented by F Scott Fitzgerald in his 1934 novel Tender Is the Night: the 
golden couple Dick and Nicole sign themselves "Dicole".) Mr and Mrs Smith was a 
key Jolie role: tough, dynamic, sexy, with a tenderness that did not compromise 
a muscular heroism.

Jolie won some respect for her performance in Michael Winterbottom's true-life 
movieA Mighty Heart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120107/mighty.heart>
 in 2007, playing Mariane Pearl, wife of the kidnapped journalist Daniel Pearl. 
She did a terrific job as Grendel's gigantic mother in Robert Zemeckis'sBeowulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/121387/beowulf>, and was nominated for 
a best actress Oscar as the doughty mom in Clint Eastwood's dramaChangeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/changeling> in 2008.

It could be that Jolie herself regarded that as the natural break, and from 
that point she has been foreseeing a post-acting career. Certainly, her 
feature-film directing debut in 2011, a Bosnia war drama calledIn the Land of 
Blood and Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/10/in-the-land-blood-honey-review>, 
was respectfully received. Jolie wrote the screenplay too, and defied the 
doubters with a film that my colleague Andrew Pulver found "sombre, powerful, 
and undeniably gripping".

So how about that Cleopatra movie? Jolie is the only possible star for this 
role. And as for who gets to play Mark Antony, my hunch is that our very own 
Dominic West will climb into the Roman tunic and Ralph Fiennes will play Cleo's 
former lover Julius Caesar. I'm already looking forward to seeing Jolie making 
a triumphal entry to Rome. But will she really leave it there? Surely she can 
intersperse her directing projects with juicy acting roles. A whole new vista 
of drama and comedy, not to mention romance, is opening up for her in her 40s. 
This is her time!
 