
When Chancellor Angela Merkel announced that she planned to stand for a fourth 
term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
, the liberals and pro-Europeans inside and outside Germany gave a sigh of 
relief: at last, some stability in an increasingly unstable world. No one can 
predict what the US will look like once Donald Trump is president, what 
Britain’s relationship with the EU will be, and whether the far right willtake 
over in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/sarkozy-marine-le-pen-france-president-election>
.

Angela Merkel and Marine Le Pen: one of them will shape Europe’s future | 
Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/angela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny>
Merkel stands for reliability and consistency. Germans call her Mutti, the 
mother of the nation; she has even been labelled in the international media as 
the new“leader of the free world” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/11/21/how-angela-merkel-a-conservative-became-the-leader-of-the-liberal-free-world/>
. Isn’t she the only mighty politician left to defend the EU and its liberal 
values? Isn’t she the one who, with 11 years’ experience on the international 
stage, can bring Europe together and tame Trump as well as Russia’s Putin?

It is tempting to have high expectations of Merkel, but it’s also dangerous. 
And it doesn’t helpGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and 
Europe in the long term.

Sure, Merkel is a wholehearted pro-European, but where is her vision of a more 
democratic and social Europe? It doesn’t exist. Hercourse of austerity  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/25/angela-merkel-greece-crisis-europe-germany>
for struggling countries such as Greece always aimed to serve German interests 
and those of German banks. In enforcing severe budget cuts, she crushed rather 
than helped the Greek economy, and across the continent it destroyed faith in 
the idea of European benevolence.

Having destroyed the idea of solidarity during the debt crisis, she was unable 
to form a coalition that could handle the increasing numbers of refugees in
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. This is why central 
European countries such as Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic and Slovakia 
were unwilling to follow Merkel and agree a compromise on distribution quotas.

In order to control the crisis, she had to put all her eggs in the basket of 
President Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/16/angela-merkel-eu-backs-aid-deal-turkey-tighten-borders>
. So the Turkish government is not only paid billions of Euros to take back 
“illegal” Syrian migrants from Greece, but in effect Erdoğan has been given the 
power to oppress domestic opposition without having to fear criticism from the 
EU and Germany.

The volatility of this deal is dangerous for Europe and for Merkel. If the 
number of incoming refugees rises again, her popularity will fall rapidly, as 
it did in autumn 2015.

Rather than rely on the Turkish president, who behaves more and more like an 
autocrat <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDdX3ngBaZs>, Europe should seek a 
common foreign and immigration policy. Yet Merkel may not be the right one to 
lead such negotiations.

In her 11 years in office she has taken few risks in dealing with national 
challenges. She made the term “without alternative” popular, meaning to wait 
and take a decision at the last moment, forcing political partners into 
acceptance. It may have been a slick way to govern, but it drove her partners 
mad. Whatever topic became popular – nurseries, climate change, parental leave 
– Merkel occupied it and made it her policy.

Thus she moved the Christian Democrats towards the centre, demolishing the 
Social Democrats who were in a coalition in her first term and have been again 
since 2013. But in so doing she created space for the far-right party
Alternative for Germany (AfD) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/german-election-results-polarised-voters-choose-pro-refugee-stance>
, which claimed to be the alternative that Merkel didn’t offer.

It seems more and more that, if Merkel wants to serve Germany, she should give 
way before her star sinks, which would risk taking her party with her.

Germany’s political landscape looks unpredictable. The Christian Democrats 
cling to Merkel and are exhausted by long disagreements with their sister party 
in Bavaria about refugee policy. The Social Democrats are stuck at 20-something 
per cent in the polls and feel so intimidated by Merkel that last year they 
questioned the need to have their own leader. The AfD, with its charismatic 
leaderFrauke Petry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/frauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview>
, is currently the third biggest party, leaving the Greens and Left party 
behind.

Germany’s election result is a warning to Merkel – not a far-right triumph | 
Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/14/germany-election-result-warning-merkel-far-right-afd>
What would a Germany without Merkel look like? Would the AfD take over and 
launch a referendum for Deutschland to leave the EU (a Dexit)? That’s unlikely 
at the moment, but not completely out of the question. Will Social Democrats, 
Greens and the Left party form a coalition? It would have been unbelievable six 
months ago, but not now.

The Christian Democratic party (CDU) “must therefore learn to run, must be 
able to take up the struggle with the political opponent in the future without 
its old warhorse […]. She has to break away from home, like someone 
experiencing puberty, and go her own way.” These are Merkel’s words, published 
in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in December 1999. They were aimed at 
Helmut Kohl, the former chancellor who still dominated the party. After 16 
years in office he had lost the general election in 1998, and in 2000 his grip 
on the CDU was broken by his former protegee, Merkel.

Her message of almost two decades ago applies to her party today, as well as 
to all liberal and pro-European Germans. They have to be willing to take over 
responsibility for Germany, as well as for a Europe that doesn’t just care 
about single market and free movement but about the needs of its citizens. They 
have to emancipate themselves from Mutti. There is always an alternative.
 