
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> has for the 
first time endorsed her party’s call for a partial ban on the burqa and the 
niqab in Germany, telling delegates at the Christian Democratic Union’s 
conference in Essen “the full facial veil is inappropriate and should be banned 
wherever it is legally possible”.

The German chancellor’s CDU party is expected this week to pass a motion 
proposing a ban on the full-face veil in some areas of public life such as 
courts, schools and universities, as well as in road traffic and during police 
checks. A full ban, asintroduced in France in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/03/niqab-ban-france-muslim-veil>, 
is seen as incompatible with Germany’s basic laws.

Merkel’s comments follow the Netherlands’ move at the end of November to 
introduce a partial ban on the full veil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/dutch-parliament-paves-way-for-approval-of-limited-ban-on-islamic-veils>
 in hospitals, municipal institutions, schools and on transport, a measure that 
also covers other pieces of clothing such as motorbike helmets or balaclavas. 
Similar bans are already in place in Belgium, Bulgaria and the Swiss canton of 
Tessin.

German interior minister backs ban on full face veils in public places
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/german-interior-minister-backs-burqa-bans-public-places>
Until further detail of the motion emerges, Merkel’s comments represent a 
change in rhetoric rather than a full U-turn: back in September, the chancellor 
had called for stricter guidelines on official situations where wearing a 
full-face veil was not permissible, while also stating that “lived diversity is 
the logical consequence of freedom”.

In her first party address since announcing she would run for a fourth term as 
chancellor next year, Merkel focused on law-and-order issues guaranteed to fire 
up her party’s conservative base.

“Our law takes precedence over codes of honour, tribal or family rules, and 
over sharia law – that has to be spelled out clearly,” Merkel said, explaining 
her decision to back a partial ban. “This also means that it is important to 
show face when people communicate.”

The full truth, Merkel added, was that not just migrants had to work towards 
integration: “Sometimes one gets the impression that some of those who have 
always lived inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> are also in 
urgent need of an integration course.”

After her speech, 89.5% of CDU delegates re-elected Merkel as their party 
leader – the lowest endorsement of her time as chancellor. As in previous 
years, her candidacy was unopposed.

Merkel’s decision to keep borders open to thousands of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/angela-merkel-defends-germanys-handling-of-refugee-influx>
 stranded in Hungary last September had led to a backlash, not least from her 
sister party, the Bavarian Christian Social Union. But during her 80-minute 
speech on Tuesday afternoon Merkel said “a situation like the one of summer 
2015 cannot, must not and will not be repeated”.

She said: “That’s what we have been working towards for many many months – for 
the good of those here in Germany, and for the good of the refugees, so that 
they don’t fall victim to ruthless people-smugglers.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fangela-merkel-cdu-partial-ban-burqa-niqab-german%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d8d66341ac85990a9b114e71d161c293dbfbb8f%2F68_162_3269_1961%2F3269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Merkel%20endorses%20party's%20call%20for%20partial%20ban%20on%20burqa%20and%20niqab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fangela-merkel-cdu-partial-ban-burqa-niqab-german%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Merkel%20endorses%20party%27s%20call%20for%20partial%20ban%20on%20burqa%20and%20niqab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fangela-merkel-cdu-partial-ban-burqa-niqab-german%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d8d66341ac85990a9b114e71d161c293dbfbb8f%2F68_162_3269_1961%2F3269.jpg>
 Two women wearing burqas in Frankfurt, Germany. Photograph: Michael 
Gottschalk/Photothek via Getty Images 
While insisting Germany had been right to offer refuge to people fleeing a war 
zone in Syria, Merkel also said many asylum seekers would have to leave Germany 
again in the future, vowing to speed up deportations of those who had been 
rejected. She said: “Not all of those who have come here can and will stay.”

Many politicians on the right of her party welcomed the speech “The party 
desperately needed to distance its policies from those of other parties,” said 
the MP Carsten Linnemann.

Gabriele Boos-Niazy, the co-chair of Germany’s Association for Muslim Women, 
argued that in most of the areas in which banning the full-face veil was 
possible, it had already been done. “Judges in Germany are already able to 
order someone to take off their veil if they feel it necessary,” she said.

“Of the few women who wear the niqab in Germany, many avoid public transport 
for fear of discrimination and use cars instead. The assumption that a ban on 
the full facial veil in road traffic would help to liberate women is therefore 
highly questionable.”

Boos-Niazy estimated there were “not more than a hundred” women in Germany who 
wore the full-face veil, and that those who were most visible, in places such 
as Munich or Bad Godesberg, were usually tourists.

Burhan Kesici, the general secretary of Germany’s Islamic Council, criticised 
Merkel’s comments. “The government should carefully study similar moves in 
France, and ask themselves if one side-effect of such a ban is that it can 
actually lead to women feeling more excluded from society,” he said.


During her speech, Merkel also condemned Russia and Iran’s support for Bashar 
al-Assad and the failure to stopbombing attacks on Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/syrian-forces-seize-control-of-more-than-half-of-aleppo>
. She said: “It is a disgrace that we haven’t been able to set up aid 
corridors. We have to keep on fighting for that.”


Germans want Merkel to take tough line with UK over Brexit, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/germans-want-merkel-to-take-tough-line-with-uk-over-brexit-poll-finds>
She expressed her frustration with the lack of public outrage about the 
humanitarian situation in Syria, saying: “To be honest, if a free-trade 
agreement with the United States of America can bring hundreds of thousands out 
on to the streets, but the barbarous bombardments of Aleppo don’t trigger any 
public protests, then something is wrong with our political standards.”

On the day that the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michael Barnier, insisted 
Britain’s new status in relation with the union would have to beinferior to 
membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/uk-will-have-under-18-months-to-negotiate-deal-says-eus-brexit-broker>
, Merkel repeated her commitment to the EU’s “four freedoms”: free movement of 
goods, capital, services and people.

She said: “Negotiations around Brexit are threatening to weaken the single 
market, and there’s great pressure on Europe’s four basic freedoms. We will not 
allow any cherrypicking: the four freedoms have to be preserved. Only then can 
you have access to the single market – that has to be the maxim for 
negotiations with Great Britain.”

The year 2016 had made the world more uncertain and unstable, Merkel said: 
“When the world has been turned upside down, we have to first do everything to 
make sure thatEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> doesn’t 
come weaker out of the current situation than it went into it.”
 