
Behind closed doors, and out of the public eye, the number of animals used in 
experiments has been steadily rising. In 2012 – the most recent figures 
available –the total exceeded 4 million animals 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/212610/spanimals12.pdf>
.

Despite the eye-watering number of animals used in experiments, we know very 
little about what is done to them and why, and about the pain and suffering 
they endure in laboratories across the UK in the name of science. This is due 
to section 24 of theAnimals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/14/contents>, which enables animal 
experiments to take place in complete secrecy and makes revealing any 
information, even with the researcher's consent, a criminal offence carrying a 
two-year prison term.

I was still in parliament when the Labour government passed the Freedom of 
Information Act. As the then shadow home secretary I queried whether in some 
areas it did enough to open up the work of government to public scrutiny. 
Similarly, I am hesitant to welcome the government's proposals in the 
long-awaited consultation on reforming secrecy in animal research, launched 
earlier this month.

The intention of the freedom of information act is to enable the public to 
scrutinise the workings of government, but this does not seem to apply to 
animal experiments. These are exempted from the act, so we have no way of 
knowing if the governing body responsible – the Home Office – is fulfilling 
even its basic duty to ensure that animals are not used in experiments where 
non-animal alternatives are available.

This secrecy surrounding animal experimentation has been examined – and 
sidestepped – by successive governments, but there continues to be widespread 
support for reform. As far back as 2002, a House of Lords committee called for 
section 24 to be repealed, and last year, theNational Anti-Vivisection Society 
(Navs) <http://www.navs.org.uk/> visited Downing Street to call on David 
Cameron to act, supported by a number of celebrities. In parliament, MPs from 
all parties have supported motions calling for reform and even the minister 
responsible at the Home Office, Norman Baker, said recently that the provisions 
in section 24 are "now out of step with government policy on openness and 
transparency and with the approach taken in other legislation".

New European legislation has now rendered the status quo untenable and the 
government has launched a consultation on this issue. Acknowledging the 
disparity that exists, it seeks to repeal the secrecy clause. However, the 
government's preferred option for reform is to replace section 24 with further 
legislation to restrict disclosure of information relating to people, places 
and intellectual property. But why is new legislation needed when the freedom 
of information act already protects businesses, the NHS, police and schools on 
these issues, and has been bolstered further by the new intellectual property 
bill?

The proposed legislation gives cause for concern, potentially gagging 
whistleblowers and organisations such as Navs, which expose wrongdoing in 
laboratories, under a new criminal offence: "malicious disclosure of 
information about the use of animals in scientific research". This raises the 
immediate question of how "malicious disclosure" is defined. A raft of"ag gag" 
laws in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/05/ag-gag-laws-the-battle-for-animal-welfare-is-a-battle-over-information>
 criminalised whistleblowers and trampled the right to free speech last year. 
It would be a mistake to begin travelling down this dark road in the UK, 
especially at a time when the government seeks to achieve better openness and 
transparency.

Greater transparency and accountability could be achieved by opening up animal 
experiment applications to review before they are approved. Sadly, this seems 
to be where the door of openness and transparency slams shut. The government 
has decided that it is the only judge capable of weighing the cost of the 
experiment to the animal against the potential benefit. It is worth pointing 
out that out of more than 4 million animal experiments conducted last year, not 
a single application was turned down.

The Home Office has resisted opening up applications to perform experiments, 
rather lamely claiming that it is not possible to provide all the relevant 
information regarding each experiment. One sad fact that we can be sure of, 
even with a full repeal of the secrecy clause, is that animals will continue to 
die in duplicate experiments: in tests for drugs that are already on the 
market, for diseases we can already cure, and where modern, faster, cheaper and 
more accurate technology can be used instead. Proper scrutiny is the least the 
public expects while animal experiments are happening.

It is vitally important that the government gets this reform right, as this 
issue is unlikely to be revisited for years to come. Meaningful reform will 
protect researchers, animals and science, but we can only achieve this by 
opening up the animal experiment industry, allowing organisations to help 
identify duplicate experiments and highlighting where non-animal technology can 
be used to benefit humans and animals alike. Tinkering around the edges will do 
nothing for transparency, public confidence in the system or, most importantly, 
for the millions of animals suffering in laboratories.

Have your say on animal experiment secrecy – take part in the consultation 
<http://www.navs.org.uk/take_action/39/0/3646/>.
 