
The murder of a teacher by one of her pupils during a class at a Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> school could not have been predicted or 
pre-empted, an official investigation has found.

Though Will Cornick had threatened to kill Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> in messages on social media, 
the independent reviewer, Nick Page, found that no warning signs had been known 
to staff or other agencies at the time.

“There are a number of suggested refinements to practice in Corpus Christi 
Catholic college but this is in no way to suggest that if implemented 
previously they would have prevented Ann’s murder,” Page’s report says.


“What is clear to me, as the reviewer, is that no one could have predicted or 
pre-empted Will Cornick’s attack on Ann Maguire and, following her murder, 
individuals and organisations acted courageously, coherently and professionally 
in supporting the school and affected people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fann-maguire-could-not-have-been-foreseen-review-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85776272734c73e680f79dd7a31ff84431321d5%2F105_255_1924_2404%2F1924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ann%20Maguire%20murder%20could%20not%20have%20been%20foreseen%2C%20review%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fann-maguire-could-not-have-been-foreseen-review-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ann%20Maguire%20murder%20could%20not%20have%20been%20foreseen%2C%20review%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fann-maguire-could-not-have-been-foreseen-review-finds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85776272734c73e680f79dd7a31ff84431321d5%2F105_255_1924_2404%2F1924.jpg>
 Will Cornick. Photograph: PA 
Cornick was 15 when he fatally stabbed Maguire, 61, during a Spanish lesson in 
April 2014. In November that year he pleaded guilty to murder and wasjailed for 
a minimum of 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/will-cornick-leeds-ann-maguire-murdered-teacher-jail>
.

Page interviewed Cornick, who was found to have had a happy childhood despite 
his “loving and supportive” parents splitting. Cornick had reported some 
difficulties when he started at the school, but his head of year had commented 
that he was “a delightful pupil”, and Maguire had described him as a “bright 
conscientious young man”.

In December 2013 Cornick “communicated on social media to a friend about his 
hatred of Ann and talked about brutally killing her”, Page’s report says. By 
February the following year, after a dispute over a detention, Cornick’s 
relationship with Maguire had broken down, according to his parents, a 
development that left the teacher baffled.

Cornick sent a message to a friend on Facebook saying Maguire “deserves more 
than death, more than pain, torture and more than anything that we can 
understand.”

Page’s report says Cornick decided to carry out the murder four days before 
going through with it, and told fellow pupils about his intention as well as 
plans to kill his head of year and another teacher and her unborn baby.

Will Cornick faces downhill path from young offender institution to prison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/will-cornick-young-offender-institution-prison>
Having brought knives into the school on the day of the killing, he told other 
students what he intended to do, but was not taken seriously.

“One pupil told police that Will had a dark sense of humour,” the report says. 
“There were no credible warning signs – behaviours or antecedent behaviours – 
that could or should have been picked up by agencies or professionals leading 
up to the murder.”

Subsequent psychiatric assessments have suggested Cornick had an adjustment 
disorder, but this was not evident to those around him. Neither staff at the 
school nor his parents were aware of Cornick’s threats towards Maguire, Page 
found.

He concluded: “This was a unique event and there are no recommendations I can 
make which in hindsight could have assisted staff in predicting or preventing 
the murder of Ann Maguire by Will Cornick or in preventing a similar event in 
the future.”

Maguire’s widower, Don, said the review “appears to be significantly different 
from an early draft report which we viewed some months ago. Therefore, our 
family shall need some time to read and consider its findings.


“Once we have completed this we will make a statement and I shall make myself 
available to answer questions or for interview.”
 