
Police have arrested one man and charged another in connection with "malicious 
communications" following the fatal stabbing ofAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, a 61-year-old teacher at 
Corpus Christi Catholic college in Leeds.

Jake Newsome, 21, from the Harehills area in Leeds, was charged and released 
on bail. He is due to appear in court on Wednesday. A man aged 42, who was 
arrested in Port Talbot, south Wales, remains in custody.

It is unclear what was the nature of the communications and in what medium 
they appeared. The Crown Prosecution Servicedefines malicious communications 
<https://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/a_to_c/communications_sent_via_social_media/> as 
"the sending to another of any article which is indecent or grossly offensive, 
or which conveys a threat, or which is false, provided there is an intent to 
cause distress or anxiety to the recipient."

Maguire, who taught Spanish and was described as an "inspirational" teacher, 
was attacked in front of her pupils and died of multiple stab wounds last week. 
A teenager who cannot be named appeared via videolink before Leeds crown court 
on Friday charged with her murder.

During the court proceedings the prosecuting barrister, Paul Greaney QC, asked 
the judge towarn members of the public as well as the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/02/anne-maguire-judge-warns-social-media-users-murder-trial>
 that the boy had a right to a fair trial.

The judge, Geoffrey Marson QC, reiterated Greaney's point, saying that 
bloggers and users of social media sites were "just as much bound by these 
rules as the press".

"The consequences for individuals, I want to emphasise, can be serious if 
there's a breach," he said.

Under English law, any child involved in court proceedings is entitled to 
anonymity. Normally, that means media cannot name their school or college.

The case was adjourned until 11 July for a plea and case management hearing. A 
date for the start of the murder trial was set for 3 November. Prayers were 
said at dozens of churches for Maguire's family and the pupils she taught in 
her 40 years at the school. TheCatholic diocese of Leeds wrote to about 90 
churches <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leeds-27273047> asking them to 
hold the special prayers during mass.

Monsignor John Wilson, administrator of the diocese, wrote to all Catholic 
churches in West Yorkshire, which have a combined congregation of about 32,000. 
His letter praised the "great spiritual and pastoral" support offered to 
students at Maguire's school.

"It goes without saying, but please would you pray especially for Ann, her 
family and the college and local community. It is in the strength of prayer 
that we stand united in faith," he said.

On Saturday, delegates at the National Association of Head Teachers conference 
in Birmingham held a minute's silence in memory of Maguire and offered their 
condolences to her family.
 