
The husband of a teacher who was stabbed to death in her classroom paid a 
moving tribute to her at her funeral as he described her passion for her job. 
Hundreds of mourners gathered on Friday to rememberAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, 61, who died after she was 
attacked at Corpus Christi Catholic college in Leeds last month.

Her husband, Don, 62, arrived at the Catholic church of the Immaculate Heart 
of Mary, next door to the school, with their two daughters and two nephews, who 
the teacher had treated as her own sons after the death of her sister. In his 
eulogy, he spoke of his late wife's dedication to her students. "Ann loved 
teaching," he said. "A dream as a very young child, an ambition in teenage 
years, a fulfilling reality for 40 years. Spanish was her subject. The pace and 
rhythm of modern language teaching suited her so well. Being head of fifth 
form, a great passion, because this is where the range of her personal 
qualities and abilities was fully exercised. But, in true humility, she always 
stressed that she learned so much from others."

Maguire was attacked on 28 April. She died of multiple stab wounds in hospital 
later that day. A 15-year-old boy has appeared in court charged with the 
teacher's murder. He has been remanded in custody and will go on trial this 
year.

She had taught at the school all her working life and had been due to retire 
in September. Tributes came from around the world. Thousands were placed on 
railings outside the school gates, stretching 100 metres down the road.

The Ann Maguire Educational Fund <http://www.justgiving.com/ann-maguire> has 
been set up "to provide bursaries and funding for the enhancement and personal 
development of young people under 18 years old through music, drama, language 
and dance".
 