
Ed Balls will have to cheer up and “look as if he is enjoying himself a bit 
more” if he has any hope of remaining inStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>, his dance 
floor predecessor Ann Widdecombe has said.

Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/04/ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-follow-my-lead>
, who, like Balls, was a senior politician before shemade her own memorable 
appearance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sISZFkR-L3o> on the programme six 
years ago, said Balls “has to look as if he is having fun”. Hisfirst-week waltz 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-eP_F1Nal6c> with partner Katya Jones earned 
the lowest points 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/strictlycomedancing/entries/f0addb5f-eba9-44e6-837f-7651cf6104f3>
 of any of the 15 contestants.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-eP_F1Nal6c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-eP_F1Nal6c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-eP_F1Nal6c&media=>
Coral has made the former Labour shadow chancellor odds-on favourite, at 4-6, 
to be the first dancer eliminated this weekend, afterone critic 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3773731/Ed-Balls-grace-Thomas-Tank-Engine-Strictly-debut-writes-CHRISTOPHER-STEVENS.html>
 described him as having “the grace of Thomas the Tank Engine”.

Balls will return with Jones on Saturday night to dance the charleston, for 
which he has said he plans tochannel the fictional scarecrow Worzel Gummidge 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/tv/2016/09/27/strictly-2016-why-ed-balls-is-taking-inspiration-from-worzel-gum/>
. The eviction, based partly on a public vote, will take place the following 
evening.

Widdecombe – who survived to week 10 of the 2010 series despite, or possibly 
because of ahighly individual dancing style 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZTN5KVDYkuI> (“I wouldn’t call that dancing, 
dear”) – told the Guardian that Balls’s performance in the waltz had been much 
better than her own. “But at least I looked as if I was enjoying it,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2RA-nDqBkbc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2RA-nDqBkbc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2RA-nDqBkbc&media=>
“Really, honestly. Last week he was so stiff and he didn’t really smile. You 
have got to look as if you are enjoying it, and then the public thinks, oh 
good, let’s have him back next time. He really does need to put heart and soul 
into looking happy next time.”

Don’t mock – Ed Balls on Strictly Come Dancing is smart politics | Gaby 
Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/dont-mock-ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-smart-politics>
Balls has said 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-09-23/ed-balls-on-his-strictly-chances-i-know-that-no-one-is-expecting-much-from-me>
 he has “never felt further outside [his] comfort zone” since joining the hit 
BBC1 show, but declared: “I am not in this for the laughs. I’m determined to 
work hard, do my best and try to improve.” After concentrating ferociously 
during his waltz, he told the programme’s judges he was “madly disappointed” 
with his performance.

According to Widdecombe, a former Tory MP, that may be the problem. “I am 
quite sure if Peter Mandelson had done it he would have been a very serious 
dancer,” she said. “ButEd Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> 
I don’t think is a serious dancer, and therefore he has got to look as if he is 
having fun.”

In response to Widdecombe’s advice Balls tweeted
Ed Balls (@edballs) 
Good advice from Ann Widdecombe - I'm off to practice ! https://t.co/92aHA7sC03
 <https://t.co/92aHA7sC03>
 <https://twitter.com/edballs/status/781909651315126272> September 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/edballs/status/781909651315126272> 
One friend of Balls said he had been giving dance training his all. “He is a 
great trier, so as you can imagine, he has been putting everything into it,” 
the friend said. “When he was asked, of course he knew he couldn’t match the 
others. But Ed is Ed. He will take on any challenge.”

Rupert Adams, a spokesman for William Hill, said the bookmaker had taken the 
choice of dance into account when offering its own odds of 8-11 that Balls 
would be the first evicted. “We think they have chosen the charleston because 
he will make such a prat of himself that people will want to keep him in,” he 
said. “We definitely expect very few points – but that might mean that he could 
stay.”

Despite their political differences in the past, Widdecombe said she hoped 
Balls would survive for at least another week. “Edwina Currie was the first one 
out [in 2011 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KMpTgI_cXS4>]. I don’t want a 
pattern set in which the politician is always the first one voted off.”

Currie, who said of her own early exit “we wuz robbed” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/13/strictly-is-tougher-than-fiscal-policy-mr-balls/>
, summarised Balls’s chances of winning enough votes to stay in: “It’ll be up 
to the viewers, but I don’t think the Corbynistas will be watching.”
 