
John Hattie of the University of Melbourne has somehow managed to examine 
half-a-million studies 
<http://www.decd.sa.gov.au/limestonecoast/files/pages/new%20page/PLC/teachers_make_a_difference.pdf>
 of what makes a difference to pupils in education. The answers won't surprise. 
Among the ingredients are genes and home environment but, he concludes, 
"excellence in teaching is the single most powerful influencer of achievement".

Last week, following the death of Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/29/leeds-teacher-ann-maguire-metal-detectors-corpus-christi>
, 61, a teacher for 40 years at Corpus Christi Catholic college, a state school 
for 950 pupils in Leeds, we were given a much-needed reminder of what 
excellence means beyond the ability to boost exam results.

Following a needless death, there is almost always, understandably, an urge to 
sanctify and eulogise. Yet the praise awarded toAnn Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> has the ring of sincerity in 
its simplicity. It brought back memories to many of us â€“ of the teacher who 
sparked an interest, who staved off many of the anarchic insecurities of 
adolescence simply by the conviction that he or she believed you had it in you, 
even when you didn't have a clue what "it" might be.

"She was the heart of the school," said one pupil of Mrs Maguire. Another 
said: "She was an incredible woman... You just have to mention her name and you 
can't help but smile."

England has more than 428,000 teachers and most are on modest salaries, work 
long hours and for the past several years have been subjected to a toxic Muzak 
of unremitting criticism from, among others, Sir Michael Wilshaw, the Ofsted 
chief, education secretary, Michael Gove, and his former adviser,Dominic 
Cummings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/11/genetics-teaching-gove-adviser>
, who said of teachers: "Real talent is rare and mediocrity is ubiquitous." 
According to the National Union of Teachers, 40% of teachers leave within five 
years of joining the profession and morale is at rock bottom.

The miracle is that young people with good degrees and the possibility of 
earning far more elsewhere still believe in the alchemy of teaching creatively 
and investing time in those who sometimes speak the language of the 
monosyllabic.

Pupils spend 85% of their waking time outside formal education. Inspirational 
guidance of the kind provided by Mrs Maguire is also seen in the tale told 
elsewhere in the papers of the lateElizabeth Braund 
<http://www.claphamjunction.co.uk/tag/elizabeth-braund/>, and now Robert 
Musgrave, running a 50-year-old youth centre,Providence House 
<http://www.netmums.com/wandsworth/local/view/after-school-activities/youth-clubs/providence-house-youth-club>
. They and their volunteers have changed the lives of many hundreds of young 
people by fostering their self-respect and encouraging them to widen their 
horizons. Yet youth workers, like the teaching profession, are also often 
denigrated, now almost part of the ritualist softening-up that justifies 
radical upheavals and swingeing cuts.

The government has made much of its interest in behavioural economics and 
psychology in influencing public policy. TheBehavioural Insights Team 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/behavioural-insights-team>, 
advised by American Richard Thaler, co-author of the best seller,Nudge, has 
given guidance on, for instance, paying taxes and organ donation. Its positive 
psychology approach should have told Gove and co that, while constructive 
criticism has its place, what works far better is acknowledgement, validation 
and praise.

The pupils of Corpus Christi, at a terrible time, have eloquently expressed 
their appreciation of what really counts. Shouldn't more of us, ministers 
included, express our appreciation of the investment that others so unselfishly 
make in our children?
 