
The already improbable Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/30/anna-chapman> saga took another 
surprising twist today when the 28-year-old former Russian spy resurfaced in 
Kazakhstan to wave off a space rocket.

Chapman, who was one of 10 Russian agents to be deported from the US in July, 
became a tabloid sensation after sultry pictures of her were published in 
newspapers around the world. She also filmed arisqu√© video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/26/anna-chapman-moscow-revealing-video>
 on her return to Moscow, but has mostly avoided appearing in public for the 
last three months.

Early today, however, Chapman arrived at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kazakhstan> to see off a US astronaut and 
two Russian cosmonauts bound for the International Space Station.

She appeared at the farewell ceremony for the space crew and was quickly moved 
to a guest house near the launch pad accompanied by a guard who blocked 
reporters. She made no public comment.

An official with Russia's space agency said Chapman was at Baikonur as an 
adviser to the president of FondServisBank, which works with space industry 
companies and was handing out awards.

Chapman, the daughter of a diplomat, was the most high-profile of the 10 
Russian "sleepers" arrested in the US this summer after being caught trying to 
embed themselves in American society while leading double lives and secretly 
reporting to the Kremlin.

The crew's relatives and supporters were also on site when the Soyuz engines 
roared and the spaceship lifted off. Russian engineers hugged and kissed one 
another after the craft shed its first stage and it became clear the launch was 
a success.

Mike Suffredini, the head of Nasa's space station programme, who watched the 
launch from an observation point with his Russian counterparts, also gave a 
thumbs-up to the launch.

American Scott Kelly and Russia's Alexander Kaleri and Oleg Skripochka are due 
to reach the orbiting laboratory in two days' time to begin their five-month 
mission, and will join two US astronauts and a Russian cosmonaut who have been 
at the station since June.

The three men on their way to the station are flying in Russia's first 
all-digital Soyuz TMA-01M.

The overhauled Soyuz will allow a doubling of the launch rate of Soyuz 
spaceships, which will help maintain a crew of six on board the space station 
when the Nasa shuttle fleet is retired.
 