
The former husband of the alleged Russian spy Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman> has said that he was not 
surprised she had been arrested over allegations of spying and said that while 
they were married her personality changed after she began having "secretive" 
meetings with Russian friends.

Alex Chapman, 30, who was married to Anna for four years, said yesterday he 
was questioned by a security service agent on Wednesday about his ex-wife. The 
trainee psychologist said he had met his wife at a party in London in 2001 and 
married five months later in Moscow. They divorced in 2006 but remained in 
contact.

MI5 are understood to be investigating whether she was carrying out any spying 
against Britain.

Mr Chapman said that she had told him her father was a high ranking official 
in the Russian security services. "Anna told me her father had been high up in 
the ranks of the KGB. She said he had been an agent in 'old Russia'. Her father 
controlled everything in her life, and I felt she would have done anything for 
her dad," he told the Telegraph. "When I saw that she had been arrested on 
suspicion of spying it didn't come as much of a surprise to be honest. Towards 
the end of our marriage she became very secretive, going for meetings on her 
own with 'Russian friends', and I guess it might have been because she was in 
contact with the Russian government."

The breakdown of their marriage followed soon after, and Mr Chapman puts it 
down to the change she underwent in both how she behaved and acted.

"It was like someone having a midlife crisis, but in their 20s. She would 
arrange to go out but when I said I would join her she told me not to bother 
because they would all be speaking Russian.

"She had never been materialistic during the years we were together, but in 
2005 and 2006 â€¦ she was transformed into someone with access to a lot of money, 
boasting about all the influential people she was meeting."

Chapman's mother, Irina, 51, who lives in Moscow, has refused to comment on 
the spying claims, beyond protesting her daughter's innocence. The family's 
home is in a 17-storey block in south-west Ramenki, a once-elite district for 
KGB officials, mid-ranking diplomats and army officers. The Kushchenkos used 
the flat for six years before returning permanently to Moscow two years ago 
from a posting, it was reported.

Neighbours told Komsomolskaya Pravda that Chapman returned to Moscow from 
Britain 18 months ago, renting her own flat in the Park Kultury district. Her 
sister, Dasha, still lives at home, they said, and has just finished high 
school. Since the scandal there has been no sign of Dasha or of her father, 
they added, with only Chapman's mother apparently at home.

Today friends said they were astonished by Chapman's arrest, and were 
convinced she had been framed. "It was an shock. Nobody believes that she could 
have been involved in such things," Dmitry Porochkin said.

Several Russians today left supportive messages on her webpage on the popular 
Russian social networking site Odnoklassniki. "This is a provocation! Hang on 
in there," wrote Sergei Prokopenko. Nikolai Likov added: "We are with you! I 
hope our government doesn't leave you in the lurch."

In Volgograd people were astonished to hear of the scandal engulfing Chapman, 
who lived in the city as a child with her grandmother and was known as Anna 
Kushchenko.

Chapman studied at a school for children suffering from scoliosis (spinal 
curvature) in a quiet suburb of the city. The buff-coloured four-storey brick 
school is known in Russian as a KhEP, meaning it specialises in creative arts.

Today, the school's director, Viktor Golovkin, sat in his office surrounded by 
children's paintings of snow-encrusted dachas, sunflowers and gold-domed 
churches. He is proud of the school's successful alumni, but he was less 
pleased to be fielding phone calls from Russian journalists about Chapman.

"We don't remember her and we don't keep records," he claimed, before 
contradicting himself, saying: "She studied here less than a year, I think from 
September to March, in 1996 and 1997."

Children at the school publish glossy brochures of their poems and perform 
plays such as Scarlet Sails, a romantic adventure story by Russian author 
Alexander Grin.

"My aim for our pupils is to make sure the boys don't become drunkards, the 
girls don't walk the streets, and that none of them end up in prison," said 
Golovkin.

Pupils did not need to be gifted to enter the school, he added. "In every 
child one can find and nurture creative talent."

He said there was no record of Chapman's endeavours but that she may not have 
been at the KhEP long enough to make an impression.

Golovkin said Chapman must have been a scoliosis sufferer to study at the 
school, which has a reputation for excellence, and where most pupils live in 
dormitories during term time.

"No one else is allowed," he said. Not even the daughter of a diplomat? "No 
chance."

The director added that he doubted the veracity of charges against Chapman: 
"If she had really been a spy she would have been a lot more professional," he 
said.

Tatyana Shumilina, 27, an unemployed journalist, told the Guardian she had 
known Anna (known to friends as Anya) when they studied for a year at the same 
school.

The two got in touch again a year and a half ago to discuss a school reunion 
and have exchanged messages on and off ever since via odnoklassniki.

"A friend called to tell me the news and I didn't know whether to laugh or 
cry," she said, describing Kushchenko as "memorable and full of life".
 