
Anna Kendrick catches me engrossed in a Vanity Fair spread on sex robots 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2015/04/sexbots-realdoll-sex-toys>. A guy in 
California runs a factory that makeslife-size erotic automata 
<https://www.realdoll.com/>. You can buy them “natural” or hairless, busty or 
flat-chested. You choose from a range of nipple sizes and colours. The options 
are comprehensive, the nomenclature (“Mini 1”, “Perky 2”, “Super Puffy”) 
mind-boggling. “That’s interesting,” says Kendrick, taking a peek. “There’s 
such a thing as a ‘standard’ nipple.”

Kendrick is in London to promote Pitch Perfect 2 – the sequel to the hit 
comedy about an a cappella choir of lovable misfits. She is smart, fun, 
friendly company - the Hollywood star you wouldn’t mind catching you gawking at 
robo-boobs. No wonder people tend to think friendship with her is a given. In 
the past year, two fans have arrived at her door: one was aPitch Perfect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/123284/pitch-perfect> devotee, the 
other assumed they would be mates.

“It was weird because they don’t think you’re going to answer your own front 
door,” she says. “And I don’t think of myself as someone who has a fucking 
butler. It was as though they were saying: ‘Well, you answered the door!’ And I 
was like: ‘I thought you were UPS!’”

Kendrick’s charm makes some fans a little dizzy. They send her stuff in the 
post (“Like, lotions … I know!”). Not wanting to encourage anyone, she has a 
blanket policy of throwing all of it away. She once saidshe threw away diamond 
earrings <>. In fact, a quick Google revealed them to be fake – $200-a-pair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431623706670%2F0588c55e-6891-42d2-b25e-9ebfc9f17cfb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anna%20Kendrick%3A%20real%20girl%20in%20la-la%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anna%20Kendrick%3A%20real%20girl%20in%20la-la%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431623706670%2F0588c55e-6891-42d2-b25e-9ebfc9f17cfb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anna Kendrick in Pitch Perfect 2. Photograph: PR 
All this unwanted attention is a side-effect of appearing in two hugely 
popular franchises:The Twilight Saga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight> (in which she played Kristen 
Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart>’s steadfast 
sidekick, Jessica Stanley) and Pitch Perfect, where she plays Beca, an aspiring 
music producer who is seduced by the geeky thrill of competitive, collegiate a 
capella singing. Goofy and a bit gross (one of the best scenes is where a 
member of the choirmakes a snow angel in a pile of vomit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AK__dRP_lcc>), the original Pitch Perfect took 
$113m (£71.5m) worldwide.Female film-goers made up 81% of the American 
box-office takings, with the majority of the crowd under 25 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/news/?id=3541&p=.htm>. The film spoke to an 
audience who had been ignored by the sprawling, blokey comedies of Judd Apatow 
and the like, while Kendrick ascribes its popularity to the startling idea that 
young women might want to watch stories about them that don’t patronise or 
unrealistically sexualise them.

“When I was a kid I watched a terrible western with Drew Barrymore and 
Madeleine Stowe calledBad Girls <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7b69nY28Rkk>,” 
she says. “It’s four women who are best friends and on the run from the law. 
It’s so bad, but I loved it, because I didn’t have depictions of strong female 
friendships to choose from. For young women to see female friendships in any 
form – particularly a broken ‘work in progress’ form – is something they 
respond to.”

Kendrick is quick to call Hollywood’s bullshit. She is part of a new 
generation of women in film (Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence>, Stewart, Emma Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-watson>) campaigning for a less sexist 
industry. She refused to do a sexy pose for the Pitch Perfect 2 poster, instead 
opting for a cross-armed stance that wascopied by fans in support 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/kristinharris/beca-the-badass?utm_term=.kmwmP1EdP#.ymkBrwG3o>
. She has also whistleblown ongender inequality in casting 
<http://www.glamour.com/entertainment/blogs/obsessed/2015/05/anna-kendrick-glamour-cover-interview>
. On a recent project, she had to wait for all the men to be cast before it was 
confirmed that she had got the part. As Kendrick put it: “What the fuck?!”

A self-diagnosed “real dick” on Twitter <https://twitter.com/annakendrick47>, 
she has built a devoted following by spinning a quirky line in self-effacement 
that neatly loops back to Pitch Perfect’s less-than-perfect heroines. The tweet 
she chose to pin to the top of her profile is characteristically frank, rude 
and entertaining: “For someone with such an intense need to be liked you’d 
think I would have figured out how to be less of an asshole.”

She plays up her endearing dorkiness, but has got a sharp sense of what works 
for her audience. She once spent an afternoon copying a YouTube video of a 
teenage girl singing, while turning and tapping a plastic cup. Kendrick’s 
version of the party trick made it into Pitch Perfect asBeca’s audition scene 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2mawaBrvFg>. Cups, the pop song spinoff 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmSbXsFE3l8>, sat in the Billboard chart for 
weeks, while the video is about to clock up 200m views on YouTube. Sheperformed 
it on Letterman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vP1Z5tmww4> and got a 
standing ovation. “I’m amazing!,” she said, sarcastically, as the crowd 
applauded.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcmSbXsFE3l8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcmSbXsFE3l8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcmSbXsFE3l8&media=>
Today, she is fresh from a live Radio 1 interview where she cheerfully said 
“shit” on air without realising it was an issue. She zips into the room, tiny 
(she just scrapes 5ft 1in) and purposeful. Her handshake is huge. The 
air-conditioning is on and,dolled up for a video junket in Alexander McQueen, 
<http://i.perezhilton.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/anna-kendrick-floral-frock-bbc-radio-1-studios-london-wenn-3__oPt.jpg>
 she is freezing. She runs to the loo and grabs a towel to wrap herself in. 
(“When it’s a print interview I’ll take the robe and wear it around, like this 
insane Barbra Streisand-esque diva.”) She’s up for answering anything except 
whether – like her Pitch Perfect character – she enjoys watching porn (“What an 
uncivilised thing to ask me. We’re in a nice hotel!”).

Pitch Perfect 2 is looser and sloppier than its predecessor, the free jazz 
workout to the first film’s perfect pop song. The Bellas, in disgrace after 
their force-of-nature soloist Fat Amy accidently flashes her vagina atBarack 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, are sent to compete 
at the world a cappella championships to restore their reputation. Both films 
are less about plot than the relationships within the all-female choir, 
remarkable considering thenon-fiction book <> the franchise is based on reveals 
a cappella to be as jockish as college football. Author Mickey Rapkin describes 
a scene at one concert where a soloist has hit a particularly tough note. 
Another member of the choir runs out behind him and draws a box in the air 
around his head.

“Box is slang for female anatomy,” writes Rapkin. “This bit of sign language 
means that whoever is singing right then just did something so spectacular, so 
worthy of celebrating, that inevitably that night a stranger will offer him, 
well, her box.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431623772885%2F18bd17b7-21ec-4847-97c1-8726f24e66f2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anna%20Kendrick%3A%20real%20girl%20in%20la-la%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anna%20Kendrick%3A%20real%20girl%20in%20la-la%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431623772885%2F18bd17b7-21ec-4847-97c1-8726f24e66f2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 With George Clooney in Up in the Air. Photograph: Dale Robinette 
“Like a rock star panty-dropper situation?” says Kendrick. “It would offend me 
if I thought a guy like that was even vaguely intimidating, but it’s a fucking 
a capella singer. You’re a male a capella singer and you have the balls to say 
you deserve pussy? Oh boy.”

Born in 1985, Kendrick grew up in a coastal town near Portland, Maine. Her dad 
was a history teacher, her mum an accountant. They instilled in their daughter 
the desire to be busy, an ethos that has kept her on movie sets for the past 
six months. She is not afraid of being in bad movies (“Everybody’s tried to 
have a perfect career. No one in the history of Hollywood’s succeeded”), but 
she is scared of not working.

From the age of 10, her mum and dad would drive her the five and a half hours 
to theatre auditions in New York. The mileage paid off when she landed a part 
in the Broadway showHigh Society <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=stnQnmLvCxU>, 
for which she earned a Tony nomination at the age of 12. She didn’t go to 
college (“delinquent”), but broke into film withCamp 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0342167/> – an indie comedy about the backstage 
machinations at a performing arts summer school – andRocket Science 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6YRCrh92wnc>, in which she played the 
motormouthed captain of a high school debate team. Her first two films set the 
template for the classic Kendrick role: twitchy high-achievers with a hint of 
control freakery. Juno director Jason Reitman tapped into that type-A tendency 
when he wrote a part specifically for her inUp in the Air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/up-in-the-air>, as a downsizer butting heads 
withGeorge Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> over the 
best way to fire a workforce. Kendrick, who was so nervous she had to practise 
lines with Clooney between takes, gave the veteran smoothy a run for his money. 
She was nominated at the 2010 Oscars for best supporting actress, losing out to
Precious <https://www.theguardian.com/film/precious> star Mo’Nique. The 
nomination bumped her to a higher level that she wasn’t quite ready for.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20'We're%20performing%20oral%20magic'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20%27We%27re%20performing%20oral%20magic%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
‘Before Up in the Air came out I just kept expecting the Hollywood coaches to 
swoop in to tell me what the hell to do,” she says. “The year that Charlize 
Theron won the Oscar forMonster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/apr/02/dvdreviews.shopping8> [2003] was 
my first year in LA as a deeply unemployed actor. And in my imagination there 
was a team of people around her working her out and taking her to the spa and 
sticking her in the secret machine that no one else knows about except for 
Hollywood stars that turns you into a perfect version of yourself. When I was 
nominated, I was like: ‘Isn’t someone going to tell me not to eat this bag of 
Cheetos?’”

If the real-girl-in-la-la-land persona is is a schtick, it is hard to spot. 
However, a colleague who did a video interview with her for the Disney musical
Into the Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/film/into-the-woods> remarked on 
Kendrick’s ability to leap into camaraderie when the camera started rolling, 
then switch off with the little red light. An admirer of Marlene Dietrich, 
Kendrick has talked about mastering the art of understanding the process of 
film-making in order to give a better performance. These days the process of 
film-making includes publicity. Today, she seems to carry an iron-willed 
determination to be as nice and honest as the situation allows, right until our 
30 minutes are up.

Joe Swanberg, who directed two of Kendrick’s best performances (in the 
low-budget improvised comedy dramasDrinking Buddies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxuxkQF7Bak> and Happy Christmas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=njsI7SZGom8>) says it is her ability to engage 
in a job and then switch off that makes her special.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431624356543%2Fe7bc3d93-e8ae-4111-8fa5-0b9d3305860f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anna%20Kendrick%3A%20real%20girl%20in%20la-la%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anna%20Kendrick%3A%20real%20girl%20in%20la-la%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fanna-kendrick-pitch-perfect-2-real-girl-in-la-la-land%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F14%2F1431624356543%2Fe7bc3d93-e8ae-4111-8fa5-0b9d3305860f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anna Kendrick and Ron Livingston in Drinking Buddies. Photograph: Magnolia 
Pictures 
“When I was casting Drinking Buddies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/drinking-buddies>, I would ask actors what 
they’d be doing if they weren’t acting,” he says. “It was suprising how many 
people drew a blank. Somebody like Anna could have six answers to that. For me, 
that means: ‘When I point a camera at you and you have to make it all up, you 
will have things to say.’

“Her personal life does not seem dominated by the movies,” he adds. “There are 
kids who grew up with sort of normal parents and a sort of a normal life, and 
then there’s people who grew up in proximity to the industry. There’s a 
different flavour to those people. She’s stayed mentally hungry and interested 
in the world”.

Post-PP2, Kendrick will be starring alongside Ben Affleck in assassin thriller 
The Accountant. She is also writing a book, commissioned off the back of her 
savvy tweeting and based on her experiences in Hollywood. Her house is “A 
Beautiful Mind situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90285/beautiful.mind>”, she says. Notes 
everywhere, ideas up the wall.

“I keep waking up to things written on my phone or on a pad by my bed that’s 
like: ‘Lima beans, Calvin, corset,’” she says. And I’m like: ‘What did that 
mean?!’ At the time I remember thinking: ‘Got to tell that story!’”

Her mum is trying to help focus her attention by emailing her own anecdotes.

“They’re all stories that a mother tells about that time her daughter was an 
absolute angel,” says Kendrick. “She said it was because she wanted people to 
know that I was a good person. That implies that I don’t come off like a good 
person, which is fair enough. But I can’t tell stories about that time I did 
something really nice for someone. I have to tell stories about the time I was 
a fucking idiot. And there are plenty … luckily.”

Interview over. Kendrick leaps from the sofa, dumps the towel and palms a 
quick, loose handshake. She makes for the door with barely a goodbye. The 
schedule is full and the work is waiting. She is off to make another new friend.

 * Pitch Perfect 2 is on general release in the UK
 