
The British passport of Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, the woman accused of spying 
for Russia in the US, has been revoked it emerged today.

The 28-year-old was recently expelled from the US in a spy swap deal between 
the two countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/09/russian-spies-swap-us> but 
although Chapman was flown to Moscow last week there was speculation that she 
could travel to the UK in the future.

Chapman gained British citizenship from her marriage to Alex Chapman, 30, from 
Bournemouth. The two met at a party in 2002 and were married for four years. 
Chapman, the daughter of a Russian diplomat, also lived and worked in the 
financial sector in London for several years. Her former husband has said he 
was suspicious she was being "conditioned" by Russian agents during the 
marriage.

Although her American lawyer said that Chapman, also known as Anya Kushchenko, 
would like to return to the UK, a Whitehall source said she had been given a 
letter revoking British citizenship and invalidating her passport.

It was also revealed home secretary Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, who has the power to revoke 
dual nationalities if they are "conducive to the public good", had been 
urgently considering the case last week.

Chapman was one of 10 Russian spies who had been operating out of the US for 
several years. The 10 had adopted false names and apparently led ordinary lives 
until their arrests, acting as sleeper agents.

While undercover, the spies were said to have sent information back to Russia 
using such devices as invisible ink and code words. US prosecutors said the 
agents were ordered byRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> to 
infiltrate policymakers and gather information.

The swap was the biggest Russia-US spy swap since the Cold War. The 10 were 
exchanged for four Western agents at Vienna airport on 9 July after pleading 
guilty to conspiracy and acting as unregistered agents of a foreign country in 
the US.

Earlier today Russia was reported to be interrogating the 10 agents at a 
secret facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/13/russia-interrogates-agents-deported-america>
.
 