
The British father-in-law of Anna Chapman has spoken of his bewilderment after 
hearing she had been arrested following accusations that she is associated with 
aRussian spy ring <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russian-spy-ring>.

Kevin Chapman, father of Alex Chapman, said: "If there is any grain of truth 
in all of this, then I think that Anna was set up or seduced into something 
because of the glamour. I feel very sorry for her. She must be feeling very 
frightened right now.

"She's simply not some Mata Hari, she can't be... she's just an ordinary 
girl," he told the Daily Mail.

Chapman, 56, batted back claims that the Russian diplomat's daughter had 
married his son in order to obtain a British passport.

"I'm convinced it wasn't a honey trap. They were so much in love. It just 
doesn't add up," said the mortgage advisor from Weybridge in Surrey.

Chapman first met Anna when she and Alex returned to England from Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> after their secret marriage in 2002.

He said: "It was a surprise but we were pleased. She ticked all the boxes 
really, she was attractive, intelligent and from a good background and nice 
personality.

"She was a very pleasing daughter-in-law and they were talking about having 
kids. I don't know why they split up."

Chapman said that when the couple returned from Russia they didn't have "two 
pennies to rub together".

"If she was being groomed by the KGB, you would have thought they would have 
set her up a bit better â€¦ they didn't give her a very good expense account."

Jane Chapman, his ex-wife and mother of Alex, also found it hard to believe 
her former daughter-in-law was guilty of the allegations.

"I knew Anna, I saw her with my son and they were genuinely in love. I don't 
believe you can fake that. I couldn't have wished for a nicer daughter-in-law. 
If she were found guilty, then I would think because of her age she'd been 
sucked into something," she said.

Mrs Chapman recalled the day Alex first told her about Anna.

"Alex phoned me and said: 'Mum, I've met the most amazing girl and I've fallen 
head over heels in love.' It was the first time he'd ever spoken about a girl 
like that before," she said.

"She seemed shy, unsophisticated and sweet. I liked her immediately and 
thought they were the perfect match. They were both very intellectual, 
passionate and driven, and when Anna came to stay for Christmas she and Alex 
spent the whole time cuddled up together in an armchair in front of the log 
fire. They didn't seem to be able to spend a minute apart."
 