
Good unemployment figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/18/jobless-total-drop-olympics-effect>
? Less bad than feared in this longest of recessions, but how good? Of the 
65,000 drop in the total, 50,000 were in London, and theOffice of National 
Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lms/labour-market-statistics/july-2012/statistical-bulletin.html>
 suggests this fall in unemployment could be due to 100,000 temporary jobs at 
the Olympics as bar staff, cleaners and security guards. Meanwhile, the trend 
for the long-term unemployed trudges inexorably upwards, now to 441,000. Worse 
is the continuing rise in the young without work, four times higher in a year. 
The damage done to them over the whole of their rest of their lives is 
well-documented from the lost generation of the early 1980s who never 
recovered, in and out of work for life.

Iain Duncan Smith, as ever cavalier with numbers, claimed in the Mail on Sunday
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2174059/Benefits-cap-pushing-thousands-jobless-work-says-Duncan-Smith.html>
 that his cap on benefits is driving people into work, before it's even begun. 
"These figures show the benefit cap is already a success and is actively 
encouraging people back to work." He says 58,000 claimants were sent a letter 
warning their benefits will be capped next April. Of these 1,700 have since 
then taken a job. But that's fewer than 3%, which the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies says is consistent "with the policy having no effect at all. Over any 
period, some fraction of an unemployed group will probably move into work."

But no one really knows, because the Department for Work and Pensions didn't 
collect any figures for how many of this group usually moves into work. So 
Channel 4's brilliantFactCheck <http://blogs.channel4.com/factcheck/> 
concludes: "His figures don't show the benefits cap is already successful at 
getting people back to work." When challenged, the DWP had to fall back on 
faith: "The secretary of state believes that the benefits cap is having an 
effect." Faith-based policymaking is something he is good at.

Faith is what's needed for his Work Programme 
<http://www.dwp.gov.uk/policy/welfare-reform/the-work-programme/>, too: what 
sort of claims will he make for that when the first figures are finally 
published in the autumn? So far, radio silence. This week I was contacted by 
someone on the Work Programme who had good help fromEco-Actif Services 
<http://ecoactifservicescic.co.uk/>, a small charity delivering specialist help 
into jobs for ex-offenders and people with mental health and addiction 
problems. Last Friday Eco-Actif went bankrupt, unable to raise money to tide 
itself over in a process where payments are complex and delayed [see footnote].

In the many tiers of the Work Programme in Sutton, A4e holds the prime 
contract, while G4S has the other part of Surrey. Eco-Actif is the sort of "bid 
candy" charity big companies use to win their prime contracts: the charity 
sector was shocked at winning only two of the 40 main contracts but only large 
commercial companies could raise the up-front investment funds. A4e puts up the 
money and passes the work down to 3SC, a social enterprise, which hands the 
work on to a panoply of smaller charities. But nobody knows how much A4e creams 
off the top. Eco-Actif thinks it may be 50%;3SC <http://3sc.org/> (which only 
takes 12% for itself) reckons A4e might take 30% – but it's a commercial 
secret. Meanwhile, those doing the actual work are paid little until they have 
placed people in jobs for six months.

Eco-Actif was created when Sutton council closed its employment department. 
Anna Burke and others made redundant turned it into a social enterprise, just 
as David Cameron extols. Nearly half of the 14 staff were themselves drawn from 
those who had been unemployed or were ex-offenders. Now retiring, Anna has lost 
all the £20,000 life savings she put into it – which she contrasts acidly with 
A4e's founderEmma Harrison's £8.6m dividend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/21/emma-harrison-a4e-nice-work>.

After a meeting with David Cameron before the election, Eco-Actif staff were 
enthusiastic believers in his "big society". No longer. Anna says there is no 
way a small charity can both survive financially and offer a good service: "The 
whole of the Work Programme is cherry-picking. We were a small charity signing 
a contract with a giantA4e <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> and their 
lawyers. Chris Grayling just says it's 'More fool you' to charities who signed 
bad contracts."

The Work Programme payment system is fiendish, with nine grades of jobseeker, 
depending on age and type of benefit – but payments are not made until they 
have been in work for 26 weeks. Now Eco-Actif staff are themselves down at the 
jobcentre, signing on. "We have a fabulous team who do wonderful work, but the 
Work Programme is toxic if you want to provide real support for people who need 
it most." 3SC, the contractor above them, says kindly of them: "Their trouble 
was they cared more about the hard cases than the easy ones. But you can only 
get income from the low-hanging fruit."

The economy is the cause of the Work Programme's trouble. Contracts were 
signed back when the Office for Budget Responsibility forecast growth at 2.6% 
for this year, when the job market should have been soaring – but instead the 
IMF predicts just 0.2% growth.

Then add in the lack of expected jobseekers with the highest bounty on their 
heads, the sick on employment support allowance (ESA). Following flawed Atos 
work capability tests, large numbers appeal, nearly 40% of whom are judged not 
able to work. The backlog of ESA people waiting for tribunals now stretches out 
to almost a year. However, Duncan Smith's revenge on ESA claimants is nigh: a 
jobcentre informer tells me new rules in the autumn will tell staff to cut all 
benefit from any ESA claimant missing an appointment. Since they are all sick 
or mentally ill, there is a 30% no-show rate: "Given the high level of 
vulnerability and chaos in their lives, this will be a disaster for many." It 
will leave them utterly destitute.

Currently Work Programme contractors are gagged, and cannot speak about their 
results. But when the first official results finally emerge, will they show 
Work Programme people are getting jobs ahead of others? But, and here is the 
second question, will there be any point at all to the whole enterprise? With 
jobs so scarce, firms are just fighting against one another and competing with 
the jobcentres to get their client in first. What an extravagance for the state 
to pay companies to leapfrog easier clients over the heads of others for jobs 
that would be filled fast anyway. The only valuable purpose would be to give 
intensive, high-quality help to people with difficulties – but that way risks 
bankruptcy, as Eco-Actif proves.

• This footnote was added on 27 July 2012: Eco-Actif is not a charity, but a 
Community Interest Company. CICs are limited companies, but have additional 
features that ensure they are established for the benefit of the community and 
the assets and profits are dedicated to that purpose. This article was further 
amended on 31 July 2012 to correct the unemployment figure for London, and to 
clarify that the ONS was cautious about whether the fall in unemployment was 
due to the "Olympics effect".
 