
Anna Chapman, the famously sultry Russian operative who was arrested in the US 
with nine others for espionage in 2010, was apparently"close to seducing a 
sitting member of President Barack Obama's cabinet." 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/9183914/Russian-spy-Anna-Chapman-was-close-to-seducing-Obama-official.html>

The reports were based on an interview that Frank Figliuzzi, the FBI's 
assistant director of counterintelligence, gave to the BBC in which he called 
the confessed spy a "honeytrap", adding: "She got close enough to disturb us."

The story went viral. There's only one problem with it, though: it's not true 
in the slightest.

"It's a completely bogus story," a defense department spokesman told the 
Guardian. "They made a giant leap."

Figliuzzi never mentions Chapman, 30, by name in the BBC video. And while he 
did say that one of the 10 operatives had gotten "close enough to a sitting US 
cabinet member" to "disturb" the agency, he wasn't talking about Chapman. Nor 
was he talking about seduction.

The New York Daily News picked up the story 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/sexy-russian-spygal-anna-chapman-close-president-obama-circle-fbi-official-tells-bbc-article-1.1055470>
 under the drooling headline: "Sexy Russian spygal Anna Chapman got too close 
to President Obama's inner circle, FBI official tells BBC."

Their article, which ran Wednesday, is maddeningly confusing.

In the fourth paragraph, the Daily News reports: 

A high-ranking FBI official says Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman> was busted in 2010 spy ring 
because flame-haired sexpot got too close to sitting President Obama cabinet 
member.

But the sixth paragraph directly contradicts this: 

Flame-haired sexpot Anna Chapman was quickly fingered as the tight-bodied 
temptress by the British press — but the needle slowly moved in the direction 
of dowdy New Jersey housewife Cynthia Murphy, who was also taken down in the 
spy sting.

It's not until the twelfth paragraph that the paper admits: 

Figliuzzi refused to reveal the cabinet member — or the female spy.

But the "honey trap" may have actually been G-man speak for cold, hard cash — 
and the access it can gain with powerful people.

So why headline it otherwise?

It was ABC News that actually bothered to pick up a phone to call the FBI. The 
network reports 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/russian-fem-spy-cynthia-murphy-spooked-us-honeypot/story?id=16061957#.T3xtPnERaso>
 that the spy Figliuzzi was referring to is, in fact, Cynthia Murphy. And by 
"getting too close" to an Obama cabinet member, he meant as a financial advisor 
to a Hillary Clinton fundraiser.

The FBI, for its part, released a statement denying that Chapman attempted to 
seduce a cabinet member.

Mr Figliuzzi's comments to BBC were consistent with and confined to the 
information outlined in the criminal complaint that was filed nearly two years 
ago. There is no allegation or suggestion in the complaint that Anna Chapman or 
anyone else associated with this investigation attempted to seduce a US cabinet 
official

Chapman, of course, is a red-headed beauty who has since modeled in lingerie 
for Maxim 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/mathieus/russian-spy-anna-chapman-for-maxim-magazine-nsfw-8q4>
 and hosted a TV programme in Russia. She was ratings and Internet gold when 
her story broke in 2010 – a femme fatale in the flesh.

So it's perhaps somewhat understandable that the Telegraph and the Daily News 
would leap at the opportunity to splash her come-hither photograph on its pages 
without actually bothering to fact check their stories. Fortunately, we at the 
Guardian are above such shenanigans.
 