
Just in time for Halloween, queen of vampire fiction Anne Rice 
<http://www.annerice.com/> has provoked the outrage of thousands of lovelorn 
teenage girls by dissingStephenie Meyer's sparkly bloodsuckers 
<http://www.stepheniemeyer.com/twilightseries.html>.

Rice, whose vampire characters Lestat and Louis put the blood into 
bloodthirsty in her bestselling novelInterview with the Vampire 
<http://www.amazon.com/Interview-Vampire-Anne-Rice/dp/0345337662>, said her 
creations"feel sorry for vampires that sparkle in the sun" 
<https://www.facebook.com/annericefanpage/posts/10150436358660452>. In Meyer's 
Twilight books, her vampires – some of whom attend high school to avoid 
detection – sparkle revealingly in sunshine. Writing on Facebook, Rice said 
that Louis and Lestat "would never hurt immortals who choose to spend eternity 
going to high school over and over again in a small town – any more than they 
would hurt the physically disabled or the mentally challenged". "My vampires 
possess gravitas. They can afford to be merciful," the author added.

Her comments were prompted by an article, "Should Vampires Sparkle?" 
<http://www.dakotastudent.com/features/should-vampires-sparkle-1.2672174>, in 
the University of North Dakota's student newspaper, and quickly provoked almost 
2,000 responses from fans of both Rice's own Vampire Chronicles and Meyer's 
bestselling Twilight series. "Totally disappointed you would stoop so low and 
knock another author. Feeling a bit smug? It's unbecoming, so stop," wrote one. 
"Anne Rice's vamps would destroy those Twilight wimps," responded another.

The row became so heated that Rice was prompted to clarify, writing: "There's 
plenty of room for a little humour in talking about the various 
interpretations."

"I think this is a new golden age for lovers of fantasy fiction; so many new 
and talented writers offering their vampires, werewolves and other supernatural 
heroes," said Rice, who has recently written a new series about a contract 
killer recruited by a seraph, as well as two novels about the life of Christ. 
"It's all there for our enjoyment, and it always has been. I like the new 
authors, as well as the old."

She later said that Lestat "has watched every episode of True Blood", adding: 
"I very much love the new vampire authors, no doubt of it. I have unqualified 
praise for the originality ofCharlaine Harris <http://www.charlaineharris.com/> 
and Stephenie Meyer and for their success. This is fun, guys, all these new 
vampires roaming the fantasy world. And a little humour about it is not out of 
place."

Rice is not the first vampire author to criticise Meyer's Twilight novels, 
which follow the romance between vampire Edward Cullen and human teenager Bella 
Swan. According to Stephen King,"Stephenie Meyer can't write worth a darn. 
She's not very good." 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/05/stephenking-fiction>
 