
As Anne Rice's erotic retelling of the Sleeping Beauty fairytale is 
re-released in the wake of theFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fifty-shades-of-grey> sales bonanza, the 
novelist has spoken out about how women have just as much right as men to enjoy 
sexual fantasies.

Rice first published the Sleeping Beauty trilogy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sleeping_Beauty_Trilogy> in the 1980s under 
the pseudonym AN Roquelaure because she "needed the anonymity of the pen name 
to write freely, to pursue an authentic erotica without being inhibited or 
self-conscious". The books, The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty, Beauty's Release 
and Beauty's Punishment, are an erotic version of the fairytale, in which the 
princess is awakened with much more than a kiss and the prince's reward for 
ending her 100 years of sleep is "Beauty's complete and total enslavement to 
him".

All three are being reissued by Penguin's US imprint Plume 
<http://us.penguingroup.com/static/pages/publishers/adult/plume.html> this 
week, with a first print run of 350,000 copies, new covers and a new foreword 
by the Interview with the Vampire author in which she lays out a feminist 
argument for erotica.

"As a feminist, I'm very much supportive of equal rights for women in all 
walks of life. And that includes for me the right of every woman to write out 
her sexual fantasies and to read books filled with sexual fantasies that she 
enjoys,"said Rice 
<http://us.penguingroup.com/nf/Book/BookDisplay/0,,9780452281455,00.html?sym=NOT>
.

Although she criticised what she called "hackwork pornography", which is 
"written by those who don't share the fantasy, and they slip into hideous 
violence and ugliness, thinking the market wants all that, when the market 
never really did", Rice pointed out that men have always enjoyed all kinds of 
pornography, and asked: "How can it be wrong for women to have the same right? 
We're sexual beings! And fantasy is where we can do the things we can't do in 
ordinary life."

Rice said that since the trilogy, which she wrote "years ago because I could 
not find an authentic erotica in bookstores", was first published, people have 
come "out of the closet" as enjoyers of erotica. "The novel Fifty Shades of 
Grey has proved this. And I am discovering that the Beauty books, in spite of 
all their playful excess, are for the first time going mainstream," said Rice. 
"The whole world knows women are sensual human beings as well as men. It's no 
secret anymore that women want to read sexy fiction just as men do, and there's 
a new frankness about the varieties of fantasies one might enjoy. So many 
cliches have been broken and abandoned. And this is a wonderful thing."
 