
Anne Rice <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annerice> is set to reveal her 
vision of the lost realm of Atlantis in a new novel starring her most famous 
creation, the vampire Lestat.

The bestselling American author has announced that Prince Lestat and the 
Realms of Atlantis will be published on 29 November this year. It is Rice’s 
second novel about the vampire prince in two years:Prince Lestat was published 
in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/11/anne-rice-vampire-prince-lestat-interview-with-the-vampire>
, following a break of more than 10 years from the world of vampires.

From Lestat to Harry Potter: which characters should be resurrected?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/sep/27/lestat-harry-potter-characters-resurrected>
“I’ve been dying to get my vision of Atlantis into the public realm for years. 
And believe me, there is a full-blown vision of Atlantis in this novel,”Rice 
told fans on Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/annericefanpage>. “I’ve been 
obsessed with it for years. Years. [I] have a huge library on Atlantis in 
fiction, in channelling, in history, in mythology … the whole thing. This was 
one of my greatest personal adventures, this novel. I’m delirious that it will 
be in bookstores by Christmas.”

According to the book’s description, the story will see Lestat, made famous in 
Rice’s novel Interview With the Vampire, “battling ... a strange otherworldly 
form that has somehow taken possession of [his] undead body and soul”. The 
spirit reveals the “hypnotic tale of a great sea power of ancient times; a 
mysterious heaven on earth situated on a boundless continent – and of how and 
why, and in what manner and with what far-reaching purpose, this force came to 
build and rule the great legendary empire of centuries ago that thrived in the 
Atlantic Ocean”.

Anne Rice takes a bite out of Stephenie Meyer's sparkling Twilight vampires
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/31/anne-rice-stephenie-meyer-vampires>
“In my dreams, I saw a city fall into the sea. I heard the cries of thousands. 
I saw flames that outshone the lamps of heaven. And all the world was shaken,” 
writes Rice in the book.

The novelist published Interview With the Vampire, later adapted for a film 
starring Tom Cruise, in 1976. Before 2014’s Prince Lestat, her most recent 
foray into the world of vampires was in 2003’s Blood Canticle. When she 
returned to the story of Lestat in 2014, she said she had gone back and reread 
all her Vampire Chronicles stories, and had to “wrestle Lestat to the ground, 
and beat him up, and say ‘look, you’ve got to talk to me, I’ve got to know what 
you’ve been doing’”.
 