
The bestselling novelist Anne Rice <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annerice>
, author of Interview With the Vampire, has said that she believes “we are 
facing a new era of censorship, in the name of political correctness”, in the 
wake of the heavy online criticism that has been directed at Kate Breslin’s 
romance novel For Such a Time.

Rice hit out at what she called an “internet lynch mob” that has descended 
upon Breslin in the last week. The novel, which had been shortlisted for prizes 
in theRomance Writers of America’s annual awards 
<https://www.rwa.org/p/cm/ld/fid=525>, imagines a relationship between a Jewish 
woman in a concentration camp and an SS Kommandant, and her eventual conversion 
to Christianity. Critics called it “deeply offensive and insensitive”, as well 
as “antisemitic, violent, and dangerous”, with the widespread online debate 
prompting the appearance of dozens of one-star reviews of the novel on Amazon.

Rice, who has spoken out before about “the anti-author gangster bully culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/04/anne-rice-protests-bullying-amazon-petition>
”, took issue with the situation onher Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/annericefanpage?fref=nf> this week. “Want to see the 
new censorship in action? Want to witness an internet lynch mob going after its 
target?” she wrote. “Check out the Amazon review site for this novel and read 
the one-star reviews.

“Do you think these are honest customer reviews? I don’t. I abhor censorship 
in all forms. I condemn those who abuse theAmazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> reviewing system to ‘take down’ 
authors who books they have not read – for political or religious or ‘social’ 
reasons.”

Amazon has since removed many of the one-star reviews of For Such a Time, 
although more keep appearing, but Rice said on Facebook that she believes “we 
are facing a new era of censorship, in the name of political correctness”.

“There are forces at work in the book world that want to control fiction 
writing in terms of who ‘has a right’ to write about what,” Rice said. “Some 
even advocate the out and out censorship of older works using words we now deem 
wholly unacceptable. Some are critical of novels involving rape. Some argue 
that white novelists have no right to write about people of colour; and 
Christians should not write novels involving Jews or topics involving Jews.”

 “I think all this is dangerous. I think we have to stand up for the freedom 
of fiction writers to write what they want to write, no matter how offensive it 
might be to someone else. We must stand up for fiction as a place where 
transgressive behaviour and ideas can be explored … internet campaigns to 
destroy authors accused of inappropriate subject matter or attitudes are 
dangerous to us all.”

Speaking to the Guardian via email, Rice said she hoped “the tide is turning”, 
and that “people are fed up with ‘censorship by bully’”.

“They’ve had it up to here with seeing internet discussions and book review 
sites and forum threads swamped by people who are disruptive and do not respect 
the very idea of open discussion. And I think that is the crux of what we’re 
dealing with: a class of persons on the net, in online book forums and other 
forums, who are indeed trying to shut down their opponents rather than engage 
with them,” said Rice.

The novelist added that sites such as Goodreads and Amazon have proved 
“remarkably vulnerable to those who would use the sites for a video game style 
shoot ups with targets they choose for a whole spectrum of reasons”.

“Say something unkind publicly about JK Rowling? They’ll flame your books and 
bring you down. Make a negative remark in the press about the fans wanting 
cheaper ebooks? How dare you? They’ll ‘take you down’. Have a character marry 
the wrong guy in the series? How dare you? They will libel you, libel your 
motives, your integrity, your attitude towards your fans and bring you down,” 
said Rice.

A year ago, the British novelist Lynn Shepherd found herself swamped with 
one-star reviews on Amazon after writing a piece asking Rowling to stop writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/27/crime-author-urges-jk-rowling-stop-writing>
, while Charlaine Harris, author of the Sookie Stackhouse novels on which the 
television adaptation True Blood is based, found herselfthreatened by fans over 
her choice of happily-ever-after for Sookie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/10/charlaine-harris-sookie-stackhouse-true-blood>
.

“Frankly, I hope the tide is turning, and sometimes I think there are clear 
signs that it is,” said Rice, who has herself been insulted, but not 
threatened, online. “It is natural to us to want to challenge unfairness when 
we’re the victim of it. Bullies and abusers cannot change human nature in this 
regard, no matter how vile their threats. Posted guidelines on Goodreads and 
Amazon provide us with something to work with here, as bully attacks almost 
always disregard the guidelines entirely. They seek without apology to 
manipulate and mislead the customers. And the best thing we can do is accept 
Amazon’s invitation to report this when we see it.”

Amazon’s review guidelines 
<https://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/display.html?nodeId=201602680&ref_=pe_584750_33951330>
 state that the site “may” reject or remove reviews that contain inappropriate 
content, hate speech and offensive content. It also does not allow 
“promotional” reviews “in order to preserve the integrity of customer reviews”. 
If a review violates the guidelines, customers are able to let Amazon know why, 
and “we’ll examine the review and take the appropriate action”, says the 
retailer.

But the writer Sarah Wendell, whose letter to the Romance Writers of America 
ignited the debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/10/jew-loves-nazi-holocaust-romance-award-nominations>
, questioned Anne Rice’s judgment in comparing negative online reviewers to a 
lynch mob.

“Comparing the pixelated letters of one person’s reaction to a book to the 
racially motivated public execution and hanging of a human being is not right,” 
she said. “Ever.”

Wendell also rejected Rice’s characterisation of Breslin’s critics as 
promoting censorship.

“I do not advocate censorship,” Wendell said. “I am advocating for better 
judgment and awareness. I question the judgement of the author, the editor, the 
publisher, and the reviewers from major publications who missed the 
offensiveness of the premise of For Such a Time.”Fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fiction> is certainly a place for 
“transgressive exploration”, she continued, but the setting of Breslin’s novel 
“isn’t the problem”.

“Re-centring the story of the prisoners of Theresienstadt on a tale of 
Christian conversion and the salvation and redemption of a Nazi commandant who 
committed genocide reframes and erases history, and forgives the horror of the 
execution of more than 17 million people in order to advance a larger religious 
perspective. When people talk about marginalisation, about appropriation, about 
revising history, this is what we’re talking about.”

Instead of trying to “shut down” Breslin and her work, Wendell argued she was 
“trying to explain why and how her narrative choices and the choices of Bethany 
House to publish her work are painful, offensive, and cruelly dismissive of the 
Holocaust. I don’t think either party understands, and I’m beginning to think 
they cannot or will not.”

Rice admitted on Facebook that she had yet to read Breslin’s novel, although 
she said she is ordering a copy, but said that she was “against what is 
happening, regardless of the contents of the book”.

The hostile focus on Breslin’s book “is a perfect example of the new 
censorship,” she wrote. “I think it is important to stress that this is not 
about whether the book is offensive, it is about the immorality of internet 
lynch mobs that ‘game’ book sites to destroy their targets.”

For Wendell, who has already read For Such a Time, Rice’s decision to post her 
comments before reading the novel came as no surprise.

“It is sadly typical,” she said.
 