
Heather Purdin had run out of options. Aged 33, she had been suffering from 
anorexia nervosa for more than two decades and her weight had plummeted to that 
of a small child, an all-time low for her. Her case worker, out of frustration 
and desperation, suggested hospice care as a way to spend her remaining days in 
relative comfort. But for the first time in years, Heather was sure of one 
thing: she desperately wanted to live.

Treating anorexia, which is characterised by self-starvation and an inability 
to maintain an adequate body weight, seems absurdly simple on the surface: just 
eat and gain weight. It is something Heather and the millions of others 
afflicted by eating disorders have heard countless times. The problem is that 
it is never that simple. Heather has long since lost track of the number of 
times she has been admitted to hospital for low body weight, electrolyte 
imbalances caused by starvation or self-induced vomiting, or thoughts of 
suicide. In hospital she gains weight, but as soon as she is discharged she 
promptly returns to her old ways and loses what little weight she has gained. 
And so for more than 20 years, she has remained hopelessly, incurably, stuck.

Up to one in five people with chronic anorexia may die as a result of their 
illness, either owing to the direct effects of starvation and malnutrition or 
to suicide. This makes it the deadliest of all psychiatric disorders. Although 
scientists have made tremendous progress in decoding the underlying biology of 
eating disorders and in finding ways to intervene in cases of teenage anorexia 
before the disorder becomes chronic, this has not translated into effective 
treatments for adults.

A chance posting on Facebook last autumn, however, brought hope for the first 
time in years. In Ohio, there was an experimental five-day intensive programme 
to help adults with anorexia. What made this one different was that it used the 
latest neurobiology research to shape its goals as well as the way treatment 
was delivered. Since research confirms that most patients struggle to make 
changes to their entrenched behaviours on their own, patients also had to 
invite up to four support people to join them on the residential programme. 
Heather asked her father and her sister, and began raising the funds to fly 
them all to Ohio.

“I need this to work,” she said. “I have nothing else to try.”

Despite its reputation as a quintessentially modern disorder, anorexia is 
nothing new. The first medical report of the illness appeared in 1689, written 
by London physician Richard Morton, who described it as “a nervous consumption” 
caused by “sadness and anxious cares”.

Even as recently as the 1970s, anorexia remained something of a clinical 
oddity – a disease that doctors rarely saw, let alone had a clue how to treat. 
When psychologist Laura Hill saw her first anorexia patient at a university 
counselling centre back in 1979, she had never even heard of the disorder: “Her 
father was in the science department there and I had to ask him what anorexia 
was,” recalled Hill. “He told me she was unable to gain weight, afraid of food.”

Rates of anorexia had been steadily climbing since the 1950s, but it was not 
until the death of the singerKaren Carpenter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/24/karen-carpenter-anorexia-book-extract>
 in 1983 that the disorder became a household word. She died from heart failure 
resulting from anorexia nervosa, and all of a sudden newspaper stories and 
after-school TV specials began to feature teenage girls “dying to be thin”. 
Besides highlighting the spectacle of a healthy, attractive young girl’s 
determination to starve herself, the storylines usually focused on the family 
dysfunction that psychologists believed lay at the heart of the disorder. 
Parents were told not to be the food police, that anorexia was a misguided 
search for control. Only when they let their child be fully in control of their 
own life would the anorexia be resolved.

Psychiatrist Walter Kaye <http://eatingdisorders.ucsd.edu/faculty/kaye.shtml> 
was not convinced. He had been asked to help finish an anorexia study for the 
US National Institutes of Health in the early 1980s, despite not having done 
research into eating disorders before. While talking with the participants, he 
noticed something unusual.

“I was just kind of struck by how homogenous the symptoms were,” he said. 
Because the patients seemed so similar in terms of symptoms and temperament, he 
believed there had to be something in their biology that was causing anorexia – 
and he dedicated himself to finding out what it was.

In the early 1980s, anorexia had been seen by the medical community as a 
deliberate decision by a petulant teenage girl: she was selfish, vain, wilful. 
Since she had chosen to become ill, she simply needed to choose to get better. 
She needed to become a fully formed individual, separate from her family, and 
had to rebel against the cultural ideal of thinness at all costs.

Research by Kaye and others, however, dismantled these preconceptions (not 
least that anorexia only affects girls) and completely changed how we think 
about the condition. Psychologist Laura Hill had to rethink her whole approach: 
“Many times, I want to call up all my old patients and apologise for getting so 
much backwards,” she said.

Hill began to keep a file full of notes about what she thought was causing 
anorexia, what her patients believed, what seemed to work and what did not. 
After a few years, she entered a PhD programme to better help her patients. But 
even with several research articles to her name and, ultimately, decades 
working at the forefront of treating and researching eating disorders, she 
realised that the treatment advances were not reaching adults with anorexia. 
She was not the only one. Across the field, psychologists, psychiatrists and 
dietitians have noted that positive treatment outcomes for adults with anorexia 
remain abysmally low. Less than half recover fully, another third show some 
improvement, but the rest remain chronically ill.

“They go for many years, and they’ve relapsed over and over again, and they 
have the highest risk of dying,” said Kaye. “I think all of us are feeling that 
this is a serious, often deadly disorder for these people, and we don’t have 
good approaches, and we don’t understand enough about the causes.”

For adolescents with anorexia, a ground-breaking treatment developed at the 
Maudsley Hospital <http://www.maudsleyparents.org/> in London in the 1980s 
called family-based treatment (FBT) has significantly improved short-term 
recovery outcomes. It puts parents temporarily in charge of making food and 
exercise decisions for their child and places a priority on normalising weight 
and eating habits. In a randomised clinical trial published in 2010, around 
half of teenagers treated with FBT met criteria for full recovery after a year, 
compared with 23% receiving standard treatment.

Nothing has been remotely that successful for adults with anorexia, and there 
is no easy explanation as to why. One reason may be that adults have simply 
been sicker for longer, believesAngela Guarda 
<http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/profiles/results/directory/profile/0006517/angela-guarda>
, director of the Eating Disorders Program at Johns Hopkins University: “The 
longer you have anorexia, the more anorexia creates physiological changes in 
the body and the brain that then create a self-sustaining cycle. You do it 
today because you did it yesterday, no longer because you decided to go on the
Atkins diet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/aug/13/sciencenews.science> when you 
were 15 or because you broke up with a boyfriend and you decided to lose 
weight. It’s no longer about that.”

Many people with anorexia don’t grasp that they are, in fact, sick. While 
parents generally sign their children into treatment, the power to do so 
vanishes when the child turns 18. Adult patients can also stop treatment if it 
gets too difficult – and it often does, because challenging the behaviours 
associated with eating disorders can create extreme anxiety. A long‑term, 
chronic eating disorder often ends up alienating friends and family – the very 
people who are needed to support the patient through the recovery process.

The longer anorexia lasts, the more the physiological changes in the body and 
brain create a self-sustaining cycle

Clinicians, like their patients, are desperate for something better, some way 
not only to help adults with anorexia normalise their eating and gain weight, 
but also to help them stay well. “In anorexia, you get their weight up and they 
go home straight from inpatient [where] they’re fed from a tray, and they’re 
expected to know how to eat in a restaurant, eat in a cafeteria, eat in social 
settings when they haven’t been eating with anyone for a decade,” Guarda said.

On a warm spring weekend in 2006, Laura Hill stopped in the middle of mowing 
her lawn. She had spent the morning reading one of Walter Kaye’s articles on 
the neurobiology of anorexia, and was familiar with how Kaye and his colleague 
Stephanie Knatz were beginning to use neurobiology in designing new treatments 
for adolescents. It occurred to Hill that she could do something similar for 
her adult patients. She dashed inside to grab a pad of paper and a pencil, 
where she scribbled a few notes before returning to her lawn. Several passes 
later, she had another insight and again stopped mowing to add to her notes. 
This went on all afternoon. It took until dusk to finish the mowing, but by 
then, as well as a neatly cut lawn, Hill also had the outline of a new type of 
adult anorexia treatment that would harness the strengths of people with the 
disorder and try to compensate for their weaknesses.

She continued to work on the outline, asking her patients at the Center for 
Balanced Living in Ohio for input on what they found helpful. A few years 
later, she teamed up with Kaye and Knatz, who further refined the idea based on 
their experiences at the University of California, San Diego. There, they had 
remarkable success with a five-day intensive FBT programme for adolescents. 
Rather than seeing someone once a week, which might not be enough to be 
effective, or taking them away from their family and putting them in an 
artificial environment for a residential programme, they had insisted that the 
family come and stay too. Encouragingly, some young adults – living at home or 
supported by their parents – had also taken part, suggesting that this format 
could work with older patients as well.

“As opposed to having people step in for an hour and talk about what happened 
over the week, we’re actually seeing what happens live. That gives us the 
possibility to intervene at the time, as opposed to coaching people on what 
they should do ‘when circumstances come up’,” said Knatz.

In 2013, Hill, Knatz and Kaye applied for a grant from the US National Eating 
Disorders Association to fund a pilot study of what they called 
Neurobiologically Enhanced with Family/Friends Eating Disorder Trait Response 
(NEW FED-TR). Every aspect of the programme was based on what researchers 
understood about what happens in the brain of someone with anorexia, the goal 
being not just to improve treatment but also to reduce blame and guilt among 
sufferers and families. To that end, the new programme would involve carers and 
loved ones as an integral part of treatment, creating a team that could work 
together to fight the eating disorder. Responsibility for recovery would remain 
firmly in each client’s hands, but some aspects of recovery that tend to be 
sticking points for adults with anorexia could be outsourced to their support 
people as needed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fanorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b425375cf0db7ad85dcf72b4898cbe3993877e%2F0_301_1889_1134%2F1889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anorexia%3A%20you%20don%E2%80%99t%20just%20grow%20out%20of%20it%20%7C%20Carrie%20Arnold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fanorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anorexia%3A%20you%20don%E2%80%99t%20just%20grow%20out%20of%20it%20%7C%20Carrie%20Arnold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fanorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95b425375cf0db7ad85dcf72b4898cbe3993877e%2F0_301_1889_1134%2F1889.jpg>
 Illustration by Magnus Voll Mathiassen 
I was first diagnosed with anorexia more than 15 years ago. The reason I 
continued to starve myself despite my failing organs and being forced to drop 
out of school, the doctors said, was that something was wrong in my family. And 
as soon as that was sorted out, I would get well. One therapist told me my 
parents were too controlling. Another said that there was too much pressure on 
me to be perfect. Yet another suggested that I just didn’t want to grow up, and 
my mother was afraid to let me leave the nest.

The problem was that none of these things were true. The other problem was 
that, despite discussing these factors at length, I remained profoundly ill. I 
would eat in the hospital or at a residential treatment centre, where I was 
sent when my condition deteriorated, but then I would return to my old ways 
upon discharge. I was 29 years old, and despite two advanced degrees, I had to 
come to terms with the fact that I didn’t have the first clue as to how to feed 
myself appropriately. My once-vibrant life had narrowed to the number on the 
scale and my next meal. Nothing else mattered, and no one could figure out why.

It wasn’t until nearly a decade after I was diagnosed that a therapist told me 
that, not only was my eating disorder no one’s fault, the personality traits 
that were driving the anorexia (perfectionism, attention to detail, a drive to 
achieve) could actually be beneficial. I learned about some of the biology that 
explained why I was so vulnerable to anorexia, and why not eating actually made 
me feel less anxious and less depressed. Instead of demonising my parents as 
the cause of the anorexia, we needed to utilise them as supports to help me get 
better. The shift was profound. What we created was a specialised anorexia 
treatment programme with a clientele of one: me. Food was described as 
medicine, and I was expected to eat everything I was served. I would rather 
have jumped out of a plane without a parachute. Meal by meal, snack by snack, 
however, the eating disorder began to loosen its grasp.

Now, nearly six years later, I do not describe myself as “fully recovered”. I 
still follow a food plan that helps me decide how much I need to eat. I have 
entered into a fragile detente with my weight, grudgingly accepting that I am 
mentally and physically healthier in my current state, even if I feel like 
evidence of a new species of land whale most of the time. Nor am I free of 
relapse. I have had two major relapses in the past few years, one of them 
rather recently. My organ systems are no longer nearly as forgiving as they 
were when my disease started. My bones are irreversibly damaged, and it doesn’t 
take much to throw my heart into complete chaos. Despite all of this, I have 
managed to create a life worth living and that, in and of itself, is a feat for 
someone who was repeatedly written off as uncooperative and untreatable.

Instead of demonising my parents as the cause of the anorexia, we needed them 
as supports to help me get better

In my years of being involved with the eating disorder community, I have seen 
a profound shift in the way we think about eating disorders. Although far too 
many people are still told that their disorder is “about control” or that 
there’s nothing anyone can do until a person chooses to get well, many parents 
and sufferers are learning about the complex web of biological and 
environmental ingredients that come together to create an eating disorder.

On an unusually mild Monday morning in December 2015, Heather Purdin was 
fiddling with her ponytail, just as she always does when she is nervous. She 
was booked into the five-day programme for adults with anorexia, and the centre 
was a short drive from the hotel, across the freeway interchange to the back of 
a wooded business park. Heather’s body mass index, or BMI, was very low now – 
all muscle and softness stripped from her body, leaving only sinew and bone. A 
baggy shirt and scarf could not conceal how ill she was. But she was not on her 
way to a hospital or a hospice. Flanked by her father, sister and best friend, 
she entered the Center for Balanced Living to take her place on the pilot of 
the NEW FED-TR programme. And despite her fears, a giant grin lit up her face.

Inside the centre, the treatment room looked like an ordinary kitchen. Long, 
grey counter tops line one wall and an island; there was a large stove, a sink 
and a fridge. Beau Barley, a tall, thin 20-year-old with bleached blond hair 
and a two‑day-old beard, was cooking an omelette for breakfast while his 
parents prepared their own meals. Beau was on his second day of the programme.

“OK, clients, check in with your supports to make sure you’ve got enough to 
eat,” called the programme’s dietitian, Sonja Stotz. She listened in as Beau 
showed his meal of eggs, toast, butter, milk and fruit to his parents.

Beau suffered from obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) as a child, having to 
turn off lights in a certain way and avoid all the cracks on the pavement. 
Every time he heard a siren, he had to ring his mother because he thought he 
might have caused an accident by not doing one of his rituals right.

He had always been sporty, and his anorexia started with a simple desire to be 
a better runner on his high school cross‑country team. He amped up his mileage, 
running for longer and longer each day and eventually training year‑round. The 
sport he loved became a compulsion. But overtraining eventually took a toll and 
he was sidelined by a severe stress fracture. His only thought as his leg was 
being x-rayed in the hospital was that he needed to cut back on his food if he 
wanted to stay in shape for next season. As his mother pushed him out of the 
emergency room in a wheelchair, she asked him what he wanted for dinner. “A 
salad,” he replied.

From there, Beau became more and more obsessed with eating “healthily” and 
returning to running. At first, his weight was stable. But as his running 
obsession returned, his weight plummeted. In the summer before he started 
university, he went through his first formal treatment programme at the Center 
for Balanced Living, attending group therapy during the day, eating his meals 
at the centre and returning home every night. Things started to look up, but 
Beau relapsed during his first year at university. Over the past summer and 
autumn, he has tried to make progress with his eating disorder, but the 
exercise compulsion is harder to shake. When his mother called the centre to 
see if he could return, they recommended NEW FED-TR. And there he was, showing 
his parents what he had cooked for himself this morning.

The programme uses a meal plan that assigns each individual a certain number 
of choices or “exchanges” from each food group for every meal and snack. Beau 
discussed his exchanges with his mother, telling her how the food on his plate 
added up to his prescribed meal. Satisfied with his choices, Stotz moved on to 
assist one of the three other families in the kitchen. Beau’s family sat down 
at the table and, as breakfast began, Hill and Stotz suggested fun games to 
play as a distraction, to decrease the anxiety all of the clients felt around 
eating. The less anxiety they felt, the more likely they were to successfully 
complete the meal, which served as their medication.

In the morning sessions, Hill gave the clients and their families a crash 
course on eating disorder neurobiology.Eating disorders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/eating-disorders> typically begin in 
adolescence. Although the exact circumstances that trigger the onset of 
anorexia are not clear, nearly all cases begin when a person fails to meet 
their energy needs, placing them in a state of what researchers call negative 
energy balance – burning more calories than they eat. For some, a weight-loss 
diet precipitates the eating disorder; for others, it is increased sports 
training, a growth spurt, an illness, stress, even new dental braces. For most 
people, being in a negative energy balance is profoundly uncomfortable. That is 
why dieting often makes people impulsive and cranky. But those with a 
predisposition for anorexia have a completely different experience: starvation 
makes them feel better.

Kaye’s work with women who have recovered from anorexia nervosa found 
unusually high levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin in the cerebrospinal 
fluid that bathes the brain, and he believes these levels were likely also 
present before the onset of anorexia. Although low serotonin levels are linked 
to depression, high serotonin levels are not good either, as they create a 
state of chronic anxiety and irritability. As many as three-quarters of those 
with anorexia had suffered from an anxiety disorder before their eating 
disorder began, most commonly social anxiety and OCD.

The body synthesises serotonin from the amino acid tryptophan, which we get 
from food. Eat less and you get less tryptophan, and hence less serotonin. For 
people predisposed to anorexia, therefore, starvation reduces the anxiety and 
irritability associated with their high serotonin levels. The problem is that 
the brain fights back, increasing the number of receptors for serotonin. This 
increased sensitivity means that the old negative feelings return, which drives 
the person to cut back even more on what they are eating. Any attempts to 
return to normal eating patterns wind up flooding the hypersensitive brain with 
a surge of serotonin, creating panic, rage and emotional instability.Anorexia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia> has, in effect, locked itself 
into place.

Heather Purdin and her team saw this first-hand as Hill asked the different 
groups of clients and supports to use wool, taken from Hill’s massive 
collection of weaving supplies, to wind the client’s hands into place. 
Heather’s team rapidly pinned her hands and arms in front of her face. This, 
Hill said, was the anorexia in action. Heather was now as stuck physically as 
she was mentally. Getting her functioning again meant weaving her supports into 
her mental “loom”. The team struggled with this, especially when Hill asked 
Heather what she was going to do differently. In sheer frustration, she slammed 
her knotted hands onto the table in front of her.

“It’s not working,” she wailed. “I can’t change.”

The tears started and it seemed they would never stop. But something had 
shifted.

“I realised I wasn’t completely crazy,” Heather said later. “It was a huge 
relief. It is real and I’m not making it up and I’m not a complete loser.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fanorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01e098c61f8a3391e63d8e58f7947653d7835c9%2F0_118_1890_1134%2F1890.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anorexia%3A%20you%20don%E2%80%99t%20just%20grow%20out%20of%20it%20%7C%20Carrie%20Arnold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fanorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anorexia%3A%20you%20don%E2%80%99t%20just%20grow%20out%20of%20it%20%7C%20Carrie%20Arnold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fanorexia-you-dont-just-grow-out-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe01e098c61f8a3391e63d8e58f7947653d7835c9%2F0_118_1890_1134%2F1890.jpg>
 Illustration by Magnus Voll Mathiassen 
Recovering from anorexia, Hill said, is like learning to navigate around 
landmines. They can be deadly, and they can derail recovery. One of the biggest 
struggles for people with anorexia is making decisions: a first-year university 
student on the programme, who asked not to be named, admitted that she can 
stand in front of the fridge for hours trying to decide what to have for lunch. 
Frustrated, she often shuts the door without eating anything.

“People with eating disorders have many amazing qualities,” said Hill. The 
goal of the programme is to make these traits work for an individual as much as 
possible, and to enlist loved ones to fill in for the parts of the brain that 
might not be working properly. The exact details of this were hammered out by 
each family throughout the week in a “recovery support agreement”. Skipping 
meals or snacks or not gaining weight as appropriate could result in 
consequences that are agreed in advance, such as leaving university or eating 
more meals with family members.

Recovering from anorexia is like learning to navigate around landmines. They 
can be deadly, and they can derail recovery

“It’s helpful for people with anorexia because they like rules, they like 
structure, they don’t like the unknown, so they have a pretty good idea of 
what’s going to happen if they’re not able to eat and gain weight. And our data 
is suggesting that may be a useful approach,” said Kaye.

A 2003 study identified five personality traits that increased the risk of 
developing an eating disorder: perfectionism, inflexibility, having to follow 
the rules, excessive doubt and caution, and a drive for order and symmetry. 
Other studies have found links between anxiety, perfectionism and anorexia. 
Adults with anorexia get stuck on details and have trouble zooming out to see 
the big picture, which can make it difficult to make decisions. They also have 
difficulty mentally switching from one task to the next.

For too long, said Hill, eating disorder professionals have been focusing on 
these traits as weaknesses when that is not true. To succeed at scientific 
research, for instance, obsessionality and attention to detail is almost a 
must. Since people with anorexia use rules and routines to “succeed” at their 
eating disorder, they can also learn to use them to succeed at recovery. It 
sounds like a small shift, but for anorexia sufferers like Heather and Beau, it 
makes all the difference in the world.

“Make your quirks work,” Heather quipped with a smile.

In healthy individuals, determining what and how much to eat is controlled by 
a variety of factors, including what is available, how hungry the person is and 
what they like. Not so in anorexia. Kaye’s use of functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) of the brain has teased out other important details. Unlike most 
people, whose brains respond strongly to rewarding things such as sweets, 
people with anorexia are generally far more sensitive to punishment (the 
removal of something pleasant) than reward.

Another study found that the brains of women who had recovered from anorexia 
responded significantly less to sugar water than healthy controls, and they 
found sweets less rewarding when hungry. Kaye says these results may indicate 
how they are able to continue starving even while food is plentiful, since 
people with anorexia find food less rewarding and thus have less motivation to 
eat. Tests also showed a preoccupation with future harm at the expense of what 
might be needed in the present moment.

“One reason that people with anorexia are able to starve themselves is that 
when they get hungry, the parts of the brain that should be driving reward and 
motivation just aren’t getting activated,” Kaye said.

Hill played an audio recording of one of her former patients re-enacting the 
anorexic thoughts that tormented her while she ate – an endless stream of “I 
can’t eat this. I’m going to get fat. I’m ugly. I’m disgusting. I’m weak. I 
hate myself. I can’t do this. I’m so pathetic, just pathetic, a weak pig.” It 
went on for more than 10 minutes.

Many of the parents had walked into the programme frustrated and angry at 
their child’s seeming refusal to eat. When they heard the recording and the 
sheer amount of “noise” that their children endured, their anger dissipated.

“I get it now,” Beau’s mother said, dabbing at her eyes with a tissue. “I get 
it.”

Heather’s week at the programme was life-changing: “For the first time, 
someone got what I had been saying all along, that I had a biologically based 
brain disorder,” she said. “They worked with me instead of against me.”

By December 2015, nearly 25 families had participated in NEW FED-TR, and more 
pilot groups are in the works. Feedback, Hill said, was uniformly positive, 
even from those with anorexia – pretty rare for a treatment programme that 
requires a person to face their deepest fears six times a day, eating three 
meals and three snacks. It is too soon to say whether the programme has been 
effective in helping adult anorexia sufferers move towards recovery, but for 
Heather it marks the first time she has actually believed in her own ability to 
get better.

Illustrations by Magnus Voll Mathiassen

This is an edited version of an article that appears on Mosaic 
<http://mosaicscience.com/>. It is republished here under a Creative Commons 
licence

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 