
For a decade now, the Nasa mantra for looking for life in outer space is to “
follow the water 
<http://www.nasa.gov/vision/earth/everydaylife/jamestown-water-fs.html>”. In 
the beginning, this was a valid way to identify the places where we should then 
start searching. Each new discovery of “water” is automatically paired with a 
statement that this increases the chance of finding alien life. But in recent 
years – the latest example being the discovery of water this week onJupiter’s 
moon Europa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/26/jupiter-europa-water-plumes-nasa>
 – we have been hearing it so often that it is starting to become boring.

The evidence for water on celestial bodies such as Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/28/nasa-scientists-find-evidence-flowing-water-mars>
, Europa andSaturn’s moon Enceladus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/22/spacewatch-clark-saturn-moon-enceladus-water-plumes-cassini-flyby>
 is now overwhelming. It is time to take the next step and actually look for 
life itself.

Jupiter's moon Europa may expel water plumes from under icy shell, Nasa says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/26/jupiter-europa-water-plumes-nasa>
When I say life, I don’t mean little green men who say: “Take me to your 
leader.” Microbes will do because the discovery of single alien microbe would 
be the greatest advance that science could ever make. We still do not know how 
life began on Earth. If we could find some elsewhere, we could look to see how 
similar or different it was from Earth life. Does it rely on DNA, for example? 
Do its similarities and differences hold clues about how it, and therefore we, 
were formed?

However, this is where the risk and the fear of failure lies. Despite what you 
might think from the news stories, water is no guarantee of life. Water is 
certainly a prerequisite on Earth and there are good scientific reasons for 
believing water may be essential for life of any description, but there is no 
guarantee that a watery celestial body will automatically play host to microbes.

Perhaps this is the reason that Nasa has seemed strangely reluctant to take 
the next step of actually looking for life. Earlier this century, they shied 
away from theTerrestrial Planet Finder 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terrestrial_Planet_Finder>, a telescope designed 
to look for Earth-like worlds and analyse their atmospheres for traces of life. 
With theirMars Curiosity rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/curiosity-rover> in 2012, they 
specifically did notput any life-detecting equipment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2012/aug/05/curiosity-rover-nasa-life-mars>
 on board.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fnasa-releases-first-close-up-images-jupiter-juno-spacecraft-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nasa%20releases%20first%20close-up%20images%20of%20Jupiter%20taken%20by%20Juno%20spacecraft%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fnasa-releases-first-close-up-images-jupiter-juno-spacecraft-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nasa%20releases%20first%20close-up%20images%20of%20Jupiter%20taken%20by%20Juno%20spacecraft%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fnasa-releases-first-close-up-images-jupiter-juno-spacecraft-video&media=>
Nasa releases first close-up images of Jupiter taken by Juno spacecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/sep/03/nasa-releases-first-close-up-images-jupiter-juno-spacecraft-video>
Monday’s Europa announcement offers the potential to really look for life, yet 
againNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> seems to be shying away. 
Scientists said they had seen what looks like geysers shooting water into space 
from Europa, which has long been known to contain a global ocean. Scientists 
have repeatedly speculated that microbial life might be found underneath this 
moon’s ice surface and have spent decades wondering how to get below the ice to 
look for it. Now that the water is jetting into space, nature is doing all the 
hard work. A craft could fly through those plumes, sample the water and look 
for life.

By a piece of cosmic good fortune, Nasa is planning a mission to Europa. Yet 
the possibility ofusing that mission to look for the evidence of life in those 
plumes was virtually dismissed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/26/jupiter-europa-water-plumes-nasa>
. “The Europa flyby is not a life-finding mission,” said programme scientist 
Curt Niebur. “That mission is focused on finding the habitability of Europa.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fdiscovery-water-jupiter-space-alien-life-europa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feceaf72def8118c191a9babac3a426b3b057a63b%2F162_65_1477_1648%2F1477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Another%20discovery%20of%20water%20in%20space%20%E2%80%93%20how%20boring.%20We%20must%20search%20for%20alien%20life%20%7C%20Stuart%20Clark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fdiscovery-water-jupiter-space-alien-life-europa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Another%20discovery%20of%20water%20in%20space%20%E2%80%93%20how%20boring.%20We%20must%20search%20for%20alien%20life%20%7C%20Stuart%20Clark&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fdiscovery-water-jupiter-space-alien-life-europa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feceaf72def8118c191a9babac3a426b3b057a63b%2F162_65_1477_1648%2F1477.jpg>
 ‘It is time for vision and commitment.’ Nasa image of Europa shows suspected 
plumes of water vapour erupting at the bottom left. Photograph: NASA, ESA, W. 
Sparks (STScI), an/PA 
This makes no sense. What better way is there to determine Europa’s 
habitability than to look for life?

Nasa was not always this timid. In the 1970s it sent two landers to the 
surface of Mars. TheseViking missions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/datablog/2016/jul/23/forty-years-of-missions-to-mars>
 carried experiments to look for life. The results were deemed inconclusive and 
then simply not followed up. This could have been a mistake. A recent 
re-analysis of the data suggested that, while the results fell short of a clear 
detection of Martian life, there were enough positive indicators to warrant a 
follow-up.

Why Stephen Hawking is light years from the truth about ‘dangerous aliens’ | 
Seth Shostak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/stephen-hawking-light-years-dangerous-aliens>
Perhaps in response, Nasa has now quietly stated that its next Mars rover in 
2020 will also look for life. But at least the European Space Agency is proving 
bolder. In 2020 it plans to launch theExoMars rover to Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/13/exomars-giant-nose-life-on-mars-prepares-launch>
 that will carry a suite of instruments capable of looking for the evidence of 
life, either past or present. That search should now be extended to Europa.

There is admirable scientific caution, and there is ducking the challenge. To 
go to Europa now without the ability to look for life is the latter. It is time 
for vision and commitment: discovering life on another planet would send 
shockwaves through science and fundamentally transform our understanding of our 
place in the universe: we must step up the search.
 