
Last week, yoga teacher Clare had a phone call from Mabel, her 93-year-old 
ex-student who she hadn’t seen for four years. Mabel sounded rather dismal and 
hadn’t been out for three months, so Clare paid her a visit. She found Mabel 
desolate, crying, feeling like a burden and wanting to die. What a change since 
2012, when she used to come to Clare’s chair-based yoga sessions twice a week 
at the local day centre, funded by the government.

Cuts have left 250,000 older people without state care, report says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/mar/26/cuts-vulnerable-older-people-without-state-social-care>
Not any more. It’s goodbye to all that sort of thing now, thanks to the cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/28/poorest-councils-bear-brunt-of-care-cuts>
. They’ve shaved away at everything so that, bit by bit, such services have all 
dwindled and gone. First thebus drivers’ wages were cut 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-26385176>, which meant fewer drivers, which meant 
less transport; no one was available to help Mabel, or anyone else, up and down 
their stairs. So, they were all marooned at home, which meant fewer pupils 
needing fewer classes, so the classes were cut. It was lucky in a way, because 
the day centre staff and manager had been cut as well, leaving one knackered 
person doing everything. Then cooked meals were cut, and sandwiches were sent 
in instead.

“Another lost lunch club, another activity for older people gone,” says Clare, 
fed up. “Goodbye birthday, Remembrance Day and anniversary celebrations, which 
mean such a lot to these people. Out with the cake and Lambrini.”

Even if anyone did get to a day centre, there would be nothing much left there 
to do and no one else around for a chat. So that means goodbye to social life 
and exercise for the thousands of Mabels who need it, who now have to moulder 
at home feeling less happy, less healthy and more likely to fall over. Which is 
what happened to Mabel, who fell out of bed.

Luckily, a neighbour found her and off she went to A&E (which was far more 
expensive than yoga classes), along with the growing number of frail elderly 
patients who havenowhere safe or pleasant to go home to from hospital 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-30902555>, because there’s barely anything 
left for them in what used to be called the “community”.

Well done, George and David.
 