
Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly are to host the Brit awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/britawards> – 14 years after they last 
fronted the music event for ITV.

The Britain’s Got Talent and Saturday Night Takeaway presenters succeed James 
Corden, who stepped down after hosting the event for four years running, 
including the infamous moment in 2012 when he interrupted Adele during her 
winner’s speech.

The show could do with some of Ant and Dec’s ratings magic after the audience 
collapsed last year with the lowest figures since 2006, with just 4.6 million 
watching on ITV.

When the Geordie pair previously hosted the Brits in 2001, the show pulled in 
an average audience 4 million higher than last year’s show.

There has been much speculation about who would take over from Corden, with 
ITV executives already said to have been keen on having more than one 
presenter. Artist Tracey Emin will design the trophy for the ceremony.

Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>, who will 
present the show from the O2 Arena in London on 25 February next year, achieved 
their own chart-topping hit last year when Let’s Get Ready to Rhumble went to 
number one, 19 years after they first released it during their pop career as PJ 
& Duncan.

They said: “We’re really excited to be hosting the Brits again next year - it 
is undoubtedly the biggest night in the British music calendar.

“We’re especially excited now we’re number one recording artists ourselves. 
We’ll be offering our advice to the fledgling pop stars backstage as to how to 
have a number one hit, as long as they’re prepared to wait 19 years for their 
records to top the chart like ours did.”

The pair are also experienced as hosts of music shows having presented Pop 
Idol from 2001, as well as ITV Saturday morning show CD:UK with Cat Deeley, who 
also went on to be a Brits host in 2004.

Earlier this week it was confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/28/oscars-host-us-saturday-night-takeaway-neil-patrick-harris-ant-dec-nbc-itv>
 that ITV has sold the format to Ant and Dec’s hit Saturday Night Takeaway to 
US broadcaster NBC, with Neil Patrick Harris to host the US version.

Brits chairman Max Lousada said: “Ant and Dec are two of the most popular TV 
broadcasters this country has ever produced and it’s a real honour to have them 
take centre stage once again to host the Brits. It’s great that these two 
pillars of British TV will be part of a night about celebrating icons in 
British music.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 