
Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly are poised to sign a new £30m three-year 
“golden handcuffs” contract with ITV, as the broadcaster tries to lock in its 
biggest names.

The hugely popular duo are set to receive about a 20% boost over the £25m 
value of their last three-year deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/22/ant-and-dec-sign-itv-deal> and 
extend the length of their exclusive relationship with the broadcaster to 18 
years.

According to one source close to ITV the prospect of a potential £10bn sale in 
the next few years, and therefore the need to keep crown jewels such as the 
Geordie duo locked in, was an incentive to sweeten their new deal by a few 
million pounds.

And and Dec are critical to the success of ITV, as the broadcaster battles 
rivals as well as the rise of newer competitors such as Amazon and Netflix.


The pair, both 40, front three of the biggest entertainment shows on TV: 
Britain’s Got Talent, Saturday Night Takeaway and I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out 
of Here.

The new deal is expected to be signed before they head off to film the next 
series of the celebrity reality survival show in Australia in January. The 
current deal expires at the end of this year.


“We are not on the dotted line yet but we want to stay and they want us to 
stay,” said Dec,speaking to the Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/ant-dec-set-sign-30million-8781502>. “It 
will have to be signed before we go to Oz because then we will be at the end of 
the year and we are fairly close.”

An ITV spokeswoman said: “We have a fantastic, long-standing relationship with 
Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>, and we are 
of course keen for that to continue well into the future.


The pair have hinted publicly during negotiations that they might look to 
leave ITV but now say that a move to Netflix or Amazon is “not necessarily for 
right now”.


“We are encouraged to see that ITV is close to agreeing a new deal with Ant 
and Dec, given their importance to ITV,” said Paul Richards, director at Numis 
Securities. “This is particularly the case following the defection of Jeremy 
Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond to Amazon, and the dislocation this 
caused to Top Gear for BBC2.”

After becoming child stars on BBC kids drama Byker Grove, the pair joined ITV 
in 1998, presenting Saturday morning shows SM:tv Live with Cat Deeley and 
CD:UK. They signed their first exclusive contract with the broadcaster at the 
end of 2000.

After a brief stint at the BBC, presenting BBC1 gameshow Friends Like These, 
they have been mainstays of ITV’s Saturday night schedule ever since, beginning 
with Simon Fuller’s Pop Idol in 2001.

The deal comes as Simon Cowell closes in on a new three-year deal worth up to 
£150m to keep the X Factor and Britain’s Got Talent on ITV until at least 2019.

The last three-year deal, signed between Cowell’s Syco Entertainment and 
co-producer FremantleMedia UK, wasworth between £140m and £150m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/nov/15/simon-cowell-x-factor-ratings-itv>
.


However, Cowell has come under pressure following a continued slump in ratings 
in recent years and ITV paying £50m to snatch rival The Voice from the BBC.

Cowell has tried to rejuvenate the show, including bringing back Dermot 
O’Leary, after the poorly received one-season stint by Olly Murs and Caroline 
Flack, and bringing back popular judges Louis Walsh, Nicole Scherzinger and 
Sharon Osbourne.


The first episode of the latest series hit a 10-year low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/23/itv-the-voice-simon-cowell-x-factor>
 but the show has since improved its audience figures.

“As we have already said, The X Factor and Britain’s Got Talent contracts come 
up for renewal after the latest series air later this year, and we fully intend 
to continue with both shows into 2017 and beyond,” said a spokeswoman for ITV.
 