
A drawing by the author Anthony Burgess that appeared in the Manchester 
Guardian when he was 12 years old was almost certainly his very first published 
piece of work. On 21 November 1929 Father, a sketch of a sleeping middle-aged 
man next to a bottle of whisky by a John Wilson of Moss Lane East, was that 
day’s winner in the Christmas ‘Fathers and Mothers’ competition (the pen name
Anthony Burgess <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> was adopted 
in the 1950s).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2Fanthony-burgess-clockwork-orange-drawing-manchester-guardian-1929%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F8%2F1412767281686%2F0842fb44-e79e-4ccc-ae64-d9bef0f47035-639x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Burgess's%20first%20appearance%20in%20the%20Guardian%20in%201929&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2Fanthony-burgess-clockwork-orange-drawing-manchester-guardian-1929%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Burgess%27s%20first%20appearance%20in%20the%20Guardian%20in%201929&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2Fanthony-burgess-clockwork-orange-drawing-manchester-guardian-1929%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F8%2F1412767281686%2F0842fb44-e79e-4ccc-ae64-d9bef0f47035-639x1020.jpeg>
Joseph Wilson 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412776879497/Burgess-21-November-1929-001.jpg>
, Anthony Burgess’s father. The Manchester Guardian, 21 November 1929. 
Launched at the beginning of November 1929, the competition invited readers 
under the age of 16 to submit drawings of their parents. Half a guinea was paid 
to each winner although Burgess’s entry may also have been judged one of the 
best four drawings entitling him to another prize.
 The Manchester Guardian, 1 November 1929. See full story 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412776926364/MG-1-November-1929-001.jpg>
Andrew Biswell 
<http://www.manchesterwritingschool.co.uk/writers/andrew-biswell>, author of 
The Real Life of Anthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/06/biography.anthonyburgess>, said: 
“To the best of my knowledge, this was John Burgess Wilson’s earliest 
publication. His first literary work, a poem in the style of Gerard Manley 
Hopkins, appeared in a school magazine, the Electron, in 1935, when he was a 
sixth-form student atXaverian College <http://www.xaverian.ac.uk>.”

 Unfortunately The International Anthony Burgess Foundation 
<http://www.anthonyburgess.org>, of which Biswell is director, does not have 
the original drawing in its collection, but, he added, “a photograph of Joseph 
Wilson [the father] from 1938 confirms that the drawing published in the 
Guardian is a good likeness.”

 Burgess would appear to have been proud of his drawing. He talked about it in 
a1964 interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/10/anthony-burgess-author-interview-1964>
, and in 1986 went into some detail about the competition in his autobiography,
Little Wilson and Big God 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Little-Wilson-Big-Vintage-Classics/dp/0099437058>:

These passes [of scholarship exams] could be the triumph of anyone with enough 
brains. What required genius in an eleven-year-old was to be published in the 
Manchester Guardian. There was a competition in which children were invited to 
submit a drawing of one or other of their parents. I had only one true parent, 
so him I drew in Indian ink. He had come home for his three o’clock lunch of 
grilled sweetbreads and then passed out in an armchair. He snorted the fumes of 
draught Bass at convalescent me, right hand in trouser pocket, left hand 
supporting head. I genteelised him. I gave him a small round table with a 
bottle of whisky and a siphon and a copy of Punch, the supposed causes of his 
stupor. I sent the drawing in without fanfares.

The Manchester Guardian may well have been the Wilson family’s paper of choice 
but there is also the possibility that Burgess heard about the competition 
through school. Apparently a Brother Martin was said to read interminably from 
the paper to morning assembly.

Burgess’s next appearance in the Manchester Guardian 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412776813981/Burgess-28-April-1934-001.jpg 
http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/10/8/1412776813981/Burgess-28-April-1934-001.jpg>
 was in 1934 when he won a prize for free verse organised by the Manchester 
Lyric Club.

Competitions were clearly important to the young Burgess, and in this spirit 
the Anthony Burgess Foundation is awarding the third annualObserver/Anthony 
Burgess Prize for Arts Journalism 
<http://www.anthonyburgess.org/about-the-foundation/observer-competition>. The 
closing date for this year’s prize is 31 October 2014.

Thanks to Anna Edwards, Burgess Foundation archivist
 