
Anthony Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, who has 
died in hospital after a haemorrhage following an operation aged 54, made an 
impact in various fields – as director of theatre, television, cinema, radio 
and opera – as well as being a playwright, screenwriter, producer and chairman 
of the BFI.

The talented Minghella's eclectic oeuvre stretched from a short film of the 
three character Play (2000), as part of Channel 4's Samuel Beckett cycle, to 
the $83m (£41.5m) Hollywood epic, Cold Mountain (2003); from the intimate 
fantasy, Truly Madly Deeply (1990), made for the BBC, to the vast panorama of 
the Oscar-winning The English Patient (1996), financed by Miramax.

Minghella, whose ample figure and cheery countenance exuded a love of life, 
seemed to be Harold Pinter, Orson Welles, David Lean and Richard Attenborough 
all rolled into one.

A passionate supporter of Portsmouth football club, he was also a mixture of 
English restraint and Italian exuberance. Some critics stressed the adjectives 
in the titles of The English Patient and Cold Mountain to describe his work, 
while others saw his films as truly, deeply romantic. His background might 
explain this dichotomy.

Minghella was born on the Isle of Wight, the son of ice-cream factory owners. 
His father was Italian/Scottish and his mother came from Leeds. But, according 
to Minghella: "My maternal grandmother was a real figurehead in my life. She 
was a tiny peasant woman from Valvori, near Monte Cassino, in the south of 
Italy… She'd run a cafe in the Gorbals in Glasgow so she spoke this coarse 
Italian/Scottish. I'd listen to her talk in a very superstitious, Catholic way 
about men and women and how the world worked: men are weak, women are strong; 
women survive, men are helpless and stupid." It was she who influenced his 
play, A Little Like Drowning (1989), a moving and funny drama about an Italian 
grandmother and her English grandchildren.


Before going to university, Minghella had dreams of being a pop musician, and 
played keyboards in a couple of bands - Earthlight and Dancer. "That was a 
really important part of my life. There was a rich music scene on the island at 
the time and for me writing songs developed later into writing plays. Music was 
a very vibrant ingredient in my life, and I originally saw my early plays as 
being a format for music," he explained.


Minghella graduated from the University of Hull, where he eventually abandoned 
his doctoral thesis on Beckett. "There was a time, for five years, when I read 
Beckett almost on a daily basis. The sense of language and poetry in his 
writing has been the single biggest influence on me as a writer," he declared, 
which may come as a surprise to those who know only his blockbusters at the 
literary end of the middlebrow.


During the 1980s, after lecturing in drama at his alma mater, he worked in 
television, mainly writing scripts for Grange Hill, Jim Henson's puppet series, 
The Storyteller: Greek Myths and Inspector Morse. At the same time, he was 
writing plays, winning the LondonTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Critics Award for most promising 
playwright in 1984, and for best play for Made in Bangkok in 1986, an 
examination of the exploitation of women in Thailand by westerners.

Minghella's international breakthrough came with Truly Madly Deeply, which he 
wrote and directed, about a bereaved woman (Juliet Stevenson) who literally 
wills her dead lover (Alan Rickman) back to life. This rather sentimental 
drama, a very English riposte to the Demi Moore vehicle, Ghost, was transcended 
by sincere performances and some telling dialogue. Perhaps the lure of 
Hollywood was so strong that Minghella accepted to direct a fluffy romantic 
comedy, Mr Wonderful (1993), for which, exceptionally, he did not write the 
screenplay.

He did not make the same mistake with The English Patient for which he 
sequestered himself for 18 months away from friends and family while writing 
the adaptation of Michael Ondaatje's 1992 Booker Prize-winning novel. This was 
followed by two years filming in Tunisia and Italy.


The result, a considerable leap in scale and ambition for Minghella, was an 
impressive, if somewhat languorous, epic love story set during the second world 
war, which won nine Academy awards, including best director and best picture. 
Certainly Minghella showed that he was able to get fine performances from his 
cast and control a complex structure – the plot moves between the Italian front 
near the end of the war, where a French-Canadian nurse (Juliette Binoche) cares 
for a seriously-burned patient (Ralph Fiennes), and north Africa during the 
late 1930s, when the patient, revealed as a Hungarian count and mapmaker, fell 
in love with a married woman (Kristin Scott Thomas).


The Talented Mr Ripley (1999), the second film to be based on the novel by 
Patricia Highsmith, was a sleek and intelligent thriller with Matt Damon in the 
title role. Cold Mountain, based on Charles Frazier's sombre bestselling 
American civil war novel, another meticulously crafted picture in the epic 
mode, was stunningly shot (in Romania) by cinematographer John Seale. Starring 
Jude Law and Nicole Kidman – he as a wounded confederate soldier who makes the 
decision to desert his army at the end of the war to return home to his love - 
it was reminiscent of the lush historical pictures of yesteryear. Comic relief 
was provided by Renee Zellweger, as a hillbilly, a role that won her the Best 
Supporting Actress Oscar.


Returning to England, and his first original screenplay since Truly Madly 
Deeply, Minghella was literally more at home with Breaking and Entering (2006), 
starring Jude Law as an architect involved in the gentrification of Kings 
Cross. Pleasant but rather pat, the film made little impression.


Minghella's last completed film, The No 1 Ladies Detective Agency, written 
with Richard Curtis, is to be shown on BBC 1 this Easter Monday. It has already 
caused controversy, unrelated to the subject or quality of the film, because it 
gives a rosy picture of Botswana, where it was filmed and where hundreds of 
Bushmen have been relocated from their ancestral lands.


In 2005, Minghella, who was given a CBE in 2001, also courted controversy with 
his party political broadcast on behalf of the Labour party which showed Tony 
Blair and Gordon Brown working together lovingly. In the same year, Minghella 
directed Madame Butterfly, of which the Guardian's Tom Service wrote: "Anyone 
expecting images of cinematic brilliance from Anthony Minghella's new 
production of Puccini's Madam Butterfly for English National Opera will not be 
disappointed", although the critic went on to express mixed feelings about the 
production, which went on to the Metropolitan in New York, where it met with 
success.

Minghella is survived by his wife, Hong Kong-born choreographer Carolyn Choa, 
a son and a daughter.

Robert Cooper writes: I read Anthony before I met him. It was his stage play, 
Two Planks and a Passion," which I was hoping to direct for the radio in the 
mid-1980s. The play was about members of one of the smaller guilds in 14th 
century York who were rehearsing The Passion as their contribution to the 
city's Miracle Plays during a time of cutbacks in the local council's arts 
budget.

Then news gets out that the king is coming and suddenly the dull burghers of 
York are hurling money at their humble plays in an orgy of self-aggrandisement. 
It was an extraordinary combination of razor-sharp observation of human frailty 
coupled with characters of genuine sincerity, complexity, warmth and charm.

Meeting Anthony was the same experience. A quiet wit, an extraordinary insight 
into people and situations, a massive intelligence which he never used to make 
you feel inadequate, and most of all a relaxed presence that made you feel that 
somehow, you "belonged". And as you got to know him you found his genuine 
delight in the simple treats of life – food, friendship, conversation, music 
and especially family.


Watching him direct his first film was a revelation. It was Truly Madly Deeply 
in Bristol in 1989. As soon as Anthony began, I realised he had somehow 
discovered how you direct – he had not tried to learn everyone's job – he just 
treated people in a way that ensured they did the best work they had ever done 
in their life for him. It was as simple as that. And of course it was as hard 
as that. The pressures of film-making reveal can character in a very 
unforgiving way – but no matter how difficult the situation, I never saw 
Anthony anything other than intensely interested in and understanding of other 
people's artistic process. Nor was this apparent only on set – after working 
with the cast and crew for 12 hours, he would meet with them half an hour later 
to watch rushes, have dinner with them and round the evening off with a game of 
squash with the assistant designer - cheered on by those who had not by this 
time given up and gone to bed. With Anthony you simply couldn't not do your 
best for him. He is an immeasurable loss to the culture of this country.

 Anthony Minghella, playwright and film director; born January 6 1954; died 
March 18 2008
 