 Anthony Shaffer, who has died aged 75, called his thriller Sleuth "the main 
event" - and he could never escape it. That "who, what and how done it" tale 
provided the playwright with a secure place in the theatre and film history of 
the 1970s.
It was turned down by the then producer king of London's West End, Binky 
Beaumont, who told Shaffer it would not last a fortnight. It opened - for a 
fortnight - in January 1970 at the Theatre Royal, Brighton, won a prolonged 
standing ovation and was promptly labelled a "piece of piss" by Sir Laurence 
Olivier. It then moved to the St Martin's theatre in London.

Once in the West End, Sleuth played for 2,359 performances, and, playing for 
more than 2,000 performances on Broadway, won a Tony Award as the best play of 
1970. Two years later, it was turned into a movie, directed by Joseph 
Mankiewicz. Its stars were Michael Caine, as the younger man, Milo Tindle, and 
Olivier himself, that acerbic Brighton critic, in the role of the scheming 
Andrew Wyke. The great man won a New York critics' award for his pains, and an 
Oscar nomination. Commenting on his co-star's interpret-ation, Caine recalled 
that Olivier hadn't seemed to be doing much, and then great waves of acting had 
swept towards him.

Shaffer was the right man to provide great waves of acting. Sleuth has washed 
around the world; in some distant clime the play is probably being performed, 
even now. It is an ideal vehicle for actors growing into a certain age and 
gravitas - Anthony Quayle was the first Wyke, and Peter Bowles was grappling 
with the part by the end of the 1990s - and with its smart youth versus wily, 
malevolent old age theme, it both teases and reassures. Audiences, said 
Shaffer, would have to be pretty dull dogs not to enjoy it.

Shaffer was the twin of that other playwright, Sir Peter Shaffer, and the two 
men's careers could blur in the public consciousness. But while Peter came up 
with Amadeus, The Royal Hunt Of The Sun and Equus, it was left to Anthony to 
provide such works as The Case Of The Oily Levantine (1979) and Murderer (1975) 
- an unsatisfactory outing for Robert Stephens strangling and chopping up his 
wife. And then there were the films.

Whatever the eventual fate of Sleuth, at least one of the films that Shaffer 
scripted, Robin Hardy's The Wicker Man (1973), was destined to become a little 
classic. The setting was a Scottish island lairded over by Christopher Lee - 
and it was reputedly his favourite script. Celtic twilight, blood sacrifice, 
paganism, passion and lust in the mist collided with visiting cop Edward 
Woodward's mainland, mainstream Christianity. The Wicker Man - initially 
butchered by British Lion - lurched away from British horror's normal 
preoccupations. Perhaps it was the spirit of the age; there was something of 
the hippy ethic hanging over the production, even down to the colour.

Born in Liverpool, where his parents quickly introduced him to the Playhouse, 
Shaffer was the son of a Jewish estate agent. Various schools around the 
(wartime) country culminated in scholarships for the twins to St Paul's school, 
which had been evacuated from London to Berkhamsted.

There followed what An- thony called in his forthcoming autobiography, So What 
Did You Expect, "three years of unrelieved hell" as a Bevin boy in the Kent 
coalfield. In 1948, he went up to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he read law 
and co-wrote detective stories with his brother. In 1951, he joined a divorce 
chambers in the Middle Temple, and practised as a barrister.

By 1955, Shaffer had concluded that the money was inadequate, so he switched 
to advertising copywriting with the company that dominated the cinema programme 
intervals in the 1950s, Pearl & Dean. Five years later, he set up his own 
production company, Hardy Shaffer Associates - his partner was to be The Wicker 
Man's director - working primarily on television commercials. But, by the end 
of the 1960s, Shaffer had experimented with LSD and found that the appeal of 
advertising had palled. He quit to write; the result was Sleuth.

He scripted his first film, the ill-starred John Hurt/ Hayley Mills comedy, 
Forbush And The Penguins, in 1972. But after the Broadway success of Sleuth in 
1970, Alfred Hitchcock had contacted him, and thus did Shaffer script Frenzy 
(1972), which marked the director's brief return to London movies.

More films followed: Absolution (1981) had Richard Burton as a Catholic 
priest-cum-teacher. But the richest seam was provided by Agatha Christie's 
all-star charabancs, with Peter Ustinov as Hercule Poirot. If Sleuth had been a 
modern extension to the dame's constructions, then Death On The Nile (1978), 
Evil Under The Sun (1982) - Shaffer's favourite of the three - and Appointment 
With Death (1988), which he co-wrote and regarded as perfectly dreadful, were 
the stately homes.

He also developed the story line - from The Return Of Martin Guerre - for Jon 
Amiel's Sommersby (1993). But Sleuth was always there, and he was irritated 
when it was dismissed as just entertainment. "What do you mean just?" he asked 
when the movie came out. "It's a bloody sight harder to entertain than to bore."

Shaffer's first two marriages ended in divorce. His third wife, the actor 
Diane Cilento, survives him, as do two daughters from his second marriage.

Â· Anthony Joshua Shaffer, writer and playwright, born May 15 1926; died 
November 6 2001
 