
Anthony Clavane's Promised Land: A Northern Love Story recently won both 
Football Book of the Year and Sports Book of the Year – and is now out in 
paperback. He is a history teacher-turned-sports journalist and is teaching an 
Arvon course on creative non-fiction atLumb Bank 
<http://www.arvonfoundation.org/p93.html> this October.

Buy Promised Land: A Northern Love Story from the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224082648>

"In King Lear, the boy Shakespeare has the Earl of Kent – the Joey Barton of 
the early 1600s – kicking Oswald and calling him a 'base football player'. More 
than 400 years later, we are still waiting for The Great Football Novel. The 
paucity of outstanding fiction about the sport remains mystifying. The American 
national game has been well served by novelists. Philip Roth's The Great 
American Novel linked baseball with communism; Don DeLillo's Underworld opened 
with the New York Giants winning the National League in 1951. In the brilliant 
Fever Pitch, Nick Hornby restricted his musings on obsessive male behaviour, 
modern romance and Liam Brady to the safe confines of non-fiction. In recent 
years there have been some tremendous football books, but writers have, on the 
whole, eschewed fiction. So compiling this list wasn't easy. Hopefully, the 
critical and commercial success of The Damned Utd will inspire a new generation 
to write equally-original works about the passion, hubris and tragicomedy of 
the world's greatest game."

1. A Kestrel for a Knave by Barry Hines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141041704/a-kestrel-for-a-knave>

Hines's 20-page account of a football match was immortalised by Ken Loach in 
the film Kes. Like David Storey in This Sporting Life, he is unafraid to use 
sport as a metaphor for Yorkshire insularity. And like Storey – who played 
rugby league for Leeds – he knew what he was writing about, having turned out 
for the England Grammar School team.

2. The Damned Utd by David Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780571224333/the-damned-utd>

As a Leeds fan, people assume I'm offended by this reinforcement of the "Dirty 
Leeds 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/lifestyle/the-arts/the_team_unfairly_damned_as_dirty_leeds_1_2298024>
" myth. But I found Peace's fictionalised account of Brian Clough's 44 days at 
Elland Road – with its imaginative use of Clough's troubled inner voice, its 
two time-frames running in parallel and its repetitive, Beckettian rhythms – to 
be viscerally exhilarating.

3. The Unfortunates by BS Johnson

Denounced as avant-garde nonsense on publication, Johnson's notorious 
book-in-a-box is, in fact, an affecting, deeply personal and emotionally 
engaged story about a hack returning to an industrial city to cover the 
City-United match. Ostensibly about football, it is really a meditation on 
memory, bereavement and loss – and a subtle critique of the self-serving 
Sixties.

4. The Match by Alan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9780007255603/the-loneliness-of-the-long-distance-runner>

Like The Unfortunates, this short story is set in Nottingham and uses football 
to symbolise a bigger issue – in this case a failing marriage. Sillitoe's raw 
realism, however, is a million miles away from Johnson's experimentation with 
form. Published in 1959, and linking the protagonist's abusive behaviour to his 
disappointment at a match, it eerily predicted the violence to come.

5. Goalkeepers Are Different by Brian Glanville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780753502433/goalkeepers-are-different>

As a young boy obsessed with football, my life changed after reading this 
gritty, beautifully-paced account of the bitterness, frustrations and 
unglamourous lifestyle of an ordinary footballer. It felt like an authentic 
glimpse into a world of sideburned centre-halves, dilapidated dressing rooms 
and muddy fields. Glanville was, and remains, one of the doyens of football 
writing.

6. The Arsenal Stadium Mystery by Leonard R Gribble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780955921100/the-arsenal-stadium-mystery>

Another classic better remembered as a (black and white) movie. It was a huge 
hit in the 1930s, giving the public a rare insight into one of the country's 
biggest clubs. Gribble was a famous detective novelist of the era, but he is 
clearly in awe of the 1939 Gunners team – which he repeatedly, and shamelessly, 
namechecks.

7. The Man Who Hated Football by Will Buckley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780007175550/the-man-who-hated-football>

Jimmy Stirling's disillusioned middle-aged anti-hero is on the verge of a 
nervous breakdown; a reckless, neurotic, self-deprecating sports hack 
struggling to get in touch with himself. All those who love the game 
unconditionally – and write about it uncritically – should read 
Stirling-Buckley's hilarious rants on the absurdities of the post-Sky game.

8. How Steeple Sinderby Wanderers Won The FA Cup by JL Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780586063583/how-steeple-sinderby-wanderers-won-the-facup>

At the beginning of every January, football journalists (like me) lazily evoke 
the romance of the FA Cup. This goes some way to explaining why many of us 
adored Carr's charming tale about a village club triumphing against very long 
odds. Like Hines, his writing feels authentic because he was a former amateur 
footballer. Roy of the Rovers stuff, Brian.

9. The Football Factory by John King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099474623/the-football-factory>

I am not a great fan of the hoolie-porn spawned by this book – but there is no 
denying its force. Whether you view football hooligans as a lost tribe of white 
working-class males or just idiotic thugs, King's brilliant dissection of their 
vicious dementia is undoubtedly a tour de force.

10. The Hope That Kills Us: An Anthology of Scottish Football Fiction edited 
by Adrian Searle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/short-stories/9780954402402/the-hope-that-kills-us-an-anthology-of-scottish-football-fiction>

The first nine choices have given the impression that football writing is 
exclusively a male preserve. But three of the 13 stories in this collection are 
written by women, the best being The Match by Linda Cracknell. Her protagonist 
goes on holiday by herself because her football-obsessed boyfriend refuses to 
miss a fourth round Cup tie. Truly she is the anti-Hornby.
 