
Aim

"To make provision <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2003/ukpga_20030038_en_1> 
in connection with antisocial behaviour."

Main provisions

• Widens the use of antisocial behaviour orders (asbos) to allow local 
authorities, registered social landlords and the British Transport police to 
apply for asbos.
• Allows police and community support officers to issue dispersal orders 
<http://www.respect.gov.uk/members/article.aspx?id=7904> to any group of two or 
more people, within a designated area, whose behaviour they believe is likely 
to cause harassment, alarm or distress to members of the public. Refusing to 
leave or returning to the area constitutes a criminal offence.
• Grants police officers the power to order young people 
<http://www.respect.gov.uk/members/article.aspx?id=7906> under the age of 16 to 
return home after 9pm.
• Creates on-the-spot fines  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2003/mar/13/ukcrime.prisonsandprobation>for 
noise, graffiti and truancy.
• Creates closure orders. Quickly nicknamed the "crack house closure order 
<http://www.thamesvalley.police.uk/reduction/antisocial/crack_house.htm>" this 
provision enables the police toshutter premises 
<http://www.respect.gov.uk/members/article.aspx?id=7884> used for the supply, 
use or production of class A drugs for a period of up to six months.
• Amends the definition of "public assembly" in Section 16 of the Public Order 
Act 1986 so that instead of 20 people being required to constitute an 
"assembly", only two are needed.

Background

In March 2003 the government published a white paper that outlined its 
proposals for tackling antisocial behaviour. The report,Respect and 
Responsibility 
<http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=1&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.archive2.official-documents.co.uk%2Fdocument%2Fcm57%2F5778%2F5778.pdf&ei=EnxHSaPQNYzwwwHLstRY&usg=AFQjCNEJ2fEYbZ0SRWXxjhwDTCqLNi13jQ&sig2=JjqWQvuIVV2vGti2YzjipA>
 – taking a stand against antisocial behaviour recommended the government 
provide local authorities and the police with a wider, more flexible range of 
powers to tackle nuisance crime and low-level criminality. The bill was 
designed to target what the home secretary, David Blunkett, described as "a
yobbish minority <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/2840627.stm>" who 
could make "the lives of hard-working citizens a living hell" and includes a 
wide range of sanctions such asparenting orders 
<http://www.respect.gov.uk/members/article.aspx?id=7780> and contracts 
<http://www.respect.gov.uk/members/article.aspx?id=7778>, curfews, and fixed 
penalty notices. The act alsostrengthened and extended the application 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2006/jan/10/crime.penal> of antisocial 
behaviour orders first introduced in England, Scotland and Wales by theCrime 
and Disorder Act 1998 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/13/crime-disorder-act>
.

Criticism

Early debate revisited the argument about whether asbos mark an unacceptable 
blurring 
<http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/index/campaigns/policy_campaign_publications/parliamentary_briefings/pb_legalaffairs/cr_anti-social_behaviour_bill>
 of criminal and civil law. Asbos are issued on a civil burden of proof ("on 
the balance of probabilities"), but incur a criminal penalty if breached.

Children's charities claimed police already had sufficient powers to deal with 
so-called "nuisance" crime. Cathy Evans, from the Children's Society, said: "We 
are very concerned <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/2840627.stm>at the 
prospect of creating more ways, more reasons to punish children and to demonise 
children." This concern has been echoed by critics including Professor Rod 
Morgan, the government's chief adviser on youth crime. Morgan warns that asbos 
can lead to children to bedemonised 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/rod-morgan-they-smoke-drink-and-behave-badly-will-we-never-learn-464332.html>
 because the orders criminalise otherwise legal behaviour.

Liberty expressed disquiet over the new police powers to disperse groups of 
two or more individuals. They described the protections written into the act as 
insufficient to ensure the protection of rights granted underarticle 11  
<http://www.yourrights.org.uk/yourrights/the-human-rights-act/the-convention-rights/article-11-freedom-of-assembly-and-association.html>
of the European convention of human rights (freedom of assembly). Liberty also 
expressed concern over the change to the definition of "public assembly" from 
20 people to two. Under section 14 of the Public Order Act 1986, a senior 
police officer has wide-ranging powers to impose conditions on public 
assemblies. Liberty said: "Any situation where 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=1&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.liberty-human-rights.org.uk%2Fpdfs%2Fpolicy03%2Fasb-2nd-reading-july-2003.pdf&ei=wX1HSaT1CY6OxAH-kpxc&usg=AFQjCNEBR7Pfsevo0uywd6dUt7N01T6-XA&sig2=Q8xjiGnMCKcaiKOfDYFwyQ>
 the police are able to self-authorise restrictions on the right to protest 
should be treated with great caution ...The fact that over 20 people were 
required to trigger the powers was at least a concession to the fact that it 
would only be appropriate for them to be used when there were a substantial 
number of people involved...It is now the case that if a senior police officer 
decides that two people could cause disorder he could order that a third person 
could not join them and if an extra person did appear the 'organiser' (if two 
people can have an organiser) will commit an offence punishable by up to three 
months imprisonment."
 