
Anton Yelchin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anton-yelchin>, who has died 
aged 27 in a freak car accident at his home in Studio City, Los Angeles, 
displayed subtlety, versatility and intelligence across the spectrum of genres 
covered in his prolific film career.

The perky, fresh-faced actor was most widely known for his sweetly comic turns 
in the 2009 film Star Trek and its 2013 sequel,Star Trek Into Darkness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QAEkuVgt6Aw>. The director JJ Abrams took that 
franchise back to the drawing board after it had been run into the ground over 
nearly 30 years of increasingly moribund instalments. Much of the new-found 
zest was attributable to a knowing and youthful ensemble cast, which included 
Yelchin as Pavel Chekov, the animated young navigator of the USS Enterprise, a 
role originated on television by Walter Koenig. Yelchin will appear 
posthumously in a third outing,Star Trek Beyond 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XRVD32rnzOw>, which is released next month.

He was born in Saint Petersburg (then Leningrad) to Irina Korina and Viktor 
Yelchin, figure skaters who had been stars of the Leningrad Ice Ballet. After 
his parents attained refugee status when he was six months old, they moved with 
him to the US, with his maternal grandfather and paternal grandmother. Anton 
was educated at the Sherman Oaks Center for Enriched Studies in Los Angeles, 
and later studied film at the University of Southern California, but early 
success in acting precluded a conventional upbringing.

Anton Yelchin: actor of cherubic charm who inspired huge affection | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-cherubic-charm-star-trek-like-crazy-green-room>
After he failed to show prowess at skating, his parents enrolled him in acting 
classes at nine years old. He quickly landed roles in television and film. 
Notable early TV appearances included ER, Curb Your Enthusiasm and the alien 
abduction series Taken, which countedSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> among its executive 
producers.

Yelchin made his first splash on film at the age of 11 in Hearts in 
Atlantis (2001) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ub1Mwor2QTg>, adapted from a 
Stephen King story, in which he played a young boy who befriends a neighbour 
(Anthony Hopkins) with mysterious powers. At 14, he started a two-year stint on 
the TV series Huff as the prematurely wise son of a psychiatrist (Hank Azaria) 
who is undergoing a midlife crisis.

Following the end of Huff, Yelchin concentrated almost exclusively on film. He 
played a real-life kidnap victim inAlpha Dog (2006) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VPWjDJmbrak> and provided valuable moments of 
warmth in a film populated largely by strutting, goggle-eyed method actors. His 
considerable charisma fuelled the teen comedyCharlie Bartlett (2007) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b_DVwLq0wn0>, in which he played the title 
character – a privileged student who becomes an unofficial guru to his new 
classmates in the US public school system.

After the success of Star Trek, he appeared in another revamped sci-fi 
property,Terminator: Salvation (2009) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LHAQjlufY0A>. The film was savaged by critics, 
and its release was overshadowed by a leaked recording of its star, Christian 
Bale, throwing a tantrum during shooting – but Yelchin proved that he could be 
a reliable point of human interest for audiences in even the most impersonal 
blockbuster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fanton-yelchin-obituary-film-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617925c4d977a5cbba25f8a6e79831a3fc8c4817%2F0_30_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fanton-yelchin-obituary-film-actor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fanton-yelchin-obituary-film-actor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617925c4d977a5cbba25f8a6e79831a3fc8c4817%2F0_30_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 In Charlie Bartlett (2007). Photograph: Alamy 
His talents were put to far better use in the sort of small-scale or offbeat 
projects that led to one website declaring him “Hollywood’s New ‘It’ Geek”. 
Among these were two dramas released in 2011: The Beaver, directed by Jodie 
Foster, in which he again played the offspring of an adult in crisis (Mel 
Gibson this time, as a chief executive who communicates via a glove-puppet); 
and Like Crazy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r-ZV-bwZmBw>, a raw and mostly 
improvised love story about a long-distance romance between a young American 
man (Yelchin) and a British woman (Felicity Jones).

He was likeable as a boy who discovers his neighbour is a vampire in the 
remake ofFright Night <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=txgGhyjPZGg> (also 2011) 
– and he stayed in the realm of quirky horror as a clairvoyant cook battling 
evil inOdd Thomas (2013) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y2txUlVsmnI>, along 
with Jim Jarmusch’s arthouse vampire oddityOnly Lovers Left Alive (2013) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-TbxI_oRSKI>, co-starring Tilda Swinton and 
Tom Hiddleston; and Joe Dante’s zombie comedy Burying the Ex (2014).

Though Yelchin was happy to work in Hollywood, he was under no illusions about 
its shortcomings. “There’s only a handful of people I trust completely, and I 
know who they are,” he said in 2011. “Other than that, I pretty much don’t 
trust people. The film industry itself – the ‘industry’ and business side of it 
– just sucks and is really demoralising, so it’s added to my general paranoia.”

Perhaps it was for that reason that, Star Trek aside, he restricted himself 
mostly to pictures that would increase his range rather than his box-office 
standing. He was seen most recently in the thrillerGreen Room (2015) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ne7C6X47s04> as a punk rocker threatened by 
white supremacists after witnessing a murder. Films still to be released 
include the intimate romance Porto and the sci-fi drama Rememory.

He is survived by his parents.

• Anton Yelchin, actor, born 11 March 1989; died 19 June 2016
 