
I first met Antonia Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/28/antonia-bird> in the late 90s, 
and in 2001 she and Robert Carlyle and [the film-maker and critic] Mark Cousins 
invited me to become partners with them in a production company. When they 
asked me, I thought, God, how many years in film school would that be worth? 
Mark, an encyclopedia of film; Bobby, one of the greatest actors of his 
generation; and Antonia, this amazing director: who could say no to that?

The first proper meeting we had, I walked from Islington down to her house 
near Brick Lane, in Jack the Ripper country. It was one of these really drizzly 
London days, but I was so excited about all the ideas I wanted to share with 
her that I didn't realise I was absolutely soaked. Antonia noticed straight 
away, and the first thing she did was get me a pair of dry socks, a towel and a 
cup of tea, and make sure I was nice and dry and cosy before we got started. 
That really struck me: great directors have that attention to detail – they 
look after the people they're working with.

I hit it off with her straight away. She was a fireball of energy and 
enthusiasm. It didn't matter how jaded you felt beforehand, you just couldn't 
help getting animated in her presence; it was like she slipped a bouncy castle 
under your bum. Her enthusiasm was infectious. She was very knowledgeable and 
erudite and smart, but very down to earth, and she threw ideas around like 
confetti. That was a good lesson for me, because as a writer you're a bit of a 
hoarder; if you have an idea, you tend to keep it to yourself.

I had this script, "The Meat Trade", that we tried in vain to get made. We had 
a lot of chances over the years to do it on lower budgets, but Antonia kept 
fighting for the higher budget she felt the script deserved. That's the 
elephant in the room in British film: no independent film-maker ever gets a 
swift, painless cheque. Even the likes ofDanny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle> and Mike Leigh have to fight 
long and hard, but being men they probably have it easier than the Antonia 
Birds of this world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F70rfkQka3us%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F70rfkQka3us%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F70rfkQka3us%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=70rfkQka3us>

Still, she had tremendous range as a director, from Safe to Ravenous 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0129332/> to things that she didn't get a lot of 
credit for, likeThe Hamburg Cell, which for me is still the best exploration of 
9/11. Her personality – her boldness, her intelligence and enthusiasm – always 
comes to the fore in her films.

Actors loved working with her. She once said that she moved from theatre to 
film so that she could see what was happening in the actors' eyes. She had her 
own amazingly expressive eyes. I remember going through the breakup of a 
long-term relationship and getting the odd glance from her, to let me know that 
she was there for me. She didn't need to labour the point. I remember thinking 
at the time: how secure and safe an actor must feel in her hands.

I miss her so much. I can't believe I'm not going to see her again. She used 
to sweep back her hair all the time, and I would find myself sweeping back 
imagined locks of hair in an involuntary tribute to her.

I'll remember her as a great, eclectic, humanistic, radical director, and a 
very uncompromising person, but also a very loving, warm and caring human 
being. Not in a drippy way: she was quite hard-ass as well and didn't suffer 
fools gladly. But that was good for me. I tend to mess around a bit and she was 
very good at centring me, saying, right, enough you, focus on the job at hand. 
She was a tremendous person, an incredible life force. It's just so difficult 
to think of someone like that not being around any more.
 