
Anton Yelchin, Star Trek actor, dies in car accident at age 27
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-star-trek-actor-dies-car-crash>
Fans of Jeremy Saulnier’s ultraviolent horror Green Room will have enjoyed an 
irony in the casting – maybe even suspected a deliberate extra-textual joke. A 
struggling punk band find themselves stranded in the middle of Oregon, their 
van conked out in a field, and desperate for some cash agree to play at a 
roadhouse exclusively patronised by neo-Nazi skinheads. They want to do the 
gig, get paid and get out, but things get complicated when they chance across a 
dead body backstage. The venue is run by a very sinister old white bald guy 
called Darcy, played byPatrick Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/patrick-stewart> — associated by many with 
his role as Captain Jean-Luc Picard in Star Trek: The Next Generation. The 
band’s moody-yet sympathetic bass guitarist Pat is played by Anton Yelchin – 
widely associated with his breakout role as Chekov, in the rebooted first-gen 
movie series of Star Trek.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fanton-yelchin-cherubic-charm-star-trek-like-crazy-green-room%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c657e673ee19bda68f701e06a911ce1ae524e8%2F65_0_663_398%2F663.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%3A%20actor%20of%20cherubic%20charm%20who%20inspired%20huge%20affection%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fanton-yelchin-cherubic-charm-star-trek-like-crazy-green-room%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%3A%20actor%20of%20cherubic%20charm%20who%20inspired%20huge%20affection%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Fanton-yelchin-cherubic-charm-star-trek-like-crazy-green-room%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c657e673ee19bda68f701e06a911ce1ae524e8%2F65_0_663_398%2F663.jpg>
 Yelchin, far left, as Chekov in the 2008 Star Trek reboot Photograph: Photo 
Credit: Industrial Light a/Publicity image from film company 
It hardly seems credible, but Yelchin, tipped as one of the most exciting and 
charismatic of the new twentysomething generation, has now been killed in a 
freak car accident – an event as sad and shocking asPaul Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-walker>’s death in 2013 or Heath Ledger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathledger>’s in 2008.

Yelchin’s charm and openness as a performer had earned him a wide following: 
he had a gentle, at certain angles almost babyish face: a cherubic face in 
fact, with its flecks of bum-fluff, which nonetheless was growing leaner and 
more chiselled as he was growing into his late 20s. And how grim that thought 
is now. It was a face suitable for any kind of all-American boy next door role: 
but he was a very shrewd choice to play Star Trek’s 17-year-old Russian 
navigator Chekov. Unlike Walter Koenig, who played the role originally, Yelchin 
was actually Russian: born in St Petersburg (or at that time, Leningrad) to two 
figure-skating Olympians who moved to the United States as political refugees 
shortly after his birth in 1989.

Star Trek <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/star-trek> was Yelchin’s 
breakout moment, and he relished giving interviews and press conferences in 
Russian for the movies’ junket tours in Russia. But in the movies he had to 
speak English in the understood hammyRyussian accyent which of course was far 
from his actual English voice as a California resident. His Chekov was a more 
comic role, his relative youth and vulnerability being ratcheted up, 
saucer-eyed with earnest self-importance as he relayed vital information to 
Kirk or Spock on the bridge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fstar-trek-star-anton-yelchin-killed-in-car-accident-at-home-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Trek%20star%20Anton%20Yelchin%20killed%20in%20car%20accident%20at%20home%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fstar-trek-star-anton-yelchin-killed-in-car-accident-at-home-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Trek%20star%20Anton%20Yelchin%20killed%20in%20car%20accident%20at%20home%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fstar-trek-star-anton-yelchin-killed-in-car-accident-at-home-video&media=>
Star Trek star Anton Yelchin killed in car accident at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jun/20/star-trek-star-anton-yelchin-killed-in-car-accident-at-home-video>
Anton Yelchin: key roles in clips, from Star Trek to Like Crazy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-key-roles-star-trek-like-crazy-alpha-dog>
In some ways, Yelchin’s finest hour as an actor, the movie that most 
heartbreakingly shows what he could have been capable of doing, was Drake 
Doremus’s long-distance love storyLike Crazy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/like-crazy> from 2011. Yelchin is Jacob, a 
young American guy who falls for a Brit college student Anna, played by 
Felicity Jones, while she fatefully outstays her visa to pursue their 
passionate affair. They are forced apart by this act of lawbreaking, and while 
separated, Jacob begins another relationship with a co-worker, played by 
Jennifer Lawrence. It was a performance which emphasised Yelchin’s sheer youth: 
a performance concerned to show youth as it is actually experienced in real 
life, rather than in the movies or TV – a youth of quarterlife career angst, 
full of bewilderment at the scary permanence of life-choices.

Before this, Yelchin commanded huge affection for one of his early roles, at 
the age of 18: Charlie Bartlett in the film of the same name, playing a rich 
kid who offers his services as psychiatrist to the student body. Later, in 
2011, the same year as Like Crazy he had a cute role in the remake of Fright 
Night, playing the kid who realises that the guy who has moved in next door 
(Colin Farrell) is a vampire.

Anton Yelchin: Star Trek and Green Room actor – a career in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-star-trek-green-room-career-in-pictures>
Latterly, Yelchin had been broadening his range, including a well-regarded if 
not mould-breaking performance as Cloten in Michael Almereyda’s film version of 
Shakespeare’s Cymbeline at the Venice film festival in 2014. For the same 
director, Yelchin acted in Experimenter in 2015, about the notorious Stanford 
psychological experiments.

Yelchin was maturing – and could have had a career like Ryan Gosling’s or Jon 
Hamm’s or indeed Colin Farrell’s, his co-star from Fright Night. We shall never 
know. A hugely popular and well-liked actor of enormous talent and potential 
has been snuffed out. What a waste.

 * This article was amended on 20 June 2016. Yelchin’s character in Like Crazy 
was incorrectly referred to as Sam, not Jacob. This has been changed.  