
The untimely passing of a promising young actor can generate a sense of loss 
in audiences whose closest connection to the man was seeing him on screen. 
Obviously this loss is as a gnat-bite compared to the bereavement of family and 
friends, but the tragic death ofAnton Yelchin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jun/20/anton-yelchin-obituary-film-actor>
 is making me appreciate how much I’d been taking him for granted.

He was at ease and totally convincing in drama, comedy, horror, rom-com, 
action thrillers, SF blockbusters,The Smurfs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142926/smurfs>, even Shakespeare 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3093522/reference>, yet gave the impression that 
he had barely got started. His “guiding factor”,he once said 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/race/anton-yelchin-his-own-words-904290>, 
was: “How many different people can I play, and how different can I make them 
every time.” There were surely so many other different people to come, and now 
we will never see them.

While he seemed content to leave the grandstanding to others (Tom and Tilda in 
Only Lovers Left Alive <https://www.theguardian.com/film/only-lovers-left-alive>
, Colin Farrell inFright Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/01/fright-night-film-review>, 
Christian Bale inTerminator: Salvation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terminator-salvation>), Yelchin never allowed 
himself to be pushed into the background. He provided films with their 
backbone, pluck and point of view, embodying the perfect straight man for all 
of us to empathise with – a role much harder to fill without disappearing 
altogether than it might appear; Johnny Depp did it surprisingly well inDonnie 
Brasco <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/69109/donnie-brasco>, Dead Man 
and Nick of Time, before he started camping it up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f6d4ddbbe188b6782333fa6142e2daa17ffcfae%2F345_24_1657_994%2F1657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f6d4ddbbe188b6782333fa6142e2daa17ffcfae%2F345_24_1657_994%2F1657.jpg>
 Yelchin in Fright Night, 2011. Photograph: Dreamworks 
Yelchin wasn’t as classically handsome as Depp; he was easy on the eye without 
having traditional film-star looks, and I don’t recall his name cropping up in 
the sort of messageboards bursting with giddy declarations of devotion to Tom 
Hiddleston or Tom Hardy or Idris Elba. Yelchin wouldn’t have stood out in a 
crowd – unless, of course, he was required to do so for professional purposes, 
since standing out was well within his abilities, if the role required it.

But it started me thinking – now we have lost Yelchin, how many other young 
actors of his generation have the range and talent to follow in the footsteps 
of such a versatile leading man? Which of them command the screen sufficiently 
to carry a film on their shoulders without recourse to a Samson-esque (if not 
Samsonite) physique or Adonis profile?

Anton Yelchin: key roles in clips, from Star Trek to Like Crazy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-key-roles-star-trek-like-crazy-alpha-dog>
In Hollywood’s first golden age, amid the sheer otherwordly beauty of the Gary 
Coopers and the Tyrone Powers, there would always be a Humphrey Bogart or James 
Cagney to straddle the gap between leading man and character actor. But films 
such as Marty (1955), in which a “fat, ugly” Bronx butcher grabs at a chance 
for romance with a “plain” schoolteacher, were the exception that proved the 
rule; in the world according to the movies, leading men just weren’t supposed 
to look like Ernest Borgnine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2378d587a5014cc58c2e4b197b1d86d48463bf%2F0_62_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2378d587a5014cc58c2e4b197b1d86d48463bf%2F0_62_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 With Imogen Poots in Green Room, 2015. Photograph: Altitude 
It wasn’t until the rise of New Hollywood in the 1970s that the floodgates 
were opened to make film stars out of schlubby-looking guys such as Warren 
Oates, Robert De Niro, Elliott Gould, Donald Sutherland, Robert Duvall, Dustin 
Hoffman or Gene Hackman – men who could pass for ordinary in the street, but 
who nevertheless commanded attention when they were up on the screen just as 
surely as dreamboats such as Robert Redford or Warren Beatty.

The fashion in Hollywood leading men now is for the sort of sculpted torso 
that requires months, if not years, of dedicated abdominal crunching. Johnny 
Weissmuller won five Olympic swimming golds before he played Tarzan, but his 
midriff now looks almost flabby compared toAlexander Skarsgård’s six-pack in 
The Legend of Tarzan 
<http://cdn04.cdn.justjared.com/wp-content/uploads/headlines/2015/12/alexander-skarsgard-legend-tarzan-poster-stills.jpg>
. Today’s dominant genre is the superhero movie, and superheroes by their very 
nature tend to flaunt muscular physiques. For every weedy Peter Parker or Tony 
Stark sans Iron Man armour, there are armies of demigods looking ripped in 
latex and leather, many of them played by people called Chris. Some of them are 
pretty good actors as well, but I’m constantly reminded of Tim Roth’s words 
<http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/t/timroth196914.html>: “I’m sick of 
very white teeth and lots of gymnasium practice. I’m bored, you know, send in 
the next one. I wanted a real man that I could believe was my brother, my 
father, you know, my next-door neighbour – a real person.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb91f67ceb687f1e025f4f008b728493861b1192%2F0_60_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb91f67ceb687f1e025f4f008b728493861b1192%2F0_60_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Paul Dano in War & Peace, 2015. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC/Laurie Sparham 
It might be argued that “a real person” is not necessarily what you go to the 
cinema to see, and yet there seems to be a dearth of them even in non-superhero 
movies (and let’s not even get started on the shortage of those). Matt Damon 
used to look like a Regular Joe, though even in The Talented Mr Ripley his 
bared torso looked more gym-honed 1990s than 1950s beachboy, and now, thanks to 
the Bourne franchise, his physique is as unfeasibly Herculean as that of every 
other Captain America. Where are the young Gene Hackmans and Robert Duvalls de 
nos jours?

'I never knew how much I'd write crying': Peter Bradshaw on film star deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/i-never-realised-how-many-articles-i-would-write-in-a-blur-of-tears-peter-bradshaw-on-movie-star-deaths>
It’s not as though Hollywood takes its musclemen seriously, as it sometimes 
did back in the days of Fat City (1972) or Stay Hungry (1976). More often than 
not, they’re the butt of a feature-length joke - Zac Efron in Bad Neighbours 2, 
or Dwayne Johnson in Central Intelligence, or Johnson and everybody else in 
Pain & Gain. Central Intelligence 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1489889/reference> (which I haven’t seen, though 
it sounds like fun) displays its game-plan on the poster - the physical 
discrepancy between The Rock and the normal-looking Kevin Hart. The corporeally 
mismatched buddy formula is a tried-and-tested comic formula as old as Laurel 
and Hardy, and there’s mileage in it yet, but will Hart ever be allowed to go 
it alone?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94ca19742862766055034448bd00d9c189d2e85f%2F47_56_4360_2616%2F4360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94ca19742862766055034448bd00d9c189d2e85f%2F47_56_4360_2616%2F4360.jpg>
 Daniel Radcliffe in Woman in Black, 2012. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock 
One could point to The Geek Squad, currently headed by Jesse Eisenberg, who 
took over from Michael Cera as Hollywood’s token nerd and seems to be cornering 
the market in protagonists who don’t look as though they’ve been cloned in the 
superhero lab. Otherwise, like Hart, you can be a regular-looking leading man – 
so long as you stick to comedy. Even Seth Rogen and Jonah Hill, who have shown 
signs of wanting to broaden their range, will forever be typecast as funnymen. 
There are worse things than being thought funny, but it’s always thrilling when 
performances turn one’s preconceptions upside-down.

Anton Yelchin obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/jun/20/anton-yelchin-obituary-film-actor>
Meanwhile, I’m keeping a hopeful eye on Paul Dano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/paul-dano-acting-love-war-and-peace>
, whose career to date has been full of surprises, from evangelist to Hitler 
impersonator to Pierre in War & Peace. As for Yelchin’s contemporaries, Alden 
Ehrenreich was so endearing as the cowboy star in Hail, Caesar! that even 
though I’ve never been a Star Wars fan, I’m looking forward to seeing him as 
young Han Solo. And the British contingent shows promise. Perhaps Spider-Man: 
Homecoming will give Tom Holland the necessary leg-up into other protagonist 
roles. Hogwarts graduate Daniel Radcliffe, who started off in the biggest 
franchise he will ever be a part of, helped make a huge hit out of The Woman in 
Black without being an Action Man type, and seems to be consolidating the clout 
that Harry Potter gave him by flexing his character-acting skills and showing a 
willingness to experiment, as indicated by his role as the farting corpse that 
keeps Dano company in Swiss Army Man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22c6a2e3fd173e4788bfaa20c470547a393b6f43%2F104_139_2613_1568%2F2613.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anton%20Yelchin%20cannot%20be%20replaced%20%E2%80%93%20there%20is%20no%20one%20as%20normal%20left%20in%20Hollywood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fanton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22c6a2e3fd173e4788bfaa20c470547a393b6f43%2F104_139_2613_1568%2F2613.jpg>
 Nicholas Hoult in Kill Your Friends, 2015. Photograph: Everett/REX/Shutterstock
My personal antipathy towards Kingsman: The Secret Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kingsman-the-secret-service> almost – but not 
quite – blinds me to the appeal ofTaron Egerton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/31/taron-egerton-eddie-eagle-kingsman-secret-service-interview>
, who was bags more fun as the lovable doofus inEddie the Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddie-the-eagle>. Will Poulter is shaping up 
as a terrific character actor, if not a leading man, though was obliged to drop 
out of the potentially iconic role of Pennywise the Clown in the remake of 
Stephen King’s It. Jack O’Connell has been going from strength to strength, from
Starred Up <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starred-up> to ‘71 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/71> to Unbroken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/unbroken>, and – for me – was the MSP of 
Money Monster <https://www.theguardian.com/film/money-monster>, simply because 
he was a fresh face among the Hollywood cliches.

Nicholas Hoult, too, is having an intriguing career, and though Nux wasn’t the 
hero ofMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/14/nicholas-hoult-mad-max-fury-road-interview>
, he provided the film with its most compelling character arc. Hoult’s 
recurring role as Dr Hank McCoy in the X-Men films has already awarded him his 
superhero badge, leaving him free to branch out into interesting areas such as 
off-the-wall westerns (Young Ones) and black comedies (Kill Your Friends). I’m 
looking forward to seeing how he tackles the role of JD Salinger in Danny 
Strong’sRebel in the Rye <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4986134/reference>.

But in the end, all this sort of parlour game does is bring home to you even 
more acutely how there was no one quite likeAnton Yelchin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anton-yelchin>. He was irreplaceable, and 
he’ll be missed.
 