
Name: Antwerp.

Age: One thousand, nine hundred years or so. It’s hard to say. The settlement 
goes back to Roman times, but was it really “Antwerp” then? I mean, what is 
Antwerp, conceptually?

Appearance: Those cool, old pointy buildings and, like, unbelievably big 
stacks of shipping containers.

Is it in Belgium or Holland? Belgium, but yeah, it is hard to remember, and 
Holland is really called the Netherlands, but they both speak Dutch, or some of
Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium> does, although I think they 
call it Flemish, well, we call what they speak Flemish, I don’t know what they 
call it, I don’t speak Flemish.

Are you all right? Yeah, sure, great, I feel fantastic do you want to come to 
the toilet with me?

Um. No thanks. You seem to be very excited about Antwerp today. Yeah, well, 
people maybe know aboutsome of the old painters like Rubens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/16/peter-paul-rubens-legacy-royal-academy-exhibition>
 who used to work there but they don’t think of it as a big party town or a 
really cool place but itturns out they do more cocaine in Antwerp than anywhere 
else in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/londoners-take-more-cocaine-on-weekdays-than-europeans-study>
.

Seriously? Yeah. Tests in European cities usually show that London releases 
the most cocaine into the wastewater, per person, but this year, Antwerp has 
overtaken it thanks to huge rises during the weekends especially.

Welcome to 'boring' Belgium where even the pigeons are on cocaine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/01/antwerp-belgium-cocaine-capital-drugs-trade-pigeons>
Maybe that just means their coke is purer than anybody else’s? It is a major 
port city after all, so perhaps they get it fresh off the boat? Fair point, so 
yeah, it could be that Antwerp does the most coke in Europe or just that it has 
the best coke in Europe. Either way, go Antwerp!

Kind of. Obviously possessing cocaine is illegal, and consuming it carries a 
number of health risks, including the risk of addiction. Plus, buying it 
ultimately supports the often brutal behaviour of criminal gangs.That’s the 
fault of the stupid politicians who ban it. Hey, they should start selling 
ethical cocaine, you know, with that Fairtrade logo on the wraps? I would 
definitely pay a premium to ensure that drug smugglers have safe working 
conditions and good pension plans.

It also makes you talk a lot of nonsense. That’s in the ear of the beholder, 
man.

Do say: “Is dit cocaïne biologisch?” (“Is this cocaine organic?”)

Don’t say: “Ik kan niet slapen.” (“I can’t get to sleep.”)
 