
Last summer I started to map the city of Antwerp in threads, tracing its 
sartorial history among streets and monuments, from thebéguinage where nuns 
stitched millstone ruffs to the department stores outfitting passengers for the 
Red Star Line steamer ships, from the alchemy of the early dye workshops to the 
ateliers of the contemporary avant-garde. This ancient port city was at one 
time the richest in northern Europe; much of its wealth derived from dyeing, 
finishing and trading cloth. Thanks largely to the influence of theFashion 
Department <http://www.antwerp-fashion.be/> of its Academy of Fine Arts, 500 
years on the Antwerp of today is distinguished by an extraordinary 
concentration of fashion professionals, includingDries Van Noten 
<http://www.driesvannoten.be/> and Ek Thongprasert 
<http://www.ekthongprasert.be/>.

This year the Fashion Department celebrates its 50th anniversary, and earlier 
this month the graduation show saw the reunion of theAntwerp Six 
<http://antwerpsix.blogspot.co.uk/> (who themselves graduated in the early 
1980s) to form the jury for the fourth-year students presentations. The city is 
being dressed in appropriately fashionable anniversary decorations, and events 
culminate in an exhibition opening in September at theMode Museum 
<http://www.momu.be/> (MoMu).

Antwerp is rich in tiny museums and specialist archives, making my historical 
research (which was used in an app of fashion walks) a joy, but I was also 
enchanted by the integration of fashion in this city. The back streets conceal 
unassuming but magical enterprises. A former solar-panel shop near to the 
Central Station is home toAtelier Solar Shop 
<http://ateliersolarshop.blogspot.co.uk/>, a welcoming local store run by 
menswear designerJan-Jan Van Essche <http://www.janjanvanessche.com/home2/> and 
photographerPiëtro Celestina <http://www.ilovebelgium.be/tag/pietro-celestina>. 
It stocks remarkable stuff, from Van Essche's garments to small jewellery 
collections and shoes to flea-market finds and patinated oddments from around 
the world.
 Fashion jury members (from left) Marina Yee, Dirk Bikkembergs, Ann 
Demeulemeester, Walter Van Beirendonck, Dries Van Noten and Dirk Van Saene at 
the Royal Academy of Fine Arts. Photograph: Nicolas Maeterlinck/Getty Images 
Solar Shop <http://www.ateliersolarshop.be http://coccodrillo.be/> also hosts 
events staged byOtark <http://otarkproductions.blogspot.co.uk/>, a food 
collective linked to the fashion scene. Started four years ago by Hadas Cna'ani 
and Charlotte Koopman, Otark's philosophy of food is rooted in communality, 
sharing and conversation, with flavours plucked both from the back garden and 
specialist shops. Regular events include Otarkino, a cinema meal that recently 
paid a leathery culinary tribute toWerner Herzog Eats His Shoe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Herzog_Eats_His_Shoe>. On Sundays their 
pop-up breakfast club at In de Roscam on the Vrijdagmarkt is a reviving 
adventure, with Georgian bread from a local monastery served alongside treats, 
such as homemade waffles, ice cream and grilled cheese with kimchi.

Tucked behind the Fashion Department and MoMu <http://www.momu.be/>, and 
flanked on one side by thePlantin-Moretus Museum 
<http://www.museumplantinmoretus.be/>, the Vrijdagmarkt has been a secondhand 
market for almost 500 years – clothing was a key part of a household's wealth, 
and there was once a thriving industry of tailors who specialised in 
adjustments or in "turning" garments to expose their less-worn panels of 
fabric. The market still runs on Fridays, but for a more upmarket fix,
Vrijdagmarkt 6 <https://www.facebook.com/events/287984061337322/?ref=22> is a 
permanent consignment store specialising in directional menswear, including 
pieces from Antwerp designers Raf Simons, Dries Van Noten,Kris Van Assche 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/feedarticle/10621314> (Dior Homme) and Ann 
Demeulemeester, with otherworldly window displays provided by fashion students.

In the Coccodrillo <http://http://coccodrillo.be/> shoe shop stock is casually 
arranged on the floor and staircase, but this high-fashion institution has 
provided MoMu with some of its most covetable objects. Owner Geert Bruloot buys 
exceptional pieces to dress the windows before adding them to his collection. 
Above Coccodrillo, in a suite of wood-panelled 19th-century reception rooms,
Dirk van Saene <http://www.dirkvansaene.com/> displays his clothes on racks by 
Maarten Baas that have the cartoonish wobble of giant doll's furniture made of 
Fimo. This is also the place to findWalter Van Beirendonck 
<http:http://www.waltervanbeirendonck.com/> and Veronique Branquinho 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/fashion/article/15744/1/veronique-branquinho>.
 On the catwalk with Wim Bruynooghe at the Royal Museum of Fine Arts in 
Antwerp. Photograph: Virginia Mayo/AP 
Another first floor – this one cached at the back of a small courtyard and 
accessed by appointment – is home to the Antwerp headquarters ofRA 
<http://www.ra13.be/>, staffed by young designers and photographers. RA is 
where you come to track down the uncompromising collections that make fashion 
insiders shudder pleasurably in their Simone Rocha brogues – Gareth Pugh, 
Meadham Kirchhoff, Lea Peckre – alongside work by emerging Antwerp talents and 
selected vintage.

Open studios are studded among the backstreets near the Marnixplaats. On 
Maarschalk Gerardstraat,Collectif d'Anvers 
<http://collectifdanvers.solidshops.com/> hammers out bespoke footwear in 
a light-filled space strung with wooden lasts. The shop out front also sells 
draped, geometric womenswear by Sophie Claes. On Scheldestraat,Salon Van Hongo  
<http://www.vanhongo.com/>offers feminine clothes with a sophisticated cut; the 
"Van" in the title being a self-Flemishisation by Japanese-born designer Izumi 
Hongo. Maureen De Clercq on Emiel Banningstraat teaches at the Fashion 
Department (the studio is open on Fridays and Saturdays) and designs a range of 
elegant adjusted-to-measure women's clothes.

On warm evenings the eight-spoked circle of the Marnixplaats itself becomes 
the city's social hub – a magnet for style hunters. They can be found crowded 
into seafood jointFiskebar <http://fiskebar.be/> before a nightcap at Café 
Vitrine <http://www.vitrin.eu/>.

fashioninantwerp.be <http://www.fashioninantwerp.be/>
 