
Drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/science/drugs> to treat anxiety in people 
may alter the behaviour of fish when the chemicals are flushed into rivers, 
according to scientists. Swedish researchers found that European perch exposed 
to tiny concentrations of a drug became less sociable, ate more and became more 
adventurous – all changes in behaviour that could have unexpected ecological 
impacts on fish populations.

When scientists at Umeå University in Sweden screened rivers for 
pharmaceuticals they found that a drug for treating anxiety, calledoxazepam 
<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/druginfo/meds/a682050.html>, was 
accumulating in fish. Many drugs and other synthetic chemicals used by humans 
in everything from pesticides to cosmetics canpass through waste water 
treatment and end up in wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/may/29/science.research>, potentially 
accumulating to toxic levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jun/20/eu.health>.

But until now scientists had never studied the behavioural impacts of small 
quantities of contaminants. Tomas Brodin led a team that mimicked in the lab 
the concentrations of oxazepam found in the wild – around a microgram per 
kilogram of fish body weight – and watched for changes in how bold, sociable 
and active the fish were.

"Normally, perch are shy and hunt in schools," said Brodin. "This is a known 
strategy for survival and growth. But those who swim in oxazepam became 
considerably bolder."

The results are published this week in Science 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1226850> and were announced at the annual 
meeting of theAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston 
<http://www.aaas.org/meetings/>.

Jonatan Klaminder, an ecologist at Umeå University 
<http://www.emg.umu.se/english/about-the-department/staff/klaminder-jonatan/> 
and an author of the paper, said the effect of the drug on fish was similar to 
its effect on people. "What the drug does is remove some of the fear that the 
very small fish experience," he said. "[They] become less interested in staying 
close with others – staying close to others is a well-known defence system to 
avoid predators. They become less afraid of exploring new areas, so they just 
go out to search for food and become more effective in finding and consuming 
food."

This change in behaviour could have evolutionary consequences. Adventurous or 
antisocial fish are more likely to be eaten by larger fishes but are also the 
ones that will explore new areas and, over time, alter the genetic diversity of 
future populations.

The solution, according to the researchers, is not to stop medicating people 
who need drugs such as oxazepam but to improve sewage treatment plants to 
capture the drugs and reduce their contamination of water systems in the wild.

The research also has implications for the way ecologists monitor pollutants 
in the environment, said Klaminder. "We're still deeply rooted in what a 
pollutant is and it goes back to the 1970s and 1980s where we had heavy rain, 
acid rain, organic pollutants that definitely cause harm and physiological 
effects. When it comes to drugs, there is a new area of contamination research 
that doesn't really fit with this old conceptual view." Focusing on the 
potential negative physiological impacts of an environmental contaminant could 
miss the subtle behavioural changes that may also occur.

He added: "Hopefully it will make researchers rethink what they are looking 
for."
 