
Kathy Gannon, the Associated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press> reporter injured in 
Afghanistan in April this year, has been talking about the incident in which 
her photographer colleague, Anja Niedringhaus, was killed.

In her first interview since the attack, 
<http://www.bigstory.ap.org/article/50df8491a25648ebad24da6d819696d8/wounded-ap-reporter-vows-return-afghanistan>
 Gannon told how she and Niedringhaus were sprayed with gunfire by an Afghan 
police commander when visiting the eastern city of Khost during the tense 
run-up to elections.
 Kathy Gannon - still being treated for her injuries after six months 
They had joined a convoy under the protection of Afghan security forces that 
was transporting ballots from Kabul to outlying areas.

Their goal was to get a first-hand sense of how ordinary Afghans would respond 
to this window of democracy in a province considered a Taliban stronghold.

As they sat in their vehicle in a well-guarded compound, amid scores of police 
and security officers, one of the men supposedly guarding them walked up, 
yelled "Allahu Akbar," and fired on them with his AK-47. Then he dropped his 
weapon and surrendered.

Niedringhaus, 48, died instantly from her wounds. Gannon, 61, was hit with six 
bullets that ripped through her left arm, right hand and left shoulder, 
shattering her shoulder blade.,

Gannon said: "I looked down and my left hand was separated from my wrist," 
Gannon said. "I remember saying, 'Oh my God, this time we're finished'... One 
minute we were sitting in the car laughing, and the next, our shoulders were 
pressed hard against each other as if one was trying to hold the other up. The 
shooting ended. I looked toward Anja. I didn't know."

She did not realise her friend was dead until she woke up, half-conscious, 
after being airlifted to a hospital in Kabul. Days later she was flown to a 
hospital inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and, later 
still, to a hospital in New York.

The months of physical recovery and therapy have been gruelling. Doctors had 
to rebuild her left arm with bone, fat and muscle from her left leg.

Her recovery remains a work in progress; the fingers of her left hand are 
still immobile. She is determined, after further surgery and therapy, to return 
toAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to report again 
for the AP.

"Neither Anja or I would ever accept to be forced out by some crazy gunman," 
Gannon said. Their attacker has since been convicted of treason and sentenced 
to death by an Afghan court.

She has established a strong bond with Afghanistan after more than three 
decades of covering the country's travails. "There's history still to be told 
there," she said.

Gannon and the German-born Niedringhaus started working together in 2009 in 
Kabul. From the start, she said, "we just hit it off... it was as if we had 
known each other for ever."

Source: AP 
<http://www.bigstory.ap.org/article/50df8491a25648ebad24da6d819696d8/wounded-ap-reporter-vows-return-afghanistan>
 