
Malcolm Turnbull and Barack Obama hold first meeting and promise to 'ramp up' 
fight against Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-turnbull-and-barack-obama-hold-first-meeting-and-promise-to-ramp-up-fight-against-isis>
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
says a political solution in Syria will require the inclusion of Sunni groups 
that have felt disenfranchised by the Assad regime, and have consequently been 
left vulnerable to overtures from Islamic State.

The Australian prime minister told reporters at the Apec summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit> in Manila that in an ideal 
world, a post-conflict Syria would end up with “a form of government that 
involved power sharing between the various groups”.

“The example of Lebanon is one that springs to mind, where there is 
representation for people of various religious groups,” he said on Wednesday.

“Plainly, when you look at Daesh, the basis [of the extremist movement] is the 
Sunni population that has felt disenfranchised inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> with very good reason and has also 
felt left out of the new government in Iraq,” he said.

He said a process of structured inclusion would “deprive Daesh of its support 
base”.

In a separate interview in Manila to Sky News, the foreign minister, Julie 
Bishop, said the Syrian president,Bashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, might need to be part of 
the transition in the country because his removal would create a power 
vacuumthat would have its own negative consequences.

She said that if there had been any “obvious” candidates from the Syrian 
opposition forces to replace the dictator, their names would have come up by 
now.

The comments from the Australian leadership are the most unguarded assessments 
of the Syrian situation to date, and come after an intensive round of talks on 
Syria with other world leaders at theG20 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20>
 and Apec summits.

The momentum for a political solution in Syria has intensified following the 
terror attacks in Paris last week.

Malcolm in the middle: Turnbull woos China and the US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-in-the-middle-turnbull-woos-china-and-the-us>
A recent meeting of foreign ministers and the five permanent members of the UN 
security council in Vienna set a roadmap fora Syrian-led political transition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/16/g20-barack-obama-and-vladimir-putin-agree-to-syrian-led-transition>
 in the riven country, which was canvassed extensively during the G20 meeting.

The Antalya gathering of world powers thus became a summit within a summit on 
Syria.

The security situation in Syria and the complex geopolitical interests among 
global powers make the task of bringing about a resolution extremely difficult.

But western leaders have launched a concerted push to bring the Russian 
president,Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, to 
the centre of the negotiations and to underscore his status as powerbroker in 
an attempt to persuade the Russians to step back from shoring up Assad in the 
long term and contribute militarily in the fight against Islamic State.


Speaking after a meeting with the president of the Philippines, Benigno 
Aquino, which focused on counter-terrorism, Turnbull echoed a call at the G20 
by the British prime minister, David Cameron, for pragmatism in framing a 
political solution on Syria.

In a message to Russia and the US, he said the parties had to adopt a 
“whatever it takes” attitude because the Syrian problem had dragged on for far 
too long.

“What is needed is a pragmatic settlement as quickly as possible. There needs 
to be a ceasefire as has been asked for at Vienna and there needs to be a power 
sharing deal,” he said.

Russian and US forces exchange military information over airstrikes against 
Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/russian-us-forces-exchange-military-information-airstrikes-against-isis-syria>
Turnbull had met Putin at the G20 meeting and was asked about the Russian 
president’s views, but he declined to provide a clear answer, saying only that 
Putin had views on the transition.

Australia was excluded from the foreign ministers’ talks in Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/australia-excluded-from-syria-peace-talks-after-russian-objection>
 on the eve of the G20 summit because the Russians insisted that discussions on 
a political transition should take place only among regional countries and the 
big powers.

Bishop insisted it was not a snub, saying other military contributors in the 
Middle East were also not part of the discussions.
 