
Leaders of Asia Pacific <https://www.theguardian.com/world/asia-pacific> 
nations have issued a joint statement condemning terrorism as the Apec forum 
wraps up in Manila.


Globetrotting Turnbull stretches his wings, but will the diehards clip them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/19/globetrotting-turnbull-stretches-his-wings-but-will-the-diehards-clip-them>
The leader’s declaration 
<http://www.apec.org/Meeting-Papers/Leaders-Declarations/2015/2015_aelm.aspx>, 
which at Apec normally restricts its content to economic issues, this year 
makes a strong joint statement on the importance of regional cooperation to 
enhance security and counter violent extremism.

“Under the shadow cast by the terrorist attacks in Paris, Beirut, and against 
Russian aircraft over the Sinai, and elsewhere, we strongly condemn all acts, 
methods, and practices of terrorism in all their forms and manifestations,” the 
declaration says.

“We will not allow terrorism to threaten the fundamental values that underpin 
our free and open economies. Economic growth, prosperity, and opportunity are 
among the most powerful tools to address the root causes of terrorism and 
radicalisation.”

“We stress the urgent need for increased international cooperation and 
solidarity in the fight against terrorism.”

The Apec declaration follows a similar posture from leaders of the 
industrialised world at the G20 summit, which got underway in Turkey 
immediately after the Paris terror attacks.

Police in Manila confirmed they used water cannons against protesters in the 
Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> capital on the 
final day of the summit, and suggested there would be prosecutions.


 The riot squad pushed back leftwing activists from the Bagong Alyansang 
Makabayan group, who attempted to reach the secure international convention 
centre site as the Apec leaders arrived on Thursday morning for their working 
retreat.

The group has been active around the city this week, shadowed by police in 
full riot gear.

Tensions between Pacific rim leaders over China’s assertive presence in the 
region have dominated the summit in Manila.


The US president, Barack Obama, used it to call on China to stop reclaiming 
lands in the disputed territory of theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>. America and China have 
also faced off in the last 24 hours with competing proposals to advance trade 
liberalisation.

The Australian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has had to walk a careful 
diplomatic line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/18/malcolm-turnbull-stays-coy-over-australian-role-in-south-china-sea>
 during bilateral meetings at the G20 summit and Apec with the leaders of China 
and the US.


Turnbull has pledged diplomatic support for the US position on the South China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea, but has declined to specify what 
practical actions Australia might take in support of future American-led 
freedom of navigation exercises in the region.

He has said only that Australia will give careful consideration before making 
any decisions.

Speaking before the leaders retreat, Turnbull told reporters in Manila that 
Australia would focus in the closed-door sessions on the benefits for the 
region of trade liberalisation. His message at the retreat would be if you 
close the door and “pull the doona over your head” then you risk being left 
behind.

“The Trans Pacific Partnership for example, that is a triumph of optimism over 
fear,” Turnbull said.


During his contributions in the room, the prime minister welcomed an 
announcement by China’s president Xi Jinping “that there will be a high-level 
forum on urbanisation next year.”

“I can say, assuming we get an invitation, we will be a very enthusiastic 
participant in that.”

Turnbull said there were powerful arguments to integrate the work of Apec and 
the G20 when it came to the financing of infrastructure and public private 
partnerships.

“We are all pretty much, we are talking about pretty much the same objectives 
and I think there is, the themes are the same between the two conferences, and 
I think a lot of collaboration there is worthwhile.”

“And it would be good, I think for us to be able to identify what are the 
things, the reforms we need to do in each market to achieve greater private 
sector investment in infrastructure.”

Malcolm Turnbull shrugs off US concern over Darwin port lease to Chinese firm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/19/malcolm-turnbull-shrugs-off-us-concern-over-darwin-port-lease-to-chinese-firm>
Freedom, open markets and liberalised trade were manifestly in Australia’s 
interests and the interests of the region, he said.


Turnbull has departed Manila for Darwin, where he will spend Friday, before 
travelling on to Malaysia for the East Asia Summit on Sunday.

He returns to Australia next Monday.

 