
A summit of world leaders has been urged to defend free trade from rising 
protectionism after Donald Trump’s election victory stoked fears that years of 
tearing down barriers to global commerce could be reversed.

Trump successfully tapped the anger of working-class voters who feel left 
behind by globalisation, vowing to protect American jobs against cheap labour 
in countries likeChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and Mexico.

How Donald Trump upended Republican orthodoxy on free trade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/30/donald-trump-free-trade-foreign-policy-china-republicans>
As a summit of the 21-member Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit> group got under way, host Pedro 
Pablo Kuczynski, president ofPeru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>, 
urged the region’s leaders to robustly defend free trade, while the US sought 
to reassure worried allies.

“In the US and Britain, protectionist tendencies are taking over,” Kuczynski 
told Apec leaders. “It is fundamental that world trade grow again and that 
protectionism be defeated.”

Trump’s victory came after Britain’s surprise Brexit vote in June to leave the 
European Union, adding to deep uncertainty about the post-war world order and 
the future of free trade.

The sentiment also exists on a far smaller scale in Peru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>, where several dozen protesters – 
including Amazon natives in indigenous headdress – gathered on Friday in Lima 
to condemn free trade agreements and the “capitalist beast”.

Trump has notably vowed to scuttle the US president, Barack Obama’s, key trade 
initiative in the Asia-Pacific, theTrans-Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/12/trans-pacific-partnership-explainer>
 (TPP), leaving a vacuum that China – which was excluded from the deal – is 
keen to fill.

A delegate at ministerial meetings held on Thursday and Friday said Apec 
ministers had expressed concern over growing protectionism in the United States 
and that the mood had been somber.

The official, who asked not to be named, said the US trade representative, 
Michael Froman, had sought to assure ministers that American core interests 
don’t change from administration to administration.

Donald Trump’s anti-trade rhetoric is textbook hypocrisy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/richard-trumka-donald-trump-anti-trade-hypocrisy>
Trump is not at the summit, but he looms large over the meeting of Apec, a 
free-trade club founded in 1989 that represents nearly 40% of the world’s 
population and nearly 60% of the global economy.


In a clear jab at the billionaire mogul’s anti-trade stance, Kuczynski said 
that “anyone who wants to promote protectionism (should) read an economic 
history of the 1930s”.

The center-right economist urged his fellow leaders to deliver an “unequivocal 
message” in support of free trade.

Singapore’s prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong, echoed the sentiment, urging 
more, not less, trade in the face of “a nativist response in developed 
countries by those who blame globalisation for making them worse off”.

The US election has left China, a country the United States once considered a 
threat to free-market capitalism, as the unlikely leader of the movement for 
open trade.

Th Chinese president, Xi Jinping, is holding a strong hand as he meets Obama 
and other Apec leaders this week.

“There is no doubt that if the TPP fails it will be a huge win for China, 
politically and economically,” said Brian Jackson, a China economist at 
consultancy IHS Global Insight.

Australia, China, and the lunacy of Trump's talk of a trade war | Bob Carr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/australia-china-and-the-lunacy-of-trumps-talk-of-a-trade-war>
Even longtime US allies in the Asia-Pacific region now say they are keen to 
get on board with Chinese-backed alternatives to TPP.

Beijing is pushing an Apec-wide Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) 
and a 16-member Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP), which 
includes India but not the United States.

World business leaders gathered on the sidelines of the summit bemoaned TPP’s 
“grim prospects” and urged governments to pour resources into FTAAP, said Sun 
Xiao, an official with the China Chamber of International Commerce.

And amid mounting criticism that globalisation has benefitted only the 
wealthiest, the IMF chief, Christine Lagarde, defended trade as a major engine 
of growth.

“We hope it continues to be – but it has to be inclusive growth,” she added.
 