
The Palme D’Or-winning Thai director Apichatpong Weerasethakul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> has said he does 
not want his new film to be screened in in his home country, for fear of the 
reaction of the ruling military junta.

Speaking at the London film festival, which screened Cemetery of Splendour 
earlier this week 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=cemeteryofsplendour&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=>
, Weerasethakultold the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-34540734> he 
would be forced to self-censor the film if he wanted to show it in Thailand. 
The drama centres on a group of soldiers who fall ill with a mysterious 
sleeping sickness, and it has been viewed by critics as a metaphor for the 
country’s societal travails.

Cemetery of Splendour review: a very calm sort of hysteria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/cemetery-of-splendour-review-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
“Whatever movies we have produced, we don’t want to show it to Thai audiences, 
because in the current situation we don’t have genuine freedom. I don’t want to 
be part of a system where the movie director has to exercise self-censorship,” 
said Weerasethakul, whose filmUncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/uncle-boonmee-who-can-recall-his-past-lives>
triumphed at the Cannes film festival in 2010.


“I feel there is more violence in our country than in others that are in 
similar situations,” added the film-maker, who debutedCemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cemetery-of-splendour> at Cannes in May. “And 
I am sad to see that I don’t have any power or rights to speak, because I know 
if I speak, harm will come to me.”

The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw praised Weerasethakul’s new film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/cemetery-of-splendour-review-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
 in his Cannes review, as an “essay in psychogeography and a meditation on 
death, the presence of the spirit world in nature and the unquiet ghosts of 
guilt and pain in the Thai nation, as symbolised by the military”.

Thailand has been under military dictatorship since May 2014, when a junta led 
by unelected prime minister Prayut Chan-o-cha seized power.Human Rights Watch 
has condemned <https://www.hrw.org/pt-br/node/281096> what it says is the 
continued use of arbitrary arrest and secret detention to intimidate and 
silence dissidents.
 