
Apichatpong Weerasethakul has just stepped off a flight from Bangkok and, 
while he betrays no obvious signs of jetlag or exhaustion, apologises for any 
potential lethargy. He has come to Tate Modern for a three-day retrospective of 
his multifarious moving-image work – feature films, shorts, promos – the bulk 
of which wasscreened continuously for 14 hours overnight 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/film/night-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
 on 9 April to mark the reopening of the gallery’s Starr cinema auditorium. 
Weerasethakul, a charming, unfailingly polite and very neatly dressed 45 year 
old, says he doesn’t mind in the least that his delicately composed, subtly 
atmospheric films should be exhibited in such an environment; it is, he says “a 
celebration, a big party”.

Everything is possible – five things we learned at the Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul all-nighter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/11/apichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london>
But the fact that such a venue should be hosting such an event tells us quite 
a bit about Weerasethakul’s work, and his approach to it. He is the winner of 
one of cinema’s highest honours, the CannesPalme d’Or, for his 2010 feature, 
Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/23/cannes-film-festival-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
, but is only now releasing a substantial follow-up, Cemetery of Splendour, 
which premiered at Cannes in 2015. (That’s not counting the hour-longMekong 
Hotel <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/18/mekong-hotel-review>, which 
emerged in 2012.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff189688b2bb4a7679a6ee0cf3ed1b1faac63b515%2F0_0_4896_2760%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20'My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20%27My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff189688b2bb4a7679a6ee0cf3ed1b1faac63b515%2F0_0_4896_2760%2F4896.jpg>
 Soldiers struck by sleeping sickness in Cemetery of Splendour by Apichatpong 
Weerasethakul. Photograph: Chai Siris/Kick the Machine Films 
Weerasethakul, bless him, says he still can’t understand why Uncle Boonmee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/24/uncle-boonmee-cannes-palme-winner>
 – an elliptical tale of a dying man who is visited by the spirits of his dead 
wife and vanished son – made such an impact. “I liked it because there were so 
many personal references, but I didn’t think they could translate to the 
audience. Some of my other films I can understand why they got a reaction 
because there are certain things in them cinematically; but Uncle Boonmee, it’s 
such a strange one.”


Cemetery of Splendour review: a very calm sort of hysteria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/cemetery-of-splendour-review-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
Cemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/cemetery-of-splendour-review-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
 is Weerasethakul’s seventh feature, if you include his long-form 2000 
documentary Mysterious Object at Noon (due to be restored and reissued on DVD 
following the Tate’s event) as well as the normally glossed-over 2003 comedy 
The Adventure of Iron Pussy – mention of which elicits a sheepish giggle. 
(“It’s a bit embarrassing if the audience doesn’t know the context.”)

His film-making strengths – as displayed in Blissfully Yours, Tropical Malady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/mar/04/apichatpong-weerasethakul>,
Syndromes and a Century <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KnIXg6-8lic>, and 
Uncle Boonmee itself – are a structural audacity that often results in 
narratives stopping dead, switching characters, or reformatting themselves; a 
languid, lyrical shooting style; and an unhurried investigation of memory and 
place. It’s a combination that – along with an unabashed cinematic eroticism – 
has made him a fixture at major international film festivals, and a three-time 
prizewinner at Cannes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a6f571e9d2b83aa3194eb7b414a85f4079c8fc%2F0_0_2480_1351%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20'My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20%27My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a6f571e9d2b83aa3194eb7b414a85f4079c8fc%2F0_0_2480_1351%2F2480.jpg>
 A scene from Tropical Malady, starring Sakda Kaewbuadee and Banlop Lomnoi. 
Photograph: Kick the Machine Films 
However, it’s clear that feature films are not necessarily his priority: 
Weerasethakul spends much of his time creating installations and performance 
pieces with glorious titles likeA Man Who Ate an Entire Tree 
<http://www.kickthemachine.com/page80/page22/page54/index.html>. In fact, he 
says, getting features off the ground has got tougher since his elevation to 
the Cannes pantheon: it is becoming “harder to finance” what he calls his kind 
of “small, no stars” films. “It’s the climate of funding. It’s all on a big 
scale now.” He’s actually doing more visual art, he says. “I am just enjoying 
experimenting and doing different things.”

It’s this tension – or cross-pollination – between art and cinema that seems 
to lie at the heart of Weerasethakul’s work. The shorts and art pieces, he 
says, are where he can film “without rules”; for feature films, he says, “you 
are leading the audience by the hand. In order for them to follow, you need to 
use the established rules.” His work is all rooted in the same ideas, he says, 
but the format dictates itself. “It’s instinctive.” He describes how it worked 
forCemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cemetery-of-splendour>, which takes place 
largely in a hospital for soldiers afflicted by a mysterious form of 
narcolepsy. It started, he says, with “this idea of sleep”. Then, “a bit of 
narrative comes along”, and “you get a larger picture”. “That tells you what it 
needs to be; that it needs to be a film.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b40bc0c95d8b226eaff46d8821596fd5a318678%2F72_58_1274_850%2F1274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20'My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20%27My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b40bc0c95d8b226eaff46d8821596fd5a318678%2F72_58_1274_850%2F1274.jpg>
 A surreal moment from Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall his Past Lives. 
Seen back to back, as most of them will have been in the night-long 
retrospective, Weerasethakul’s preoccupations emerge with some force. Some are 
stylistic and structural: a fondness for bifurcated storytelling; characters 
and actors that shift from film to film; a tip of the hat to the cheesy Thai TV 
of his youth. Others are thematic: an investigation and recreation of memories 
– he grew up the son of doctors, hence the frequent presence of hospitals and 
medical procedures in his films; reincarnation and the spirit world regularly 
invoked for its metaphoric value; the recurring presence of the military as a 
symbol of power and control.

A lot of his ideas, he says, derive directly from the people he works with. 
Anyone with a passing knowledge of his work, for example, will probably 
recognise the figure of Jenjira Pongpas (aka Nach) Widner, the woman whose 
romantic yearnings and undisguised limp – the result of a motorcycle accident – 
have become key features of what Weerasethakul terms his “universe”. Actors, 
says Weerasethakul, “are not just a shell, they are part of the movie”. Widner, 
whose story Weerasethakul also exploredin one of his shorts, Cactus River 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H5vT0T_ionU>, has become an even more 
significant figure in Cemetery of Splendour, which foregrounds her habit of 
knitting baby socks and her relationship with her American husband. “When I 
wrote Cemetery, Jenjira was in my mind from the beginning.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlnBu0wgl5ZI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlnBu0wgl5ZI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlnBu0wgl5ZI&media=>
Watch a trailer for Cemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lnBu0wgl5ZI> 
In Weerasethakul’s hands, Thai culture comes across as simultaneously profound 
and absurd, mysterious and mundane, heroic and trivial. His films’ – and 
characters’ – interest in reincarnation arguably gives his work its most 
distinctive flavour, allowing him to stage utterly strange sequences – such as 
the talking ape scene in Tropical Malady, or the princess-fish sex in Uncle 
Boonmee. It’s an active social force in his homeland he says: “People believe 
in it, and it drives the way they view life. [Belief in] karma makes people 
submissive; that’s how the country is run.”

For Weerasethakul, this issue is no longer simply aesthetic: after the 2014 
military coup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/thailand-army-chief-announces-military-coup>
, it’s one of political urgency.Pointing out 
<http://www.bangkokpost.com/learning/learning-from-news/695496/fortuneteller-to-thailand-generals-warin-buawiratlert-of-chiang-mai>
 that “the army has its own fortune teller”, he sounds less than happy at the 
state of affairs: “The country is run by superstition.” Weerasethakul is in a 
relatively fortunate position, in that his arcane films are not exactly 
populist and don’t depend on the mainstream Thai film industry for funding, but 
he has becomecast as a significant voice of dissent in a difficult time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/16/apichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-cannes>
. “For the record,” he says, “Cemetery is not censored: I refuse to submit it 
to the censor board. It’s not that they ban it, but the fact they ban other 
things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F547f2f20df7577be7b3c144c781d748d4ff34901%2F0_0_7087_3987%2F7087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20'My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%3A%20%27My%20country%20is%20run%20by%20superstition%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-thailand-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F547f2f20df7577be7b3c144c781d748d4ff34901%2F0_0_7087_3987%2F7087.jpg>
 Jenjira Ponpas Widner, right, in Cemetery of Splendour. Photograph: Chai 
Siris/Kick the Machine Films 
But in retrospect, the heavy presence of soldiers and the military in his 
films suggests a presentiment that turned out to be correct. Cemetery of 
Splendour, if nothing else, is a pointed analysis of the wounds the Thai 
military have inflicted on the country over the decades. “I like to show 
uniforms anyway, but in the course of the last 10 years the role of the army 
has got more and more difficult. I have shifted from symbolic uses to do with 
power, like being a sexual predator, to more reflect the political involvement 
they have had for a long time.” The mid-1960s communist insurgency, supported 
by Maoist China and leading to significant conflict in the north-east of the 
country, is the subject of Weerasethakul’s touring installation project 
Primitive, which grew directly out of his research for Uncle Boonmee (which is 
set in the same region).

But, he says, there’s nothing like dealing with Thai bureaucracy for keeping 
your feet on the ground. “When I go to get a driving licence or to report 
something missing to the police, they want to write down my profession. I say, 
‘I am a film-maker’; and they say, ‘What?’ Then they write: ‘Freelance.’”

“In Thailand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand>, being an artist or 
a film-maker is not considered a career.” Oh well, give the boy time. You never 
know, he just might get somewhere.

 * Cemetery of Splendour is released in UK cinemas on 17 June, and the 
installation Primitive opens atTate Modern, London 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-modern>, on the same date. Mysterious Object 
at Noon is released on DVD and Blu-Ray on 25 April.
 