
Mozambique <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mozambique> generally has two 
seasons: wet and dry. When it rains, it can flood; when rainfall is scarce, 
crops dry up. Civil engineer Aline Okello saw how this pattern affected local 
farmers, who see their crops flooded year after year only to lose out again 
come the next big drought. So she decided to help.

After studying water science and management in the Netherlands – another 
low-lying country prone to floods – Okello began to understand Mozambique’s 
problems in a new light.

“I was seeing all these windmills, all these wheels pumping water, and I 
thought, ‘My God, I didn’t know about this [technology] and I’m a civil 
engineer,’” she says.

Okello considered the technologies on hand in Mozambique, including those 
available to the poorest communities, and realised they generally all have 
access to the same modern-day tool. “They won’t have water or electricity, but 
they will have a mobile phone – often a smartphone – and apps like WhatsApp,” 
she says.

As Mozambique's rivers dry up, the hopes of a harvest evaporate too | John 
Vidal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/mozambique-drought-hopes-harvest-evaporate>
“That got me thinking: we don’t have enough reservoirs, and we have only 
limited water management and infrastructure, so there is a huge need for growth 
and technology. People don’t have any idea how much water they can actually 
save from their rooftops. There is a huge information gap.”

So she developed a rainwater harvesting app – one that would source reliable, 
live precipitation data from Nasa, as well as giving users a step-by-step guide 
to how harvesting works.

The app relies on inputs for roof type (clay, thatch, iron sheets) and 
location to determine how much water can be harvested every day and month, 
given the locale’s average precipitation. Once this information is provided, 
the app suggests the best size of harvesting tank and informs users where to 
buy the necessary equipment, including tanks, pipes and pumps. Although most 
manufacturers are in SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and 
ship to Mozambique, Okello expects the local industry to expand as demand grows.

Should rainwater harvesting succeed, it could help to tackle the huge problems 
facing residents in the region. Mozambique, much like the rest of southern 
Africa, has suffered from a prolonged drought that began in March 2015 and
worsened with this year’s El Niño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/17/mozambique-drought-hopes-harvest-evaporate>
. Crops have been devastated, livestock killed off, bore holes dug and 
evaporated, and residents forced to scavenge for wild fruit and vegetables.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Frainwater-harvesting-app-dampen-effects-climate-change-mozambique%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc88f6bbea4c5187abbd9c347cd8452901656785b%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=App%20for%20all%20seasons%20aims%20to%20dampen%20effects%20of%20climate%20change%20in%20Mozambique%20%7C%20Kate%20Hodal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Frainwater-harvesting-app-dampen-effects-climate-change-mozambique%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=App%20for%20all%20seasons%20aims%20to%20dampen%20effects%20of%20climate%20change%20in%20Mozambique%20%7C%20Kate%20Hodal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Frainwater-harvesting-app-dampen-effects-climate-change-mozambique%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc88f6bbea4c5187abbd9c347cd8452901656785b%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Aline Okello’s rainwater harvesting app has earned her a place on the 
shortlist for the Africa prize for engineering innovation. Photograph: James 
Oatway/The Royal Academy of Engineering 
The extended drought has left about 3.2 million children in southern Africa 
without access to clean drinking water,according to the UN Office for the 
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 
<http://www.unocha.org/el-nino-southern-africa>. The expected arrival of La 
Niña, which normally brings floods to southern Africa, has prompted residents 
to dig large holes that they hope willserve as reservoirs 
<http://www.africanews.com/2016/08/17/mozambique-readies-to-harvest-rainwater-after-a-severe-drought/>
. But such floods can carry serious waterborne diseases, further exacerbated by 
contaminated water supplies and lack of access to sanitation.

Okello’s app has been a great success in rural South Africa, where she has 
been trialling it with local communities also affected by the recent drought.

Ultimately, says Okello, her goal is to inform residents how to use the 
technology that is available to them, in a manner that helps them adapt to an 
ever-changing climate: “My vision really is to bring information to people’s 
fingertips.”

• Aline Okello’s app was shortlisted for the Royal Academy of Engineering’s 
Africa prize for engineering innovation
 