
Interested becoming a better parent? There’s an app for that. And, according 
to an Oxford University study of families who downloaded the games designed to 
encourage child development, it works.

The Oxford researchers said the success of the trial meant that local 
authorities and schools should consider using digital outreach to parents as a 
cheap and simple way ofimproving school readiness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/23/half-children-reception-unready-school>
 among infants.

The study followed 144 families from disadvantaged areas in Bournemouth who 
used theEasyPeasy <http://www.easypeasyapp.com/> software application that 
offered techniques, suggestions and nudges for parenting while bringing up 
children aged between two and six.

“Although there are many parenting programmes, there is still limited evidence 
that they are effective at improving children’s learning or their capacity to 
make a strong start at school,” said Kathy Sylva,professor of educational 
psychology 
<http://www.education.ox.ac.uk/about-us/directory/professor-kathy-sylva/> at 
the University of Oxford.

“These promising results on EasyPeasy stem from a rigorous trial and so build 
optimism that we can make a difference in the lives of young children through 
supporting their parents.”

Secret Teacher: why do some parents expect us to toilet train their children?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/apr/18/secret-teacher-parents-toilet-train-children>
In one task offered through the app, Yummy Strawberries, parents could watch 
an explanation of a game, in which both parent and child would hold a 
strawberry each and set the phone’s timer for one minute before eating it.

The app gave tips, such as: “Ask your child to distract themselves from eating 
the strawberry” to help the child fight temptation, recalling Stanford 
University’s famous “marshmallow experiment 
<http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/psp/5/1/24/>” where children who resisted 
eating a treat placed in front of them tended to have positive personality 
traits.

After 18 weeks using the app, the parents taking part reported improvements in 
their children’s behaviour and self-reliance, saying that they were more 
persistent in completing difficult tasks and were more willing to make 
decisions independently.

The parents reported that they themselves felt better able to stick to rules 
and set boundaries. However, the app sent data on parents’ usage to children’s 
centres where they were recruited, allowing centre staff to “encourage less 
engaged parents to participate”.

The parents’ experience was backed by the researchers’ findings as being 
statistically significant – meaning they were unlikely to have occurred by 
chance - despite the small sample size involved in the randomised controlled 
trial.

Although the study found that the result was “moderate” in its success, the 
researchers concluded that the “very low delivery costs” of about £35 per child 
made it cost effective and easy to expand rapidly.

“The low cost, digital nature of the intervention provides an innovative route 
forward for providing parenting support and preschool learning to families of 
any background,” the study argued.

The research was funded by the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/research/> and the Esmée Fairbairn foundation 
<http://esmeefairbairn.org.uk/>, with the EasyPeasy app originating from a 2014 
competition run by the Guys & St Thomas’s charity and the Design Council.

Sir Peter Lampl, founder and chair of the Sutton Trust, said: “We know that 
the attainment gap between the richest and the poorest pupils begins before 
they’ve even started school. Tackling this disparity early on is critical to 
breaking the cycle of disadvantage and improving social mobility.”

Previous research commissioned by the Sutton Trust found a 19-month gap in 
development between the richest and poorest children by the age of five.

Parents interested in using the app can join a waiting list at EasyPeasy’s 
website <http://www.easypeasyapp.com/>.
 