
The Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak said he no longer recognises the company he 
built, thanks to creations such as theApple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch>.

He wrote in an interview on Reddit 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/4apj5f/im_apple_cofounder_steve_wozniak_ask_me_anything/d12f5dq>
: “I love my Apple Watch, but - it’s taken us into a jewellery market where 
you’re going to buy a watch between $500 or $1,100 based on how important you 
think you are as a person.

The only difference is the band in all those watches. Twenty watches from $500 
to $1,100. The band’s the only difference? Well this isn’t the company thatApple
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> was originally, or the company 
that really changed the world a lot.”

Fitbit Blaze: the fitness tracker with some of Apple Watch's perks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/05/fitbit-blaze-fitness-tracker-apple-watch-ces>
Wozniak’s answer came in response to a question about what he thought of the 
chief executive Tim Cook’s performance. But while he had critical words for the 
Apple Watch, overall, he voiced his approval of Cook, saying: “He is continuing 
a strong tradition that Steve Jobs was known for of making good products that 
help people do things they want to do in their life, and not taking the company 
into roads of, ‘Oh, we’ll make all our money like by knowing you and 
advertising to you.’ We’ll make good products. And you know, I started out as a 
hardware product guy, so I’m glad to see that.”

Wozniak also had strong words of support for the company in its ongoing battle 
with the FBI over encryption and security on iPhones.


“I come from the side of personal liberties. But there are also other 
problems,”he said 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/IAmA/comments/4apj5f/im_apple_cofounder_steve_wozniak_ask_me_anything/d12ewrj>
, referring to the FBI’s proposed solution of writing a special version of iOS 
to bypass iPhone security features.

“Twice in my life I wrote things that could have been viruses. I threw away 
every bit of source code. I just got a chill inside. These are dangerous, 
dangerous things, and if some code gets written in an Apple product that lets 
people in, bad people are going to find their way to it, very likely.”

Wozniak originally left Apple in 1981, after a traumatic plane crash as a 
pilot left him with anterograde amnesia – the inability to form new memories. 
He opened up about the accident in the interview, writing “I didn’t come out of 
an amnesia state for five weeks, where I didn’t know time was passing.

“When I came out of the amnesia I realised that the Macintosh team (they were 
my favorite, most creative thinking team at Apple, and I was on that team), 
would be fine without me.”

He returned to the University of California, Berkeley, where he had previously 
dropped out just one year before graduation and finished his degree. After 
that, he returned to Apple for a short period before leaving again in 1985. He
said 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=zC4EAAAAMBAJ&lpg=PA13&ots=a_Fs_n1Np8&pg=PA35&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 at the time that the company had “been going in the wrong direction for the 
last five years” and selling most of his stock as he exited.

But now, the unsung co-founder of Apple looks back on his time with a more 
rosy view. “Apple is the most important thing ever in my life … no matter what 
I might go off and try to do outside … I would only say one thing, I am Apple.

“Somehow I grew up with these values that seem kind of incredible, so I always 
was on good terms with Apple and they always liked me, I’m always welcome. I 
could come by, Steve Jobs would always make sure I had a badge that could get 
me into any building. I didn’t use it much, but I can go there. The only 
trouble is I’ll get mobbed.”

When it comes to Apple’s current plans, Wozniak expressed support for the 
company’s reported self-driving car division 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/18/apple-meets-california-officials-self-driving-car>
. “The car market makes total sense to me for Apple, but the important thing is 
that I hope if they get off on a product, something that they could sell and 
make a lot of money for but is not ‘insanely great’ as Steve jobs would say, 
Apple should drop it and start over.”

After leaving Apple, Wozniak built the first universal remote control, the CL9 
Core. The company was sold in 1988, a year after the Core was released, with 
Wozniak briefly pursuing a lifetime goal of teaching computer science to 
elementary school students.


A few months after Wozniak departed, his co-founder Steve Jobs also resigned 
from the firm, to found the competing computer company, NeXT. By the 1990s 
Apple had entered a period of decline, which was only halted by Jobs’ return to 
the firm in 1997. The company is the largest publicly traded firm by market cap 
in the world.
 