
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> sold 3.6m Watches in the 
second quarter of this year, but compared to the 40m sales estimates, does that 
make the company’s first smartwatch a flop?


The Apple Watch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch> has both 
excited some and disappointed others. Before it was even launched, financial 
analysts predicted that Watches would sell in their droves, hitting 40m on 
customer wrists by the end of the first year.

Those estimates, based on the performance of Apple’s iPhone and its 47.5m 
sales in a single quarter, were 80 times larger than any other smartwatch had 
sold in a year.

Device analysts such as CCS Insight’s Ben Wood described the notion of Apple 
Watch being a flop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/23/will-apple-be-the-smartwatch-saviour>
 as “absolute nonsense” and said it would easily be the “most successful 
smartwatch ever”.

Early smartwatch pioneer Pebble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/16/pebble-boss-eric-migicovsky-smartwatches-app>
, which recently launched its newTime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/28/pebble-time-review-simple-effective-answer-apple-watch>
 andTime Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/25/pebble-time-steel-review-metal-body-150-hour-battery-life-smartwatches>
, only sold 1m watches in three years, and Google’sAndroid Wear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/13/google-android-wear-5-1-watch-review-simple-useful-best-for-now>
 watches, which are produced by a variety of manufacturers, only sold 800,000 
before the end of last year.

Even Samsung, which is Apple’s number one rival in the smartphone space, only 
soldsmartwatches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/03/samsung-gear-s-review-can-a-smartwatch-with-a-phone-built-in-replace-a-smartphone>
 in their hundreds of thousands.

Predictions of 40m appear to be way off to the tune of at least 20m, maybe 
more, if thelatest numbers from analyst firm IDC 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS25872215> are accurate.

Six times greater

The latest update to IDC’s worldwide quarterly wearable device tracker puts 
Apple ahead of the pack with 3.6m Watches sold in the second quarter of this 
year. The next biggest smartwatch vendor wasSamsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung>, with 600,000 of its Gear 
smartwatches sold, which makes Apple’s sales six times greater than its closest 
rival.

In terms of all wearable technology, not just smartwatches but including 
fitness trackers primarily classified as “basic wearables” by IDC, Apple’s 3.6m 
Watch sales put it only 0.8m shy of the market leader Fitbit, which sold 4.4m 
devices in Q2.

Fitbit commands 24.3% of the wearable market, leaving Apple with 19.9%, “
China’s Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/16/xiaomi-chinas-equivalent-to-apple>
” Xiaomi with 17.1% and 3.1m sales ofits Mi Band fitness tracker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/04/xiaomi-worlds-second-biggest-wearables-maker>
, Garmin with 3.9% and 700,000 sales, and Samsung in fifth place with 3.3% 
according to IDC’s numbers.

‘Two of every three smart wearables were Apple Watches’

Jitesh Ubrani, senior analyst for IDC, said: “About two of every three smart 
wearables shipped this quarter was an Apple Watch. Although Fitbit outshipped 
Apple, it’s worth noting that Fitbit only sells basic wearables – a category 
that is expected to lose share over the next few years, leaving Apple poised to 
become the next market leader for all wearables.”

Apple’s entry into the wearables space might seem like doom and gloom for 
other players, including Samsung, given it has already secured 20% of the 
market, but that need not be the case. Apple brings attention to the market – 
and with attention comes awareness of competitors and a potential expansion of 
a segment, something smartwatches needed if they ever hoped to be more than a 
geek niche product.

Ramon Llamas from IDC’s wearables team explained: “Its participation benefits 
multiple players and platforms within the wearables ecosystem, and ultimately 
drives total volumes higher.”

The device analysts are clearly satisfied that the Apple Watch is anything 
other than a flop, even if the financial analysts and Wall Street look down on 
not-quite-iPhone sales numbers.

Apple’s success in the smartwatch space will be measured in how many people 
buy the second and third generation devices over the next few years, after the 
novelty has warn off and the early adopters have already bought their devices. 
Only then will Apple Watch’s impact outside the tech-geek niche be clear.

• What Apple needs to get right with its new iPhone 6S and 6S Plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/28/what-apple-needs-to-get-right-new-iphone-6s-plus>
 