
Apple’s CEO Tim Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tim-cook> has 
told investors that augmented reality is going to be “huge” and that the 
company is investing in the technology.

Responding to a question about Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> Cook said that the game had 
shown that “AR can be really great”. “We have been and continue to invest in AR 
in the long run,” he said. “We’ll see whether it’s the next computing platform, 
but regardless it will be huge.”

The comments came during an earnings call to discuss the results of the 
company’s third financial quarter, the three months ending 30 June, in which 
the company earned $42.4bn in revenue, a 15% decline from the same period last 
year.

It’s the second consecutive quarter that Apple has reported a revenue decline, 
following a streak ofuninterrupted growth since 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/apple-iphone-first-revenue-decline-13-years>
. However, the company’s results were slightly better than expected, leading 
the stock to increase more than5% in after-hours trading 
<https://www.thestreet.com/story/13652742/1/apple-aapl-stock-soars-in-after-hours-trading-on-q3-beat.html>
.

The revenue decline was largely credited to a drop in iPhone sales, which 
typically make up aroundtwo-thirds of the company’s revenue 
<http://www.statista.com/statistics/253649/iphone-revenue-as-share-of-apples-total-revenue/>
. Apple sold just 40.4m phones compared to 51.2m shipped the previous quarter.

The company hasn’t issued any major updates to the device range since the 
iPhone 6 was launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/10/apple-watch-iphone-launch-what-we-learned>
 in September 2014, which is likely to have contributed to the slump, but also 
the recently launchedlower cost iPhone SE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/21/iphone-se-4in-apple-smartphone-launched-cheaper-price>
 appears to have cannibalised sales of the more expensive flagship devices.

Apple doesn’t reveal revenue breakdowns per model, but the average iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> sales price appears to have 
dropped from $642 to $595.

Nevertheless, Cook was eager to point out that many of the people who bought 
the iPhone SE are “switchers” – people new to the iPhone and theApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> ecosystem.

The weakening Chinese economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/china-economy-grows-at-slowest-pace-in-25-years-latest-gdp-figures-show>
, which had been a key source of growth for the Cupertino company, also played 
a role. Sales there fell by 33.1% compared with the 112.4% growth in the same 
quarter the previous year.

Despite the disappointing performance in China, Cook said that he’s 
“encouraged about the growth prospects” in the country and that the “underlying 
business there is stronger than the results imply”.

One area of growth is something Apple calls “Services”, which generated nearly 
$6bn of revenue – that’s bigger than the Mac and iPad. Services include Apple 
Music, iCloud storage plans, iTunes, Apple Care, paid apps and Apple Pay 
commissions.

This year is the first year that Apple has separated the services from the 
devices in its financial reporting – a shrewd move by Cook that illustrates 
that the company can still make more money from people who aren’t upgrading 
their devices. Cook said he expects the Services division to be “the size of a 
Fortune 100 company” next year.

Apple expects a slight uptick for the current quarter, predicting that the 
months from July to September will deliver between $45.5bn and $47.5bn in 
earnings, potentially breaking the company’s mini streak of bad results. That’s 
in spite of the fact that theiPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/08/10-brilliant-revisions-apple-iphone-7>
, due to launch on 16 September, is likely to come with only modest incremental 
changes rather than technological breakthroughs (except, perhaps, the
controversial removal of the iPhone jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/22/innovation-e-waste-apple-iphone-7-ditch-headphone-jack>
). This may mean there’s less of a reason for iPhone 6 owners to upgrade.

Apple is still the largest company in the world, with a market cap of more 
than $520bn, $231bn in cash, and a quarterly net profit of $7.8bn, which is the 
value of thewhole of Spotify 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-20/will-a-spotify-ipo-live-up-to-its-8-billion-valuation>
.
 