
The Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> effect shows no sign 
of wearing off - which is excellent news for component designer Arm Holdings.

The UK group was one of the top FTSE risers in early trading this morning - 
and it didn't even have to utter a word to achieve the bounce. Instead, all the 
talking was done last night by executives in Cupertino, California, where Apple 
smashed Wall Street expectations with a set of stellar earnings, which have now 
boosted the shares in the London-listed company which designs the mobile chips 
in the iPad.

Apple has $100bn of cash sitting in its coffers, which will likely renew 
speculation that it might try to acquire a few of its suppliers. Even if that 
theory proves nonsense, traders reckon that Apple's numbers will translate to 
plenty of business for Arm, whose shares rose 3.7% to 601.13p

Meanwhile, the old saying that it takes two views to make a market looks 
apposite in the case ofAshmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ashmoregroup>, which topped the FTSE 100 
leader board in early trading after a poor day on Tuesday.

Its shares rose by 6.6% to 378.3p after Barclays Capital upgraded the stock to 
"overweight" from "equal weight", citing an improving performance at the 
group's emerging market debt fund at a difficult time for the sector. The 
positive take came after a downgrade yesterday by RBS, which hit the shares by 
2%.

Against a "pessimistic backdrop" for the industry, due to deteriorating retail 
confidence in the UK and Europe, BarCap says it prefers emerging-market focused 
Ashmore, among UK-listed asset managers.

The bank is cautious on the British asset management sector, flagging "strong 
equity redemptions" in the UK and high outflows in Europe, while reiterating 
its "underweight" stance on Schroders andHenderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hendersongroup>, which focus on the 
retail segment.

BarCap also downgraded Aberdeen to "equal weight" from "overweight" due to 
strong share outperformance last year and weaker-than-expected flows. Shares in 
the Scottish-based asset managers fall 0.8%.

In the wider market the FTSE 100 was treading water, down 0.2% at 5740.4.
 