
Apple stands to rake in $3bn in revenue from the Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> craze in the next one to 
two years as gamers buy “PokéCoins” from its app store, according to analysts.

The augmented reality game, published by Niantic in partnership with Nintendo, 
can be downloaded for free but iPhone users can use PokéCoins to buy additional 
features.


 A pack of 100 PokéCoins costs 99 cents in Apple’s app store 
<http://apple.co/29j1uDa>, but the price can go up as much as $99.99 for a pack 
of 14,500.

“We believe Apple keeps 30% of Pokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> Go’s revenue spent on iOS 
devices, suggesting upside to earnings,” Needham & Co brokerage analyst Laura 
Martin wrote in a client note on Wednesday.

 Pokémon Go had 21 million active users in the United States alone as of 18 
July – less than two weeks after going live.

Pokémon Go: why our dark world needs escapism more than ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/pokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism>
 The game, which has been rolled out in 35 countries, is also available on 
Android devices.

 Martin said Pokémon Go’s ratio of paid users to total users was 10 times that 
of Candy Crush, the hit game from King Digital that generated more than $1bn of 
revenue in both 2013 and 2014.

 Users in the United States are spending far more time playing the game than 
they are using Facebook or WhatsApp, according to app analytics firmSensor Tower
 <http://bit.ly/29EQaj0>.

 Electronics retailers have also seen a bump in sales of mobile chargers and 
charging cases since the launch of the game.

 Up to Tuesday’s close, Apple’s shares had gained 5% in market value, or about 
$25bn, since the launch of the game in the United States on 6 July. Nintendo’s 
stock has nearly doubled.

 * This article was amended on 21 July 2016. It originally stated that Pokémon 
Go is a Nintendo one – it is in fact published by Niantic, which developed it 
in partnership with Nintendo. It also incorrectly stated that the game launched 
in the US in June, rather than July. These errors have now been corrected.  