
Apple has been punished by investors 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-apple-results-shares-idUSBREA0R0S320140128> 
in thewake of recent financial results 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/miguelhelft/2015/10/27/apple-shares-rise-on-strong-q4-results/#2f319eab1c1e>
 that have posted growth in revenues, iPhone sales and business in China. 
Shareholders wereconcerned <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-21186991> that 
the tech group’s growth was not as meteoric as expected, so they sold down the 
stock.

Apple plans to invest in augmented reality following success of Pokémon Go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/26/apple-earnings-pokemon-go-augmented-reality-steve-cook>
Last week, however, Apple’s shares surged on a 15% decline in revenues, falls 
in sales of iPhones, iPads and Macs, and a 33% drop in Chinese revenue.

Has Wall Street lost its bearings, or does it know something other people 
don’t? After all, it is unlikely that the iPhone will ever repeat the red-hot 
growth of 2014, when larger-screened models drove the company’sbiggest-ever 
quarter <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-31012410> for revenues and profit. 
Smartphone sales generally have cooled. Unlike 2010-12, when annual growth 
rates for all handsets were between 60% and 90%, so far this year worldwide 
sales growthhas been below 1% 
<http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS41636516>.

Apple has underperformed the market, recording two successive quarters of 
fallingiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> sales amid fears 
that consumers will not flock to upgrade when Apple launches new models in the 
autumn. Asked about those concerns last week, Apple’s chief executive, Tim 
Cook, said the non-hardware part of the business would take the strain. Cook 
said he expected the services unit to be a star performer, through iTunes, app 
and iCloud storage sales. “We think [revenue from] services will continue to 
grow very briskly,” he said.

Nonetheless, despite their positive response last week, investors are 
understandably keen for Apple to unearth another big seller, with the iPad and 
the Watch failing to match the iPhone’s success. Could “Project Titan” – the 
codename for Apple’s electric car project – be the new smash hit? Or might 
virtual reality headsets, or some augmented reality product akin to Pokémon Go, 
prompt a new reason for overnight queues outside Apple stores? Analysts are 
sceptical. With abillion iPhones sold 
<http://www.apple.com/newsroom/2016/07/apple-celebrates-one-billion-iphones.html>
 since the handset’s 2007 release, it is the most successful consumer product 
ever, generating almost $625bn (£475bn) in revenues in just nine years. Apple 
will struggle to come up with a concept or a category that matches the iPhone – 
what other hi-tech product could you potentially sell to everyone in the world?

There are 2.5 billion smartphone users around the world, calculates 
<http://ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2016/7/25/platform-wars-final-score> 
Benedict Evans, an analyst at venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz. That 
will rise to 5 billion over time. He estimates there are 630 million iPhones in 
use worldwide, and another 250 million iPads; outside China, there are about 
1.35 billion phones made by the likes of Samsung and HTC that use Google’s 
Android system as well as 175 million Android tablets. Inside China, about 450 
million phones and 200 million tablets use Android software – albeit without 
access to the Google search engine.

“Both Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> and Android have 
sufficient scale for their [smartphone] ecosystems to be viable,” Evans notes. 
“No one else does.”

The likely buyers of the next 2.5 billion smartphones will not be typical 
iPhone customers. “Most of these people are in emerging markets, and most will 
be buying phones for under $50 and certainly under $100,” says Evans. In other 
words, the high-value users Apple has always targeted have mostly been picked 
off. Any future growth will come from those on comparatively lower incomes in 
emerging market countries, and “switchers” from Android.

But with so many iPhones in use, the combination of replacement sales, adjunct 
sales (such as its Watch, which currently needs an iPhone to function) and 
services – its newest focus – has enough momentum to keep Apple profitable. 
Cook’s reference to services is part of the company’s new narrative, where its 
future profits come from users buying a mix of hardware upgrades and content of 
some sort, such as apps, music or TV shows. The latter will include James 
Corden’sCarpool Karaoke, after Apple bought a distribution licence for the 
viral smash hit from CBS. That won’t make the stock rocket, but former stock 
analyst Neil Cybart, whose Above Avalon consultancy focuses on Apple, says the 
character of the people and institutions owning its shares has changed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fapple-iphone-cant-recreate-success-doesnt-need-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de31347c9b1572f85d4a3e3046181c9cf3f0700%2F0_6_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Apple%20could%20never%20recreate%20the%20success%20of%20the%20iPhone.%20But%20it%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20need%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fapple-iphone-cant-recreate-success-doesnt-need-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Apple%20could%20never%20recreate%20the%20success%20of%20the%20iPhone.%20But%20it%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20need%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F30%2Fapple-iphone-cant-recreate-success-doesnt-need-to%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8de31347c9b1572f85d4a3e3046181c9cf3f0700%2F0_6_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Fears over Apple’s prospects in China caused Carl Icahn to bale out of the 
stock. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
Apple used to be a “growth stock”: its price rose in a long bull run, 
beginning when Steve Jobs rejoined in 1997, through to a trough in June 2013 of 
$56, to what looks like a final peak of $130 in May 2015. Since then, says 
Cybart, the growth buyers have been replaced by value investors who want a 
reliable dividend, not a rollercoaster ride. Writing ahead of last week’s 
results, he called it an “expectations reset 
<http://www.aboveavalon.com/notes/2016/7/21/the-great-apple-expectations-reset>
”, and suggested: “One sign that a company’s expectations have truly been reset 
[with Wall Street] is that company’s stock price increases on negative news.” 
That duly happened.

Two notable stockholders exemplify this shift. The first is Carl Icahn, an 
activist investor. He bought into Apple in 2012, repeatedlysuggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/18/apple-shares-carl-icahn-stock-market-value>
 the stock was worth double its price, thensold all his Apple stock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/29/billionaire-investor-carl-icahn-sells-entire-stake-in-apple>
 in April, citing fears about China after Apple’s earnings fell.

The second investor is Warren Buffett, renowned for being uninterested in tech 
stocks, but very interested in solid long-term returns. A month after Icahn 
dumped his holding, Buffett’s Berkshire Hathawaybought a $1bn stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/16/warren-buffett-apple-stocks-berkshire-hathaway>
 in Apple. Buffett sees Apple as a reliable cash machine through its dividend, 
which it began paying in 2012.

And the dividend is attractive, as long as you don’t think that the iPhone 
maker is about to fade away – which, as Evans points out, is probably a safe 
bet. Richard Windsor, formerly of Nomura Research and now running his own Radio 
Free Mobile consultancy, says it is simpler to think of Apple stock not as 
equity, but a bond – paying a return (through its dividend) on the investment 
of buying it.

“Apple is unlikely to see much in the way of growth but it is continuing to 
distance its ecosystem from Google’s,” henoted 
<http://www.radiofreemobile.com/apple-q3-16a-high-yield/> last week. “This 
gives me confidence that its superb profitability and cashflow are likely to 
remain intact for some time to come.”

He points out that Apple’s dividend is currently running at $52bn a year; that 
gives it an effective yield of 9.8% per annum on what is seen as a low-risk 
stock. Over the past quarter the yield hasremained above 2% 
<https://ycharts.com/companies/AAPL/dividend_yield> and dividends are paid 
quarterly. Of course, unlike a bond, there is no guarantee either of getting 
the capital invested in the shares back, or of a regular payout. But, Windsor 
points out: “For those that are not worried about capital growth, this is a 
no-brainer. Most companies with bonds yielding 10% are highly distressed.”

Apple, however, is not in distress – though Cook must hope that this autumn’s 
phone releases regain momentum, alongside new versions of the Watch, iPad Pro 
and Mac computers. Revenues will probably never hit the heights of 2014 again. 
But when he visits the studios of Apple’s design chief Jonathan Ive to see the 
latest car mock-up, Cook won’t have to worry where the company’s next billion 
is coming from. We have reached peak iPhone, but it will remain a money-spinner 
for some time yet.

WHAT’S ON THE WAY?

After the blockbuster hits of the iPod, iPhone and iPad, what lurks in Apple’s 
laboratories and design studios that could revive its success in hardware? 
Nobody outside Apple is certain – the company is notoriously secretive – but 
its hirings and patent filings give strong clues.

Virtual reality
Headsets that immerse the user in video and audio may be the next big thing. 
Facebookspent $2bn on the company behind the pioneering Oculus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jul/22/facebook-oculus-rift-acquisition-virtual-reality>
 virtual reality headsets, and other technology companies are investing in the 
concept heavily.

Tim Cook has called VR “really cool” and patents have been filed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/18/apple-patent-virtual-reality-iphone-carrying-headset>
 – but any future product might depend on how the broader market develops.

Augmented reality
Superimposing virtual data on to real scenes, or augmented reality, is the 
concept behind the Pokémon Go craze. Microsoft and Google are working on their 
own forms, and Cook talked it up in the latest earnings call. Future iPhones 
could form the basis for an Apple AR push.

TV content and channels
Apple has bought distribution rights from CBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/26/james-corden-carpool-karaoke-apple-music-series>
 to James Corden’s hugely popularCarpool Karaoke, where celebrities such as 
Adele join the chatshow host for in-car singalongs, which will be distributed 
through its Apple Music service. It is also seeking would-be participants for a 
reality show entitledPlanet of the Apps.

Such moves suggest that Apple will launch its own TV service through its Apple 
TV set-top box, based on a bundle of shows cherry-picked from major channels.

Cars
Documents and hirings clearly show that Apple is working on a car under the 
codename of Project Titan. Electric? Surely. Self-driving? Perhaps. The 
timescale is uncertain, but the company recently brought back Bob Mansfield, 
the manager behind products like the iMac, iPad and Watch to oversee Titan. 
 