
Founded on 1 April 1976, Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
celebrates its 40th birthday on Friday and from a garage in Los Altos to a new 
spaceship-shaped HQ in Cupertino, it has come a long way.

It enters its fifth decade with a market cap of $621.8bn and, in CEO Tim 
Cook’s words, “the mother of all balance sheets” with almost $216bn of cash 
reserves.

But from battles with the government over privacy to questions as to what its 
next big thing is, there are challenges ahead – and not just those facing many 
other 40-year-olds … like spending too much money on a midlife crisis car that 
it probably doesn’t need.

1) Software stasis: the need for improvements

Any company whose former CEO regularly boasted that “it just works” can expect 
criticism when its technology, well, doesn’t just work. This month has seen 
user fury overthe iOS 9.3 software, non-working links and crashing iPhones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/30/broken-iphone-links-frustrate-thousands-apple-fix-problem>
, which came hot on the heels ofSafari browser crashes in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/27/apple-iphone-users-angered-safari-browser-crash-how-to-fix-it>
.

This isn’t just about bugs: Apple’s iTunes desktop software remains a magnet 
for criticism of its clunky interface, whilethe iOS software’s familiarity has 
started to breed contempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/24/apples-ios-hardware-software-smartphones>
 in some quarters.

Fears that Apple is losing its software edge are becoming an annual tradition 
<https://marco.org/2015/01/04/apple-lost-functional-high-ground>. Across its 
business – from iCloud to the App Store to Game Center to notifications to 
Apple Music – there are questions about its attention to detail. Or, indeed, 
its attention to thingsjust working.

Apple’s challenge – which applies just as much to Google, Facebook and any 
other big tech company you care to mention – is to balance stability and 
usability with the rapid pace at which new technologies are being introduced.

2) New frontiers from wearables and cars to VR

Will Apple ever have an iPhone-sized hardware hit again? It’s a strange 
question: often resting on the assumption that another device can be as 
pervasiveand personal as the smartphone.

It’s more likely that Apple’s business will grow based on a family of products 
– lesser-sized hits, but still hits – that complement the iPhone. iPad sales 
(and tablet sales more generally) have tailed off; there’s still little 
evidence that theApple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch> is appealing to anyone 
beyond early adopters; and it’s early days for the post-”hobby” Apple TV device.

What next? Apple executives continue to perform the corporate equivalent of a 
nudge and a wink whenever asked about making a car – “it’s going to be 
Christmas Eve for a while,”Cook said in February 
<http://www.theverge.com/2016/2/26/11120574/tim-cook-apple-car-speculation-like-christmas-eve>
 – but entering that particular category is an immense (and thus fascinating) 
challenge: from design to technology to the most basic future-proofing 
decisions, such as whether it’s driven by a human or by whatever Siri becomes 
by the time it goes on sale.

Apple’s strength in its modern (iPod and everything since) incarnation has 
been as much about what it doesn’t make and release as what it does. There will 
be plenty more opportunities tonot make products in the years ahead, from 
flatscreen TVs to virtual reality headsets.

3) Picking its privacy fights carefully

Many thousands of words have been written about Apple’s recent tussle with the 
FBI over unlocking theiPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> of 
one of the San Bernardino shooters. The dropping of the case has by no means 
settled the wider issues around encryption, privacy and public safety.

Cook and Apple were bold in their decision to take the dispute public in the 
way that they did. Whether you agree with the company’s strongly-worded views 
on the FBI’s demands or not, it was an important debate to have in public. Not 
least because it alerts us to the fact that governmentsmay strive to keep 
future cases like this secret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/fbi-apple-case-dropped-san-bernardino-iphone-far-from-over>
.

Apple’s stance is now set, though, which puts it in the forefront (and firing 
line) of the wider debates around technology and privacy that are looming. The 
company will be picking its battles carefully – and certainly using the topic to
take regular jabs at Google from keynote stages 
<http://www.stuff.tv/features/apples-wwdc-keynote-repeatedly-smacked-google-in-face-you-just-didnt-see-punches>
 – while accepting the scrutiny that comes with its privacy-protecting promises.

How will that protection extend to Apple customers in, say, China and Russia? 
And just as important as pushing back against governments is the ongoing arms 
race against criminals: ensuring that the technology in iOS and Apple’s other 
platforms remains an effective barrier to anyone with cyber-mischief in mind.

4) Growing in to its role as a media gatekeeper

Apple has historically seen itself as marrying technology with the liberal 
arts. In 2016 that means getting to grips with a role as a powerful filter, or 
gatekeeper, for liberal arts, entertainment and information.

It’s already been a bumpy road at points, as controversies over App Store 
censorship ofnudity in satirical game Papers, Please 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/15/apple-censoring-games-music-books>
; agame parodying North Korean propaganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/aug/06/apple-bans-joyful-executions-game>
; games aboutthe war in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/jan/08/endgame-syria-apple-rejection>
 andsmartphone supply chains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/sep/14/apple-phone-story-rejection>
; andan app tracking deaths caused by US drone strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/30/apple-removing-drone-strikes-app>
 showed. Not to mention digital comics firm Comixologyrefusing to distribute on 
iOS an issue of Saga comic featuring gay sex scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2013/apr/11/apple-saga-comic-app-store-ban>
, after (wrongly, as it turned out) assuming that Apple would ban it.

In some of these cases, Apple has changed – or at least clarified – its 
policies. Its belief that books, music and films are more deserving to tackle 
some of those issues than games remains a curious cultural blind spot for the 
company. But there will be other rows ahead. Music streaming companies such as 
Spotify are grumbling about the 30% cut Apple takes of their in-app 
subscriptions on iOS while blocking them from pointing users to their websites 
to subscribe directly; Amazon locked horns with Apple over in-app Kindle ebook 
sales in the past; and video streaming services may do so over subscriptions in 
the future.

Then there’s news. The Apple News app has the potential to become one of the 
main filters – alongside Facebook and whatever Google comes up with forAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> – for reading news. Not to 
mention a key source of advertising revenues for its publishers.

These are interesting times for a company that can be thin-skinned when it 
comes to criticism: the concerns here aren’t just that Apple might take action 
to reduce the distribution of critical stories or sceptical publications; but 
also of the potential chilling effect for publishers who expect it to do that – 
the Comixology effect.

5) Corporate responsibility: workers, women, climate and more

Finally, to the policies that might spark some of that critical news coverage. 
Due to its wealth and influence, Apple has been scrutinised for some time 
around issues including worker rights, environmental action and equality.

At times it has been praised for taking strong public stands on issues such as 
gay marriage and climate change – Tim Cook once angrily told a campaigner 
against action to tackle climate change to“get out of this stock” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/03/tim-cook-climate-change-sceptics-ditch-apple-shares>
. At other times, however, it has been attacked for falling short of 
expectations – if not always legal obligations – onworking conditions in the 
Chinese factories that make its products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/19/apple-under-fire-again-for-working-conditions-at-chinese-factories>
.

Sometimes, the small questions around these issues can hint at wider 
challenges too. Why didSiri seem to have a problem with gay marriage in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/16/apple-russian-siri-homophobic-refuses-answer>
? Why was period-trackingleft out of the initial release of Apple’s Health app 
<http://fusion.net/story/147020/finally-the-iphone-will-have-a-period-tracker-for-women/>
? But the company can also drive conversation and action with its big moves: the
$1.5bn green bond announced in February 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/20/apple-green-bond-environment-energy-toyota-climate-change>
 and its willingness toopen up about its efforts to reduce its impact on the 
environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/22/apple-climate-change-is-real-and-its-a-real-problem>
.

These issues aren’t restricted to Apple by any means: journalists and gadget 
buyers alike may be even more willing to ask hard questions in the years ahead. 
How are the materials inside our smartphones sourced? How are the workers 
assembling them treated? How green are those factories? How white and male are 
the executives making the decisions about these and other strategies?

Under Cook’s leadership, Apple has shown itself willing to open up on these 
issues already, and take bold stances. Continuing that may be a competitive 
advantage, but more importantly, it’s a necessity.
 