
2012 was a landmark year for apprenticeships. The National Apprenticeships 
Service (NAS) <http://apprenticeships.org.uk/> announced plans to expand 
apprenticeships to amaster's degree equivalent 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2012/dec/28/lawyers-accountants-need-not-have-degrees>
, introduced agrant to help small- and medium-sized employers 
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/employers/steps-to-make-it-happen/incentive.aspx>
 take on their first apprentice, took steps toenforce the quality and minimum 
duration 
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/news-media/latest-news/~/link.aspx?_id=424f7e0abed646938c007ed03238518b&_z=z>
 of apprenticeships and launched the search for theapprentice team of the year 
<http://apprenticeships.org.uk/Home/Be-An-Apprentice/Team-of-the-Year.aspx>.

But the real sign that apprenticeships are gaining momentum and popularity is 
the sheer volume of applications and vacancies. Newdata shows there were almost 
1,127,000 apprenticeship applications submitted 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2012/dec/31/apprenticeships-applications-vacancies-online-data>
 and 106,510 vacancies advertised online in 2012.

The research also reveals that the most popular apprenticeship was in business 
and administration.

July was one of the most popular months to apply for an apprenticeship, 
generating 124,770 applications. Meanwhile, Thursday 16 August (A-level results 
day) was the most popular day to apply, with nearly 5,730 applications 
submitted.

Although there was a pretty even split between genders, slightly more 
applications came from males than females – 56% and 43% respectively. That 
said, more women are taking up apprenticeships; the number of young women 
applying for apprenticeships has grown by about 40% year-on-year, from 31,262 
in November 2011 to 44,851 in November 2012.

The industry sectors that generated the most vacancies were business, 
administration and law (42,600), retail and commercial enterprise (19,780), and 
engineering and manufacturing technologies (15,000).

The research showed that overall there were more than 10 applications 
submitted online for every vacancy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2012/dec/31/apprenticeships-applications-vacancies-online-data>
. It is perhaps surprising that there was such disparity in the ratio of 
applications to jobs; hospitality apprenticeships received 4.6 applications per 
vacancy. But we know that the less popular sectors want to do more to celebrate 
careers in these industries, for example,Caterer & Hotelkeeper's Think Again 
campaign <http://www.caterersearch.com/think-again/>.

Such competition means it's vital candidates make their applications stand 
out. If you're applying viaNAS's vacancies service 
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/>, here are three tips to make your 
application fit for the job:

• Find out more about the employer, the training provider and the job 
description before applying.

• Identify yourself, your skills and interests clearly – be professional, but 
try to allow your personality to come out.

• Tailor your application to each vacancy – don't just send the same CV and 
covering letter to each employer.

Jaine Bolton is director of the NAS <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 