
A selection of 12 new and notable apps for you today:

Jesus Christ Superstar 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/jesus-christ-superstar/id542037174>

This is the latest high-profile second-screen TV app, launching for British 
broadcaster ITV's Superstar reality show. As Andrew Lloyd-Webber looks for a 
Jesus for his upcoming musical revival, viewers can see social media feeds, get 
backstage info, and get links to performance downloads. When the actual musical 
goes on its arena tour, meanwhile, there'll be features for that too.
iPhone / iPad

Hooters Calendar Girls Live 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/hooters-calendar-girls-live/id533646415?mt=8>

Stay classy, iOS users. This new app based on the Hooters restaurant chain 
promises the chance to "socialize with the beautiful Hooters Calendar Girls 
from all over the world". As long as you pay them. Well, there are free images 
and video, but the promise of "special premium content" in return for credits, 
plus messaging and live chat features. It's the work of Handmade Mobile 
Entertainment, which also runs the Flirtomatic and Take Me Out Flirting apps.
iPhone / iPad

Word Lens 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.questvisual.wordlens>

Word Lens made a big splash on iOS last year with its ability to translate 
signs, menus and other printed words simply by pointing your device's camera at 
them. Now it's available onAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> too, with language packs for 
English-Spanish, English-French and English-Italian. One is included for free.
Android

SoulCraft <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/soulcraft/id537997329?mt=8>

I wrote about SoulCraft when the free-to-play action-RPG was released as an 
open beta on Androidin March 2012 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/appsblog/2012/mar/26/apps-rush-mog-alltop-ipad>
. Now it's available on iOS, with the same angels/demons/humans focus, and new 
content being added regularly. Interestingly, while the Android version was 
published by developer MobileBits, larger casual games firm Bigpoint is listed 
as the publisher on iOS – hinting at a deal between the two companies.
iPhone / iPad

Blottr <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.blottr>

Citizen-journalism startup Blottr has released an Android app, following the 
iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> version from July 2011. 
It aims to provide a quick way to capture news stories and upload them to 
Blottr's website from a smartphone. The company says the iOS version has been 
downloaded more than 35k times, with mobile now driving 23% of the site's 
traffic.
Android

Kapu Forest 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=air.com.kamukamu.forest>

Here's a rarity: a beautiful-looking app for kids that's launching 
(near-enough) simultaneously on iOS and Android. Kapu Forest is aimed at 1-4 
year-olds, with a forest full of virtual creatures to play with. The link above 
is for Android, buthere's the iOS version 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/kapu-forest/id533425930?mt=8>.
Android / iPhone / iPad

Keymonk Keyboard 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.keymonk.latin>

Is there room for another big third-party Android keyboard besides SwiftKey 
and Swype? Golden Keymonk hopes so: its Keymonk Keyboard app promises users can 
"Sweep words with both fingers twice as fast as Swype or SlideIT" (that being 
another app). The both-fingers element being the key feature here: the company 
says it has "multi-sweep patent pending technology".
Android

Wrestling Revolution (PPV) 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=air.WRPPV1>

It's described as an "ongoing work in progress", so I'm not sure how well 
Android game Wrestling Revolution plays – although it looks nice judging by the
YouTube demo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YxSS4biimqs&feature=player_embedded#!>. But 
here's what grabbed my attention: its claim to be the "world's first 'episodic' 
wrestling game - featuring weekly storylines and match-ups that you would 
expect from a TV show." A smart idea.
Android

Moops <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/moops/id510678164?mt=8>

There's definitely a Rayman-esque vibe to Moops, a new iOS game from... Well, 
from Moops Games. It sees two pest controllers "squishing, catching, trapping 
and popping" an infestation of critters in their town, over 18 cartoon-3D 
levels.
iPhone / iPad

Ships N' Battles 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.skahal.shipsnbattles>

Battleships in 3D? Well, that's how it works in the real world with the board 
game. But in this Android game's case, the 3D refers to the graphics, with a 
choice of views of what you're blowing up. It joins the existing iOS and Mac 
versions.
Android

Ringtonium Pro 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bamboo.ringtoniumpro>

Creating your own ringtones? It's a bit fiddly in most cases. Ringtonium aims 
to help, having made its name on iPhone, and now crossing to Android. It 
promises to be a much-easier way to create, edit and share your own tones.
Android

I Woke Up <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/i-woke-up/id528527121?mt=8>

Here's a fun new weapon in any passive-aggressive parental battles over who's 
getting up most in the night to attend to a baby. "Are you the one who wakes up 
every night to take care of your baby? Now you can prove it! Check every time 
you get up, and show it to your partner when he finally wakes up (after a good 
night sleep.....)"
iPhone
 