
ARCADIA BY IAIN PEARS <http://arcadiatheapp.com/>

iOS

There have been apps of books before, with varying success. But this is a 
novel written specifically to be an app. While it makes use of the interactive 
potential with its interweaving characters, the medium never swamps the 
message: it’s a very good read indeed.

YOUTUBE GAMING <https://gaming.youtube.com/>

iOS/Android

Games are huge on YouTube: gamers like PewDiePie and the Diamond Minecart are 
even more popular there than Taylor Swift. This is a dedicated app for watching 
favourite YouTube gamers and discovering new channels – with an emphasis on 
live streams as well as archived videos.


 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/wonderbox-explore-learn-science/id949704805?mt=8>

WONDERBOX 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/wonderbox-explore-learn-science/id949704805?mt=8>

iOS

Children are using apps like Instagram and YouTube in their millions, even if 
they shouldn’t be. WonderBox blends the best of both – creativity and 
educational videos – in an app for parents and children. An inventive idea, 
artfully crafted.

AMAZON UNDERGROUND 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/feature.html?ie=UTF8&docId=1000854643&ref_=mas_surl_undrgrnd>

Android

Amazon’s latest app for bargain-hunters could be a boon for anyone fed up with 
freemium games. It offers a list of apps and games for free, including any 
freemium components, with Amazon picking up the bill by paying developers for 
every minute you use them.

NUMEROUS 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/numerous-lifes-most-important/id797642904?mt=8>

iOS/Android

Claiming to track “life’s most important numbers”, Numerous aims to be a 
single dashboard for your digital stats, from steps counted by your 
fitness-tracker, to your social media followers or the number of days until 
your anniversary. A fun tool for number-crunchers.

MICROSOFT TRANSLATOR <http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/translator/default.aspx>

iOS/Android

If you’ve ever turned to Google Translate on a phone to make yourself 
understood abroad, now it’s got competition. Microsoft’s app supports 50 
languages, and includes a feature that speaks phrases for you, plus smartwatch 
support.

KAREN <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/karen-by-blast-theory/id945629374?mt=8>

iOS/Android

Karen sounds a bit scary at first: a “life coach” who asks you questions in 
order to build a psychological profile of you. Except, as you go along, there’s 
more to it interactions than you expected. Part science and part interactive 
drama, and always thought-provoking.

MOODNOTES 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/moodnotes-thought-journal/id1019230398?mt=8>

iOS

Moodnotes is part of the wider “mindfulness” trend, which in this case uses 
cognitive behavioural therapy to help you track your moods and getgive tips on 
how to deal with negative moments. It’s a stylish, simple logging tool with 
plenty of practical advice.

NINJA JAMM 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=net.ninjatune.ninjaJamm&hl=en_GB>

 iOS/Android

This app is the work of independent label Ninja Tune, tapping its stable of 
artists for songs and samples that you can remix, or mix into new tracks of 
your own. It’s playful rather than intimidating, and there are plenty of tune 
packs sold as in-app purchases to experiment with.

MSTY <https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.msty.app&hl=en_GB>

 iOS/Android

People are messaging about music in apps like WhatsApp and Snapchat in their 
hundreds of millions, but MSTY is focused purely on music messaging. You pick a 
song, a background then type a message before sending to a friend – a fun idea 
with potential for more.
 