
1. I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cX9kwfkHIcM>

“Don’t believe the hype.” Those are the words muttered by Alex Turner after 
introducing his band in the video to their single I Bet You Look Good on the 
Dancefloor, their debut on Domino. That was the moment Arctic Monkeys’ hype 
skyrocketed from fans filesharing the group’s early music on web forums and 
MySpace into something inescapable. The four sheepish teenagers captured on 
film were not the kind of obvious stars you’d expect such a blistering 
performance from, but this was the start of it all. Dancefloor, still their 
biggest hit so far, captured the musical zeitgeist of the mid-00s, with the 
post-punk and garage rock revivals allowing guitar bands to make a huge impact. 
“Lighting the fuse might result in a bang,” goes the pre-chorus, which summed 
up the breakdown of the borders between the mainstream and the independent. 
Paying no heed to Turner’s warning, the nation bought the single, sending the 
track straight to No 1.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpK7egZaT3hs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpK7egZaT3hs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpK7egZaT3hs&media=>
2. When the Sun Goes Down <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EqkBRVukQmE>

When the Sun Goes Down followed its predecessor to No 1, and it was also the 
most structurally and lyrically multi-dimensional song on their debut album. 
Turner’s reputation as a great storyteller began with this contemporary view of 
Jarvis Cocker’sSex City <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wLpDyvPqm1s> and 
symbolised the passing of the Sheffield torch. Turner’s greatest scorn is 
reserved not for the woman looking for custom who is “scantily clad beneath the 
clear night sky”, but for the “scummy man … I bet he’ll rob you if he can”. In 
what feels like a concerted attack, each passing second becomes more piercing 
and aggressive as the group goad him into admitting “what his story might be”. 
Turner’s breathless vocals and Helders’ racing drums come at breakneck speed – 
the soundtrack of excitement and a club anthem for years to come.

3. A Certain Romance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jxDRQrlQ-EU>

A Certain Romance is on the surface a lament about the claustrophobia of 
living in a town untouched by imagination. But this isn’t a protest song. If 
anything, it’s about acceptance: a song that documents unease about a culture 
in decline and being part of generation approaching adulthood. Turner’s choice 
of contrasting “knackered Converse” and “trackie bottoms tucked in socks” 
presents two subcultures in opposition in the same environment. Growing apart 
from your peers is a rite of passage for all of us, and with all those 
irreplaceable, wasted nights: “Well over there, there’s friends of mine / What 
can I say? I’ve known them for a long, long time / And they might overstep the 
line / But you just cannot get angry in the same way.” A Certain Romance 
insists it is futile trying to change others when your destiny is the same 
“around here”.

4. Fluorescent Adolescent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ma9I9VBKPiw>

Debut LP Whatever People Say I Am, That’s What I’m Not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jan/13/popandrock.shopping6> was 
followed 15 months later byFavourite Worst Nightmare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/apr/20/popandrock.alexispetridis>. 
Capitalising on their momentum, Favourite Worst Nightmare was recorded in 
December 2006 and produced by James Ford of Simian Mobile Disco, whose guidance 
added a dancier dimension and different genres for the group to pluck new 
inspiration from. Turner delivers his lines more akin to scat singing, while 
his counterparts laid down a ska-indebted rhythm, with a playful hurdy-gurdy 
guitar lead. Turner’s then girlfriend, Johanna Bennett, co-wrote the single 
with him in a hotel room and was perhaps responsible for the new, progressive 
characterisation of women in their music; she’s “discarded all the naughty 
nights for niceness”, and it’s the boy who is the slag.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPltKDFVAkXs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPltKDFVAkXs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPltKDFVAkXs&media=>
5. 505 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wj-OPruXPqQ>

Just as on their debut album, on their second Arctic Monkeys saved their best 
song until last. Furnished by an Ennio Morricone organ sample (taken from the 
soundtrack toThe Good, the Bad and the Ugly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/34970/good.the.bad.and.the.ugly>), 
Turner’s imagery and scene setting are suitably vivid and worthy of the silver 
screen: “In my imagination you’re waiting, lying on your side / With your hands 
between your thighs.” The track unfolds patiently, from suspended notes and 
guitar flourishes (played by Miles Kane) to a frenetic finish. Turner’s words 
are among his most poignant and tender, particularly at the climax: “But I 
crumble completely when you cry,” he yells, before the rest of the group crash 
into view. It’s a perfect finale.

6. Crying Lightning <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fLsBJPlGIDU>

The lead single from the third Arctic Monkeys album, Humbug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/20/arctic-monkeys-humbug-cd-review>
, arrived a year after Turner linked with Miles Kane to release an album as the 
Last Shadow Puppets. The gap between Favourite Worst Nightmare and Humbug found 
Arctic Monkeys adopting a darker sound, influenced by their friendship with 
Josh Homme ofQueens of the Stone Age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/queensofthestoneage>, who co-produced the 
album. Structurally, it’s one of the group’s most sophisticated and interesting 
songs, adopting Homme’s tecehnique of the dramatic pause. Lyrically, Turner 
explores his contempt for the mind games between him and his partner. The title 
refers to the running mascara of girls when they cry – a spectacle he was once 
fond of – and Turner becomes more and more contemptuous as he picks apart her 
sweet demeanour.

7. Cornerstone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d1h2_TygQYM>

Richard Ayoade <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-ayoade>’s 
hilarious video for Cornerstone presented Turner as he had never seen before; 
self-aware, a little seedy, and helplessly saccharine – beyond forlorn as he 
chases the phantom of a former flame. Ayoade’s clip captures the frontman as a 
hapless fool, and for once you wish he would stop oversharing to save himself 
the embarrassment. Everything reminds him of her to the point of driving him 
insane (Cornerstone is the name of a counselling and therapy centre in 
Sheffield), before Turner admits “I’m beginning to think I’ve imagined you all 
along.” This song set the blueprint for the dreamy reveries and lilting ballads 
Turner wrote for thesoundtrack to Ayoade’s film Submarine 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/reviews/v6cg> a year later.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLIQz6zZi7R0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLIQz6zZi7R0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLIQz6zZi7R0&media=>
8. The Hellcat Spangled Shalalala <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dAlRXC19hmE>

A highlight of their confused fourth album Suck It and See 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/02/arctic-monkeys-suck-it-and-see-review>
, The Hellcat Spangled Shalalala is (lyrically speaking) Turner at his best. 
Characterised by a strolling, melodic bassline, and the interplay of wistful, 
ringing guitars, Turner paints an impressionistic canvas more reminiscent of 
Monet than Morrissey. The title’s vagueness is central to the song’s magic: 
just what exactly is The Hellcat Spangled Shalalala? “That’s Alex’s 
imagination,” said Nick O’Malley at the time, while drummer Matt Helders added: 
“I don’t even know.” Hard to tell, but the narrative evokes plenty of fantasy. 
The Hellcat Spangled Shalalala is perhaps a feeling more than anything else – 
if not, it’s certainly a phrase for a sparkling singalong.

9. Do I Wanna Know? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bpOSxM0rNPM>

In 2013, with two members now living in Los Angeles, Arctic Monkeys entered a 
new phase of their career. Despite their popularity in Europe, cracking America 
remained a target. What was needed was a statement: enter Do I Wanna Know? 
Shaped by Jamie Cook’s monolithic riff, this brooding, slow-burning number was 
a fully realised take on the attempts at heavy, dark rock heard on Humbug. 
Their reuniting with Josh Homme saw them trade denim for leather, and Turner’s 
smouldering vocal performance is loaded with innuendo and desire. Arctic 
Monkeys sold their adopted home’s sound back to them, and the albumAM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/08/arctic-monkeys-am-review> hit 
the US top 10.

10. I Wanna Be Yours <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6ayyfucIl6M>

The irony of AM’s most poignant and touching song – and, in a wider sense, 
Turner’s songwriting development – is that his journey leads him to find the 
answers he needs through the words of others. OnI Wanna Be Yours 
<http://www.nme.com/blogs/nme-blogs/john-cooper-clarke-on-alex-turners-lyrics-and-writing-i-wanna-be-yours>
, Turner learns about devotion through John Cooper Clarke, specifically his 
poem of the same name.Clarke applauded Turner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jkiz8R1VyI> for “spotting the romantic hards” 
in his composition, though it didn’t stop his disciple from adding a few lines 
of his own. Turner’s lessons come as a swooning, Spectoresque arrangement 
fashioned with a personal and creative confidence that leaves anyone weak at 
the knees. “Secrets I have held in my heart / Are harder to hide than I 
thought,” sings Turner, finally offering himself as warm, deep, sincere and, 
most importantly, dependable.
 