
There was a beautifully serendipitous irony to the timing of the revelations 
that a number of high-profile British musicians, including Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/jul/10/arctic-monkeys-rock-stars-tax-avoidance>
, had been using a tax-avoidance scheme called Liberty to shield their money 
from the Inland Revenue by stashing it away in Jersey. When the story broke 
yesterday, thousands of teachers, firefighters, council staff and other public 
sector workers were on strike to defend the services for which taxation, in one 
form or another, pays.

There is, of course, a long history of entertainers bitching about 
contributing to the common purse. The best-known example is the Beatles' 
Taxman, wherein George Harrison gracelessly complained about the Wilson 
government's fiscal policy at the same time that he was consorting with Hindu 
gurus and urging his followers abandon materialism. Harrison, at least, had the 
decency to make his hypocritical stance public. The same can't be said for this 
week's blushing celebrity faces.

Criticism should especially apply to the Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> – whose members have 
sheltered up to £1.1m in the Channel Islands – as they've long traded on their 
image as a band of the people, with Turner cast as a working-class hero, a 
snotty, sharp-minded northern kid in the mould of the young Lennon, cutting 
through the bullshit and telling it like it is. They could do with a reminder 
of just how much they owe to the state they're so reluctant to fund. Singer 
Alex Turner may have ascended to the elite, dating models and living the high 
life, but taxation paid for the hospital where he was born, the school where he 
was educated and the schools which paid his (teacher) parents' wages, the 
street lamps that lit his way home from rehearsals, and the benefits that 
sustained his bandmates when they were out of work.
 Alex Turner drops his microphone at the Brits in one of the most shocking 
acts of rock'n'roll vandalism every witnessed. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Their shtick reached a peak at this year's Brit awards, when in an incoherent 
and semi-nonsensical speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cEVkt0fLWKA&feature=kp>, he posed as the 
plucky underdog, arguing that rock'n'roll was a force of rebellion that could 
still smash through the "glass ceiling" keeping it down (ironically, if anyone 
could afford a glass ceiling, of purest Ravenscroft crystal, it was Turner). 
For this, he was celebrated by the NME with an unintentionally hilarious 
call-to-arms cover,depicting Turner as a latterday Kitchener with the headline 
"Rock'N'Roll Needs You" 
<http://images.thevine.com.au/resources/images/000/275/275120_nme_591w.jpg>. 
The same NME, a week later, gave a Villain of the Year award to One Direction's 
Harry Styles. Styles, interestingly, had actually spoken out on tax avoidance, 
urging the chancellor to crack down on loopholes, while Turner & co were 
happily diverting their dollars into exactly such an enterprise. Sadly, so was 
Styles: it soon emerged that 1D themselves were channeling their cash through 
holding companies in Ireland to avoid UK tax.

Perhaps the poor sap didn't know. Anyone can make a mistake. Katie Melua, who 
wasonce given a Tax Superhero Award by Christian Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/10/christian-aid-brands-katie-melua-fallen-hero-following-alleged-tax-avoidance>
 after claiming to have paid "nearly half of what comes to me in taxes", was 
reportedly mortified once she discovered that £850,000 of her money had been 
put into Liberty, and – her spokespeople assure us – immediately paid it back.
 Katie Melua has promised to pay back the tax she avoided through Liberty. 
Photograph: IBL/Rex Features 
With other culprits, there's a sense of "Well, what did we expect?" No one, 
surely, is particularly surprised to hear of Andrew Lloyd Webber, Anne 
Robinson, Gary Barlow or Michael Caine shielding their wealth in offshore 
schemes. Some names, however, are a little disappointing. Mark Knopfler, for 
example, who once wrote aDire Straits song about the Battle of Orgreave 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zja63r8O2jU> from the point of view of the 
miners. Or George Michael, whosefirst hit with Wham!  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=doZ6wOJHu_E>was a subversive celebration of 
life on benefits, but who now uses the Liberty scheme and says, "I would feel 
feel enormously unhappy about paying 50% tax to another Tory government." (Most 
of us, George, don't get to choose, except via the ballot box.)

Fan reaction to the Arctic Monkeys furore has been mixed, but the temptation 
to snarkily quote lyrics has proven irresistible: "What a scummy man/ Just give 
him half a chance, I bet he'll rob you if he can."That song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUatH8zI6Qc>, of course, was a bleak piece of 
social realism about prostitution on the streets of Sheffield, a city in which 
the band exhibit a great deal of civic pride: they introduce themselves on 
stage as "The Arctic Monkeys, from High Green, Sheffield", and the area 
telephone prefix 0114 is printed on Matt Helders' drumhead. If they really 
cared about their hometown, they could always consider what that £1m could do 
for a city in which the number of people using food banks has almost doubled in 
the last 12 months, instead of leaving it to gather dust in Jersey.

The usually mouthy Alex Turner has, so far, declined to comment. And why, his 
defenders will argue, should he? Arctic Monkeys haven't done anything illegal 
(although the Liberty scheme is being challenged by HMRC). But next time 
Turner's cruising the old neighbourhoods for songwriting inspiration, perhaps 
he'll remember what taxation did for him – for all of us – and do the decent 
thing: give it back.
 