
Higher education is one of London's many draws, with 40 higher education 
institutions including five of the 24 prestigiousRussell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/> universities. However, there are several more 
universities in London thanthese HESA statistics show 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/index.php?option=com_pubs&task=show_pub_detail&pubid=1&Itemid=276>
. This is due to the growing trend for universities outside the capital to open 
up London campuses.

For example, as well as offering courses on its home campus, Coventry 
University has, since 2010, offered students the possibility of studying for 
degrees atCoventry University London Campus <http://www.coventry.ac.uk/culc/> – 
in the City of London. Cumbria, Glasgow Caledonian and Ulster universities all 
have London campuses, and the University of Liverpool has announcedthe opening 
of its London campus 
<http://news.liv.ac.uk/2013/03/15/university-of-liverpool-to-open-london-campus/>
 this autumn.

This relatively new development has clear benefits for universities – but the 
main one is the potential to attract international students. The strict quota 
system governing universities in England means they are forbidden to recruit 
more than a fixed number of UK or EU domiciled students. Those that want to 
expand can only do so by recruiting students with the best A-level grades or by 
recruiting off-quota international students.

The latter are highly lucrative – unregulated international fees can be far 
higher than the maximum £9,000 annual tuition fee for UK and EU undergrads. 
Indeed, research has shown that international students contributed£2.2bn in 
tuition fees 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CC8QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.jiscmail.ac.uk%2Fcgi-bin%2Fwebadmin%3FA3%3Dind1012%26L%3DSUNI%26E%3Dbase64%26P%3D1512237%26B%3D--_011_D10460A0CC0611469D2047796527D578140226E974nusmailnussll_%26T%3Dapplication%252Fpdf%3B%2520name%3D%2522GFB_Fees_Final.pdf%2522%26N%3DGFB_Fees_Final.pdf%26attachment%3Dq%26XSS%3D3&ei=PIgxUqpahq_sBrO_geAG&usg=AFQjCNFbp0N-XNK1_TMeVE9camH5T2Zfpg&sig2=qYbJgcBH6P9bvXc979TCGw&bvm=bv.52109249,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
 income alone in 2008/09.

Crucially, overseas students are potentially more likely to be attracted to 
London, as a capital city of international standing. The marketing material for 
Coventry's London Campus – which offers degrees such as finance and global 
business management – is littered with references to the capital, highlighting 
London as a global business and financial centre.

This is not the only way in which universities outside the M25 are reaching 
into London to attract students. For many years, Sunderland University has been 
offering degree programmes based at their so-called 'London campus' – but these 
degrees are actuallytaught by EThames college and accredited by Sunderland 
<http://www.sunderland.ac.uk/faculties/bl/partnerships/uk/ethames/>. Both 
institutions benefit from the arrangement: Sunderland by entering the London 
market and thereby increasing their appeal to international students; EThames 
by expanding into the degree market without the cumbersome and lengthy process 
of having to obtain degree-awarding powers.

But as well as having clear financial advantages for universities, this trend 
could benefit both foreign and domestic students. All students gain from having 
a greater pick of institutions in any one location. Those keen to study in 
London, attracted not only by the entertainment and nightlife but also by the 
wealth of academic resources and close promixity to employers, may have 
previously ruled out universities in regional cities such as Liverpool. Those 
students may now be tempted to enroll in the university.

More importantly, all students could benefit from the competition these new 
campuses will generate. London-based universities from UCL to London Met now 
face a new set of competitors from outside the capital. This should force the 
London incumbents to sharpen up and look for ways to improve their student 
offering, hopefully leading to a rise in quality across the board.

All this assumes, of course, that institutions are able to handle the 
logistics of running multiple campuses. Managing staff and monitoring students 
in a campus as much as 500 miles away from central administration could be 
difficult, particularly at a time when money is tight and the sector is under 
financial pressure. Institutions will have to work hard to ensure the student 
(and staff) experience is consistent across campuses or risk diluting their 
well-established brands.

The concern is that this trend could result in yet more of a shift of power 
and resources towards London. More students who might originally have moved out 
of London, thereby boosting the income of a new region, could opt to stay at 
home. But in a sector which has long been characterised by demand exceeding 
supply, anything that forces institutions to raise their game can only be a 
good thing.

Gill Wyness is a researcher in education policy at LSE and the thinkthank 
CentreForum <http://www.centreforum.org/> – follow it on Twitter @CentreForum 
<https://twitter.com/CentreForum>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for thousands of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 