
Avocado on toast is the latest object of intergenerational finger-wagging, 
with columnist Bernard Saltsuggesting millennials could more easily afford a 
house if they stopped eating a delicious cafe breakfast 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/weekend-australian-magazine/moralisers-we-need-you/news-story/6bdb24f77572be68330bd306c14ee8a3>
.

The logic is simple – spend less on luxuries and save more. But what actual 
difference would skipping a cafe breakfast make to your savings?


Here you can see an estimate of how long it would take you to save for a 20% 
deposit for a median-priced house in each capital city (and yes, you can get a 
loan with a smaller percentage deposit but this would usually then require 
mortgage insurance):

time taken to save for a deposit 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2016/sep/saving-time> 
And, if you’re curious on how the cost of various other luxury items breaks 
down into housing deposits, then look no further:

comparison of various items expressed as housing deposit ratio 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2016/sep/avo-houses> 
So, on one hand, it is true every little bit counts. On the other, the time 
involved to actually save for a deposit in some cities is so long the reduction 
in time iseffectively meaningless to many people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/baby-boomers-have-already-taken-all-the-houses-now-theyre-coming-for-our-brunch>
.


In 2015, a survey of Australian’s saving habits by Suncorp found $98 to be the 
national weekly average 
<http://www.suncorpbank.com.au/news/generation-y-named-australia%E2%80%99s-best-savers>
. If you’re saving 100 dollars a week for a house in Sydney, the most expensive 
city, by finding an extra $22 per week you can shave a good 3.5 years off the 
time it’d take to save for a deposit. However, the total time is still 23 years.


And yes, home buyers can currently access historically low interest for 
mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/04/millennials-should-stop-moaning-theyve-got-more-degrees-and-low-rates?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 but, for many, the issue is obtaining the deposit in the first place. The 
house price-to-income ratio, an indicator of housing affordability, and the 
“deposit gap”, a similar measure, both remain incredibly high in comparison 
with the past few decades:

chart - house to income ratio 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/aus/2016/sep/housing2-interactive/> 
Another assumption implicit in these sorts of criticisms of Generation Y is 
that the generation is generally worse at saving money, instead choosing to 
spend money on iPhones, holidays and lattes.


Interestingly, the same survey of spending habits found that younger people 
(defined as younger than 35) saved more per week than older people, even when 
comparing families with children. This may well be due to younger people living 
at home but it still indicates millennials have no issues with saving money.


Further, all age groups, including younger people, are saving more than they 
used to, according to a comparison of 2004 and 2010 ABS figures by the Grattan 
Institute:
comparison of savings by age group 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-17T07:50:42/embed.html>
The RBA, in a 2014 paper on household savings, identified the same trend and 
showed a relationship between the increase in savings by younger people and 
household debt <http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/rdp/2014/pdf/rdp2014-03.pdf>.


Another comparison of ABS figures 
<https://twitter.com/aJoeMcKenzie/status/787835674565021696> shows younger 
people now are spending a greater proportion of their income on housing rather 
than other household expenditure categories, such as food, alcohol, or 
recreation. You can read more detail on this, and on the coming changes in 
apartment affordability, inGreg Jericho’s excellent column on the topic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/18/i-could-get-outraged-by-this-boomer-millennial-war-but-id-rather-look-at-the-evidence>
.

 