
As economic leaders gathered in Los Cabos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/19/g20-leaders-growth-financial-integration>
 in June to debate fiscal strategies for restoring global growth,educational 
leaders were meeting at Unesco headquarters 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/resources/news-and-in-focus-articles/all-news/news/unesco_2012_world_open_education_resources_congress_opens_with_key_supporters/>
 in Paris to discuss a different kind of solution.

Discussed at length at the inaugural Unesco World Open Educational Resources 
Congress, this approach seesOpen Educational Resource 
<http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/oer>s (OER) as the key not only to solving the 
global education crisis but to unlocking sustainable global growth in the 21st 
century- that is, if governments are ready to seize on their potential.

OERs are learning materials that can be accessed, used, and transformed by 
anyone, anywhere. Though the concept is simple, the economic potential is 
tremendous and the advantages are two-fold: First, OERs can lower education 
costs substantially. In the American northwest, for example,Washington State 
decided to digitise 81 of its highest enrolled community college courses 
<http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/2012/02/oer.html> and make them freely 
available as OERs,through an open course library 
<https://sites.google.com/a/sbctc.edu/opencourselibrary/>. The move will save 
students more than $40 million a year once the entire system completes the 
transformation, with the initial costs of $1.8 million already offset in its 
very first year of limited implementation.

OERs can also help universities reduce their marketing costs. Open resources 
have been a boon for recruitment: 35% of MIT applicants tell their admissions 
office that they chose MIT after they looked at itsOpenCourseWare 
<http://ocw.mit.edu/>. Open resources can also help bolster a school's global 
reputation: 91% of visitors toOpen University's page on iTunes U 
<http://www.open.edu/itunes/> are from outside the UK.

But what crystallised at the Unesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> 
Congress are the larger economic implications of the OER movement and its 
potential to dramatically expand the global knowledge economy. As policymakers 
struggle to apply traditional fiscal and monetary tools to mend world markets 
restrained by weak purchasing power, accelerated learning based on OERs could 
do more to stimulate global economic demand and growth than all the world's tax 
holidays combined - then multiplied ten-fold.

How? By making education more accessible and adaptable to the changing needs 
of the global economy. The best new OER programs, including a new$2 billion 
initiative by President Obama <http://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/26100>, 
are working closely with industry to create credentials earned from OER that 
are linked to specific occupations or job openings. So, for example, a company 
that needs cybersecurity experts will work with an educational institution to 
make sure the OER training and or education is aligned with exactly what that 
business needs.

Moreover, there is mounting evidence that learners can be trained more quickly 
using OER. A recent study conducted by scholars associated withCarnegie Mellon 
University's Open Learning Initiative 
<http://jime.open.ac.uk/jime/article/viewArticle/142> demonstrated that 
students who use OERs can obtain the same or better learning outcomes in half 
the time compared with students using traditional methods.

This means that OERs can be used to create a better trained, more flexible 
global workforce for the 21st century. Imagine what our global economy will 
look like when the estimated 90% or more of earth's inhabitants currently 
locked out of high-quality post-secondary education and job training 
opportunities finally get a fair shot. And what happens when we can finally 
start matching curricula to the changing employer needs?

The OER movement has been steadily gaining momentum since its inception, as 
more and more individuals and institutions discover its extraordinary 
potential. Over 400,000 teachers have benefited from theTeacher Education in 
Sub-Saharan Africa program <http://www.tessafrica.net/>, whilst the Open 
University'sOpenLearn <http://openlearn.open.ac.uk/> website has had more than 
21 million visits since its launch in 2006. One by one, the world's most 
prestigious universities are launching new OER initiatives. In May, Harvard 
University announced it would join forces with the MIT to createedX 
<http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2012/edx-faq-050212.html>, a platform that 
provides free access to rigorous online courses to students anywhere in the 
world. Stanford University is planning a similar venture.

Initiatives like these are remarkable, but higher education activities can 
only go so far. Governments are by far the biggest suppliers of education 
worldwide. They have the most to contribute to the OER movement and the most to 
gain in terms of cost savings and economic growth.

The first Unesco World OER Congress concluded with a declaration 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/Events/Paris%20OER%20Declaration_01.pdf>
 that urged governments to play a more active role in supporting this movement, 
which has, to date, been largely funded by a few supportive foundations. This 
call to action is about more than education. It is about widening the circle of 
those able to contribute to renewed economic growth. Governments around the 
world would do well to heed that call.

Sir John Daniel, knighted for his contribution to education, served as 
president and CEO of theCommonwealth of Learning 
<http://www.col.org/about/staff/pages/jdaniel.aspx/> from 2004 to 2012 and as 
Unesco's assistant director-general for education from 2001 to 2004

David Killion is the US ambassador to Unesco <http://www.unesco.org/>. He led 
the US delegation to theWorld OER Congress 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/communication-and-information/events/calendar-of-events/events-websites/world-open-educational-resources-congress/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 