
It's not often that Lost in Showbiz asks you, the reader, to dig deep into 
your pockets and support a charitable cause, but this week it felt impelled to 
do so. Its philanthropic bent was pricked by news of a situation that no one 
else seemed to be addressing: the plight of Jermaine Jackson, a man Lost in 
Showbiz has had a vast amount of respect for ever since he claimed that if he 
slept without a light on, he was visited by "people from 1800". He was 
apparently trapped in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. According to reports, his 
passport expired while he was visiting the West African country and, under 
Californian law, he couldn't be issued with a new one until he paid outstanding 
child support amounting to almost £62,000 to his former wife Alejandra, for 
their two fairly astonishingly named children Jaafar Jeremiah Jackson and 
Jermajesty Jermaine Jackson.

The tension in this dire situation was ratcheted up further by events back at 
what the media persist in referring to as The Jackson Family Compound in 
Encino, California, where Alejandra and children – two by Jermaine and two by 
his brother Randy, oh do keep up – appears to be engaged in some kind of 
TransatlanticCelebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> 
Squatting Challenge with Alex "The Reidinator" Reid, refusing to budge despite 
a court order demanding she leave so that building work can take place. Earlier 
this week, The Reidinator appeared to have edged ahead in the dignity stakes by 
complaining that his wife was telling people he was "living in a cupboard", but 
that was before Alejandra threatened to make her own reality TV series, which 
as far as Lost in Showbiz can gather, will, by necessity, essentially consist 
of footage of her sitting in the garage singing We Shall Not Be Moved.

Lost in Showbiz was all ready to dismiss suggestions that if that was waiting 
for you back home, you too might strongly consider the benefits of "losing" 
your passport in Burkina Faso, when it learned that Jermaine had been spotted, 
apparently not in Africa any more, but in Cannes: perhaps those suggestions had 
a point after all. Cancelling the telethon, Lost in Showbiz still fears the 
situation at The Jackson Family Compound could escalate into a terrifying David 
Koresh-style siege situation. It looks on aghast at the prospect of Waco Jacko 
and wonders what it can do to help.
 