
The Australian electronic producer Harley Streten, best known as Flume, has 
swept the nominations for the 2016Aria awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/aria-awards>, shortlisted for 11 categories 
in total – and already winning in three.

Flume’s second album, Skin, which he is touring through the US and Europe, won 
in all three artisan categories on Wednesday: best producer, engineer and cover 
art of the year. Appearing over video message, he also announced that he will 
be performing at the November ceremony, where he will be competing for the 
night’s top awards – including album of the year, best male artist, best dance 
release and the Apple Music song of the year – a new category voted for by 
Apple Music subscribers.

In 2013 the producer was nominated in seven categories for his debut 
self-titled record, and won in four.Speaking to Guardian Australia this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/24/flume-on-the-pressures-of-writing-his-sophomore-album-it-didnt-just-come>
, Flume described the follow-up process as “incredibly stressful”.

“I put a lot of pressure on myself to have my music at a certain quality, and 
that wasn’t a positive thing,” he said. “Skin was a totally different 
experience than the first record. It didn’t just come.”

Flume on the pressures of writing his sophomore album: 'It didn’t just come'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/24/flume-on-the-pressures-of-writing-his-sophomore-album-it-didnt-just-come>
The 2016 nominations were also dominated by YouTube star-turned-pop artist 
Troye Sivan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/04/troye-sivan-i-came-into-the-music-industry-as-an-out-person>
, who was nominated for two artisan awards and will be competing with Flume in 
five categories on the night: artist of the year, male artist, pop release, 
Apple Music song of the year and best video.

Released last year, Sivan’s debut album, Blue Neighbourhood, was awarded five 
stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/04/troye-sivan-blue-neighbourhood-review->
 by the Guardian Australian music critic Everett True. “Sivan and his equally 
youthful co-writer-producer, Alex Hope, have such a natural flair for capturing 
the sound of now that in a year’s time he could well be sharing the 
stratosphere with Taylor Swift,” True wrote.

The pop artist Sia, the hip-hop artist Illy and the long-awaited return of the 
Avalanches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/14/the-avalanches-wildflower-interview>
 have brought in six nominations apiece, with King Gizzard & the Lizard Wizard, 
RÜFÜS and Violent Soho each nominated in five categories. Courtney Barnett, who 
was nominated for eight Arias in 2015 and won four, is up for two public-voted 
categories in 2016: best video for Elevator Operator, and best live act.

Awards announced at the nominations announcement also included best comedy 
album (Roy & HG, for This Sporting Life), best world music album (Melbourne Ska 
Orchestra for Sierra Kilo Alpha), best original soundtrack/cast/show album 
(Josh Pyke & The Sydney Symphony Orchestra for Live at the Sydney Opera House), 
best jazz album (Vince Jones & Paul Grabowsky for Provenance) and best 
classical album (Flight Facilities for Live with the Melbourne Symphony 
Orchestra).

Crowded House will be inducted into the Hall of Fame at the ceremony, which 
will be held on 23 November at the Star Casino in Sydney and broadcast on 
Channel Ten.
 