
Electronic music producer Nicholas Murphy, better known as Chet Faker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/apr/03/chet-faker-australia>
, has picked up nine Aria award nominations, including album of the year, 
breakthrough artist and best independent release.

Murphy’s debut album, Built on Glass, was released in April 2014 to critical 
acclaim, and immediately took the No 1 spot in the Aria charts.


The Melbourne artist’s swag of nominations can also be seen as a nod to the 
rise of indie record label Future Classic and the trend towards electronic 
dance music in Australia.


At the 2013 Aria awards <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aria-awards>, 
Murphy’s friend and label mate, fellow electronic music producer Flume (aka 
Harley Streten) won four out of eight nominations, including best male artist.


Streten is also up for an award with Murphy for their joint single Drop the 
Game, which is nominated in the best dance release category.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6vopR3ys8Kw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6vopR3ys8Kw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6vopR3ys8Kw&media=>
Before the main nomination announcement at the Art Gallery of NSW, the Built 
on Glass album was also awarded three artisan awards (producer of the year, 
engineer of the year and best cover art). The last album to win all three 
awards was Silverchair’s Diorama in 2002.

After months of gruelling international touring, Murphy said he was happy to 
be home for the win. “It’s a great time for Australian music,” he said, 
acknowledging the changing taste of the public, which has seen instrumental 
artists such as Flume flourish.

“It makes me proud. I’ve travelled the world and all these different countries 
and pop acts that are just money pumped into it. So to see artists that put 
care into their craft actually getting nominated is nice.”

The second-most nominated act is the Brisbane band Sheppard, whose No 1 single 
Geronimo went four times platinum (selling more then 280,000 copies). Their 
nominated categories include best group, album of the year and best independent 
release.


Artists on independent record labels have featured heavily in the 2014 
nominees list. Joining Murphy and Sheppard as indie label artists in the 
running for multiple awards is Sia (six nominations), Dan Sultan (five 
nominations) and Violent Soho (four nominations).


Four out of five artists up for the coveted album of the year award are on 
independent labels. The category is also notable for having two Indigenous 
musician nominees: Sultan and pop artist Jessica Mauboy.


Mauboy commended the 2014 nominee list for its broad array of different sounds 
and genres. “It’s a very diverse year. We should be doing more of that,” she 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Foct%2F07%2Fchet-faker-aria-awards-nine-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F7%2F1412639468854%2F468a54c1-d1c3-4264-b53a-12d38577d482-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aria%20awards%202014%3A%20Chet%20Faker%20leads%20charge%20with%20nine%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Foct%2F07%2Fchet-faker-aria-awards-nine-nominations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aria%20awards%202014%3A%20Chet%20Faker%20leads%20charge%20with%20nine%20nominations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Foct%2F07%2Fchet-faker-aria-awards-nine-nominations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F7%2F1412639468854%2F468a54c1-d1c3-4264-b53a-12d38577d482-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sia performs at Gotham Hall in New York, June 2014. Photograph: MANDEL 
NGAN/AFP/Getty Images 
Several Australian artists this year found success on overseas charts. 
Previous Aria award winner Sia Furler released her sixth studio album 1,000 
Forms of Fear this year, which went toNo 1 in the US  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/jul/17/sia-1000-forms-of-fear-no-1-us-album>
and Australian charts. Furler’s nominated categories include album of the year 
and best female artist.

Other nominated acts to reach No 1 on the US charts include boy band 5 Seconds 
of Summer (four nominations) and rap artistIggy Azalea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/03/-sp-in-defence-of-iggy-azalea-on-racism-naivety-and-a-twisted-cluster-of-exploitation>
 (four nominations).

Also boasting three nominations apiece are Andy Bull, Hilltop Hoods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/29/the-hilltops-hoods-by-their-crew?CMP=soc_568>
, Mauboy, John Butler Trio, Justice Crew and Rüfüs.

The winners of the 2014 Aria awards will be announced on 26 November during a 
televised event at the Star in Sydney.
 