
Aria awards 2015 with Tame Impala, Tina Arena and Ed Sheeran – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2015/nov/26/aria-awards-2015-with-kylie-minogue-kevin-parker-and-ed-sheeran-live>
It was Tame Impala’s night at the Arias, but the show-stopping performance 
came from Hall of Fame inductee Tina Arena who used her acceptance speech to 
slap down ageism.


Perth’s Tame Impala <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tame-impala> took out 
five awards on Thursday for their third album Currents.


“Really, what really? That was really looking like it was setting up for 
Courtney Barnett <https://www.theguardian.com/music/courtney-barnett>,” 
frontman Kevin Parker said when the band took out the best rock album award.


By the time they accepted the gong for best album they realised it was 
probably their night after all.


The show-stopper of the night, though, was Tina Arena who blasted on to the 
stage with an army of female performers including the Veronicas and Jessica 
Mauboy, performing her hit, Chains.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB9BjdM8z67o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB9BjdM8z67o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB9BjdM8z67o&media=>
 The Veronicas and Jessica Mauboy join Aria Hall of Fame inductee in performing 
Chains. 
It was the only all-female show on a night dominated by male performances 
including Peking Duk, Hermitude and Jarryd James.


Arena was then inducted into the Aria Hall of Fame by pop princess Kylie 
Minogue <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kylieminogue> and Tour de France 
winner Cadel Evans.


Aria awards 2015: best and worst dressed – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/nov/26/aria-awards-2015-best-and-worst-dressed-in-pictures>
In a wide-ranging speech, the singer paid out on ageism and sexism in the 
industry.


“I want to still acknowledge that ladies over 40 are still in the game,” she 
said, name-checking Kylie, Madonna, Jennifer Lopez and Annie Lennox.


“Keep doing what you’re doing, ladies, because we will decide when it’s time 
for us to stop.”

Telstra (@Telstra) 
Here it is! @kylieminogue <https://twitter.com/kylieminogue> and @Ella_Hooper 
<https://twitter.com/Ella_Hooper> celebrate with @tinaarena 
<https://twitter.com/tinaarena> #GreatAussieMusic 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GreatAussieMusic?src=hash> #ARIAs 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ARIAs?src=hash> https://t.co/RJ6AUOa4gX 
<https://t.co/RJ6AUOa4gX>
 <https://twitter.com/Telstra/status/669847026733940737> November 26, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Telstra/status/669847026733940737> 
Arena also implored radio to play Australian music.


“Radio please don’t try and meet your Australian quotas because you have to, 
exceed them because you really want to,” she told the crowd at Sydney’s Star.


The only controversy of the night came when Channel Ten’s national TV 
broadcast of the Arias failed to showan acceptance speech by comedian and 
broadcaster Matt Okine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/26/matt-okine-uses-arias-speech-to-highlight-gender-inequality-in-comedy?CMP=soc_567>
in which he called out sexism in his industry.

Accepting the award for best comedy release – beating Bondi Hipsters, Buddy 
Goode, Ronny Chieng and Sammy J & Randy to the pointy statue – the Triple J 
presenter used his speech to highlight how there wasn’t a single woman 
nominated in the category.

Matt Okine uses Arias speech to highlight gender inequality in comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/26/matt-okine-uses-arias-speech-to-highlight-gender-inequality-in-comedy>
“I didn’t feel great reading that list of people,” he said.

Some viewers tweeted their disappointment at Okine’s exclusion from the 
televised broadcast.
Silvia Pinneri (@siilvp) 
Disappointed at #ARIAs <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ARIAs?src=hash> for not 
playing@mattokine <https://twitter.com/mattokine> acceptance speech. How about 
embracing gender equality & maybe the industry can progress?
 <https://twitter.com/siilvp/status/669816838675542017> November 26, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/siilvp/status/669816838675542017> 
Despite rumours, Taylor Swift was a no-show at the Arias but Courtney Barnett 
finally appeared – via video – on the biggest night of the Australian music 
calendar.


Barnett, who had the most nominations going into the ceremony, won the best 
female award, along with breakthrough artist and independent release.


Wearing a T-shirt reading, “choose love”, she told viewers from London it was 
a real honour.


Vance Joy, who opened the awards ceremony with a performance of Fire and the 
Flood <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zKmWd8DPrEc>, won best male artist.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faria-awards-2015-tame-impala-take-top-gongs-as-tina-arena-calls-out-ageism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6558821dc6f3dfed67b39b4c5723da0c82bc0b6c%2F0_152_5567_3340%2F5567.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aria%20awards%202015%3A%20Tame%20Impala%20take%20top%20gongs%20as%20Tina%20Arena%20calls%20out%20ageism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faria-awards-2015-tame-impala-take-top-gongs-as-tina-arena-calls-out-ageism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aria%20awards%202015%3A%20Tame%20Impala%20take%20top%20gongs%20as%20Tina%20Arena%20calls%20out%20ageism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Faria-awards-2015-tame-impala-take-top-gongs-as-tina-arena-calls-out-ageism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6558821dc6f3dfed67b39b4c5723da0c82bc0b6c%2F0_152_5567_3340%2F5567.jpg>
 Courtney Barnett appears via video link from London to accept the Aria for 
best female. Photograph: Zak Kaczmarek/Getty Images 
Guest international artist Ed Sheeran picked up the inaugural diamond award 
for album sales of more than half a million, while Conrad Sewell won song of 
the year.


Sewell closed the show with a medley of his songs Firestone and Start Again.


2015 ARIA AWARDS

Tame Impala (Currents) - album of the year; best group; best rock album

Courtney Barnett (Sometimes I sit and think, and sometimes I just sit) - best 
female; best independent release; breakthrough artist

Vance Joy (Dream your life away) - best male artist

Arias awards 2015: list of winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/26/arias-awards-2015-list-of-nominees-and-winners>
Tina Arena - Aria Hall Of Fame

Shane Nicholson (Hell breaks loose) - best country album

Jarryd James (Do you remember) - best pop release

Conrad Sewell (Start again) - song of the year

Oh Mercy - best adult contemporary album

Matt Okine - best comedy release

Click here for the full list of 2015 Arias winners and nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/26/arias-awards-2015-list-of-nominees-and-winners>
 