
There are two different sets of advice for visiting Organ Pipe Cactus National 
Monument, an austere swathe of desert on Arizona’s border withMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>.

“Immerse yourself in a photographer’s paradise!” advises a glossy tourist 
brochure. “Explore the abundance of plants and wildlife unique to the Sonoran 
desert. Guided walks through the park, as well as hiking trails, camping and 
picnic facilities, are available. Drive the scenic 21-mile Ajo Mountain loop 
... star-studded night skies wash away the modern world.”

An identical-sized pamphlet on cheap paper, which you find in Mexican towns 
bordering the park, offers starker tips in Spanish.

“Use the north star and the movement of the moon to guide you towards the 
north during the night. Carry one gallon of water in each hand and six litres 
in the backpack. You can drink cactus fruit but the skin has nearly invisible 
spines. Peel carefully. If you have no water, drinking urine can sustain you 
for a while. Don’t do it repeatedly because it will become toxic.”

One park with two very different types of visitor. One seeking recreation, the 
other survival. This is the new normal on the front line of America’s border 
crackdown.

The 530 square mile park, a Unesco biosphere reserve 
<http://www.nps.gov/orpi/index.htm>, is enjoying a tourist boom. Numbers have 
jumped more than 30% since it fully reopened to the public last year.

This may be news to Donald Trump. The leading Republican presidential candidate
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
 says criminals and rapists, among others, are swarming across an open border. 
He wants tobuild a wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/28/donald-trump-mexico-immigration-presidential-campaign>
 to stop them and to “protect America”.

In 2002, Trump could have pointed to one tragic incident: drug cartel gunmen 
shot and killed a park ranger, Kris Eggle.

The shock of his death transformed the park. The government funnelled a chunk 
of the post-9/11 border security expansion to Organ Pipe, a 30-mile segment of 
the 2,000-mile frontier.

The park ranger staff tripled from five to 15 and the number of border patrol 
agents exploded from 15 to 500, with a new, sprawling base. In addition to 
manning checkpoints and vehicle and pedestrian fences, which now stretch across 
much of the desert, they run fleets of helicopters and SUVs and monitor ground 
sensors and surveillance towers.

Roads and highways bristle with guns and badges. So too at Grannie Mac’s 
Kitchen, a diner off Highway 85. When the Guardian visited one recent morning, 
the breakfast clientele comprised a middle-aged couple in hiking gear, two 
sheriff’s deputies, three park rangers and five border patrol agents.

“We’re looking at a bright future,” said Brent Range, the park’s 
superintendent. “It’s safe.”

Safe for tourists. But not for the dwindling number of migrants and drug 
smugglers who use it to illegally enter the United States. An unknown number 
succumb to the ferocious heat, freezing nights and treacherous terrain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Forgan-pipe-national-monument-migrants-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6704cbc70281f283adae69d68f3043b77e8a539%2F0_9_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arizona's%20Organ%20Pipe%20park%20is%20a%20'paradise'%20for%20tourists%20but%20a%20death%20trap%20for%20migrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Forgan-pipe-national-monument-migrants-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arizona%27s%20Organ%20Pipe%20park%20is%20a%20%27paradise%27%20for%20tourists%20but%20a%20death%20trap%20for%20migrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Forgan-pipe-national-monument-migrants-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6704cbc70281f283adae69d68f3043b77e8a539%2F0_9_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument. A discarded bicycle was thought to have 
been left by a border crosser. Photograph: Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
One set of human remains is found on average each month, according to migrant 
activists. The wilderness is so desolate that some corpses lie undiscovered for 
years, degrading to skeletons or just bone fragments, their identities a 
mystery.

“I beg them not to cross. I say don’t go, don’t go, don’t go,” said Francisco 
Beltran, a Catholic priest in Sonoyta, a violence-wracked Mexican town abutting 
the park’s southern perimeter. “But they go.”

For would-be crossers like Albert Lavenant, marooned in Mexico, there seems 
little choice. He spent 35 of his 41 years in the US, working in construction 
and raising six children in Santa Ana, California, only to be deported in May 
for driving offences, he said. “What am I gonna do here? I gotta get back,” he 
said, speaking in a Catholic church-run migrant shelter in Altar, Sonora.

Lavenant drank filthy water from a cattle tank and hurt his leg during one 
fraught, failed crossing attempt. Should he try again via Organ Pipe, 
formidable natural and synthetic obstacles await.

Cactus spines penetrate boots and slash clothing. Mountains and gorges rise 
and fall with cruel gradients. Rocky terrain twists ankles. Summer temperatures 
exceed 112 degrees. Border-crossers resorted to this route in the 1990s after 
US border security choked off traditional routes near urban centres.

Border patrol agents now intercept about 23 people in the park daily, said a 
spokesman, Anthony Scott Good. He could not provide exact comparisons but said 
it marked a steep fall from previous years, reflecting a trend along the entire 
border.

The dramatically enhanced security enabled the park to welcome back visitors, 
said Range, the superintendent. “It’s public land owned by the taxpayer and 
needed to be opened.”

Tourists and residents cannot miss the security but seldom if ever glimpse 
actual border-crossers, said Hop David, publisher ofAjo Copper News 
<http://www.cunews.info/contact.html>, a weekly paper which serves western Pima 
county.

David is well aware of the drama unfolding in the desert. “We had this Mexican 
family who called us for months asking if we knew what had happened to their 
nephew. It was heart-wrenching.”

He shook his head. “It’s a horrible thing to die of heat exhaustion in the 
Sonora desert. Usually we don’t think of them as people but they are, just like 
you and I, except they come from desperate conditions.”

Bodies at the border: ‘Many Mexicans have no option. This flow will not cease’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/21/-sp-bodies-border-mexico-us-crossing>
No one knows how many die. The remains of 129 border crossers were recovered 
in the southern Arizona desert last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/21/-sp-bodies-border-mexico-us-crossing>
, the lowest number since 2001. The number so far this year is 93, said Gregory 
Hess, Pima county’s medical examiner.

Activists say the death rate has in fact increased since far fewer people are 
attempting to cross. “It’s government policy to force them into these deadly 
areas in hope of deterring them,” said Gayle Weyers, 73, a member of a 
Samaritan group which leaves water in the desert.

Border patrol agents recovered nine human remains in the park last year. 
Nonprofit groups like Eagles of the Desert andNo More Deaths 
<http://forms.nomoredeaths.org/en/> found a handful of others.

“The tourists are safe, and they’re saying it’s quiet and peaceful, but 
they’re removing one body per month,” said Scott Warren, 32, an academic and 
activist with No More Deaths, as he hiked to a remote spot deep in the park 
where colleagues had left water three weeks earlier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Forgan-pipe-national-monument-migrants-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c4e24823c396257f7777c37a35165fe685cb53%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arizona's%20Organ%20Pipe%20park%20is%20a%20'paradise'%20for%20tourists%20but%20a%20death%20trap%20for%20migrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Forgan-pipe-national-monument-migrants-mexico%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arizona%27s%20Organ%20Pipe%20park%20is%20a%20%27paradise%27%20for%20tourists%20but%20a%20death%20trap%20for%20migrants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Forgan-pipe-national-monument-migrants-mexico%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c4e24823c396257f7777c37a35165fe685cb53%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Scott Warren, an academic and activist with No More Deaths, stops for a water 
break. Photograph: Rory Carroll for the Guardian 
Discarded water bottles, food wrappers, socks and rusting bicycle parts 
indicated a trail of sorts. Ten miles to the south glinted the border fence, 
beyond it Mexico, an identical rocky landscape.

The 15 gallons left at the site was gone. “It’s satisfying to know people are 
getting the water,” said Warren, sweating from the heat. “But for someone to 
hike here at this time of year ...” his voice trailed off. He planned to return 
to replenish supplies.

A border patrol helicopter buzzed overhead on the way back, swooping low, then 
hovering over a peak in the Ajo mountain range.

The agency saves border crossers, said Good, the spokesman. It has nine 30-ft 
tall, solar-powered beacons in the park, each with a red button to summon help, 
and helicopter pilots keep eyes peeled for people in distress, he said.

The agency’s primary task, however, is interception, an ever-evolving game of 
cat and mouse. Some border-crossers, for instance,wear carpet boots, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/14/altar-mexico-how-the-migrant-oasis-for-would-be-border-crossers-became-a-trap>
 resembling big furry slippers, to cover their tracks. “It gives them an 
advantage but our agents are very well trained in tracking,” said Good.

If they make it out of the park they must then dodge highway patrols. “They 
have scouts and change their routes,” said Patrick Hilliker, a supervisor with 
the Pima County sheriff’s border interdiction unit. “They’re watching us and 
we’re watching them.” He said most border-crossers hauled narcotics, something 
migrant advocates dispute.

The glossy tourist brochure’s advice to savour Organ Pipe’s breathtaking 
vistas, vibrant sunsets and bird-watching opportunities is probably lost on 
border crossers. They don’t want to “wash away the modern world”, they want to 
reach it. The brochure does, however, make one pertinent prediction. “Adventure 
awaits.”
 