
Armando Iannucci <https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> is 
leaving the award-winning political satire Veep after being at the helm since 
it first aired on HBO in 2012.

The Scottish comedian and writer departs just days before the show begins its 
fourth season on Sunday, with Curb Your Enthusiasm’s David Mantel taking over 
as showrunner.

In a statement to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/veep-creator-armando-iannucci-depart-787794>
, HBO said: “We have had conversations with Armando for some time about the 
challenges of maintaining his family life in London and producing a show in the 
states.

“Armando is not replaceable but we are confident that Veep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep> will continue to be produced at 
the highest levels with new showrunner David Mandel. David has worked with HBO 
for many years as executive producer, writer and director for Curb Your 
Enthusiasm.”
 Julia Louis-Dreyfus in Veep. Photograph: PR Handout 
Mandel will work with Julia Louis-Dreyfus, who stars as the disaster-prone 
vice-president Selina Meyer, after the pair first collaborated on Seinfeld.

Iannucci had suggested his time working on Veep was drawing to an end in 
recent interviews, and when asked about his next projects,he told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/22/armanda-iannucci-goodle-facebook-doctor-who>
: “The one thing I don’t want to do is look at American politics or British 
politics. I feel I have done that.” He is also beentouted as a possible 
screenwriter for Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/22/armando-iannucci-doctor-who-the-thick-of-it-alan-partridge-veep>
, which would see him reunited with Peter Capaldi, whom he worked with on the 
series Veep is based on, The Thick Of It.

Veep has not been renewed for a fifth season yet, but with the success of the 
show and the rapid appointment of Mantel, it looks likely to return after its 
fourth season finishes later this year.
 