
It would be a match made in TV heaven; Armando Iannucci writing an episode of 
Doctor Who,reuniting him with Peter Capaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/28/peter-capaldi-doctor-who-armando-iannucci-bbc1>
, the former star of Iannucci’s satirical romp, The Thick Of It.

The man behind foul-mouthed spin doctor Malcolm Tucker deciding the time 
lord’s fate is an intriguing prospect, but don’t set your recorder just yet. 
Iannucci has discussed the idea with Doctor Who showrunner Steven Moffat but 
his diary is full for the year ahead. “I’m a big fan ofDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> and obviously with Peter, 
who’s loving it, it would be nice to,” says Iannucci. “I’ve spoken off and on 
to them but it’s a case of being able to fit something in. It’s a nice thought.”

But has he an idea of the storyline and where he might take the Doctor? “Yes, 
in our conversations there was an idea we had, but it may be a wee while yet 
before we get round to working out when it would be,” he says. “Knowing I am 
committed for the next year or so, it’s all on hold. ‘Let’s get back in touch 
when we can’.”

More immediately, Iannucci will reunite with Steve Coogan for a new series of 
Alan Partridge’s Mid Morning Matters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/01/alan-partridge-sky-atlanic-mid-morning-matters>
 on Sky Atlantic later this year. A film sequel to2013’s Alan Partridge: Alpha 
Papa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/22/armando-iannucci-partridge-alpha-papa-interview>
 is also on the cards. “We haven’t said no and we haven’t said yes,” says 
Iannucci. “We will think about it soonish.” Partridge aside, Iannucci is 
“itching” for a return to film six years after The Thick Of It’s big screen 
spin-off, In The Loop, and is talking to BBC Films, among others, about a 
“variety of stuff”.

“The one thing I don’t want to do is look at American politics or British 
politics. I feel I have done that,” he says. But why switch from TV to film 
when so much of the traffic is in the other direction? “It’s that thing where 
you have got one hit, it’s 90 minutes or thereabouts, and that’s when you tell 
the story,” he says. “In television you tell a story continuously over a number 
of years with a bit of luck, which is great, but I do like that other 
discipline. Plus, you can shoot a film in four or five weeks.”

He is also considering a comedy about social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/01/armando-iannucci-social-media>. 
“The more you look at the world of politics, the more you realise how limited 
political power is,” says Iannucci. “Companies like Google and Facebook have a 
much greater influence over individuals and that just intrigues me.” He is 
about to read Jon Ronson’s So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed, a catalogue of 
online humiliation, and adds: “That’s an interesting area, the way the crowd 
can suddenly turn nasty and ugly within minutes of something happening. It’s 
like an infection, or a mass hysteria. It’s kind of spooky.”

Iannucci will discuss his career at a Royal Television Society event in London 
on Wednesday. It is two and a half years sincehe delivered the Bafta lecture  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/11/armando-iannucci-bafta-lecture-transcript>
in which he called on the BBC to fight back against its critics in parliament 
and the press. Pretty much ever since, the BBC has been embroiled in one crisis 
after another, from the Savile scandal to the implosion of the BBC Trust. “Tony 
Hall seems to have at least calmed things down,” says Iannucci. “He has a sense 
of a clear mission about what he wants the BBC to be.”

What Iannucci thinks the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> needs is 
to face up to the end of the licence fee. “More and more people are poking 
their heads up and saying, ‘do you think the licence fee is going to last?’ It 
would be lovely but I really don’t. Inevitably it’s going to fall apart, or 
it’s going to be more difficult to collect or sustain,” he says, a process made 
more difficult by the possible decriminalisation of its non-payment. “Why not 
just bite the bullet and say, ‘OK, let’s do a completely different way of 
funding’ rather than having a switch forced on them by circumstances or 
legislation.”

Armando Iannucci interview: 'We didn't want Alpha Papa to be the equivalent of 
Holiday on the Buses'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/22/armando-iannucci-partridge-alpha-papa-interview>
Iannucci’s idea, outlined in his Bafta lecture, was for the BBC to 
aggressively market itself with paid-for subscription abroad – “prostitute 
itself to blue buggery” – which would help subsidise subscription services in 
the UK at a lower level than the current licence fee. “I reckon in 10 years 
[the licence fee] will be gone,” he says. “This generation – there have been 
several generations – just don’t watch television in a traditional way.” As for 
how many people in the UK would subscribe, Iannucci reckons “it would get 
enough. And those that didn’t, I think they would notice.”

Negotiations around the BBC’s charter renewal and its future funding will not 
begin until after the general election. Iannucci predicts the 7 May poll will 
be “very frustrating because like most election campaigns nothing really gets 
discussed. I think the interesting thing will be the day after and from then 
on. There are so many possibilities of how messy it can be, it could be quite 
entertaining.” But he has fears about a “worrying level of frustration” if, as 
seems inevitable, several of the smaller parties receive a large number of 
votes but only a handful of MPs.

“Like the licence fee, the present electoral system is not fit for purpose, 
the first past the post system just doesn’t work. But in order for it to change 
it requires politicians in power to give away some of their power. That’s the 
problem.” But Iannucci does not subscribe to theRussell Brand school of not 
voting <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YR4CseY9pk>. “I would rather people 
voted but put ‘none of the above’ or something to express their feelings. It’s 
difficult to heed the voice of someone who hasn’t said anything.”

He argues that there was “something contemptuous” about David Cameron’s 
attitude to the TV leader debates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/19/broadcasters-pile-pressure-david-cameron-second-live-election-debate>
, comparing him to a “petulant child who doesn’t want to do his homework coming 
up with more and more excuses as to why it can’t happen”.

“I kind of half take his point that these leader debates turn into the 
[campaign’s] main thing and it kind of detracts from the rest,” he says. “But 
if what you are saying is ‘I don’t want to discuss my politics during a general 
election campaign to as wide an audience as possible’, then you don’t really 
deserve to be in politics.”

Iannucci’s focus of late has been on the other side of the Atlantic, where his 
White House satire Veep will return for a fourth series next month, and in the 
UK onSky Atlantic <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-atlantic> in July. 
Selina Meyer, played by Julia Louis-Dreyfus, is now president, but the 
obstacles to office remain. “I’m sure Obama would have a lot to say about the 
limits of the job,” he says.

Despite its recent travails, Iannucci remains optimistic about the BBC. “The 
drama has been great the last two or three years and they’ve got good comedy on 
now,” he says.

“I don’t work within – I was going to say TV Centre – Broadcasting House, I 
can’t vouch for the attitudes and atmosphere, but as a viewer I get this sense 
there is a bit more confidence about getting on with making good stuff. That’s 
the key. The better the shows, the more it will shut people up.”

In Conversation With Armando Iannucci 
<http://www.rts.org.uk/conversation-armando-iannucci> is on 25 March at 6.45pm 
at the Telford Theatre, Westminster. rts.org.uk

Curriculum vitae

Age 54

Education St Aloysius’ College, Glasgow, University of Glasgow, University 
College, Oxford

Career 1994 co-writer, co-director, Knowing Me, Knowing You 2001 The Armando 
Iannucci <https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> Show, Channel 4 
2005creator, The Thick Of It 2008 wrote libretto for Opera North’s production 
Skin Deep2009 film director, In The Loop 2012 creator, Veep 2013 co-writer Alan 
Partridge, Alpha Papa
 