
Standing next to Andy Turner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/aug/08/dai-greene-andy-turner-gold-medal>
 to be photographed, I comment ruefully that it will be a picture of one of 
Britain's fittest men next to one of its most unfit. This is the socially 
acceptable version of what I am really thinking: that while I am a mere lumpen 
mortal, this Olympic hurdler has the body of a Greek god.

The finest ancient Greek statues portray athletes with perfectly proportioned 
bodies. The amazing Charioteer of Motya, on view this summer at theBritish 
Museum 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/visiting/planning_your_visit/winning_at_the_ancient_games.aspx#4>
, reveals a rippling, sensuous body under a thin tight robe (carved 
miraculously out of marble). Other Greek athletes were portrayed naked. The 
sculptorPolykleitos <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Polykleitos> devised the 
"Canon" of the perfect athletic body, the ideal measurements of the ideal 
human. I seem to be seeing that ideal come alive as Turner explodes from the 
starting blocks.

He has been dedicated to athleticism since school – Turner's dad was an 
800-metre runner – and at 31, has the flab-free, slender but powerful physique 
of a man who has been training his body all his life. The London Olympics will 
be his crowning moment.

We meet on the day the British team is announced and, having read reports 
about the fraught battle to qualify, I expect him to be nervous – but it's 
clear he knows he's in. The mood at the training venue in Lee Valley is 
relaxed, as if the announcement is a moment to take stock and a deep breath.

Turner runs at the training hurdles – lighter than race hurdles but amazingly 
high. It seems incredible anyone can jump them with such a short run in between 
and still maintain their speed. Why choose such a difficult event? He says he 
likes the challenge. Everything about Turner's life appears to be about 
challenge and discipline: as he observes, you can't exactly go home after 
training and booze it up in the pub.

Some athletes live like invalids. After morning training, many, I am told, 
will have a nap before a second session. Turner says he relaxes by spending 
time with his three daughters, aged seven, five and one. I am fascinated by 
this mystery of how athletes really live: when Turner started out, he did 
part-time factory jobs. The lottery, sponsorship and prize money now make it 
possible for hurdling to be his full-time job. 

Looking around the decent but scarcely luxurious training facility (at 1pm the 
Olympians and Paralympians have to leave to make way for local schools), I 
can't help thinking how much money washes around the art world by comparison. 
This seems a purer culture.

Athleticism is high art. Athletes sculpt their bodies to approach an ideal 
(although of course, this is no longer seen as some unquestionable absolute, as 
it was by Polykleitos: across the stadium, a runner is pounding down the track 
on a prosthetic leg).

What I am thinking as Turner crouches on the blocks, face severe and sinews 
throbbing, is that athletes are heroes of being human. They show us the 
extremes of physical achievement we are, or should be, capable of. Theancient 
Greeks invented both philosophy and athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/22/olympic-games-ancient-modern> – 
mind and body can both be honed, they thought. As Turner leaps forward, their 
legacy lives on.

Andy Turner's favourites

Film The Shawshank Redemption

Book Biographies

Singer Tinie Tempah

• See the world's best athletes in action at the Aviva Birmingham Grand Prix 
on 26 August. For tickets, visitwww.uka.org.uk/aviva-series 
<http://www.uka.org.uk/aviva-series/home/> or call 08000 55 60 56 
 