
A young man in shades is being interviewed. The conversation, airing on an old 
black-and-white TV, runs like this: "Do you think purchasing Aboriginal art is 
an act of cultural reconciliation?" "Uh, no." "Are you sure about that?" "Uh, 
no." "So it is reconciliatory?" "Uh, yes." "In what way?" "I hadn't thought 
about it."

The video, created by Tess Allas, Charlie Schneider and Vernon Ah Kee, is a 
parody of theTV interviews given by Andy Warhol 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=deRMRh8Zjgg> in which he rotated three 
responses: "Uh, yes", "Uh, no" and "I hadn't thought about it".

The work is part of Four Rooms, an exhibition at Tandanya 
<http://www.tandanya.com.au/ed142/four-rooms/>, the National Aboriginal 
Cultural Institute in Adelaide. Tandanya usually shows more traditional 
indigenous arts, but for the duration of the Adelaide festival it has been 
transformed into a Factory-like environment of silver walls, popcorn machines 
and vintage sofas. There are posters that state "Let's be polite about 
Aboriginal art" and reproductions of Warhol's soap boxes that substitute Brillo 
for a contemporaneous Australian brand, Nulla Nulla. The latter's packaging 
features an Aboriginal woman in a breastplate being beaten with wooden spoons 
beneath the line: "Knocks dirt on the head."

Playing the Warhol part in the video is Vernon Ah Kee 
<http://www.milanigallery.com.au/artist/vernon-ah-kee>, whose surfboards 
decorated with sacred Aboriginal designs have earned him rock-star status in 
Australia. He's the only visual artist here who also took part in theRoyal 
Academy's survey of Australian art 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibitions/australia/> in London last year. 
It's fair to say that the critical response wasn't kind.Writing in the Sunday 
Times, Waldemar Januszczak likened John Olsen's Sydney Sun, an iconic abstract 
painting, to "a cascade of diarrhoea" 
<http://nga.gov.au/AboutUs/press/sydneySun.cfm>. Brian Sewell dismissed the 
Aboriginal pieces as "stale rejiggings of a half-remembered heritage wrecked by 
European alcohol". The Guardian'sAdrian Searle was more balanced, but had to 
concede that the representation of Australian art from the 1960s to the present 
day was piecemeal and unsatisfactory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/16/australia-royal-academy-exhibition-review>
.

The curator of Four Rooms, Troy-Anthony Baylis 
<https://radio.adelaide.edu.au/bestival-interview-troy-anthony-baylis/>, 
suggests that the whole notion of cramming a continent into an institution was 
misguided. The first thing visitors to the RA were presented with was an 
acknowledged masterpiece of modern Aboriginal painting, Anwerlarr Anganenty 
(Big Yam Dreaming), created byEmily Kame Kngwarreye 
<http://www.nma.gov.au/exhibitions/utopia_the_genius_of_emily_kame_kngwarreye/emily_kame_kngwarreye>
 at the age of 85. "When I see photographs of Emily Kame Kngwarreye painting 
those huge canvases outdoors in wide-open spaces," says Baylis, "it reminds me 
of the drive-in cinemas I used to go to as a kid. These paintings are not 
pictorial representations of the landscape, they are part of the landscape 
itself. Displacing them to the white walls and artificial lighting of a gallery 
is like putting a lion in a cage."

Baylis is a gay, cross-dressing blue-haired performance artist of Irish and 
Aboriginal descent who still travels to Brighton once a year to visit the widow 
ofhis friend Leigh Bowery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/leigh-bowery>. He didn't see the RA 
show on his last trip, nor did he particularly want to. "I have no personal 
disregard for the 19th century paintings that made up the bulk of that show," 
he says. "But they're so indebted to European styles and schools of thought, I 
don't really think of them as Australian art at all."

Nick Mitzevich, director of the Art Gallery of South Australia 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home>, adds: "It was a pity that 
Australian critics seemed to take their lead from their British counterparts. 
But on a personal level, I was proud that a significant selection of works from 
this museum were made available to audiences on the other side of the world."

Mitzevich is also the curator of Dark Heart, the 2014 biennial of new 
Australian art <http://adelaidebiennial.com.au/>. "I called the exhibition Dark 
Heart because, for me, the most exciting artists today are those interested in 
representing the underbelly of Australian culture," he says. "I wanted to show 
work that represents a young country still healing from the wounds of its 
frankly brutal colonial past."

Mitzevich points out that Australia is a country in which one in two members 
of the population were born overseas, or have at least one parent who was. Yet 
the migrant dream is succinctly exploded byAlex Seton's work 
<http://www.alexseton.com/> Someone Died Trying to Have a Life Like Mine, which 
features an array of limp lifejackets strewn across the gallery floor. It's a 
reference toan incident from last May, in which 28 empty lifejackets washed up 
on the shore of the Cocos Islands off Western Australia 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-05-27/fears-more-asylum-seekers-may-have-drowned/4714346>
. It comes as quite a shock when you realise the jackets have actually been 
carved from solid marble.Wombeyan marble from Queensland 
<http://www.quarries.com.au/quarries-articles/1998/5/25/wombeyans-oncewerequarriers-lose-their-marble/>
, to be specific, which itself seems to challenge the Eurocentric assumption 
that sculptural-grade marble must come from Carrara.

Yet there is one work that seems to outstrip everything the RA attempted. It's 
byBen Quilty <http://www.benquilty.com/>, generally reckoned to be the finest 
of Australia's young painters witha solo exhibition coming up at the Saatchi 
Gallery in London in July 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/art-and-design/artist-ben-quilty-lands-cash-and-london-showing-with-asian-award-20140119-312tc.html>
. For Dark Heart he has created a vast, symmetrical, butterfly-shaped blob 
formed by slathering an eight metre canvas in acrylic and folding it in half. 
Its title, The Island, pays homage to the Tasmanian views ofthe great 
19th-century Australian landscape painter Haughton Forrest 
<http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/forrest-haughton-6210>, and has been executed 
with a confrontational messiness in which European history painting, Aboriginal 
art and contemporary surf culture slide into a viscous mix. There's horror 
within it, like smeared entrails, but great beauty as well. It's too big. It 
defies comprehension. It's aRorschach test <http://theinkblot.com/> that opens 
up the subconscious of Australia.

â€¢ The Adelaide festival <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/> runs until 16 
March. Alfred Hickling's flights were provided byEmirates 
<http://www.emirates.com/uk/english/>
 