
Landowners in England will be paid to remove young ash trees and replace them 
with other species to help slow the spread of the disease killing them, the 
environment secretary said on Tuesday.

Announcing the government's "ash management plan" 
<http://www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13936-chalara-management-plan-201303.pdf>
, Owen Paterson said an additional £1.5m would be spent to identify populations 
of ash trees that are resistant to ash dieback,which was discovered in the UK 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/30/ash-tree-crisis-dieback-disease>
.

The plan accepts that the disease, which threatens the 129,000 hectares of the 
UK covered by ash, cannot be stopped and the most that can be hoped for in the 
short and medium term is to slow the spread of the fungus, which will continue 
to be monitored.

Paterson said: "We know we can't stop Chalara fraxinea infecting our ash 
trees, so we have to throw our resources into managing it and slowing the 
spread. A key part of that strategy will be identifying those trees which have 
a natural resistance to the disease so that we can restock our woodlands in the 
future."

In England, grants will be made available in a bid to stop the spread of the 
disease from the east of the country to the west. The amount the government 
will spend on replacing young trees will depend on demand, said a spokeswoman 
for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra).

Landowners will be paid to remove recently planted ash from high priority 
areas – a band running from Cornwall and Devon and then north through 
Gloucester and up to the Midlands – and replace the trees with other species. 
Thelatest official map of the disease's spread 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/chalara> shows it has now reached 427 sites across 
the UK, up from309 just before Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/dec/23/ash-dieback-infected-nurseries-map>
.

Mary Creagh MP, the shadow environment secretary, accused the government of 
abandoning sections of the UK: "This management plan makes clear that some 
areas of the country are being left to ash dieback disease and others protected 
and the public will want a full explanation of why ministers have made those 
choices. This is the biggest tree disease to hit the country since Dutch elm, 
yet the government has quietly published this plan on the day that parliament 
rises for Easter, so there is no chance for MPs or the press to question 
hapless Defra ministers on their plans."

To the relief of some ecologists, the plan suggests mature trees should not be 
felled in a bid to slow the disease's spread. An import ban,introduced last 
October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/26/ash-dieback-imports-banned>
 to stop the disease – which is believed to have potentially arrived via 
imports of European-grown ash saplings – will stay in place, Defra said.

Harry Cotterell, president of the Country Land and Business Association, said: 
"We are particularly pleased the government has resisted the temptation to 
issue compulsory felling notices and chosen to give landowners help towards the 
costs of removing and replacing young infected ash trees."

Simon Pryor, director of natural environment at the National Trust, said: "It 
is too late to eradicate this disease, but this plan could buy us time. If we – 
government, landowners and foresters – can all work together to reduce the rate 
at which it spreads across the country we can find ways to ease its impact on 
our landscapes and wildlife. But we must use this time energetically, to 
explore every possible way in which we can increase the resilience of our trees 
and woods."

The Woodland Trust welcomed the grants and the suggestion that mature trees 
should not be felled. Sue Holden, Woodland Trust chief executive, said: "We 
will be providing land on two of our sites as part of the long-term study Defra 
has announced today into finding resistant strains of ash. We are also working 
alongside a number of partners as part of our own plan and commitment to 
determine a joint and practical way forward for our native woods and trees."

In the long term, the government said it would identify and grow resistant 
populations of ash, by planting 250,000 trees at up to 25 sites, mostly in East 
Anglia. In Denmark, the disease has already been detected in more than 90% of 
the country's ash trees, many of which will die as a result.

However, the plan broadly rejected the use of treatments or cures as a silver 
bullet for stopping the disease. "We are advised against expecting to find a 
treatment which can be widely applied to protect woodland or treat an infected 
wood or forest. Treatments may have a role, though, in protecting individual 
trees or groups of trees, or reducing production of spores, level of damage and 
rate of spread in some circumstances," it said.

Harriet Tupper, who chairs the International Dendrology Society, has written 
to Paterson criticising the lack of a search by government scientists for a 
treatment 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/earthnews/9948411/Government-ash-dieback-management-plan-criticised-for-failing-to-stop-disease.html>
: "It is pessimistic not to try to find a cure/antidote. Over the centuries, 
scientists have discovered cures for many diseases, of humans, animals and 
plants. There is no reason why this cannot also happen forChalara fraxinea. No 
antidote was found in Poland or Denmark, but of the trees in those countries, 
ash represented only a tiny fraction unlike the situation in the UK."

Today's plan is an updated version of an interim "control" plan published in 
December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/dec/06/ash-dieback-infection-sites-double>
, which was prompted in part bythe discovery of the disease in the wild in 
Norfolk and elsewhere in the country last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/24/ash-dieback-disease-east-anglia>
. The disease's spread will become clearer when summer arrives and leaves grow 
back – infected trees can be identified by diamond-shaped lesions on stems and 
crowns to "die back", with the fungus causing infections between June and 
October.

New ash control plans will be published annually in the future, Defra said.
 