
Last week, environment secretary Owen Paterson quietly published a written 
ministerial statement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-vote-office/December_2012/06-12-12/6-DEFRA-AshDieback.pdf>
 on ash dieback, setting out his department's plans for the months ahead to try 
to control theChalara fraxinea fungus – as well as releasing the interim report 
by the independent Task Force on Tree Health and Plant Biosecurity.

Having written in recent weeks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/blog/2012/nov/16/ash-dieback-vulnerability-flora-fauna>
 about the dire situation now facing our ash trees, I'm glad to be able to 
welcome this statement as a clear step in the right direction. Finally, there 
are encouraging signs here that the government is starting to listen to its 
scientists on this serious issue.

However, with the overall strategy on biosecurity now being delayed until the 
Task Force produces its final report in spring 2013, fears remain that the 
government is still not acting quickly enough to reduce the vulnerability of 
our forests.

Right now we're in the middle of the tree planting season, and while ash tree 
imports may be banned 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2012/oct/26/ash-dieback-imports-banned>, 
there are many other tree diseases for which the public and the industry needs 
some guidance in the short term. The Department for the Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs (Defra) and the Forestry Commission already knows enough about 
these increasing risks to realise that efforts to strengthen biosecurity must 
now be stepped up.

The final report 
<http://www.defra.gov.uk/forestrypanel/files/Independent-Panel-on-Forestry-Final-Report1.pdf>
 from the Independent Panel on Forestry, for example, illustrates the build-up 
of diseases such as Asian longhorn beetle in broadleaved trees, Cryphonectria 
parasitica on sweet chestnut, oak processionary moth, acute oak decline, and 
other fungal diseases on a range of trees.

Even though EU regulations should prevent plants being exported from regions 
known to have a named pest or pathogen, the accidental import to the UK of 
sweet chestnut nursery stock recently from an area in France – which was 
supposedly free of the disease but wasn't – shows the system simply isn't 
working well enough.

As I highlighted in my previous blogpost 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/blog/2012/nov/16/ash-dieback-vulnerability-flora-fauna>
, in light of the challenges posed, not least by the increasingly international 
trade in trees, the scientific community is calling for far more radical 
controls on biosecurity, with some tree specialists suggesting quarantine for 
trees such as oak and pine, and a total ban on imports where necessary.

And as set out in an early day motion 
<http://www.parliament.uk/edm/2012-13/663> that I co-sponsored, we still need 
guarantees from the government that there will be enough money in the pot to 
deal with these threats. With only a handful of tree health experts left in the 
UK, will the funding be forthcoming to make sure we have the necessary 
knowledge and expertise to recognise and deal with future outbreaks?

Together with these improvements in biosecurity and funding to match, we must 
also look to build greater resilience in UK woodland. This is about developing 
larger, richer and more diverse woodland habitats throughout the country which 
are far more likely to be able to cope with diseases.
 