
As my family will happily tell you, I am a bit of a hypochondriac. At the 
first sign of any worrying symptom, I think the worst.

At least I have the self-awareness to know it, and to realise that it’s a 
tendency that extends to other aspects of my life too, like my gardening. So, 
when I first noticed one or two withered, blackened ash leaves in the hedge at 
the end of our garden, I told myself to look the other way.

That was a month or two ago; now it’s impossible to ignore what’s going on. 
The telltale signs ofChalara ash dieback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback>, aka Hymenoscyphus 
fraxineus <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ashdieback>, are clear to see. Blackened 
leaves droop from just about every other branch and, here and there, the 
smooth, grey bark is stained and marked.

Turning to the Forestry Commission’s Tree Alert pages 
<https://treealert.forestry.gov.uk/>, the diagnosis was easy. I filled out a 
form and reported my finding. The first signs of dieback in the UK were found 
in 2012, in a Buckinghamshire nursery. Last autumn, the western edge of the 
disease’s spread had reached neighbouring Carmarthenshire, but now it’s 
definitely come to Pembrokeshire - and is here in our valley.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fash-dieback-is-unstoppable-but-you-can-help-by-planting-new-trees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d9e3c29775bf26fe4af74df43d990f784f61853%2F0_38_900_1125%2F900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ash%20dieback%20is%20unstoppable%2C%20but%20you%20can%20help%20%7C%20Julian%20Rollins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fash-dieback-is-unstoppable-but-you-can-help-by-planting-new-trees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ash%20dieback%20is%20unstoppable%2C%20but%20you%20can%20help%20%7C%20Julian%20Rollins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fash-dieback-is-unstoppable-but-you-can-help-by-planting-new-trees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d9e3c29775bf26fe4af74df43d990f784f61853%2F0_38_900_1125%2F900.jpg>
 Chalara ash dieback causes leaves to blacken and droop. Photograph: Julian 
Rollins 
As a child I can remember hearing adults bemoaning the impact of Dutch elm 
disease <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fr/hcou-4u4jcl>, without understanding how 
trees could matter so much to them. Now, I think I do.

Dieback is expected to wipe out Britain’s ash trees, just as it has in Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/07/disease-killing-denmarks-ash-trees>
. It is unstoppable and will transform the look of British landscapes because 
ash is one of our commonest trees. In the countryside it grows in woods and 
hedges, and it thrives in towns and cities, too. Dieback will kill young trees 
quickly, but mature ashes are expected to linger on. In the long term, there is 
ahope that a tiny few will have some resistance 
<https://www.jic.ac.uk/news/2016/04/ash-dieback/>, and that they may offer the 
opportunity of an ash comeback. But even if this happens, it is a long way off.

In the meantime, ash trees will die, creating millions of gaps in woods and 
hedges across Britain. In woods, their passing will create opportunities for 
other species such as hazel and sycamore, but elsewhere gaps will not be filled 
without human help.

I can’t save our ash trees, but I can get ready for when those gaps appear. 
Inspired by theTree Council’s Seed Gathering Season project 
<http://www.treecouncil.org.uk/Take-Part/Seed-Gathering-Season>, which runs 
from September 23 to October 23, I’m going to get growing, making a corner of 
my garden into a tree nursery. The Tree Council argues that the best tree to 
plant is one raised from seed collected as near as possible to where it is 
going to grow. So, I’m going to be collecting lots of acorns over the next few 
weeks. “Tree nursery” sounds a bit grand; it will actually be a couple of dozen 
mismatched old plant pots, but at least I’ll be doing something.

 * Julian Rollins <http://www.julianrollins.co.uk> is an author and journalist 
who specialises in the environment, conservation and rural affairs.  