
Almost all the ash trees in the UK and across Europe are likely to be wiped 
out by a “double whammy” of a bright green borer beetle and the fungus that 
causesash dieback <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback>, 
according to a comprehensive new academic analysis.

The loss of the ash, one of the most abundant tree species in the UK, would 
mean losing even more trees than the 15 million elms killed byDutch elm disease 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dutch_elm_disease> in the 1970s. Ash is the most 
common hedgerow tree, with 60,000 miles of tree lines. It is the second most 
common tree in woodland, after the oak, and there are many ash trees in towns 
and cities.

“Between ash dieback and the emerald ash borer, it is likely that almost all 
ash trees in Europe will be wiped out, just as the elm was largely eliminated 
by Dutch elm disease,” said Peter Thomas, a tree ecologist at Keele University, 
UK, who did the analysis, published on Wednesday, in theJournal of Ecology 
<http://www.journalofecology.org/>. “The two together are a double whammy.”

Thomas said the arrival of the emerald ash borer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/04/ash-trees-under-threat-borer-beetle-britain>
, originally from Asia but which has devastated North American ash and is now 
as close as Sweden, is inevitable: “It is only a matter of time before it 
spreads across the rest of the Europe – including Britain. Our European ash is 
very susceptible to the beetle and the beetle is set to become the biggest 
threat faced by ash in Europe – potentially far more serious than ash dieback.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28becb4ed9350618baa334694ab0c0863a773ef6%2F0_0_5469_3648%2F5469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ash%20dieback%20and%20beetle%20attack%20likely%20to%20'wipe%20out'%20ash%20trees%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ash%20dieback%20and%20beetle%20attack%20likely%20to%20%27wipe%20out%27%20ash%20trees%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28becb4ed9350618baa334694ab0c0863a773ef6%2F0_0_5469_3648%2F5469.jpg>
 Close-up of an emerald ash borer beetle. Photograph: Solent 
News/REX/Shutterstock 
“It is quite a big beetle, originally from Asia, and can fly a long way. In 
the past, insect diseases have spread very quickly,” Thomas told the Guardian. 
He said attempts to halt its spread in North America, by trying to catch male 
beetles in traps baited with female pheromones for example, have failed.

Ash dieback was first reported in the UK in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/06/ash-dieback-widespread> 
but given the large number of sites it was found at, it must have arrived 
earlier, Thomas said. It remains unclear how many ash will die, as it can take 
years for mature trees to succumb. But 95% could be eventually be lost in the 
worst case scenario, which has played out in Denmark already. “We already have 
lots that are mortally wounded,” Thomas said.


Ash dieback <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback> will be 
virtually impossible to eradicate from the UK, Thomas said, as its spores can 
be blown more than 10 miles in the wind and survive on woodland floors for four 
or five years.
Ash dieback spread map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/ash_dieback-zip/giv-271676hbyYZKbD4Io/>
However, ash trees have a very wide genetic diversity and some are resistant 
to the fungus. Three genetic markers have already been identified and will be 
used to select trees for future planting efforts. The genes that give the 
special strains their resistance could also beinserted into trees via genetic 
engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/31/ash-dieback-gm-genetic-modification-woodland-crisis>
, Thomas said.

A spokeswoman for the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
(Defra), said: “Natural tolerance to the disease exists and the UK is leading 
the way on work to identify resistant strains, investing more than £21m intree 
health research <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fr/infd-9hjf24>. Our approach also 
includes protecting non-infected areas and managing infected trees.”

Defra has identified the emerald ash borer as a “significant threat” and 
worked with other EU nations to introduce restrictions to protect against its 
spread. Imports of ash trees have been suspended since ash dieback was first 
recorded in the UK.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F506881039075cf70a2eee7d1141725e999e76161%2F0_0_2800_1767%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ash%20dieback%20and%20beetle%20attack%20likely%20to%20'wipe%20out'%20ash%20trees%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ash%20dieback%20and%20beetle%20attack%20likely%20to%20%27wipe%20out%27%20ash%20trees%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F506881039075cf70a2eee7d1141725e999e76161%2F0_0_2800_1767%2F2800.jpg>
 The larvae of emerald beetle feed on the inner bark of ash trees, disrupting 
the tree’s ability to transport water and nutrients. The beetle killed about 10 
million ash trees in Michigan, Ohio and Indiana in 2003. Photograph: Sipa 
Press/REX/Shutterstock 
“If the ash went, the British countryside would never look the same again,” 
Thomas said. Beyond the loss of the trees themselves, the species is associated 
with over 1,000 species of animals, birds and plants. In particular, over a 100 
species of lichens, fungi and insects would decline or become extinct if the 
ash was gone.

Ash had been thriving in Europe until recently thanks, paradoxically, to air 
pollution: nitrogen pollution has acted as a fertiliser. Climate change has 
also aided ash because it is sensitive to spring frosts and therefore benefits 
from warmer springs.

Thomas said, while it may well be too late to save most ash trees, more could 
have been done sooner: “It beggars belief that we had known this disease was 
coming for decades but we didn’t do anything about it.”
 