
An Australian man who travelled to Syria to fight against Islamic State has 
challenged theAustralian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> to 
charge him for breaking Australia’s foreign fighters law, or leave him alone.

“If I’m the bad guy, then fucking charge me,” Queenslander Ashley Dyball told 
ABC’s 7.30 program. “I don’t care. I’ll do my time.”

Dyball joined Kurdish militia the YPG – People’s Protection Units – in May 
2015, fighting in Rojava in northernSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

On a break from the conflict in Germany, he was deported from that country 
because he was on an Interpol watch list, and returned reluctantly to Australia 
in December.

Relatives baffled and shamed as Israel's 'Isis family' returns home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/relatives-baffled-and-shamed-as-israels-isis-family-returns-home>
Dyball was interviewed by the AFP at the airport – and had his passport 
confiscated – but was released without charge.

Nearly a year later, he remains under investigation by the police.

He had his passport returned to him to allow him to go on a family holiday to 
Fiji earlier this year, but then, in June, he was detained at Brisbane airport 
holding a one-way ticket to Sweden.

His passport was cancelled again.

Dyball said he went to Syria to assist in humanitarian work and to help 
civilians caught in the conflict.


But he ended up fighting on the front lines for the YPG against Isis before 
progressing to the “sabotage team”, clearing mines and booby traps left by 
retreating Isis soldiers.

He fought alongside fellow Australian Reece Harding who was killed by an 
improvised explosive device. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/01/reece-harding-funeral-family-pledges-to-further-kurdish-cause-he-lost-his-life-for>

Reece Harding funeral: family pledges to further Kurdish cause he lost his 
life for
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/01/reece-harding-funeral-family-pledges-to-further-kurdish-cause-he-lost-his-life-for>
Dyball said he knew before he left for Syria it was “frowned upon” by the 
government for Australians to travel there to fight.


But he argued the government’s investigation into his activities showed a 
double standard in the federal government’s position.

“You [the government] say we can’t fight for them [the YPG], but yet you fund 
them,” he said.

“You’ll airstrike for them. You’ll aid them. So how is it OK for you to aid 
them and I can’t aid them?”

In a statement to 7.30, a spokesman for the attorney general, George Brandis, 
said: “The Australian government has, for a number of years, strongly and 
consistently discouraged Australians from travelling to conflict zones such as 
Syria and Iraq to participate in hostile activities.

“It is dangerous, it puts others’ lives at risk, and it may constitute a 
criminal offence.”
 