
Actors Mila Kunis and Ashton Kutcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> have sued Daily Mail 
publisher Associated Newspapers in the UK’s high court over two articles about 
their baby daughter.

The couple are angry about news stories on the Mail Online site which they say 
featured “wrongful publication of paparazzi photographs of family outings”, 
according to a statementreleased to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/ashton-kutcher-mila-kunis-sue-811216>. 
Their lawsuit also cites the allegation that the stories were used to “promote 
clothing products by the Mail”.

George Clooney rejects Daily Mail apology, calling it 'worst kind of tabloid'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/11/george-clooney-rejects-daily-mail-apology>
The statement reads: “Ashton and Mila understandably value their private and 
family life, and in particular their personal time with their daughter. Like 
any other family they should be allowed to enjoy family outings without being 
pursued by photographers. They have made it clear that they do not agree to the 
publication of photographs of such occasions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fashton-kutcher-mila-kunis-sue-daily-mail-baby-photo-paparazzi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438076755493%2F3481c76d-1dfc-4a2c-89f2-068f0a5872e8-2060x1468.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashton%20Kutcher%20and%20Mila%20Kunis%20sue%20the%20Daily%20Mail&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fashton-kutcher-mila-kunis-sue-daily-mail-baby-photo-paparazzi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashton%20Kutcher%20and%20Mila%20Kunis%20sue%20the%20Daily%20Mail&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Fashton-kutcher-mila-kunis-sue-daily-mail-baby-photo-paparazzi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F28%2F1438076755493%2F3481c76d-1dfc-4a2c-89f2-068f0a5872e8-2060x1468.jpeg>
 Mila Kunis, left, and Ashton Kutcher at a basketball game in Los Angeles last 
December. Photograph: Stephen Dunn/Getty Images 
According to the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-33679726>, 
the lawsuit alleges misuse of private information and breaches of the Data 
Protection Act.

Mail Online routinely posts paparazzi shots of famous and not-so-famous people 
accompanied by fashion boxouts inviting their readers to purchase items of 
clothing similar or identical to those worn by celebrities. Two pieces about 
Kunis and Kutcher remain visible online, from June and July.

The couple, whose daughter Wyatt was born in October, become the latest 
powerful Hollywood figures to take on the Mail. George Clooney called out the 
newspaper in July last year for falsely suggesting that the mother of his wife 
Amal Alamuddin did not approve of the duo’s impending nuptials because she was 
a member of Lebanon’s Druze community. The Mail later apologised butClooney 
refused to accept the climbdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/11/george-clooney-rejects-daily-mail-apology>
, calling the newspaper “the worst kind of tabloid” in a statement to USA Today.



The Guardian has approached the Mail for comment.
 