
As an investor in Uber, it’s no surprise that Ashton Kutcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> is unhappy with some of the 
coverage of the company in recent days. But a series of tweets he posted this 
afternoon are likely to fuel more controversy.

Uber has been under fire after BuzzFeed reported on comments 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/bensmith/uber-executive-suggests-digging-up-dirt-on-journalists>
 made by its senior vice president of business Emil Michael at an event.

Michael suggested that his company would be prepared to spend up to $1m on 
investigating the personal lives of journalists who criticised the company, 
with specific reference to Sarah Lacy, co-founder of tech news site PandoDaily.

“What is so wrong about digging up dirt on shady journalist?” asked Kutcher in 
the first ofa series of tweets addressing the controversy 
<https://twitter.com/aplusk> today.

“I believe we live in a day were the first word has become ‘the word’. Rumors 
span the globe before anyone has an opportunity to defend them selves. Everyone 
is guilty and then tasked to defend themselves publicly. Questioning the source 
needs to happen... Always! So as long as journalist are interested and willing 
to print half truths as facts... Yes we should question the source.”

Kutcher went on to stress that he was speaking his own views rather than on 
behalf ofUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>, before commenting 
on the likely response. “This should be fun... Here comes the part where 
journalist explain why they should be exempt from ridicule and judgement and 
probing...”
ashton kutcher (@aplusk) 
What is so wrong about digging up dirt on shady journalist? @pando 
<https://twitter.com/pando> @TechCrunch <https://twitter.com/TechCrunch> @Uber 
<https://twitter.com/Uber>
 <https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535091002151690242> November 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535091002151690242> ashton kutcher (@aplusk) 
So as long as journalist are interested and willing to print half truths as 
facts... Yes we should question the source.
 <https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535094058725543936> November 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535094058725543936> ashton kutcher (@aplusk) 
This should be fun... Here comes the part where journalist explain why they 
should be exempt from ridicule and judgement and probing...
 <https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535096148927586305> November 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535096148927586305> ashton kutcher (@aplusk) 
U r all right and I'm on the wrong side of this ultimately. I just wish 
journalists were held to the same standards as public figures.
 <https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535102500009811968> November 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/aplusk/status/535102500009811968> 
Yep, here it comes. First, what makes Lacy “shady”? She has been a prominent 
critic of Uber, including an opinion piece in October titledThe horrific 
trickle down of Asshole culture: Why I’ve just deleted Uber from my phone 
<http://pando.com/2014/10/22/the-horrific-trickle-down-of-asshole-culture-at-a-company-like-uber/>
, about a sexist advert launched by the company’s French office.

If criticising a company’s business practices and corporate culture is 
shady... well, I don’t know what word is best used to describe responding to 
that criticism with threats to investigate the writer’s family and personal 
life. A reminder of Michael’s comments:

Over dinner, he outlined the notion of spending “a million dollars” to hire 
four top opposition researchers and four journalists. That team could, he said, 
help Uber fight back against the press — they’d look into “your personal lives, 
your families,” and give the media a taste of its own medicine...

At the dinner, Michael expressed outrage at Lacy’s column and said that women 
are far more likely to get assaulted by taxi drivers than Uber drivers. He said 
that he thought Lacy should be held “personally responsible” for any woman who 
followed her lead in deleting Uber and was then sexually assaulted.

Then he returned to the opposition research plan. Uber’s dirt-diggers, Michael 
said, could expose Lacy. They could, in particular, prove a particular and very 
specific claim about her personal life.

In this situation, it’s pretty clear where the shadiness comes in, and it’s 
not the journalist.

Kutcher is right: journalists should be subject to probing and judgement and 
questioning, especially if they’re writing “half-truths as facts”. But it’s 
their work – their articles, their sources, their conclusions – that need 
probing. Not their personal lives.

I have a lot of sympathy for Kutcher, who has endured intrusive, speculative 
and doubtless usually half-true (at best) journalism about his own personal 
life, and that of his family.

Few tech journalists can ever know what it’s like to have the bones of their 
marital relationship picked over in the tabloids, or to regularly run the 
gauntlet of aggressive paparazzi with their loved ones. Few would blame Kutcher 
for having an extremely negative view of journalism in general as a result.

Even so, harassing or printing lies about a celebrity is a very different kind 
of journalism to criticising – no matter whether you put “asshole” in the 
headline – a technology company that they’ve invested in.

In the age of corporate blogs and social media, Uber had plenty of 
“opportunity to defend themselves” that didn’t involve private investigators 
and personal dirt-digging.

All journalists – celebrity and tech hacks alike – are on notice that if our 
journalism is bad, we can be called out publicly. Often by one another, in 
fact, but also by the companies and people that we write about. It’s a hugely 
positive development.

Judging by Michael’s comments and the separate controversy about the company 
accessing a reporter’s personal data without permission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/19/uber-investigates-top-executive-after-journalists-privacy-was-breached>
, Uber’s natural inclination was to choose another path.

“U r all right and I’m on the wrong side of this ultimately. I just wish 
journalists were held to the same standards as public figures,” he tweeted, 
presumably after reading some of the feedback.

I suspect more journalists share Kutcher’s views on standards than he thinks, 
but when that leads them to criticise companies in his portfolio, that doesn’t 
make them shady.

• Is Uber the worst company in Silicon Valley? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/nov/18/uber-worst-company-silicon-valley>

 