
"How can someone know what they want if they've never even seen it?" booms 
Ashton Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher>, channelling 
the spirit of Steve Jobs in the new biopic of the late Apple founder and chief 
executive. This may be the cri de coeur of the frustrated inventor, but history 
tells us that Jobs did things somewhat differently: Apple, after all, were 
geniuses at coming up with things people didn't know they wanted in the first 
place.

Be that as it may, Jobs – or jOBS as its marketing people would have it – is 
due to receive its world premiere tonight at theSundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival>, and to draw attention 
to it they've released this short clip. It features Kutcher, as Jobs, and Josh 
Gad as Steve Wozniak, Jobs' hairy co-founder of Apple Computer, arguing about 
the possibililties of Wozniak's recently developed operating system in what is 
presumably supposed to be the car-park of Hewlett Packard, where they both 
worked in the summer of 1970.

As to whether or not Jobs will turn out to be a good movie, we'll have to wait 
till the reviews come in; but this clip already has at least one famous 
detractor: Wozniak himself, who posted a cutting response on theGizmodo website 
<http://gizmodo.com/5978671/first-look-at-steve-jobs-movie-with-ashton-kutcher-is-actually-pretty-good?post=56589037>
. Saying the scene was "not close … we never had such interaction", Wozniak 
went on to say: "Personalities are very wrong although mine is closer." He also 
suggested that, at that time, Jobs was the one learning from Wozniak about the 
likely future impact of computing.

Jobs <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jobs> is due to be released in the US 
on 19 April.
 