
Ashton Kutcher as Steve Jobs

As well as the (admittedly quite freaky) physical resemblance, Ashton Kutcher 
is perhaps the most qualified actor around to play Steve Jobs. After all, 
they're both technological visionaries: Jobs being the brains behind Pixar, the 
Mac, the iPod, iPad and iPhone, and Kutcher being an early investor in startups 
such as Skype,Airbnb <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/> and Foursquare. What's more, 
Jobs was known for his obsessive perfectionism and ability to convince the 
public of a product's desirability. Having been the host of Punk'd and the star 
of Dude, Where's My Car, Kutcher also ... no, I don't know where I'm going with 
this one.

Jesse Eisenberg as Mark Zuckerberg
 Jesse Eisenberg as Mark Zuckerberg in The Social Network. Photograph: Merrick 
Morton 
Jesse Eisenberg only shares a handful of obvious traits with Mark Zuckerberg – 
like age, hair colour and the last syllable of his surname – but that didn't 
stop him from doing a bang-up job of playing the Facebook founder inThe Social 
Network <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/137709/social-network>. Eisenberg 
perfectly captured Zuckerberg's short-fuse nervous energy and jumpy 
intellectualism. Perhaps it's because they both share humble beginnings; 
Zuckerberg was raised in a small upstate New York village and Eisenberg 
starring inLightning: Fire From the Sky 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iFLrKy7R3nA>, a terrible TV movie about 
lightning, which came in the form of fire from the sky.

Justin Timberlake as Sean Parker
 Justin Timberlake as Sean Parker in The Social Network. Photograph: cCol 
Pics/Everett/Rex Feature 
Napster's Sean Parker was often described as a "rock star", so who better to 
play him in The Social Network than frizzy-haired pop crooner Justin 
Timberlake? Timberlake absolutely nailed Parker in the movie, provided that the 
real-life Parker is a swaggering tool who lives his life like it's the world's 
worst Puff Daddy video. He may not actually be like that, but let's assume he 
is. After all, Justin Timberlake is the star ofIn Time 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/143564/in-time>, so we can't really doubt 
his acting credentials.

Alexander Armstrong as Clive Sinclair
 Alexander Armstrong as Clive Sinclair in Micro Men. Photograph: BBC 
In 2009, Alexander Armstrong starred in BBC4's Micro Men 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2009/oct/03/clive-sinclair-micro-men-alexander-armstrong>
, a biopic of Clive Sinclair, the inventor of the pocket calculator. Painfully 
conspicuous slaphead wig aside, the casting was inspired. Armstrong managed to 
channel Sinclair's blind devotion, volcanic temper and awkwardness around women 
magnificently. Perhaps he was able to access the mindset of a compulsive 
attention-seeker such as Sinclair so easily because of his own determination to 
present every single television programme that has ever been made.

Martin Freeman as Chris Curry
 Martin Freeman as Chris Curry in Micro Men. Photograph: BBC 
Meanwhile, the more mild-mannered Martin Freeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/martin-freeman> played Acorn co-founder 
Chris Curry in Micro Men. Curry, in a sense, was an amalgamation of every 
character that Freeman has ever played. Like John Watson, he's a quiet 
pragmatist sidelined by a more charismatic partner. Like Tim from The Office, 
he enjoys a flirtation with a secretary and aspires to a better future that 
exists just out of his reach. And like Bilbo Baggins, his prosthetic eyebrows 
are incredibly off-putting. Perfect casting, really.

Bill Gates in The Simpsons

Although Bill Gates made a fleeting appearance in The Social Network (played 
by a professional lookalike), his greatest onscreen moment came inThe Simpsons 
episode Das Bus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Das_Bus>. Voiced by Hank Azaria – 
who plays Moe, Apu and Comic Book Guy, among others – Gates's appearance is 
brief and incendiary. He marches into the Simpson household and acquires 
Homer's startup by ordering some hired goons to smash up his office. Is this 
realistic? Would Bill Gates ever make a business decision as bad as acquiring 
Homer's Compu-Global-Hyper-Mega-Net in real life? You only have to look atthe 
infamous Zune 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/may/26/microsoft-zune-history> to 
know that the answer is probably yes.

Richard Ayoade as Moss
 Chris O'Dowd as Roy and Richard Ayoade as Moss in The IT Crowd. Photograph: 
Channel 4 
He may not be based on anyone from real life, but Moss from The IT Crowd is 
just about a perfect blend of any number of famous nerds. He's got the glasses 
of Steve Jobs, the uniform of Bill Gates, the slightly inept never-say-die 
attitude of Clive Sinclair and the vast haircut ofSteve Wozniak 
<http://woz.org/> in the 1970s, although back then Wozniak wore it as a beard.
 