
Ashton Kutcher has been cast as Steve Jobs in one of two competing biopics 
about the late founder of Apple,reports Variety 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118052143>.

Kutcher, who bears some resemblance to the young Jobs, has been cast in a 
version bySwing Vote <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125814/swing-vote>
's Joshua Michael Stern, which will chronicle the entrepreneur's journey from 
"wayward hippie" to co-founder of the iconic technology firm, "where he became 
one of the most revered creative entrepreneurs of our time".

"I had the idea the day Jobs retired and I notice several IT and art directors 
at my company all in a buzz," producer Mark Hulme of Five Star Insitute told
TheWrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/movies/article/ashton-kutcher-play-steve-jobs-indie-film-36702>
. "I was observing that day how distractive his retirement was to the 
marketplace and I knew in my heart that his story was the film I wanted to do".

Little else is known about the project, other than that it is based on a 
screenplay by Matt Whiteley and is likely to shoot as early as May. Producers 
are hoping to steal a march on a second Jobs biopic from studio Sony which was 
announced in the autumn.

The other Jobs film is based on Walter Isaacson's bestselling authorised 
biography of the Apple founder, and Sony was at one point tapping Aaron Sorkin 
of The West Wing andThe Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137709/social-network> fame to take on 
screenwriting duties. "Right now I'm just in the thinking-about-it stages," 
said Sorkin in November. "It's a really big movie and it's going to be a great 
movie no matter who writes it. He was a great entrepreneur, he was a great 
artist, a great thinker."

Isaacson's book Steve Jobs: The Exclusive Biography is the only authorised 
book about Jobs's life. Published in the UK just 19 days after Jobs died from 
pancreatic cancer, it sold 37,000 copies in its first five days here and more 
than 379,000 copies in its first week in the US. The volume is based on more 
than 40 interviews with Jobs conducted over two years, as well as interviews 
with more than 100 family members, friends, adversaries, competitors and 
colleagues.

Kutcher, who replaced Charlie Sheen in TV sitcom Two and a Half Men last year, 
has been in the news recently following his high-profile split from Demi Moore. 
His film credits include romantic comedy fare such asNew Year's Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144990/new-year-s-eve> and No Strings 
Attached <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140299/no-strings-attached> as 
well as more serious material such as Emilio Estevez's historical dramaBobby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91867/bobby> and the science-fiction 
themedThe Butterfly Effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/100080/butterfly.effect>. Stern is best 
known for the 2008 Kevin Costner election comedy Swing Vote and little known 
2005 literary drama Neverwas, starring Aaron Eckhart.

The only previous film to tell Jobs's story was 1999's made-for-TV docudrama 
Pirates of Silicon Valley, which starred ER's Noah Wyle as theApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> founder.
 