
What’s the name of this show? The Ranch

When does it premiere? All 10 episodes are on Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> now.

What is this show about? After giving up on his dreams of being a professional 
football player, Colt Bennett (Ashton Kutcher) returns back to his family’s 
ranch in Colorado. While there he confronts his tough father Beau (Sam 
Elliott), who thinks that Colt is a wastrel who peaked in high school, and his 
resentful brother Rooster (Danny Masterson) who stayed behind and helped out on 
the ranch. Their mother Maggie (Debra Winger) runs the local bar and, though 
separated from Beau, is still shacking up with him on occasion. When Colt 
learns that the ranch is in financial difficulty he decides to stay behind and 
help his family out, even though his father doesn’t want his charity.

God, that sounds like a really depressing drama. No, it’s a comedy. With a 
laugh track.

What are you talking about? This is one of the strangest sitcoms I’ve ever 
seen. There are plenty of old-school sitcoms that try to take on dark topics 
(CBS’s Mom, which is about a family overcoming addiction, is the best example), 
but The Ranch can’t seem to find its tone. There’s a dramatic scene where a son 
is confronting his father about their tumultuous relationship that is then 
punctuated by a joke about how the son made the paper because he “showed Shania 
his Twain”. It’s like a plains version of Chekhov spliced with a Mel Brooks 
movie.

Who created such a thing? Jim Patterson and Don Reo, who made Blossom and a 
handful of other shows.

Is the show full of contradictions? Absolutely. It’s staged like a traditional 
three-camera sitcom (think Big Bang Theory or Two and a Half Men) but it’s lit 
dramatically, like the ranch is really a set for a community theater production 
of Our Town. It’s trying very hard to appeal to a red-state audience with all 
its country music and a character who honestly thinks “global warming was 
invented by Al Gore to sell books to Californians”, but the word “dick” pops up 
more often than in a Cheney biography and there are as many F-bombs as North 
Korea has nukes. There is just something that doesn’t gel about the show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fthe-ranch-review-netflix-ashton-kutcher-danny-masterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d9ab163c5fa5e850682ca6f39ae224608348550%2F98_0_3471_2085%2F3471.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashton%20Kutcher's%20The%20Ranch%3A%20story%20of%20a%20family%E2%80%99s%20implosion%20with%20a%20laugh%20track&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fthe-ranch-review-netflix-ashton-kutcher-danny-masterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashton%20Kutcher%27s%20The%20Ranch%3A%20story%20of%20a%20family%E2%80%99s%20implosion%20with%20a%20laugh%20track&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fthe-ranch-review-netflix-ashton-kutcher-danny-masterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d9ab163c5fa5e850682ca6f39ae224608348550%2F98_0_3471_2085%2F3471.jpg>
 ‘The Ranch is lit dramatically, like the ranch is really a set for a community 
theater production of Our Town.’ Photograph: Netflix 
Is it bad? It’s either the most ingenious traditional comedy around for 
blending humor and drama in such a strange way, or it’s a complete steaming 
mess.

Is it funny? There aren’t many laugh-out-loud moments, but it is pretty clever 
and there is some great wordplay and a fun dynamic between brothers Colt and 
Rooster, who punch each other in the nuts with the frequency of members of the 
Jackass crew. But when that is sandwiched in between Colt getting wasted at a 
high school football fundraiser and realizing that he has wasted his life 
pursuing his dream of being an NFL player, it’s hard to really get on a comedic 
roll.

What’s good about it? The characters and the performances are top notch. After 
all their years on That 70s Show together, Kutcher and Masterson have an easy 
chemistry and are joke-delivering machines. Elliot’s Beau is the real star of 
the show, with his deadpan humor and caveman attitudes about life. Winger, so 
greatly missed all these years, doesn’t have as much to do, but a scene where 
she embarrasses her son by talking about her sex life is one of the best in the 
series. Elisha Cuthbert also shows up at Colt’s high school girlfriend who is 
now a teacher at their alma mater.

What’s bad about it? This being Netflix, each episode is a solid 30 minutes 
long, which is considerably longer than a half hour program on commercial 
television, which really only run about 22 minutes. There is too much going on 
in each episode, and not because they’re trying to balance comedy and drama, 
but because there is a bloat to a lot of the scenes and there are some 
extraneous storylines. Also, if you’re not a fan of bands like Florida Georgia 
Line, the soundtrack is going to get on your nerves really fast.

Should I watch this show? For those who think that the liberal media doesn’t 
represent their values about putting family first, keeping government small and 
avoiding quinoa at all costs, then this is a home run. For everyone else it’s 
worth taking a look at because it is such an odd amalgamation of parts. 
However, there is not going to be any need to get through all 10 episodes with 
any urgency.
 