
Christian Bale is rumoured to have lived on coffee and one apple a day to 
achieve his emaciated physique in The Machinist. But not everyone is suited to 
unorthodox diets, asAshton Kutcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> discovered after adopting the 
late Steve Jobs's fruitarian regimen in preparation for a new biopic of the 
technology magnate.

Speaking at the premiere of Jobs at the Sundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival> on Friday night, 
Kutcher revealed that he went to hospital with pancreas problems after 
following a strict diet of fruit, nuts and seeds. Jobs, who was often reported 
to be a fruitarian, died of pancreatic cancer in October last year.

"First of all, the fruitarian diet can lead to, like, severe issues," Kutcher 
toldUSA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/movies/2013/01/26/ashton-kutcher-steve-jobs-sundance/1866023/>
. "I went to the hospital like two days before we started shooting the movie. I 
was like doubled over in pain. My pancreas levels were completely out of whack. 
It was really terrifying â€¦ considering everything."

Kutcher also revealed that he spent hundreds of hours studying tapes of Jobs 
in an effort to accurately replicate his hunched walk and mannerisms. The actor 
said that he felt close to theApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> founder as they shared a 
fascination for "tech space". He also revealed an admiration for his subject's 
ability to bounce back after periods of struggle.

"He's a guy that failed and got back on the horse," said Kutcher. "I think we 
can all sort of relate to that in some place in our life where we are moving 
forward with something and we fall down. You have to have the guts to get back 
up and go again. I think I share that as well."

Jobs, which covers the period from Apple's founding in a garage in Palo Alto, 
California to the launch of the iPod in 2001, has so far received a lukewarm 
response from critics. Variety'sJustin Chang 
<http://www.variety.com/review/VE1117949097/> said Joshua Michael Stern's film 
"more or less embodies the sort of bland, go-with-the-flow creative thinking 
Jobs himself would have scorned", while CNET'sCasey Newton 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-13579_3-57565992-37/review-while-jobs-fawns-over-subject-film-falls-flat/>
 was unimpressed by a movie in which "the viewer spends two hours watching 
cardboard cutouts lose arguments to Ashton Kutcher". Indiewire'sEric Kohn 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/sundance-review-ashton-kutcher-does-a-solid-steve-in-jobs-but-is-this-tame-biopic-a-lost-cause-from-the-start>
, however, praised "Kutcher's committed performance, certainly his most 
impressive turn in years, which conveys the character's focused, manipulative 
intentions in each calculated look".

Aaron Sorkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/16/aaron-sorkin-steve-jobs-biopic>, 
the Oscar-winning writer of The Social Network, is planning a separate biopic 
based on Walter Isaacson's bestselling official biography of Jobs. Sorkin's 
version will reportedly comprise just three extended scenes, each capturing a 
point just before a vital product launch in order to portray Jobs and his 
biggest successes.
 