
A+ <http://aplus.com/>, the viral content site established by actor and tech 
investorAshton Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> has 
been accused of lifting content wholesale and without credit from sites 
includingBuzzFeed <http://buzzfeed.com/> and the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/>, reports the Daily Dot 
<http://www.dailydot.com/business/a-plus-ashton-kutcher-stolen-content/>.

A+, first launched in 2011, claims to be a “platform that will leverage viral 
social storytelling to create positive change in the world”, and offers a 
mixture of listicles, videos and lifehacks.


It describes itself as the “fastest-growing site in the history of the 
internet” and claims to have racked up30 million unique visitors in a little 
over 100 days <https://angel.co/a-42> after a 2013 relaunch. 

The site’s huge rise in popularity is a result of Kutcher promoting the site 
on his verifiedTwitter <https://twitter.com/aplusk/> and Facebook 
<http://cdn0.dailydot.com/uploaded/images/original/2014/8/6/Screen_Shot_2014-08-06_at_16.40.48.png>
 pages.


The Daily Dot’s Rob Price, however, has investigated the platform and found 
the site to have copied and pasted content directly from BuzzFeed, Huffington 
Post,Cracked <http://www.cracked.com/> and Instagram <http://instagram.com/> 
(without credit).

Articles reposted with very minor alterations included “This Girl Was Sent 
Home in Tears Because Her Dress Was Too Short So Her Mom Did The Most Awesome 
Thing Ever”, which the Daily Dot describes as identical to aBuzzFeed post by 
Ryan Broderick 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/ryanhatesthis/mom-wears-too-short-dress-code-graduation>
; aside from a changed headline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Faug%2F08%2Fashton-kutchers-viral-content-site-accused-plagiarism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F8%2F1407495753942%2Fe28a96b1-adcb-4bbd-8347-192eaea8420a-927x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashton%20Kutcher's%20A%2B%20viral%20content%20site%20accused%20of%20plagiarism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Faug%2F08%2Fashton-kutchers-viral-content-site-accused-plagiarism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashton%20Kutcher%27s%20A%2B%20viral%20content%20site%20accused%20of%20plagiarism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2014%2Faug%2F08%2Fashton-kutchers-viral-content-site-accused-plagiarism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F8%2F1407495753942%2Fe28a96b1-adcb-4bbd-8347-192eaea8420a-927x1020.jpeg>
 A screengrab produced by the Daily Dot as proof of plagiarism. Photograph: The 
Daily Dot 
Plenty of examples of articles lifted either entirely without change or with 
very minor changes have been highlighted and screen-grabbed; all of which have 
since been removed by A+ after the internet paper asked for comment.

All A+ content from before July has been removed from the site; all tweets 
<https://twitter.com/aplusapp/> from before 6 August; and all Facebook posts 
before 4 August. It is also reported that KS Anthony, who described himself as 
“writer/content developer at A+”, deleted his LinkedIn profile after he was 
contacted by the Daily Dot.

 The not found error which displays on content removed from A+. Photograph: A+ 
A spokesperson for A+ said: “We take these allegations seriously and are 
looking into them. The content that was removed was taken down as a 
precautionary measure.

“Respecting the intellectual property of others is extremely important to us.”

A+’s about page describes its copyright policy <http://aplus.com/about> thus:


We respect the intellectual property rights of others and expect our users to 
do the same.

It is our policy, in appropriate circumstances and at our discretion, to 
disable and/or terminate the accounts of users who repeatedly infringe or are 
repeatedly charged with infringing the copyrights or other intellectual 
property rights of others

Kutcher, who first became famous for his MTV show Punk’d 
<http://www.mtv.com/shows/punkd/series.jhtml>, in which he played secret camera 
pranks on celebrities, has since established himself as a Hollywood movie star 
and tech investor.

His AngelList profile <https://angel.co/aplusk> lists him as an investor in 
Skype <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/skype> and Flipboard 
<https://flipboard.com/> among other tech companies. He also played Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/stevejobs> in the 2013 biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/14/steve-jobs-apple-film-biopic-review>
 of the formerApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> co-founder 
and CEO.

This is not the first time 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2701942/Ashton-Kutcher-stole-picture-Hollywood-star-accused-tweeting-wildlife-photographers-image-monkey-Facebook.html>
, however, that Kutcher has been accused of plagiarism. This month, the 
photographerMarsel van Oosten <https://www.flickr.com/photos/squiver/> took to 
Twitter to call out the star for stripping an image of his of its watermark and 
reposting it as his own.

Marsel van Oosten (@Squiver) 
Ashton Kutcher stole my picture, re-processed it, removed my watermark, and 
then added his own.http://t.co/pDTghDhH8S <http://t.co/pDTghDhH8S> 
#stopstealingmyimages 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/stopstealingmyimages?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Squiver/statuses/486526917567586305> July 8, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Squiver/statuses/486526917567586305> 
July was a big month for plagiarism exposes. BuzzFeed sacked its political 
editor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/26/buzzfeed-sacks-editor-benny-johnson-plagiarism>
, Benny Johnson, over consistent plagiarism, and the Times’ chief tennis writer 
Neil Harman wasfound to have copied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jul/24/thetimes-plagiarism> 
large swaths of a number of his Official Wimbledon Annuals from other writers.

• The big steal: rise of the plagiarist in the digital age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/21/rise-plagiarism-internet-shia-labeouf>
 