
For two weeks in November, Asian Pacific culture has descended on Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane>, bringing with it not 
just a unifying understanding of the wider region but of Australia itself.

Asia Pacific Triennial 8 review – a colourful snapshot of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/23/asia-pacific-triennial-8-review-a-colourful-snapshot-of-the-world>
As well as the eighth Asia Pacific triennial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/23/asia-pacific-triennial-8-review-a-colourful-snapshot-of-the-world>
 of contemporary art, Queensland’s capital also hosted the ninth Asia Pacific 
screen awards (the Apsas) and the sophomore Brisbane Asia Pacific film festival.

“We’re now recognising the most powerful thing – we’re now recognising a 
common humanity,” the actor and Apsa president,Jack Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/07/jack-thompson-i-was-adopted-by-the-yolngu-nation>
, said. “In a world in which we’re asked to recognise the divisions of that 
common humanity on a daily basis, we look to the lingua franca of our age – the 
screen – to remind us we’re in the same place, at the same time, and we’re 
doing the same thing.”

Brisbane’s lord mayor, Graham Quirk, echoed Thompson’s sentiments, positioning 
cinema as a tool for unity in the face of the divisive forces of terrorism. In 
fact, this rhetoric resonated through the festival program.

The films selected – 102 movies from 42 countries – gave a wide-ranging 
perspective on the Asia Pacific region, ranging from Turkish and east Asian 
classics to contemporary films such as Hou Hsiao-Hsien’sThe Assassin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/the-assassin-review-enigmatically-refined-martial-arts-tale-baffles-beautifully>
 and APSA best feature film winner,Cemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/cemetery-of-splendour-review-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
, from the Thai director, Apichatpong Weerasethakul, whose Uncle Boonmee Who 
Can Recall His Past Liveswon the Palme D’Or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/uncle-boonmee-who-can-recall-his-past-lives> 
at Cannes in 2010.

Casting a broad net risked muffling the coherent voice championed by Thompson 
and Quirk, but the festival’s carefully curated program focused its diversity 
into a consistent beam of light, illuminating the increasingly hybridised 
culture of modern Australia.

Apichatpong Weerasethakul: I won't censor my work for Thailand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/16/apichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-cannes>
“We care about films that reflect their cultural origin or those that touch on 
important issues in their homeland,” said the head programmer, Kiki Fung. “We 
are pleased to showcase distinctive voices from Australia or stories about 
Australia that subvert the usual stereotyped perception of Australian cinema.”

Take directors Michael Rowe and Christopher Doyle, whose third feature films 
respectively –Early Winter 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/markets-festivals/michael-rowe-directed-drama-early-winter-wins-venice-days-award-1201590911/>
 (a winner at Venice) andHong Kong Trilogy: Preschooled Preoccupied Preposterous
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/hong-kong-trilogy-preschooled-preoccupied-preposterous-review-christopher-doyle-tiff>
 – had their Australian premieres at the festival.

Both are Australian-born, but both have established themselves as artists 
abroad – Rowe in Mexico, Doyle inTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> – creating art influenced by their 
countries of residence more so than their homeland. “I consider myself 
Australian more than Mexican,” said Rowe, “but I consider my cinema more 
Mexican than Australian, just because it was born out of the Mexican tradition.”

The mob that we have worked with have a million stories they want to tell
Rolf de Heer 
Conversely, Rolf de Heer has established himself as one of Australia’s 
greatest directors despite being born in the Netherlands. De Heer was in town 
to host a Q&A screening of his 1993 filmBad Boy Bubby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/16/bad-boy-bubby-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
, as well as in his capacity as producer of Molly Reynolds’s APSA-nominated 
documentary,Another Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/31/another-country-review-enlightening-observation-of-a-very-different-australia>
.

Along with Bangarra artistic director Stephen Page’s debut feature film, Spear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/spear-review-a-weird-wonderful-milestone-of-a-dance-movie>
, Reynolds’s film showcases the culture of – and challenges facing – 
Australia’s first peoples, a story all too often marginalised. “The mob that we 
have worked with have a million stories they want to tell,” said de Heer, “and 
Molly and I are, to them, a means by which they can tell their stories.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F125434808&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F125434808>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F125434808&media=>
The Trailer for Nora Niasari’s short The Phoenix <https://vimeo.com/125434808> 
Immigration tales also featured prominently, whether imminent – a character 
discusses moving to the Gold Coast in Iranian film Atomic Heart – or 
established, as inNora Niasari’s short film The Phoenix 
<https://vimeo.com/125434808>, which draws from the real-life experiences of 
the actor Manouchehr Farid, who emigrated to Australia after the Iranian 
revolution.

Spear review – a weird, wonderful milestone of a dance movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/19/spear-review-a-weird-wonderful-milestone-of-a-dance-movie>
Chinese auteur Jia Zhang-ke’s Mountains May Depart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/20/mountains-may-depart-review-jia-zhang-ke-scales-new-heights-with-futurist-drama>
 is, like the closing night film The Taking of Tiger Mountain, a conversation 
between China’s communist past and capitalist future. It is significant this 
future occurs in 2025 Australia, centring on a young man divorced from the 
culture of his homeland.

These refracted perspectives on Australian identity paint an inclusive 
portrait of the country that goes beyond the traditional images associated with 
our national cinema. But the festival still has some work to do to attracting 
audiences; sessions were better attended than in its debut year, but half-empty 
cinemas were the norm rather than the exception.
 