
I define an indie band as anyone who sings about "my town", "your town" or 
"this town". What are your thoughts?
Tandino 

This is a more insightful definition than you might think. When I first 
broached the topic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2010/jul/19/ask-indie-professor> of 
defining indie, I discussed five areas of contestation (independent 
label/distribution, independent ethos, genre, aesthetic judgment, and not being 
mainstream). What these arguments all have in common is that they (and indie) 
express the interconnection of two primary western philosophies: puritanism and 
romanticism. Puritanism is based on autonomy of local congregations, simplicity 
of worship, asceticism, egalitarianism, and a call to the past with restoration 
of original values through purification.

Within puritanism, there is a distrust of centralised authority in the guise 
of the Catholic church. Catholicism was protested against for being corrupt, 
hierarchical, distancing and disinterested in the needs and specificity of 
local communities. Does this sound at all like how the mainstream music 
industry is portrayed? It should. Romanticism cultivates emotions, the natural, 
the past, and the ordinary. Even the root for romanticism is "enromancier" 
meaning vernacular. The focus on "my town" reveals both of these impulses. "My 
town" is not the distanced centralised authority of London or Rome. It is the 
ultimate embodiment of the local, ordinary and parochial and therefore, 
expresses both the puritan and romantic foundations of this aesthetic movement.

I'm quite into Radiohead and realise that their music is quite depressing or 
melancholy which gives it a bit more of an edge. Why is depression so often 
linked to good music?
Richard Minkley via email

As Poe wrote in his exposition on The Raven 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXU3RfB7308&feature=related>, "Beauty of 
whatever kind, in its supreme development, invariable excites the sensitive 
soul to tears. Melancholy is thus the most legitimate of all poetic tones." 
This sentiment is not an aesthetic universal, but the product of the same 
ideologies discussed above. In melancholy, the puritan distrust of sensual 
pleasures meets the romantic value of extreme emotions.

Puritanism rejects indulgence and if you can't indulge yourself, what better 
way to experience emotional intensity than to gather pleasure from pain? The 
more acute the emotional experience, the more validating it is. This is why 
much of the music that is the heartland of indie culture ismelancholic, 
disconsolate and miserable <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7Pwc95g1YJc>. The 
taste and sensitivity to experience pathos shows that one is a member of the 
aesthetically elect. The intersection of puritan/romanticism takes unrequited 
longing as superior to physical satisfaction. Physical satisfaction is seen as 
the dominion of other music genres; hence the uneasy relationship between indie 
and dance.

Now a more overt manifestation of the value of melancholia can be found 
amongst the Kaluli of Papua New Guinea. In the Gisaro ceremony, recounted inThe 
Sorrow of the Lonely and the Burning of the Dancers 
<http://us.macmillan.com/thesorrowofthelonelyandtheburningofthedancers>, 
visiting dancers and chorus perform songs designed to bring their hosts to 
tears. The chorus sings of the places on their host's land and eventually about 
the places where loved ones have died.

Upon the experience of intense sadness, the hosts become enraged and descend 
upon the dancers, grabbing lit torches to burn them to avenge the suffering and 
pain the hosts have been made to feel. As Schieffelin puts it, "It is the very 
beauty and sadness that he (the dancer) projects that cause people to burn 
him." Sadness, here, is not an inward experience of depression, it is the 
encounter of grief, nostalgia, and sorrow in a public spectacle that requires 
violent retribution.

My question relates to "music snobbery" â€“ for example, people who are very 
particular about the music they listen to, will only listen to obscure artists 
and reject mainstream or "top 40" music. Do you think "music snobbery" exists? 
If so, do you think that music snobbery is more prevalent within indie music?
Kate Bradbury Manchester

Music snobbery is a cornerstone of indie music. It is even part of the joke 
cycle regarding indie, "How many indie fans does it take to screw in a light 
bulb?" Answer: "You mean, you don't know?" Fundamental to indie is the 
discursive practice of the connoisseur.Indie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/indie> music fans consider themselves to be 
music critics with the ability to recognise music artistry. They co-opt the 
language of high art which marginalises the legitimacy of popular music in the 
first place. Some find popularity and artistic worthiness to be opposites and 
therefore, reject bands that become successful.

Indie fans and publications present the discourse of quality, not genre. This 
is why indie fans nominally embrace music from other genres. Considering other 
forms of music instantiates to indie music critics that they really have 
considered all music. Therefore, the music they like the most, indie, must be 
best. Indie fans designate themselves as the anointed ones, who, applying their 
puritan principles of authenticity, can recognise true music in contrast to 
false idolatry.

Thanks to the internet, indie music fans can now express their critical acumen 
without the fuss of making a fanzine. Within puritan/romantic theocracy "good 
taste" is a crucial moral quality and indicator of spiritual merit (Campbell). 
The more refined and exclusive the taste, the more one demonstrates one's elect 
status. Elitist discrimination in taste is a fundamental tenet of the ideology 
producing indie's music and culture. To be bothered by it, is like being 
bothered that Puritans are too Puritanical.

How well this fits with the contemporary fixation with the "curator," to the 
point the word is now used as a verb.Festivals are "curated" 
<http://www.atpfestival.com/events/godspeednightmare.php>. Music selections on 
web pages are "curated." 
<http://www.nerve.com/entertainment/2010/09/08/five-albums-you-should-be-listening-to-right-now-wendy-fonarow-the-indie-professor>
 DJs have startingcalling themselves curators 
<http://www.nerve.com/entertainment/2010/09/08/five-albums-you-should-be-listening-to-right-now-wendy-fonarow-the-indie-professor>
.

With so much music available, the curator chooses from the vast array to share 
their discerning good taste with the masses or their 286 followers on Twitter. 
Elitism is alive and, well, it's flourishing. Thus, the pronouncements of 
indie's demise are indeed greatly exaggerated.

Please post questions for the indie professor below, or email her at 
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <>
 