
Question: @indiegodess <http://www.twitter.com/indiegodess> Musicians playing 
a perceived classic album in its entirety at a gig; is this a good or a bad 
thing?@sickmouthy <https://twitter.com/#!/sickmouthy> (Nick Southall)

Answer: Playing an album in its entirety is a trend reflecting a specific 
moment in time that will be unlikely in the future. I'm not referring to the 
passing ofretromania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/02/total-recall-retromania-all-rage>
, but the decline of the album. Performing a "classic" album is predicated on 
enacting a series of songs previously experienced in a specific sequence. 
However, in the era of MP3s, when audiences pick and choose the tracks they 
wish to acquire, have their music players on shuffle, and allow an algorithm to 
choose songs streamed from the cloud, fewer people are listening to complete 
albums. So while artists still release albums and often compose thinking of the 
album as a unit of material, audiences have more power than ever to chose how 
they wish to experience recorded music. I'm not suggesting the album will cease 
to exist, just that fewer people will chose to experience music as the artist 
proposed. It is unlikely there will be demand to play an album in full when 
fans didn't listen to it as a complete work to begin with.

Part of the pleasure of the "album in its entirety" is that it is the live 
experience of a beloved sequence of music coming to life. When you listen to an 
album over and over, your brain begins to anticipate the next song. Or to put 
it in more scientific terms: "When two melodies are frequently heard in the 
same order, as with consecutive movements of a symphony or tracks on a rock 
album, the beginning of the second melody is often anticipated vividly during 
the silence following the first. This reflexive, often irrepressible, retrieval 
of the second melody, or 'anticipatory imagery', reveals that music consists of 
cued associations, in this case between entire melodies." So sayLeaver et al 
<http://www.jneurosci.org/content/29/8/2477.full.pdf>. The classic album played 
live meets that anticipation of the next song. It's giving the audience what 
the brain wants. Whether that is a good or bad thing is a moral question.

A classic album generally means the work has proved to have some enduring 
value, at least relative to the other work of the same artist. It's music of a 
certain age. Subsequently, the majority of bands performing albums are not the 
new kids on the block, but the mature adults on the block. Some of these bands 
were hibernating or extinct. The popularity of the performed album is an 
opportunity for these bands to be resurrected. Intriguingly, some bands did not 
get the acclaim their legacy suggests they deserved when the records were first 
released. Slint'sSpiderland 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/spiderland-r18243/review> barely dented the 
public consciousness in the early 90s, but went on to be hugely influential 
after the band's demise. The reuniting of bands gives fans that missed them the 
first time around the chance to see them play live. You were too young to see 
Kraftwerk; now you can choose which album to seeperformed live at the Museum of 
Modern Art <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b4yohA0ZVt4> in New York. Joy 
Division never made it to America, but you can see Hooky do Unknown Pleasures 
in Chicago.

Let's give credit where's it's due: All Tomorrow's Parties was at the 
forefront of this trend. In 2005, ATP began the ironically namedDon't Look Back 
<http://www.dontlookbackconcerts.com/> series starting with a Stooges reunion. 
The band performed Fun House. It wasincredibly well received 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/sep/01/popandrock1>. Once reformed, the 
band have continued to tour. It's amazing how many bands followed suit, 
reforming or revitalising in order to play their most popular album: Primal 
Scream doing Screamadelica, Ocean Colour Scene doing Moseley Shoals, Rush doing 
Moving Pictures. Rock the Bells, the hip-hop touring festival, is organised 
around the majority of artists playing albums in their entirety, including The 
Miseducation of Lauryn Hill, Snoop Dogg's Doggystyle and Nas performing 
Illmatic. I'm still gutted I couldn't hearBelle and Sebastian perform If You're 
Feeling Sinister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/sep/27/popandrock.belleandsebastian>. 
So good or bad, who cares, just enjoy it while it lasts.

If you have a question for the indie professor about the music industry, indie 
music or anthropology please leave a comment below, email her at
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <mailto:theindieprofessor@gmail.com> or inquire via 
twitter atindiegodess <http://twitter.com/indiegodess>
 