
How come so many bands at this year's SXSW festival had such awful names? 
Jessamyn Cuneo, via email


Well, firstly I'd like to state that one person's awful name is often another 
person's awesome name. That's why suggesting an example of a "bad" band name 
can be the easiest way to start an argument. Still, most music fans and 
professionals do seem to agree that some bands have inarguably bad monikers.

So what are the factors people use to judge band names? I'd suggest the 
following: Is it original (Sissy-Eared Mollycoddles 
<http://sissyearedmollycoddles.com/>), memorable (Smith Westerns 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smith_Westerns>), what are the name associations 
(Dirty Beaches), can you pronounce it (Schlachthofbronx 
<http://www.schlachthofbronx.net/>, but they are German so they have an 
excuse), searchability (Man Man), length (I Was Totally Destroying It 
<http://www.iwtdi.com/>), and does it have a good story, to name just a few.

Originality is more challenging than you might think. The longer the record 
industry exists, the great number of bands historically. Once a band name has 
been used, it cannot be used again without the prospect of litigation.

After the well-known American Nirvana had success in the early 1990s, a less 
well-known British Nirvana, a progressive rock band from the late 1960s, 
contested the usage of the name. British Nirvana filed suit against American 
Nirvana. The case was settled out of court allowing both bands to use the name 
Nirvana. Instead of a settlement, the result could have been a modification of 
the band's name to something like "American Nirvana" or evenDinosaur Jr 
<http://www.dinosaurjr.com/>. Dinosaur Jr were originally named Dinosaur, only 
to find out that there was a band named the Dinosaurs. This litigious issue is 
the reason why the Charlatans are known in the US as the Charlatans UK and 
Suede,the London Suede <http://www.mtv.co.uk/artists/the-london-suede>. Even 
the band I helped name, Mojave 3 had to be modified because of a previous 
incarnation of the name Mojave. The band were in Abbey Road Studios mixing 
their first album and realised that with a new lineup, a new label, and a new 
sound (the band were formed by the three remaining members of Slowdive), they 
needed a new name. Rachel Goswell had invited me to the studio and I came as 
they were contemplating new band names. My first suggestion was Mojave. They 
called the label only to find out there was a Mojave on the books and so Mojave 
3 it was.

An inability to recycle band names means short names with musical resonance 
are in short supply. You can either go for something that hasn't been used 
before, create a neologism or go long. This could easily be how we end up with 
bands called Yuck (London), or Flosstradamus (Chicago) orSomeone Still Loves 
You Boris Yeltsin <http://www.myspace.com/boris> (Springfield MO).

Another factor is searchability. This issue has changed during the last decade 
in its degree of importance. Bands would often chose a name that would appear 
near the front of album or CD stacks, not buried in the middle (Hello Abba and 
ABC). There are still bands that think about how to be the first in your 
alphabetically organised list of MP3s.

Of course, bands also need to consider how searchable their name is online. 
Using a common word (say, Brother) makes it very difficult for fans to find the 
band on the internet. It can work the other way. I've heard several people 
suggest that part of the buzz around the band Cults has been due to the 
difficulty in finding them online. Thus, making them de facto more obscure than 
the singularSlim Cessna's Auto Club <http://www.slimcessnasautoclub.com/> 
(Denver). You have to wonder whether the band Games (Brooklyn) considered this 
when naming themselves one of the most oversaturated terms on the internet? 
Probably not, which is why they are changing it to Ford & Lopatin.

Last week I was at the SXSW festival in Austin, where bad band names were easy 
to come by. The one people complained to me about the most wasAdam Arcuragi and 
the Lupine Chorale Society <http://www.myspace.com/adamarcuragi> 
(Philadelphia). I see this has issues all around. It's long. It's difficult to 
pronounce and it seems too similar to the spate of bands with "Wolf" in the 
title (Wolf Parade, Sea Wolf, Wolf Mother, Wolf Gang, Wolf & Cub, Peanut Butter 
Wolf) as well as a certain tinge of "Twilight zeitgeist" pandering. The 
ubiquitousness of certain words in band names ends up making those bands sound 
unoriginal. At least 11 bands at the festival had "black" in the title and 
seven had the word "young." The Los Angeles-based Black Crystal Wolf Kids, an 
exuberant and self-effacing indie cover band, were parodying name trends.

My recommendation for a band name: An Exercise in Unhappiness. Any band can 
feel free to use it. You'll have a potentially interesting story (nearly every 
new band interview will include "how did you come up with your name?" as a 
question so it serves a band to have a better tale than "the bassist said it as 
a joke and now we were stuck with it.") and it will hopefully cause some debate 
as to whether your new name is awful or awesome. After all, those two different 
words have the exact same origin.

If you have a question for the indie professor then leave a comment below. 
Alternatively, email her attheindieprofessor@gmail.com <> or via twitter at 
http://twitter.com/indiegodess <http://twitter.com/indiegodess>
 