
Dear indie professor, will Peter Bjorn & John's Young Folks and Kings of 
Leon's Sex On Fire ever disappear from radio playlists and B&Q/DFS/Asda 
adverts? Or is the earth doomed to endure them for millennia, like slowly 
decomposing nuclear waste?

BarryBeatmaster 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2010/jul/26/ask-indie-professor?showallcomments=true#CommentKey:f0823d84-3c37-477c-9a23-47170db9ed35>

When a song is extremely popular it becomes enmeshed with people's memories of 
a specific time. The music can create a sensory vestige, something akin to a 
fragrancerecalling a specific moment in time 
<http://www.haverford.edu/psych/ddavis/p109g/proust.html>. When songs dominate 
a summer, or even a year, they persist in the popular imagination regardless of 
critical accolades or disparagements, becoming the de facto soundtrack of the 
era (see John Hughes soundtracks for every contemporary 1980s-revival film). 
These songs become DJ staples – they're sure-fire floor-fillers because people 
know them. It's the same reason why audiences want touring bands to play hits 
rather than new material – people like the familiar. The same songs are used in 
adverts so the emotional association of the music is transferred to the product 
or brand. Eventually, those songs become emblematic of the era, so instead of 
slowly languishing, the most popular tracks segue into retro club nights and 
films about the noughties or even flashback DJ sets. It won't be the new clubs 
that play them, but revival clubs. I can't speak for Peter Bjorn & John orthe 
Ting Tings <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FH6wpO66J4k&feature=avmsc2>, but I 
can tell you that Coldplay's Clocks will never go away.

PS Beatmaster. I won't hear you diss Sex On Fire. Despite not being a Kings of 
Leon fan (and the critical acumen of pigeonsdeeming them craptastic 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/jul/28/kings-leon-pigeons-review-singles>
), my last boyfriend landed me by saying that song made him think of me.

I'd be interested in knowing about the demographics of this: who listens to 
[indie] music and some suggestions why they might be drawn to it. Class, race, 
age, that kind of thing.

MoreTeaVicar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2010/jul/13/ask-indie-professor?showallcomments=true#CommentKey:11e3e4e0-381e-4b67-94be-19a8ffe77a9e>

I can give you my recorded demographics for indie from the early 90s to 2003 – 
after that I relied on informal observation (just looking at crowds), although 
these demographics are pretty consistent to the present. The audience is 
primarily white with 1-2% ethnic minorities (both US and UK), although this 
does seem to be on the increase (especially in the UK) with several prominent 
indie bands featuring members from ethnic minorities (Mystery Jets, the 
Libertines, Maximo Park, Elbow, TV On the Radio, Vampire Weekend etc).

The gender ratio is 2/3 male and 1/3 female. When those ratios skew in any 
direction it usually has to do with the artist playing. Rage Against the 
Machine have a more ethnically diverse crowd. Bands with female members, such 
as Le Tigre or Sleater Kinney, have higher female participation, while a 
hyper-masculine band would have an almost entirely male audience. As for age, 
in the mid 90s, indie was: 45% 15-19-year-olds; 35% 20–24 year-olds; 15% 25–29 
years-old and 5% were aged 30 and above. However, as indie continues to appeal, 
I would say that the over-30s are now more than 5% of the audience.

People tend to gravitate to forms of expression that reflect their culture and 
beliefs (Anthro 101). Aesthetics – ie what is perceived as beautiful or 
compelling – is a value judgment and therefore an expression of morals and 
conventions. There is much hand-wringing and self-flagellation over indie 
having a primarily white, middle-class audience. Weirdly, the people most upset 
by this tend to be liberal, educated white people. But I don't hear complaints 
that Mbuti music is most popular with the Mbuti or that the Japanese 
disproportionately listen to nagauta. Since one of the fundamental pillars of 
indie is a protest against the mainstream, is it any surprise that people from 
a Protestant society find it appealing? People find protest(ism) in other 
genres as well. For example, hip-hop has a fundamental rejection of authority, 
which may explain why it also attracts a similar audience. There is more to 
indie (and hip-hop) than just protest of course. Other indie valuesinclude 
autonomy, egalitarianism, modesty, pathos and self-expression. This goes some 
way to describe the principles of the culture that produces it.
 