
Hey there indie professor! As the year comes to a close, everyone is releasing 
their top/best of lists for 2010. Would you please indulge your readers with 
your personal selection of this year's top 10 records?Indie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/indie> records, of course ... 

GdEnough

I rarely feel the need to discuss best albums as I don't listen to music 
through headphones. I see bands play live. So instead of my top 10 records, 
here are my top 10 shows of 2010. It's been a strange year for gigs. I've had 
to miss more great bands due to work requirements and unforeseen upheavals than 
any other year. And yet those that made the list have been all the more 
remarkable for it ...

1) Lou Barlow and Sarah Silverman @ Hollywood Forever Masonic Temple

Los Angeles has distinctive settings for shows, such as this converted Masonic 
temple in a Hollywood cemetery. Lou Barlow has many incarnations but there is 
nothing like his self-effacing acoustic sets where he plays like a functional 
Cat Power. His radiant songs are scaled down to their essence and mixed with 
surprising covers such as Ratt's Round and Round.
2) The Wedding Present @ Troubadour, West Hollywood

I adore the current trend for performances of classic albums. The live 
interpretation of a favourite record is always a treat for longtime fans. As 
people possess auditory sequence memory, the brain starts to recall consecutive 
album tracks. It's as though your mental mixtape is being brought to life, 
augmented by accidental nuances that are the essence of live music.
3) Delorean @ The Echo, LA

I went to the Echo on a mission. I was going to Madrid and wanted to find 
someone who was going to be in the city when I was there (Delorean are, of 
course, a Spanish band). I dragged Nicholas Humphrey, a London artist, to the 
show saying, "We are going to make some Spanish friends". Instead, we danced to 
their retro-futuristic electro-pop. I was invited to Barcelona and a tour of 
Iberia, but declined. The show was enough that I knewSpain was going to work out
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RFBnIoZ6mE4>just fine. 
4) The Franks @ Spaceland, LA

Part of the reason so many great bands have emerged from southern California 
(such as Best Coast) are the free shows on Monday nights at LA's eastside 
venues. I had already planned on going when I got a text from my best friend, 
"Come now, first band is wow". I made it over in time to catch the Franks. They 
have a bit of the dance-rock magic of Franz Ferdinand but with a punkier edge. 
There is nothing like being blown away by a band you've never heard of.
5) Belle and Sebastian @ Hollywood Forever Cemetery

While they say it never rains in southern California, it most definitely was 
raining before this outdoor show. I thought the rain would be the deal breaker, 
but it stopped in time for the screening of Trainspotting on the mausoleum 
wall. The band played surrounded by tombstones, funerary monuments and the
mortuary statue of Johnny Ramone 
<http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Johnny_Ramone_-_Hollywood_Forever_Cemetary_1.jpg.>
.
6) Villagers @ Hotel Cafe

The only thing I knew about Villagers before I went to this show was that they 
were signed to Domino. Conor came out with his guitar and a few humble 
comments. Then he sang. I knew I was in the presence of greatness. His 
enchanted voice and plaintive lyrics remind me of both Neil Hannon and Bright 
Eyes.

7) Arcade Fire @ Online/NYC 

They're one of the best live bands ever. When I saw them at the Reading 
festival, I climbed on to the stageside scaffolding and jumped around so wildly 
that I hit my head. I hadn't made up my mind about their latest album, The 
Suburbs, until I saw thelive feed of the Madison Square Garden show 
<http://www.spin.com/articles/watch-arcade-fire-live-madison-square-garden>. 
Not many bands can pull you through a computer screen into a transcendent 
performance, but they did.
8) Pavement, Sonic Youth and No Age @ Hollywood Bowl 

This is a legendary outdoor venue surrounded by pine trees and picnic tables. 
Everything was set: amazing seats, exquisite food and champers, but I was so 
exhausted all I wanted was weapons-grade coffee. No Age were killed, as it's 
quite difficult for a two-piece to fill such a huge space. By the time that 
Pavement came on, I knew this was going to turn into another one of the shows 
by a great band that I slept through: REM, the Smiths, Mogwai, Godspeed You! 
Black Emperor. But as soon as they played Range Life I was resuscitated from 
the land of Nod.

9) Weezer @ The Mirage, Vegas

This is one of those times when all your good karma pulls together and makes 
something amazing happen â€“ in this case, boarding a private jet and being flown 
to Vegas to see a band. That just doesn't happen, at least not to 
professors/indie fans. I'm not a Vegas person, but this was going to be insane 
fun. Weezer were playing a show at a small outdoor poolside club. Everyone was 
buzzing like they had found Willy Wonka's golden ticket. No one could believe 
they were seeing such a beloved band in such a diminutive setting. Weezer 
played hit after hit, including Hash Pipe, the song I played before I taught my 
first university course and I'm pretty sure there was an instrumental section 
that sounded an awful lot like Hot for Teacher. This show is one that will be 
on my best gigs ever list.
10) Peter Hook and the Light @ Music Box, Hollywood

It's not often you get asked to sing Ceremony with a former member of Joy 
Division. I'm pretty sure this was to demonstrate that those who can't sing, 
teach anthropology. I declined because I don't believe in human torture. 
Instead, Perry Farrell from Jane's Addiction sang Transmission, creating a mix 
of fury and poignancy. For people who identify with isolation, sharing a moment 
of belonging is what keeps us coming back to shows, albums, festivals, music. 
Old is often used as an unkind epithet, but it's a compliment when it precedes 
the word "friend".
The indie professor will be back in 2011. Post any questions for her below or 
emailtheindieprofessor@gmail.com  <>
 