
Why do people make such a big deal about Coachella now?
Julianna Young

Over the past decade, destination music festivals have overtaken the touring 
market. While in the previous 20 years, such events were primarily the purview 
of Europe, Americans have finally entered the international festival circuit 
with significant music events such as California'sCoachella 
<http://www.coachella.com/>, Chicago's Lollapalooza 
<http://www.lollapalooza.com/> and Tennessee's Bonnaroo 
<http://www.bonnaroo.com/>. As the festival calendar has become extremely 
crowded, bills have a generic quality.

The artist lineups look interchangeable, with the same bands playing most of 
them (Muse, is there a festival on Earth that you haven't headlined in the past 
four years?). With so many artists overlapping, it's important the destination 
festival become its own brand. Fans go to festivals to see specific bands and 
often to find new acts â€“ but the real draw is the festival itself. People don't 
say: "I'm going to see the Black Keys, Kanye West or Mumford & Sons." They say: 
"I'm going toCoachella <https://www.theguardian.com/music/coachella>. I'm going 
to Green Man. I'm going to Benicassim." Thus, while many music festivals 
suggest they are eclectic, it's actually the ability of a festival to 
encapsulate a distinct musical point of view and/or have a track record that 
makes it a must-see event.

Several factors lend Coachella attendance its cultural cachet. First of all is 
location. Like most destination music festivals, it's far enough from the big 
city that fans need to commit to being away from home. The Coachella Valley, 
home to Palm Springs, Indian Wells, androadrunners 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_7TmiQAVgvG4/TCDofF1sNfI/AAAAAAAAABU/rcVIwdh9HnY/s1600/roadrunner+(Medium).jpg>
 is about an hour and a half from Los Angeles. This means a weekend of either 
camping or staying in any of the hundreds ofcozy 
<http://s81.photobucket.com/albums/j215/marchellebradanini/palm%20springs%20wedding/?action=view&current=villarosa.jpg>
,kitschy 
<http://atomicranchdinogal.blogspot.com/2008/08/swanky-midcentury-homes-in-desert-of.html>
, or posh hotels that are the staple of the resort community's desert 
landscape. The weather tends to be between hot and perfect, so festivalgoers 
wear bathing suits and sunglasses.

The site itself, on the Empire Polo Grounds, is a vast expanse of green fields 
surrounded by palm trees, adjacent to Joshua Tree national park and with the 
San Jacinto mountains in the distance. It is the definition of picturesque. Or, 
as Lou Barlow said to me on a first visit to the site: "This is what people 
think Reading looks like when they are on ecstasy."

Coachella has slotted itself into the festival calendar early, which means it 
gives many fans and pundits the first chance to see this year's re-formed 1980s 
or 90s beloved cult act or get an idea of what Arcade Fire's lighting rig is 
going to be like. The Coachella bill's special spin reflects the history of a 
southern California gig circuit, as local promoter Goldenvoice puts the event 
on. This is why LA bands figure so largely, with Perry Farrell having performed 
in some fashion at nearly every one and Rage Against the Machine perennial 
favourites. Southern California's music scene has a tradition of punk, dance, 
new wave, ska and alt-rock, which is mixed with indie fare and a nod to acts 
that have graced the Hollywood Bow, such as Paul McCartney, Prince, or the 
Time. Location, timing, southern Californian branding, and a bit of celebrity 
shrapnel from actors who like to spend a weekend slumming make Coachella a 
potent trademark.

Being the early contender for first festival of the season in a globalised 
world of music coverage, Coachella, like other destination music festivals, 
increasingly serves another important social function. The destination festival 
provides content for the virtual presentation of self. Music performances and 
other social activities are fodder for producing online content for social 
networking.

Festival attendance becomes part of your cyber identity. A good avatar needs 
documentation of exclusive events, particularly events or activities that 
express taste, as online personas are constituted by listing your consumer 
preferences. By going to a Coachella, you can advertise yourself as the "type 
of person that goes to Coachella". The destination festival as opposed to the 
reproducible tour is the ultimate "I was there" event. This is why people go 
even when they claim that the bill sucks or seems identical to some other 
festival. If you are really lucky, you might just capture this year's"man in 
altercation with flip-flop" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Au_8GMUxVs> or 
whatever viral sensation emerges from using your phone to record being at a 
festival rather than just being there.

If you have a question for the indie professor about the music industry, indie 
music or academia please leave a comment below, email her at
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <> or inquire via twitter at indiegodess 
<http://twitter.com/indiegodess>.
 