
The indie professor is looking for more questions to answer. Please send your 
musical queries totheindieprofessor@gmail.com <> or in the comments section 
below ...

Why doesn't "indie" mean "independent record label" or DIY any more?
bristarman


I would start by asking: according to whom? Among fans there was never a 
consensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/jul/19/ask-indie-professor>, 
and from an industry standpoint "indie" never meant "independent record label". 
In Britain, a record is independent if it is eligible for inclusion on the
independent record charts <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UK_Indie_Chart>. In the 
US, there used to be a college radio chart, which arose from the tastes of 
students who worked the airwaves while getting degrees. The UK standpoint 
classified a record as independent if it had an independent distributor, such 
as Pinnacle or 3MV, rather than a distribution company owned by Sony, 
Universal, EMI or Warner. So regardless of size, the nature of label ownership 
or the degree of DIY, distribution was considered the defining criterion for 
"independence".

The question of why independent distribution was the deciding factor is a 
historic one. In the post-punk era, when lo-fi recording became affordable, 
lack of funding was no longer the obstacle to a band's bid to be heard. DIY 
artists could make their own records but the issue was how to get them 
available and noticed. One of two major stumbling blocks for nascent artists 
and labels was media exposure. With a limited number of media outlets in the 
UK, charting was the primary way to get music on the radio or on record store 
shelves. Charting was seen as so essential that record companies would 
regularly lose money on singles as part of a larger strategy to break a band. 
Thus, giving music away for free or at a loss in order to introduce an artist 
isn't something from the MP3 generation but a longstanding practice.

However, there used to be a more consistent return on fans purchasing albums 
after getting their hands on underpriced singles. There were few ways for 
unsigned local artists to be heard nationwide, other than through the sadly 
missed John Peel; the industry machine had majors manipulating the chart system 
and excluding the sales of speciality retailers. It was the weekly press that 
initially began making alternative charts (Sounds 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sounds_%28magazine%29> was first). Someone would 
call up a speciality retailer, such as Intone Records or Rough Trade, and get a 
list from whoever answered the phone of what they claimed their top sellers 
were. Not the most scientific way of putting a chart together, but one that had 
the intended effect of broadcasting the tastes of niche markets (or at least of 
the person who answered the phone).

The second and biggest obstacle for artists and small labels was securing 
distribution to get their records into shops. Some companies made deals with 
majors for distribution but lost control over release schedules. Distribution 
was seen as crucial for control over access and expression. In the early days, 
independent distribution and record labels mostly coincided in practice, though 
certainly not in musical styles. It was typical for a Stock Aitken 
Waterman-style pop act such asKylie Minogue 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmPmIJyi0sc&feature=related> to appear alongside
Orange Juice 
<http://www.dominorecordco.com/uk/news/08-11-10/eighteen-tracks-from-orange-juices-coals-to-newcastle/>
 or the like on the independent chart.

However, as smaller independent labels flourished, some were bought by majors 
or had artists poached by majors after doing the initial legwork. During this 
time, an ideology grew up regarding the means of circumventing corporate 
gatekeepers. AsDavid Cavanagh put it 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Creation-Records-Story-Magpie-Hungry/dp/0753506459>: 
"The decision to take the independent route represented an emotional rejection, 
based on ethics and political beliefs, of everything the major labels stood 
for." Professionals began to see "indie" as a marketing tool. Artists wanted to 
be indie, but not necessarily on an independent label. The criterion of 
independent distribution was a loophole that could be exploited and the early 
90s saw the development of crypto-indies: imprints on major record labels that 
would be distributed independently in order to be classified as independent. 
Thus, a band could both be on a major label and appear on the independent 
record chart.

I've often wondered why people prefer independent labels but have no concern 
over the nature of ownership of publishing companies or booking agencies. The 
idea of independence being about labels is a fascinating one because it reveals 
that the chief concerns are issues of autonomy, artistic control and rejection 
of the establishment. If an artist has signed a contract with a label of any 
sort, independent or major, they have given up control and it really is a 
matter of the specific practices of the label how much of a good or bad thing 
that turns out to be. Independents are viewed as having less marketing power 
and fewer financial resources, leading to the assumption that they give artists 
more control and greater ownership â€“ but that isn't always the case.

My answer, then, to why indie doesn't mean "independent record label" or "DIY" 
any more is: because it never did.
 