
I've lived in Reading my whole life and have never been even remotely tempted 
to visit the festival despite the fact that most of my friends go annually. 
What's so special about it? I presume it's nothing to do with music and 
everything to do with necking beers.

LinkyLee

Reading is about music and about necking beers.

For any festival to be successful in the current climate, it needs to express 
a musical point of view or have a good track record. You knowReading 
<http://www.readingfestival.com/lineup/index.aspx> is going to skew towards 
indie and rock, with at least one day where the main stage is rock/metal and 
with up-and-coming indie bands on the smaller stages. Being part of a community 
of music is key to festival participation: you meet people with the same taste, 
share the emotional experience of listening tomusic you like together  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bAXPUN2z2CE> and experience Altered States of 
Consciousness (better known as "drunkenness").

Profound bonding may occur due to the difficulties of the festival experience. 
Often, the relatively simple act of listening to music in a field can be 
extremely uncomfortable or even scary. Festivalgoers are sometimes crammed into 
a confined space, and being near the front of a stage when 70,000 people surge 
and you are lifted from the ground, dependent on other festivalgoers for your 
safety, can be truly frightening.

The facilities are limited, meaning that much of the time you are dirty and 
sweaty. Even if you get the upgraded VIP tent with a raised mattress, camping is
not usually comfortable 
<http://www.tangerinefields.co.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout=blog&id=35&Itemid=37>
– and that's if your Altered State of Consciousness has permitted you to find 
your tent. Also, there are few experiences as awful as waking up hungover at 
6am because your tent isboiling hot or flooded 
<http://www.facebook.com/photo.php?pid=9064654&op=2&o=global&view=global&subj=405015810206&id=554715353>
.

These things might make you think that festivalgoers must be deranged to pay 
good money for them, but the extreme highs and lows are in fact what make the 
experience remarkable. Pronounced hardship or suffering is said to produce 
"communitas" – the feeling of closeness with others due to having shared an 
ordeal. Discomfort can be very important when the aim is to conjure a group 
spirit – pain is, for instance, often the fundamental component of aninitiation 
ceremony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZGIZ-zUvotM&feature=related>. It's the 
euphoria of communitas, due to the unique cocktail of mud, heat, 
sleep-deprivation, claustrophobia and your favourite music, that makes Reading 
so special.

Why are so many bands (even the mighty Arcade Fire) best on their debut album? 
Exceptions are rare.

Kettles

A number of posters asked me to identify why so many bands have a great debut 
and then decline. I have a problem with the providing an answer because I don't 
buy the premise. There are many great follow-ups to debut albums: Pulp took 
ages to grow into their finest work; Elbow won the Mercury prize with their 
fourth album; Belle and Sebastian's If You're Feeling Sinister far exceeds 
Tigermilk, in my book. And what about Bright Eyes?

In the west, we believe that creativity manifests itself in original and novel 
expression. A new band is therefore always going to get more attention, 
especially if they aredoing something different 
<http://il.youtube.com/watch?v=BoMdkyeZOqE&feature=related>. As they progress, 
they maintain the same sound – which eventually appears stale and predictable – 
or they change direction à la Bob Dylan and their fans call them "Judas".

But innovation is not universally prized. For the Navajo Native Americans, 
there is only one correct way to sing a song and new songs are not desirable. 
Similar is true for the wood-carvers of the Trobriand Islands, who show superb 
artistry in reproducing an ideal template in uncooperative materials 
<http://www.anmm.gov.au/site/page.cfm?u=1330>.

Why do journos refer to second albums as "sophomore" and how can we stop them 
before it spreads further? We don't want sports reporters calling the second 
half the "sophomore half", theologians referring to the "sophomore coming", etc.

dothebathosphere 

This is an American expression that has infiltrated music journalism across 
the globe. In the US, the second year of high school or university is called 
the "sophomore" year (it goes: freshman, sophomore, junior, senior). The term 
itself is fairly appropriate for a second album, deriving from the Greek words 
"sophos", meaning wise, and "moros", which provides the root for "moron". Thus, 
a sophomore is essentially a "wise moron". Perhaps this explains why second 
albums are so variable – they can beremarkably well done 
<http://www.billboard.com/news/ra-ra-riot-tries-to-beat-sophomore-slump-1004109358.story#/news/ra-ra-riot-tries-to-beat-sophomore-slump-1004109358.story>
 or sadly disastrous.

Another commenter, mrparnsip, offers another theory: "Sophomore sounds 
remarkably like 'suffer more'", he writes. So there you go.

• Please post a comment below if you'd like me to answer one of your 
questions, or feel free to email me attheindieprofessor@gmail.com <>.
 