
Question: @indiegodess <http://www.twitter.com/indiegodess> When should an 
amateur/semi-pro musician decide to stop bothering the public?

EGJnr Andrew Bradley

Answer: On one hand, an amateur/semi-pro musician should never stop bothering 
the public. Making music can be a great joy, not just for the player. Karl 
Hagstrom Miller examined the topic of amateur musicians in his paper The New 
Parlor Piano: Home Recording and the Return of the Amateur Musician, which 
points out that the majority of music-makers past and present have been 
amateurs.

From the purchasers of sheet music to the guitarist who posts a cover version 
of The Boy with the Arab Strap on YouTube 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxAbNQ89spg&feature=related>, music-making 
provides pleasure for people with different skills and abilities. While sales 
of prerecorded music have plummeted, the sale of musical instruments and 
peripherals has rocketed. In 2007, revenues of the two industries were reported 
to be equal (Miller 2010). Many musicians do not aspire to fame or a career. 
Similarly, many people enjoy listening to music with ragged edges oran old 
favourite interpreted in a new way <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HtbnVp8DRwg>.

The importance of amateur musicians can be seen in the changes in marketing 
campaigns for instrument manufacturers, which tended to classify customers into 
professionals, aspiring professionals, and hobbyists. The amateur/semi-pros sit 
between the professionals and hobbyists. While aspiring musicians' goals are 
similar to professionals, their lifestyles are similar to hobbyists. Before the 
turn of the century, instrument adverts tended to the present images of success 
and stardom in their marketing campaigns. The message: buy "gear" to get a 
career. Hobbyists, "those who make music for fun" were not part of this 
marketing strategy. In many ways, hobbyists were excluded because they could be 
seen as failures or lacking the dedication for a musical vocation. Current 
marketing campaigns often target amateurs and hobbyists. Instruments and 
recording equipment are portrayed as part of daily life, in living rooms and 
bedrooms as well as stages and basements. Music-making is portrayed as 
worthwhile. We increasingly have the ability to enjoy amateur musicians and 
entertainers who post their work online. While some may aspire to greatness or
fame <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iaqJ4kDupxI>, others are just as happy to 
have people listen. In a sense, we are in a golden age for amateurs who make 
music for pleasure.

On the other hand, there is an issue with some aspiring musicians, the ones 
who continue long into adulthood without steady employment dreaming of a career 
if only they can expose enough people to their music. I suspect these are the 
musicians you are referring to in your question. I like to call this "friend 
rock". Their audiences are friends the band has asked to come, not people who 
have requested to be there. These aspirants constantly "ask" everyone they know 
to come to their shows and please "bring your other friends too". Social 
network event pages are flooded every month with their invitations. There is no 
discrimination in location, it doesn't make a difference to them if they are 
playing a pub in Ipswich and you are in Reykjavik. All publicity is good 
publicity. Shows are listed as birthday parties or pub nights, and then they 
mention that if you say "baba booey" at the door you can get in for free. Even 
if you go a few times, it's not enough. It seems like every human interaction 
becomes a marketing opportunity. At shows, they ask people to stand closer to 
the stage and complain that people at the bar are not listening to them. 
Eventually the friend rocker morphs from forcing copies of CDs in your hand to 
asking you to go to their Kickstarter page to purchase a limited-edition MP3 or 
give money for privileges such as having them play in your living room, or 
having them send you a "signed framed photo" so they can fundraise for a 
European tour. These semi-professionals should stop bothering people (and more 
importantly their friends) when they are old enough to feel embarrassed to say: 
"I live with my parents."

â€¢ If you have a question for the indie professor about the music industry, 
indie music or anthropology please leave a comment below, email her at
theindieprofessor@gmail.com <> or inquire via Twitter @indiegodess 
<http://twitter.com/indiegodess>
 