
I grew up on a diet of live gigs around the north-west â€“ the Stone Roses, the 
Happy Mondays, the Fall, New Order, etc. The gigs were boisterous, friendly and 
fun and there was generally a feeling of people really getting into it. Fast 
forward toBuilt to Spill <http://www.myspace.com/builttospill> in London a 
couple of years ago and I felt like I was the only person dancing or expressing 
any emotion at all. Everyone stood stock still! At a gig byCat Power 
<http://www.myspace.com/catpower> I saw a girl given a hard time because she 
was dancing. Has indie changed? Has overexposure and/or a generational shift 
led to more "stiff" crowds? Have squares infiltrated our scene?

Steve Potter, via email

While not all audience members do the same things at shows, there has been 
significant evolution in crowd behaviour at gigs. Activities have always 
differed depending on where you place yourself in a venue. You can push and 
bump people near the front of the stage, but if you did that in the back you 
would get thrown out. Audience behaviour is one of the areas you can clearly 
see dramatic differences between genres. For instance, where indie venues have 
clear regions of activity and inactivity, dance has been characterised by 
movement across an entire venue. And where metal has its headbangers, indie 
fans have tended to throw their heads from side to side.

Here is a brief history of dancing at gigs:

From punk in the UK you get pogoing 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pogo_%28dance%29>, which eventually morphs into 
slam dancing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HbFrM4Lm18> and moshing 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XQW8eb1P3dk>. Punk blows up in America and 
moshing becomes more stylised, with acircling chicken dance 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HbFrM4Lm18>. Americans add stagediving 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WNeEfPtnn1c>. Initially viewed as obliterating 
the distinction between audience and performer, this is eventually seen as 
grandstanding. Stage-diving comes back to England, but punk is dead so it's the
Goths 
<http://encyclopediaofstupid.com/stupid/images/thumb/4/4f/Goth.jpg/297px-Goth.jpg>
 who stagedive. Of course, in order to get back on your own two feet when you 
stagedive, you have to ride over fellow audience members to get to the less 
dense areas of the crowd. Thus,crowdsurfing 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dCV8Y_7bLE> develops.

They co-exist for a while in the post-punk landscape, but eventually 
stage-diving is rejected. After all, it's hard to get up to the stage while 
holding your arms aloft in some Rocky pose without looking like a narcissist. 
Crowdsurfing takes firm hold despite the protests of the fans near the front 
who dislike people rolling over them and the fans behind them who complain that 
crowdsurfers weren't listening to the music properly. However, in the 
early-to-mid noughties, many audiences stopped dancing at shows. This lack of 
movement was initially more characteristic of American gigs, but is now more 
common in the UK as well.

Currently, it is fairly typical to go to a show with an entirely "stiff" 
audience (although at punk shows audience members still do exactly the same 
things they did 30 years ago). For someone used to dancing at gigs, it's hard 
to not to find this boring and perhaps even painful. A mild toe-tap seems a 
sorry replacement for the cathartic physical exertion of "people getting into 
it" or even the thrill of being picked up by a stranger after you've fallen on 
your face.

One interesting thing is that the increase in stiff crowds runs parallel to 
the rise of mobile phones at shows. After all, it's hard to dance when you're 
concentrating on tweeting, taking pictures or recording the show. It's possible 
that the crowd are not dancing to protect their mobiles; the risks of going 
wild are not just to your life and limb but to your connectivity. You certainly 
can'ttweet <http://twitter.com/indiegodess> "I'm crowd surfing" as it would be 
too difficult, while tweeting "I crowd surfed" is so two minutes ago.

Regardless, the motionless body is now the staple of gigs. I speculate that 
this is what is behind the recent spate of injuries tomusicians stagediving 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/aug/17/los-campesinos-singer-injured>. 
With a different audience unprepared for previous modalities of gig behaviour, 
their instincts are to avoid people diving from the stage. For a good number of 
contemporary indie fans, they have no idea how to act beyond the most basic 
instinct: get the hell out of the way!
 