
Hi Prof ;-)

At almost every gig an audience member will shout the name of a particular 
song, in the hope that the band play it. Ninety-nine percent of these requests 
are completely ignored by the band and, furthermore, the audience member 
generally knows this, being an avid concertgoer. Why then do fans persist in 
yelling out the name of their favourite track, often multiple times within a 
set?

Michael Kuge, via email

For some audience members, a gig isn't just a chance to hear and see a band 
perform live but a chance to express their status as a committed fan. A set 
list means the specific songs and order are decided in advance of a show. 
Superfans know about set lists. Half the time, they are the same ones who beg 
crew members for the copies taped to stage or ask the sound man for his/hers 
before the set starts (I'm just letting you know how to get a set list in case 
you want one). The songs superfans yell out tend to be little-known B-sides or 
other rarities. These call-outs aren't really to get the band to play the song 
but to demonstrate to everyone present that s/he knows every song the band has 
ever written. Occasionally, if the request is sufficiently obscure, someone in 
the band might react by laughing or even having some personalised banter with 
the audience member. Shouting out esoteric requests differentiates that person 
from the rest of the audience to instantiate s/he knows the band better and 
with more depth than other audience members. It's a way to be special.

Less experienced or drunk fans tend to call out the big hits that are going to 
be played at some point during the set anyway. They persist in yelling out that 
one song over and over, because they want it now. Fundamentally, they are 
clueless about the culture of shows, but that doesn't stop them from expressing 
themselves. They often end up being the same people who on aeroplanes get up 
and try and get their luggage before the plane has come to a complete stop. 
This is what happens when you are impatient, don't know how to follow the 
explicit and implicit rules of social conduct and thinkyour needs are more 
important than anyone else's 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/08/09/100809fa_fact_sedaris>. I know 
most people just try to ignore them, but generally I just swear at them, grab a 
couple beers, thendeploy the aeroplane slide 
<http://gawker.com/5608503/flight-attendant-uses-inflatable-slide-for-dramatic-job-walk+out>
 to get away from the unpleasantness as quickly as possible.

Why do so many people on the Guardian music blogs think they're being erudite 
and witty by having a knee-jerk negative reaction to anything which smells of 
"alternative" that is also popular?

Johnny5eyes

The indie fan base is extremely suspicious of popularity and success. Part of 
what defines indie is "size". Remember, the word "indie" is not the same as the 
word "independent"; rather, it's a diminutive of the term. A diminutive 
modifies a word to mean small, familiar, not particularly well done, childlike, 
or possibly to express derision.Indie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/indie> 
is a small, modest, and personalised version of music in contrast to the 
mainstream seen as large, distant, vulgar and unspecialised.

Diminutiveness is indie's style for gigs, production (lo-fi), and popularity. 
An indie band that becomes successful may be transforming intimate devotion 
into a mass production and is necessarily suspect. Successful bands are 
scrutinised to make sure that they have remained true to their roots and have 
not been transformed by success. The community looks to see if a band has been 
polluted by its exposure to the corrupting influences of the mainstream. This 
can be seen in the criticism directed towards bands that play larger venues due 
to their increasing popularity. Indie fans strive for intimacy between 
performer and audience and consciously oppose arenas and seated venues. Stadium 
shows are denigrated because of the distance between crowd and stage, which is 
seen as an impediment to the direct experience of music. When an indie band 
plays a stadium or has success, some see this as conversion to the mainstream 
and will no longer patronise the band (seethe White Stripes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2004/jan/25/popandrock>, the Stone Roses 
<http://www.thestoneroses.co.uk/2010/04/nme-spike-island-review>, and Blur 
<http://www.vblurpage.com/gigography/1995/0617_mileend.htm> for ways to 
circumvent the large performance prohibition; festivals and shows that give the 
impression of being in some way organised or envisaged by the band are largely 
exempt). Indie sees popularity as an ethical issue, demonstrating the belief 
that a bands are "morally superior because they are not successful" (Cavanagh 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Creation-Records-Story-Magpie-Hungry/dp/0753506459/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&s=musical-instruments&qid=1280889112&sr=8-2>
).

Additionally, an increase in the popularity and profile of a band creates 
additional problems for some fans. When such fans discover an unknown band, 
they feel a certain proprietary right to the artists. They feel the band is 
"theirs". If the band becomes successful, their ownership feels diluted, as if 
some personal control has been lost. They will stop name-checking the band or 
will remind people that they liked them before anyone else or claim that 
success has "changed" their music to justify rejecting the band. It doesn't 
matter if a band changes or not with fame; its fame is already a problem. A 
band's success takes away exclusivity. If part of your identity is formed by 
music allegiances based on your discerning and supposedly superior taste, then 
liking the music of the masses threatens your elite status. Of course, it's 
easy to expect someone else to toil in poverty and obscurity when you are well 
fed.
 