
Why are there so few non-white artists in indie? I'd be interested in your 
perspective. Aiden Tyler, via email


There is continuing interest in the ethnic make-up of indie 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/musical/2007/10/22/071022crmu_music_frerejones>
. Like other music genres, indie mirrors the ethnic make-up of its audience. 
The number of non-white artists is relatively the same proportion as the 
audience, which is 1–2% in the UK. People often do not count ethnically diverse 
indie bands, unless the singer is non-white. I'm not going to list them because 
it forces you to think of artists according to their ethnic backgrounds, which 
is not how they choose to define themselves. It's interesting that there isn't 
a similar ethnic scrutiny of hip-hop or country. Or for that matter, why
Balinese gamelan music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c1AiCTJ9t8g> is 
disproportionately popular with Balinese people? In some ways, this question is 
similar to asking why are there different cultures? Why do you like the music 
of your culture or a different culture best? Eventually, you are brought to the 
question of why does anyone like any particular form of music. Music expresses 
cultural values through conventional sounds. For example, in the west, minor 
chords are often thought of as sad – yet even our notion of a chord is formed 
by western ideas of tonality. If being part of a music community is sharing 
similar sentiments, it should be no surprise that people raised in the same 
culture would have a similar ethos and conceive of the aesthetically pleasing 
in a similar fashion.

The aesthetics of indie: the longing for a golden age, the melancholy, poverty 
chic, and the overall values of simplicity, autonomy and austerity. This may 
not be appealing to immigrant or marginalised groups who have already 
experienced poverty and experience genuine outsiderness as a social class. As 
expressed inPulp's Common People <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SRPa0GhxGUs>, 
people who have a genuine experience of being poor do not like it when other 
people play poor. Indie's vernacular aesthetics do not speak to their life 
experiences or aspirations. Pop or hip-hop values are often at odds to the 
indie DIY ethos. Can you imagine an indie band singing name-dropping lyrics of 
wealth/status-markers such as Cristal,Louboutins <http://plixi.com/p/64504147> 
or Prada? Or displaying affluence by putting diamonds in their teeth when for 
an indie band even putting on a suit is seen as dressing up? Aggrandisement is 
not part of the philosophy. On the other side, why long for the past when it 
includes slavery or colonial imperialism?

You might make this ethnic characterisation of indie bands, only if you don't 
look globally.Brent Luvaas's work  <http://brentluvaas.com/publications.html>on 
youth culture in Indonesia shows there are many Indonesian indie rock bands 
including La Luna, Pure Saturday, and the Upstairs. The indie aesthetics are 
consistent, but meaningful in a different way. Here there is a nostalgic 
longing for an imaginary past. For them, indie is a way to create an identity 
beyond a confining national model of Indonesian ethnicity. Their world music is 
worldly, not ghettoised. Our society is heterogeneous, with different cultures 
living together. So indie bands are generally white in the UK and US, but so 
what?

Do you have a question for our indie professor? Then post a comment below or 
emailtheindieprofessor@gmail.com <>.
 