
On your lecture tour of the UK, what was the best question anyone asked you? 
Bob Hardy at Mono cafe in Glasgow

I've just finished a series of lectures in the UK and Milan on topics 
including Gender Inversions: The Role of the Female Fan in the Popular 
Imagination, Destination Music Festivals, and Audiences at Gigs: Significant 
Shifts in Activity and Meaning. Yes, I realise that giving different talks in 
each city is a bit like going on tour and playing a different set of songs each 
night, but if I wanted life to be easy I would have kept doing maths instead of 
anthropology.

My favourite question came from one of the participants at Peterhouse Theory 
Group <http://www.facebook.com/group.php?gid=71727324848> at Cambridge 
University. His question was if I thought there was a connection between indie 
music and Gnosticism. I had just given a paper on the relationship between 
indie music, Puritanism and pathos (there is a reason why there is a shoegaze 
revival band called the Pains of Being Pure at Heart). I think finding a 
connection between religion and aesthetics is a valuable line of inquiry. 
Gnosticism, from the Greek for knowledge, is where adherents derive their 
spiritually elect status by virtue of special experiential knowledge. Gnostics 
teach that a spiritual elite possesses "hidden knowledge" of the divine that 
places their revelations above the revelations found in scripture. Gnosticism 
would work with arguments that elitist knowledge of arcane bands confer 
"cultural capital", the notion that cool is a commodity of sorts. In other 
words, you can increase your social status by possessing prestigious and 
abstruse forms of knowledge. Indie fans are often parodied as having wilfully 
obscure tastes. However, Gnosticism never really matured from a sect. And 
currently, there is criticism that indie music is just too popular to be 
considered non-mainstream. A single correspondence doesn't seem to be enough to 
suggest a generative theory. However, there could be something to the idea that 
the valorisation of esoteric knowledge could explain members of the indie 
community who pride themselves on knowing every chillwave release. So, perhaps 
Gnosticism is a sect of indie. Either way, a great question and creative 
application of the argument that religious values can generate aesthetic 
practices.

The best observation was from a student at the University of Southampton who 
has been researching audience behaviour at dance shows. Spiro Martyr noted the 
widespread use of earplugs among audience members at the venue. At indie gigs, 
earplugs are usually worn by older fans who stand at the back. He found by 
looking at message-boards that wearing earplugs is not looked down on in dance 
as it is in indie. Rather, he found there is respect for wearing earplugs. In 
rock, fans who wear earplugs are stigmatised with associations of ageing. Thus, 
earplugs are often hidden because they are seen as a source of shame that can 
make an audience member the target of ridicule. Dance fans wear earplugs with 
pride and see them as a sign of experience. For serious dance fans and 
professionals, the participation ritual would include putting earplugs in prior 
to entering the venue, almost like putting on body armour before entering 
battle. Hardcore participants see taking care of your ears as demonstrating 
long-term commitment rather than the casual participation of a dilettante just 
up for a good night out. This would make earplugs within dance something akin 
to tattoos in Punk â€“ a sign that you are dedicated to the genre for life. In 
dance, earplugs show you are in for the long haul. As someone who's ears rang 
for two years after seeing My Bloody Valentine, indie could pull a page from 
dance's book. But you can't make lovers of youth value longevity.
 