
Another week, another set of fascinating anthropological indie questions to 
wade through. Thanks for all the posts and remember – if you have a question 
you'd like me to answer, post a comment below or email
TheIndieProfessor@gmail.com <mailto:TheIndieProfessor@gmail.com>

Why is indie tied in with Converse sneakers and grunge linked with Dr Martens?
Anon via email

Shoes are an important element of a sartorial aesthetic, sending subtle 
signals of participation in a music scene. Forms of adornment often indicate 
affiliation or social status. For example,Zulu earplugs 
<http://www.virtualmuseum.info/collections/object.asp?galleryid=107&row=15&ckid=340067>
 signified that the individual wearing them participated in a ritual to attain 
social maturity. However, earplugs could signify anything from clan identity to 
regional origin and prestige. Footwear purchases combine concerns over 
aesthetics, functionality, price and durability. Dr Martens represented a clear 
desire for grunge rockers to be connected to punk. Punk adopted Dr Martens 
because of the boots' connection with the working class, seen as rebellious and 
anti-establishment. Dr Martens' durability adds to their appeal, especially for 
those without much disposable income. They also fare well at gigs with a lot of 
physical contact.

In the 1990s, the indie shoe of choice was Adidas 
<http://www.shopadidas.com/product/index.jsp?productId=3721202&kwCatId=&cid=G17067&shopGroup=R>
. Indie style has been consistently modest with the idea that clothing should 
be everyday wear. The flat athletic shoe fits well with ordinariness and the 
three-chord structure of much indie music (three chords on your guitar, three 
stripes on your shoulder, three stripes on your shoes).  Most importantly for 
indie isnostalgia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yWyLaXCV2_s>, a longing for 
the past. Children's shoes will always have a place in the movement. Keds,
Converse <http://chucksconnection.com/#youth>, ballerina flats or any shoe that 
evokes childhood will have a place in the indie sartorial landscape. Athletic 
shoes are also functional for shows with pits or crowd-surfing. It's much less 
painful to be kicked in the face with an athletic shoe than a pair of boots.

I'd like to know why people would rather film shows than fully engage with 
them?
AngelesAngeles 

Live music performances now serve an increasingly important function for 
audiences by providing content for the virtual presentation of their online 
selves. More time at gigs and other social activities is spent creating 
documentary evidence to upload on to social networking pages. Audience members 
are increasingly acting like tourists at gigs and in their everyday lives. They 
document their experiences rather than just experience them.

Any cyber identity needs content – so a person's life in the real world acts 
as a way of gathering material for their virtual avatar. To have a good cyber 
identity, it is important to chronicle exclusive activities, particularly 
social activities that express your taste. Online personae are often 
constituted by enumerating your consumer preferences. You didn't just go toWild 
Beasts <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/oct/12/wild-beasts-review>, you're 
the "type of person" that goes to Wild Beasts. A prominent gig is the ultimate 
"I was there" event. So much so that people often spend a good portion of shows 
not watching bands directly, but through the viewfinders of theircamera phones 
<http://www.laweekly.com/slideshow/the-dead-weather-third-man-records-28280199/20/>
.

People in the front row take a photo and then look at it on their mobile 
device before returning to watch. Obviously, looking at photographs means you 
don't focus on the performance in the same way. Your engagement becomes 
intermittent. Now with 3G, the tourist documentation function has escalated. 
Previously, you'd return home to update your cyber self, but now the 
communication is "I am at this show". This immediacy has created an escalating 
intolerance for boredom. At any point when a show is not stimulating enough, 
people disengage and communicate with non co-present others. They check 
Facebook, Twitter, text message, or other phone applications. Between sets 
people don't talk to strangers, they communicate with the friends they came 
with and their phones. Greater percentages of concertgoers are holding their 
mobiles throughout the performance, a technological supplement of the hand with 
an imagined limitless potential of connection. Admit it, some of you are on 
your phone right now, ignoring the people around you while read this.
 