
Question: @indiegodess Serious question for a Friday night. Why do so many 
girls like cheesy music? And by cheesy I mean inane. And crap. Girls went crazy 
for Katy Perry.
WileyEQuixote <https://twitter.com/#!/search/%20wileyequixote>

Answer: Let's be frank, most people think the music they don't like is crap. 
You think Katy Perry's music is crap because you don't like it, and society 
calls it crap because of the people who listen to it. The cultural expressions 
of stigmatised groups are often denigrated. It's not confined to music – just 
look at language and art. African-American English is just as rule governed as 
Standard English, but the dialect is often ridiculed because of cultural 
snobbery. A study in India found the dialects of lower castes were 
characterised by others as "ignorant" and "backward".Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, the poor, ethnic minorities, 
homosexuals, and young people will have their modes of expression insulted. 
From calling their linguistic innovations "slang", their grammar "uneducated", 
their intonation "insecure", to saying their music is crap.

Using the term cheesy to attribute poor taste to "girls" is telling. The 
origin of the word "cheesy" comes from the Urdu "chiz", meaning "thing". The 
negative association for an Indian "thing" is a leftover of the colonial 
attitude towards objects and customs of subjugated people. A cheesy thing was 
thought to be big or showy. Of course, big and showy are not values of the 
western cultural elite. Modesty, intellectualism, the mind over the body are 
Protestant values. Criticism of pop dance music often focuses on its immodesty: 
too big, too popular, too ostentatious, too pompous, too showy and too sexual. 
Pop dance music is created to inspire movement and provoke participation – but 
what is wrong with leaving both your head and heart on the dancefloor? You 
might even ask why are women more interested in dancing. Perhaps because they 
are allowed to display their bodies as sexual spectacles while men are more 
encouraged to display their bodies as athletic spectacles.

Katy Perry is about to break Michael Jackson's No 1 singles record with her 
album Teenage Dream. Bizarrely, this has brought an outburst that American 
Billboard should change its rules soshe could not be the record holder 
<http://www.billboard.com/column/chartbeat/ask-billboard-are-chart-rule-changes-needed-1005817152.story#/column/chartbeat/ask-billboard-are-chart-rule-changes-needed-1005771152.story>
. Why should people object to her being the new record holder? Gender seems to 
be at the heart of the answer. Just as with the repulsive internet meme12 
Extremely Disappointing Facts About Popular Music 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/daves4/12-extremely-disappointing-facts-about-popular-mus>
, it's accepted that music created by women or consumed by women is inferior. 
Of these 12 facts, eight disappointments are female artists having outperformed 
their male counterparts. There were no complaints that a male performer outsold 
Joni Mitchell or Patti Smith. Billed as "The Saddest Thing You'll Read Today", 
it certainly was the saddest thing I read that day, but for different reasons 
than were hoped for.

• If you have a question for the indie professor please leave a comment below, 
email her attheindieprofessor@gmail.com <> or inquire via Twitter @indiegodess 
<http://twitter.com/indiegodess>
 