
Nick Robertson, the co-founder of the online fashion retailer Asos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos>, is to step down as chief executive 
in a surprise move after a tricky 18 months for the former stock market darling.

The entrepreneur, who will remain on the board as a non-executive director, 
will be succeeded by Nick Beighton, the group’s chief operating officer and its 
former finance director, who is thought to have been groomed for the role over 
the past year and a half.

The company declined to comment on the move, which comes after a troubled 
period for the business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/jan/29/asos-slips-as-chief-executive-robertson-sells-20m-of-shares>
 that has included a series of profit warnings, a fire at its warehouse and 
poor international sales following adverse currency movements. It also follows 
Robertson raising £20m by selling shares in the retailer in January, although 
his remaining stake of just under 10% of the company is still worth about £210m.

A person familiar with the company said Robertson “should be applauded” for 
stepping down from the business he created, because many entrepreneurs cling on 
as bosses even if they do not possess the skills to run established businesses. 
The adviser said: “It suits him and the business to move on.”

Robertson founded Asos in 2000 when it was known as As Seen On Screen because 
its garments were copies of clothes worn by celebrities. It wasfloated on 
London’s junior stock market <http://www.asos.com/infopages/pgeaboutus.aspx?r=2>
, Aim, the following year and boomed from acompany then worth about £12m 
<http://www.iii.co.uk/articles/252277/how-hunt-best-quality-aim-shares> to one 
worth about £6bn last year, as it introduced more original ranges aimed at the 
mid-market, expanded internationally and consistently wowed the City by 
producing stellar figures.

However, since its shares peaked in early 2014, the value of the business has 
slumped and the stock market now deems it to be worth about £2.5bn. In March 
last year, Asos warned that higher warehouse costs and start-up losses in China
would hit annual profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/18/asos-value-slow-sales-growth-profit-shares>
. It followed that up three months later by admitting that thestrong pound had 
forced it to slash prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/asos-shares-plummet-profits-warning>
 for non-UK customers.

Beighton joined Asos as finance director in 2009, and was promoted to chief 
operating officer last October. At the time of the appointment, the Barclays 
analyst Christodoulos Chaviaras said: “It is important news in our view that 
Nick Beighton will be taking on the newly established role of chief operating 
officer.

“This will likely be viewed positively by investors, some of whom have been 
claiming that in the current phase of growth, Asos needs further management 
additions.”

The news, which is thought to have been relayed to major investors by the Asos 
chairman, Brian McBride, after the stock market closed on Tuesday evening, is 
expected to be formally announced on Wednesday morning.
 