
Price cuts and investment in its international business drove down profits at 
online fashion retailerAsos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> in the 
first six months of the year.




A record Christmas trading period, when sales increased by 14%, was not enough 
to lift profits for the first half overall.

Pre-tax profit fell to £18m in the six months to end-February, from £20m over 
the same period a year earlier. Revenue rose 14% to £550m.

It follows a torrid time for the retailer, whose ranges are targeted at 
“fashion-conscious twentysomethings”. Last year, Asos suffereda fire at its 
main warehouse in Barnsley, South Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/22/asos-warehouse-fire-south-yorkshire>
 and issued a series of profit warnings, while adverse currency movements hit 
international sales.

Asos sells its own brands as well as third-party brands and high street names 
such as Mango, French Connection and River Island.

Among its bestsellers in the first half were playsuits and jumpsuits, shirts, 
trainers, oversized coats and scarves. “We increased our gifting range with a 
more extensive selection of beauty, men’s grooming, novelty gifts and also more 
traditional items such as nightwear,” the company said.


“In addition, events such as Halloween and Valentine’s Day are becoming 
increasingly important to our customers and we have responded by adding 
specific ranges for these celebrations.”

UK sales jumped 27% over the first half, while international sales increased 
by 5%.

Nick Robertson, the chief executive who co-founded Asos in 2000, sold about 
£20m of shares in the company in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/jan/29/asos-slips-as-chief-executive-robertson-sells-20m-of-shares>
, amounting to about 10% of his holding. It left him with an 8% stake, making 
him the company’s second-largest shareholder.

“With our continued investment in our international price competitiveness 
gaining traction, momentum in the business is building. This gives us 
confidence in the outlook for the second half and that full-year profit and 
margin will be in line with expectations,” Robertson said.

The shares jumped nearly 7% in early trading before ending the day 2.7% higher 
at £37.28.

 