
Demand for summer dresses and festival wear helped business boom for online 
fashion retailerAsos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos>, which said 
annual sales would be at the top of forecasts.

The company, whose customers include Michelle Obama and Samantha Cameron, said 
retail sales for the four months to 30 June increased 20%, or 24% allowing for 
currency movements.

Sales in Britain rose 27% and international sales, worth about 60% of the 
total, were up 16%, or 23% in constant currencies. For the year that ends on 31 
August, sales will be at the high end of Asos’s previous guidance of 15% to 20%.

Nick Robertson, Asos’s chief executive, said top-selling items included 
sequinned mini skirts, structured sun dresses, dungarees and boots for 
festivals bought by customers in their 20s.

“Festivals and dresses for holidays were really, really strong for us,” he 
said.

In the UK, new brands such as Misguided and Boohoo helped increase sales. The 
company also extended its cutoff time for next-day delivery to midnight from 
10pm and simplified its smartphone app.

Asos’s strong trading is a turnaround from last year when three profit 
warnings in six months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2014/sep/16/asos-third-profit-warning-six-months>
 rocked its position as a stock market favourite valued at £6bn.

The company, which sells in about 200 countries, blamed weak international 
sales caused by the strong pound making goods expensive and it alsosuffered a 
fire at its main depot in Barnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/23/asos-takes-orders-again-warehouse-fire>
.

“A year ago our UK performance was OK but where we were struggling was 
international. That was with the currency working against us and we were unable 
back then to change our prices in international territories.”

Asos installed software so it could adjust prices quickly to compete in 
particular countries. It has cut prices but better stock control and strong 
full-price sales have helped keep gross profit margins steady when analysts had 
expected a sharp fall.

High-street fashion retailers suffered slow spring sales because of cold 
weather,prompting many to launch their sales early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/07/marks-and-spencer-clothing-sales-suffer-spring-falls>
. Robertson said the unseasonal weather had little effect on Asos.

“We are very global and we are not reliant on the UK,” he said. The company is 
on track to reach its target of £2.5bn annual sales soon, Robertson said 
without being more specific.

Andrew Wade, an analyst at stockbroker Numis, increased his estimate for 
annual pre-tax profit to £46.5m from £45.8m. Profit last year was £43.9m.

Wade said: “We are seeing clear positive results and a business which has 
regained its momentum.”

Asos shares, which were valued at £70 in February 2014, were down 2.5% at 
£37.45 in lunchtime trading. After plunging in 2014, they have gained about 50% 
this year.
 