
One of the founders of Asos is selling a chunk of his shareholding in the 
online fashion retailer to fund his £70m divorce settlement. The company 
announced that Nick Robertson,who stepped down as chief executive last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/asos-founder-nick-robertson-chief-executive-steps-down>
, wished to sell 1.3m shares through a placing with institutional investors. 
The share disposal plan, revealed after the stock market had closed, would 
raise £46.4m based on the closing price of £35.71.

Earlier this year, Robertson was ordered to hand about a third of his £220m 
fortune to his ex-wife Janine after a public trial in the family division of 
the high court. The judge was asked to decide how much she should receive after 
the couple failed to agree on the division of shares and property owned by the 
entrepreneur.

The hearing revealed the couple had a property portfolio worth nearly £60m, 
with homes in London, Oxfordshire and France, as well as cars – including a 
Mercedes, Bentley and Ferrari – and boats worth about £2m.

Robertson co-founded Asos in 2000 when it was known as As Seen On Screen 
because its garments were copies of clothes worn by celebrities. It wasfloated 
on London’s junior stock market 
<http://www.asos.com/infopages/pgeaboutus.aspx?r=2>, Aim, the following year 
and has grown from acompany then worth about £12m 
<http://www.iii.co.uk/articles/252277/how-hunt-best-quality-aim-shares> to one 
worth close to £3bn today as it expanded its selection to 80,000 products and 
launched overseas.

In a statement Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> said: “Nick 
Robertson, one of the company’s founders and a non-executive director, today 
announces that following a recent divorce settlement he intends to sell 
approximately 1.3m shares in the company, representing approximately 1.6% of 
the company’s share capital, through a placing to institutional investors. The 
books for the placing will open with immediate effect.”

The retailer said the share sale was “subject to demand, price and market 
conditions”. If it proceeds Robertson would still own a 6.6% stake worth close 
to £200m.
 