
Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> has hit back at the Labour 
leadership candidate Owen Smith after he called for an inquiry into the fashion 
retailer over allegations that it uses zero-hours contracts.

In a post on his website, the former shadow work and pensions secretary said 
Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> has the “worst forms of 
zero-hours arrangements I’ve come across”. The retailer denies that any 
employees are on zero-hours contracts.

Owen Smith pledges to end austerity in radical pitch to Labour's left
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/owen-smith-pledges-to-smash-austerity-in-pitch-to-labours-left>
In a letter to the chair of the business, innovation and skills select 
committee, Iain Wright, Smith said staff “face invasive surveillance, limited 
access to toilet facilities and random searches during lunch breaks,” likening 
the company to Sports Direct.

The letter followed a meeting that Smith held with local activists from the 
GMB union at Asos’s distribution centre in Barnsley. GMB, the UK’s 
third-largest union, has sinceendorsed Smith’s leadership campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/10/gmb-union-backs-owen-smith-labour-leader>
.

Smith’s campaign had long courted an endorsement from GMB, which previously 
raised concerns about Asos warehouse staff, including working conditions and 
allegations that the company uses short-notice contracts for many employees.

Asos said Smith had not been in touch with the online retailer or XPO 
Logistics, which runs the 102,000 sq metre (1.1m sq ft) centre, or visited to 
see conditions for employees.

“We were surprised to see these allegations from Owen, given that it was the 
first we had heard from him and he’s never been inside the warehouse,” a 
spokeswoman said.

“We work incredibly hard with XPO to create a positive, supportive, healthy 
working environment for the team in Barnsley. As we have now said on the record 
several times before: we don’t do zero-hours contracts, people can take toilet 
and water breaks whenever they want, and we pay above minimum wage.”

The retailer said it had recently spent £3m on a cooling project to alleviate 
high temperatures in the warehouse during hot weather.


A spokesperson for Smith said: “The allegations against Asos are incredibly 
serious and should not be treated lightly. That is why Owen has raised this 
matter with the relevant select committee in parliament and asked them to 
investigate. Owen would be more than happy to visit the warehouse at Barnsley 
and to talk to workers and management about these issues.”

Smith’s campaign said his letter to Wright had made it clear that he was 
referring to “effectively sub-zero hour contracts, where workers face little to 
no notice of the hours they’re expected to work”.
 