
Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> shares fell by more than 5% 
after Nick Robertson, co-founder of the online fashion retailer, stepped down 
as chief executive after a rocky 18 months for the former stock market 
favourite.

Asos has replaced Robertson, who will remain on the board as a non-executive 
director, with Nick Beighton, the group’s chief operating officer, the company 
said,confirming reports on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/asos-founder-nick-robertson-chief-executive-steps-down>
. Beighton, who is thought to have been groomed for the role since early last 
year, has taken over running the company with immediate effect.


Robertson’s resignation comes after a troubled period for the business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2015/jan/29/asos-slips-as-chief-executive-robertson-sells-20m-of-shares>
 he launched 15 years ago. Its problems have included a series of profit 
warnings, a fire at its warehouse and poor international sales caused by the 
strength of sterling.

The move also follows Robertson raising £20m by selling shares in the retailer 
in January, although his remaining stake of just under 10% of the company is 
still worth about £210m.

Brian McBride, Asos’s chairman, said: “On behalf of everyone who works at 
Asos, I’d like to acknowledge Nick Robertson’s extraordinary achievement. His 
passion and vision have built a start-up into a world class company. We are all 
delighted that Nick will continue to contribute to the company that he started.”

Asos shares were down 2.5% to £29.14, after dropping by 5.5% in early trading 
on Wednesday.

A person familiar with the company said Robertson “should be applauded” for 
stepping down from the business he created, because many entrepreneurs cling on 
as bosses even if they do not possess the skills to run established businesses. 
The source said: “It suits him and the business to move on.”

Robertson founded Asos in 2000 when it was known as As Seen On Screen because 
its garments were copies of clothes worn by celebrities.

Beighton joined Asos in 2009 as finance director and took on the wider role of 
chief operating officer last October. His replacement as finance director, 
Helen Ashton, started on Tuesday.

Asos floated on London’s junior stock market 
<http://www.asos.com/infopages/pgeaboutus.aspx?r=2>, Aim, the following year 
and boomed from acompany worth about £12m 
<http://www.iii.co.uk/articles/252277/how-hunt-best-quality-aim-shares> to 
become worth about £6bn last year, as it introduced more original ranges aimed 
at the mid-market, expanded internationally and consistently wowed the City 
with its financial performance.

However, since its shares peaked in early 2014, the value of the business has 
slumped and the stock market now deems it to be worth about £2.5bn.

In March last year, Asos warned that higher warehouse costs and start-up 
losses in Chinawould dent annual profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/18/asos-value-slow-sales-growth-profit-shares>
. It followed that up three months later by admitting thestrong pound had 
forced it to slash prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/asos-shares-plummet-profits-warning>
 for non-UK customers.
 