
People with diabetes should not routinely take aspirin to prevent heart 
attacks, new research suggested today.

It has been argued that routine use of the drug could help prevent the risk of 
a heart attack. Butresearch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/medicalresearch> by the British Medical 
Journal (BMJ) found that people with diabetes who showed no symptoms of heart 
disease had no benefit from regularly taking aspirin.

But some groups of people with diabetes would still benefit from taking 
aspirin, it found. After a heart attack or stroke, taking the drug could reduce 
the risk of future related problems by a quarter.

The research, conducted by Professor Jill Belch of the Institute of 
Cardiovascular Research at Dundee University, found the drug was most effective 
if prescribed to people with more serious cardiovascular problems.

The report read <http://www.bmj.com/cgi/content/full/337/oct16_2/a1840>: "A 
total of seven well-controlled trials now show that aspirin has no benefit for 
primary prevention of cardiovascular events, even in people at higher risk.

"Although aspirin is cheap and universally available, practitioners and 
authors of guidelines need to heed the evidence that aspirin should be 
prescribed only in patients with established symptomatic cardiovascular 
disease."

The study involved more than 1,200 middle-aged patients with type one or type 
two diabetes.

Belch told the Daily Mail: "If you're taking aspirin for secondary prevention 
because you've had a heart attack, or stroke, or have a circulatory problem, 
then it works.

"But it doesn't work if you have none of these problems and there is also no 
evidence for its use by healthy middle-aged people.

"We do not want people taking aspirin prescribed by their doctor to stop 
taking it without seeking medical advice. They may have conditions for which it 
is suitable."
 