
Some people with a family history of cancer could halve their risk of 
developing the disease by taking daily doses of aspirin, according to the 
results of a 10-year trial of the treatment.

The study shows that regularly taking the medicine cuts the risk of bowel 
cancer by more than 60% in those with a particular genetic predisposition to 
get the disease â€“ as well as reducing the risk of other hereditary cancers.

Scientists who led the study said people with several family members with 
cancers other than breast, blood and prostate might be advised to start taking 
aspirin daily from the age of 45.

They said those without a family history of the disease might also consider 
doing so, but that they should make a personal assessment of the risks and 
benefits and get medical advice. Anyone thinking of taking the drug regularly 
should consult their doctor first.

Doctors already prescribe low, daily doses of aspirin to people at increased 
risk of heart attacks and strokes, and evidence has been growing of anti-cancer 
properties for 20 years. However, this is the first long-term, randomised 
controlled trial to show such an effect.

The trial involved people with Lynch syndrome <http://www.lynchcancers.com/>, 
a genetic abnormality that predisposes carriers to develop bowel cancer and 
other solid organ cancers including endometrial, ovarian, stomach, kidney, 
oesophageal, brain and skin tumours.

The condition affects at least one in 1,000 people. Carriers are around 10 
times as likely to develop cancer and often do so at a young age.

Professor John Burn 
<http://www.ncl.ac.uk/biomedicine/research/groups/profile/john.burn> of 
Newcastle University, who led the study, estimated that if all 30,000 or so 
people with Lynch syndrome in the UK were to start taking two aspirin tablets a 
day then some 10,000 cancers would be prevented over the next 30 years, saving 
about a thousand lives. The downside of the treatment is that around an extra 
thousand people would develop stomach ulcers as a side-effect.

"People with a genetic susceptibility are a model system," said Burn, whose 
workis published online in the Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2811%2961049-0/fulltext>
 on Friday. "They are more sensitive to the environmental triggers to cancer.

"If we can do something to change cancer progression in people at high genetic 
risk, then that's telling us what we might all benefit. But we are not making a 
recommendation for the general population. Everyone can take this evidence and 
make their own choice.

"In between you have the people who have a family history [of cancer]. Those 
individuals may well decide to put themselves on aspirin and that would be a 
reasonable conclusion from the data currently available."

Between 1999 and 2005, about half of a group of 861 Lynch syndrome carriers 
were given two aspirins (600mg) a day, while the rest took placebos.

By 2010 those who had taken aspirin for at least two years were 63% less 
likely to have developed bowel cancer.

Looking at all forms of the disease, almost 30% of those in the placebo group 
developed a Lynch syndrome-related cancer, compared with 15% for those given 
aspirin.

The most common side effects associated with taking aspirin are 
gastrointestinal ulcers and stomach bleeding. There is also an very small 
increased risk of haemorrhagic stroke, in which a blood vessel in the brain 
bursts.

There was no difference in the proportions of the study groups suffering such 
side-effects.

Burn added that he takes low-dose aspirin tablets as a preventative measure. 
"That was a balanced judgment based on weighing risks and benefits. I know I 
might get an ulcer or a cerebral bleed but I'd rather not have a heart attack, 
stroke or cancer. That's my choice."

Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> is a synthetic version 
of the active component of willow bark, salicylic acid, which has been used as 
a medicine for its anti-inflammatory properties for hundreds of years. 
Salicylates also trigger programmed cell death to help diseased plants contain 
the spread of infection.

"It's not a huge stretch to think that if salicylate induces programmed cell 
death in plants to kill infected cells, maybe it's doing similar things in the 
animal kingdom to enhance the death of aberrant cells causing cancer," said 
Prof Burn.

"This adds to the growing body of evidence showing the importance of aspirin, 
and aspirin-like drugs, in the fight against cancer and emphasises how critical 
it is to carry out long-term international research," said Prof Chris 
Paraskeva, a bowel cancer expert at the University of Bristol.

On Friday the researchers will launch a website to recruit 3,000 people with 
Lynch syndrome <http://www.capp3.org> worldwide to take part in a five-year 
trial to determine the best dose of aspirin to take.
 