
The Telegraph front page 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/10526771/Uncontrollable-rage-could-be-cured-by-drugs-like-aspirin.html>
 on Thursday reported that aspirin could be a cure for intermittent explosive 
disorder. IED, characterised by bouts of extreme and disproportionate rage, is 
thought to affect 2-3% of the population of the USA, according to the research 
paper.

It’s a pretty serious disorder, not to be confused with mere ‘bad behaviour’. 
These are impulsive, hard-to-control aggressive outbursts, and the condition is 
linked to a number of other adverse health outcomes.

But can aspirin really cure it? I went to the study in question 
<http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1790358> and had a 
look. For a start, there’s no mention of aspirin, or any anti-inflammatory 
drug, anywhere in the peer-reviewed article.

The scientific research looks at the relationship between aggression, in 
particular IED symptoms, and levels of two inflammatory markers found in blood 
plasma – C-reactive protein, and interleukin 6. The study is a case-control 
design, which means people are chosen to be included in the study because of 
their aggression status.

They recruited fewer than 200 people, which for studies of this design is 
quite a small number, and then further split these people into three groups to 
compare. People with IED are likely to be different from people without it in a 
number of ways, so usually for observational studies like this you’d want a 
larger sample size.

Not only this, but the measures of aggression and the measures of inflammatory 
marker levels were taken at the same time as each other. This means that even 
if an association between the two is seen, as it was here, there is no way of 
knowing the direction of causation.

Aside from the possibility that the association seen is due to other 
differences between people with or without IED, it could be that aggression 
leads to rises in inflammatory markers, or that increases in these markers lead 
to an increase in IED. If the former is true, then no amount of aspirin would 
help, as causation is the wrong way round.

Which brings me to my next question: can aspirin actually change the levels of 
these markers? Evidence suggests not. The main marker investigated is 
C-reactive protein (also known as CRP). Because it is relatively easy to 
measure, and stability in level, it’s often used as a marker of inflammation, 
with rises in levels associated with diseases such as diabetes, cardiovascular 
disease and potentially even some cancers.

However, there’s very little evidence that aspirin can change levels of CRP. 
Althoughthis study 
<http://content.onlinejacc.org/article.aspx?articleid=1127121> suggests that 
aspirin might differentially affect risk for unstable angina depending on CRP 
levels, the levels themselves weren’t greatly affected by aspirin use.Other 
<http://content.onlinejacc.org/article.aspx?articleid=1127255> studies 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10590187> have found no effect on CRP 
levels after aspirin use.

Also, it’s important to remember that aspirin is not a harmless drug. In fact 
a recent review <http://www.journalslibrary.nihr.ac.uk/hta/volume-17/issue-43> 
suggests that for healthy people, there’s not enough evidence that the 
potential benefits would outweigh the risks of daily aspirin. Regular aspirin 
use can increase health risks such as bleeding in the brain or stomach, and as 
yet there’s not enough evidence to advise healthy people to take aspirin as 
regularly as daily.

For a newspaper to suggest that aspirin could treat this disorder, a claim 
that wildly extrapolates from the findings they are referring to, is not only 
misleading in terms of the findings of the research, but also potentially could 
harm people who might think they should begin self-medicating with aspirin.
 