
What if parliament were to follow the advice of right-to-die campaigners and 
legalise assisted dying? As it happens, we have the published experiences of 
Oregon and the Netherlands to guide us in the UK.

In 1997 the US state of Oregon licensed doctors to supply lethal drugs to 
terminally-ill patients who met certain conditions – that they had less than 
six months to live, had mental capacity and were acting voluntarily.


Up to 2013 there was a steady overall upward trend in the numbers of such 
assisted suicide deaths. But from 2013 there has been a marked upturn. The two 
years 2014 and 2015 saw an 80% increase in deaths of this nature: there are now 
more than eight times the number than when the law came into force.

Oregon, with only 3.8 million inhabitants, has less than half the population 
of London.Oregon’s assisted death rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/jul/18/how-many-people-choose-assisted-suicide-where-it-is-legal>
 last year is the equivalent of over 2,000 physician-assisted deaths in England 
and Wales every year – and the numbers are still rising.

There are other concerns too. There is “doctor shopping”, whereby people whose 
doctors won’t participate in assisted dying (and two out of three won’t) seek 
lethal drugs from other doctors who are willing but have never met them before 
and know nothing about them beyond case notes. One such doctor issued no less 
than 27 prescriptions for lethal drugs in 2015 alone.


Brittany Maynard, 29, kills herself under Oregon's 'death with dignity' law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/03/terminally-ill-oregon-death-with-dignity-brittany-maynard>
Prognosis of terminal illness is fraught with difficulty. The reports from 
Oregon illustrate this. They show that some people who had been supplied with 
lethal drugs on the basis of a prognosis of six months or less lived for up to 
three years before taking them. How long they might otherwise have lived is 
anybody’s guess.


Every doctor has been faced with the question: how long have I got? The answer 
in many cases is only a best guess. Yet accurate prognosis is an important 
factor in any decision to end it all. The assisted dying bills presented to 
parliament in the UK treat prognosis as if it’s a scientific tool. It isn’t.


What of the Netherlands? Their 2002 legislation also permits 
physician-administered euthanasia – where a doctor injects lethal drugs 
(coma-inducing drugs plus, often, a paralysing agent to cause death by 
asphyxia). TheNetherlands’ assisted death rate 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/11/netherlands-sees-sharp-increase-in-people-choosing-euthanasia-du/>
 also rose modestly at first before turning sharply upwards. Last year 
euthanasia or assisted dying accounted for one in 26 of all deaths in the 
Netherlands: that’s the equivalent of over 20,000 deaths annually in the UK.


The Dutch official reports also reveal legislative drift. Increasing numbers 
of people were euthanised last year because of psychiatric illness (56 cases) 
or dementia (109 cases). In 2015 euthanasia was administered to a young woman 
suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder and anorexia nervosa who had been 
sexually abused as a child. Dutch campaigners want to make suicide drugs 
available to people who aren’t ill at all, just tired of life.


Dutch legislators simply didn’t envisage this in 2001 when they enacted the 
Termination of Life on Request and Assisted Suicide Act – a title that is at 
least upfront and honest and avoids the sugar-coated euphemisms (like assisted 
dying) that are used here to cloak the realities.


Assisted dying: how does it work in a Dutch end-of-life clinic?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/11/assisted-dying-dutch-end-of-life-netherlands-unbearable-suffering>
Assisted dying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/assisted-suicide> 
campaigners in the UK claim they only want Oregon-style physician-assisted 
dying for the terminally ill. But such criteria are purely arbitrary and 
contain within themselves the seeds of their own expansion. Oregon has already 
seen an attempt to re-define terminal illness as a prognosis of 12 instead of 
six months. The limited criteria we are seeing look more like an unpacking of 
assisted dying in an attempt to get it through the door of a sceptical 
parliament. If we are wise, we will learn from the experience of others rather 
than from our own mistakes.


This is an edited version of an article published by the King’s Fund as part of
a series of short essays <http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/reports/thenhsif> 
exploring a range of hypothetical scenarios for the future of health and care. 
Tweet your thoughts using the hashtag#nhsif 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NHSif?src=hash&lang=en-gb>
 