
The Associated Press has deleted a tweet posted two weeks ago about the 
Clinton Foundation <https://www.clintonfoundation.org/>, the humanitarian 
charity set up by Bill and Hillary Clinton with their daughter, Chelsea.


AP, the largest news agency in the US, announced that the tweet “fell short of 
AP standards by omitting essential context.”

The climbdown has prompted wider action, as AP’s vice president for standards, 
John Daniszewski,wrote in a blog post 
<https://blog.ap.org/announcements/statement-on-why-ap-deletes-clinton-tweet>: 

“We are revising our practices to require removal and correction of any AP 
tweets found not to meet AP standards, including tweets that contain 
information that is incorrect, misleading, unclear or could be interpreted as 
unfair, or having a problem in tone.”

The tweet that provoked a controversy was linked to an investigation by AP 
<http://www.bigstory.ap.org/article/82df550e1ec646098b434f7d5771f625/many-donors-clinton-foundation-met-her-state>
 into how many Clinton Foundation donors met Democrat presidential candidate 
Hillary Clinton during her time as secretary of state. It said: “More than half 
those who met Clinton ... gave money to Clinton Foundation.”

What the tweet did not mention was that AP’s analysis focused only on Clinton’s
discretionary meetings with those who were not in the US federal government or 
representatives of foreign governments.

The omission of the exact nature of AP’s investigation therefore led to both 
the tweet and the story being criticised by some media critics and politicians. 
Clinton’s own team were also critical.

AP’s executive editor, Kathleen Carroll, initially defended the report. 
Although admitting,in an interview with CNN 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/08/28/media/kathleen-carroll-defends-ap-clinton-investigation/>
 that the tweet was “sloppy” she said the wire service wasn’t going to change 
it. Now, however, it has been altered to read:

“AP review: many of the discretionary meetings Clinton had at State were with 
people who gave to Clinton Foundation.”

Clearly, the row has stimulated AP to reconsider its Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> policy. Previously, AP news 
executives were left to decide whether deletions or updates of tweets were 
necessary “on a case-by-case basis.”

But Daniszewski wrote that new guidance – “subjecting tweets to the same 
internal review and response process as other AP content” – is mandatory.

He wrote. “In the earlier days of Twitter, there had been a belief that 
removing tweets was akin to retroactively editing a conversation; it wasn’t 
transparent.

“Additionally, tweets were seen more as providing paths to in-depth content 
and less as content in themselves that would remain in the public discussion 
for an extended period.

“Industry thinking on this topic has been changing. And the controversy over 
the AP tweet has led us to an extensive reflection on this evolution.”

Sources: AP Blog 
<https://blog.ap.org/announcements/statement-on-why-ap-deletes-clinton-tweet>/AP
 
<http://www.bigstory.ap.org/article/82df550e1ec646098b434f7d5771f625/many-donors-clinton-foundation-met-her-state>
/CNN 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/08/28/media/kathleen-carroll-defends-ap-clinton-investigation/>
/Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/09/ap-deletes-clinton-foundation-tweet-227917>
/USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/onpolitics/2016/09/08/associated-press-hillary-clinton-tweet/90089520/>

 