
George Weston, the boss of Primark owner Associated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods>, has banked a 23% 
pay rise to £7.15m thanks to bonuses linked to the food and fashion group’s 
achievements in previous years.

Weston’s basic salary rose to £973,000, up 2.6% on the previous year in line 
with the rest of the company’s employees, but his take-home pay was lifted by 
an increase in the value of long-term incentives to £4.8m from £3.1m in 2013, 
according to the company’s annual report published on Thursday. Weston also 
received £15,000 in other benefits, £457,000 towards his pension and an 
£894,000 annual bonus.

Finance director John Bason, the group’s only other executive director, also 
saw his pay jump 21% to £4.8m thanks to a £3.2m long-term bonus. Both received 
all the possible bonus shares allocated to them in 2011 under the long-term 
scheme after ABF achieved earnings per share growth of more than 12% in the 
three years to 2014.

For the year ahead, Weston’s basic salary will rise above £1m for the first 
time. A short-term bonus of up to 150% of base salary and a long-term bonus of 
up to 200% of salary could again take his total pay to more than £5m including 
benefits such as a company car and private medical insurance.

The company said in the annual report: “We are satisfied that pay outcomes for 
the financial year 2013/14 reflect overall business performance.”

It said that with the exception of its sugar business underlying operating 
profit increased in all divisions, particularly in agriculture andPrimark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark>, which it said was “well 
positioned to maintain its growth momentum.”

It added that the performance resulted in a short-term incentive payment 
slightly above the mid-level of what was possible.

The revelation of Weston’s pay comes after the company announced a 30% surge 
in profits in the year to 17 September at Primark which helped to offset 
problems in ABF’s sugar business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/04/primark-profits-surge-magnificent-year>
. That underpinned an 18% rise in group pretax profits to £1.02bn despite a 3% 
fall in revenues to £12.9bn.
 