
As every self-respecting copy editor knows – and as every writer and reader 
ought to know – style is politics, and politics inform style. As such it’s no 
surprise that Wednesday the Associated Press’ Stylebook announced would no 
longer head its stories from Crimeawith datelines from Ukraine 
<http://blog.ap.org/2014/03/19/datelines-from-crimea/>, eg “Sevastopol, 
Ukraine”. Their reasoning: “Ukraine no longer controls Crimea, and AP datelines 
should reflect the facts on the ground.” True enough, but also a little 
disingenuous: AP won’t be writing “Sevastopol, Russia”, even though Russia 
clearly controls the situation on the ground, and Tuesday said it would annex 
the region regardless of Ukraine and western nations’ refusal to recognize the 
new treaty.

AP, ever striving for neutrality, tries to get away with justifying the change 
by geography, and the new dateline “Sevastopol, Crimea”.

Why not “Sevastopol, Russia” if Russia formalizes its annexation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/ukraine-crisis-putin-plan-crimea-annex-speech-russia-live>
 of the territory? The reason is that Crimea is geographically distinct from 
Russia; they have no land border. Saying just the city name and “Crimea” in the 
dateline, even in the event of full annexation, would be consistent with how we 
handle geographically separate parts of other countries. For instance, we just 
say “Sicily” and “Sardinia” in datelines — “Palermo, Sicily” – even though they 
are part of Italy, and “Guadeloupe” in datelines even though that island is 
part of France.

The problem with this retroactive policy – besides that Crimea didn’t become a 
peninsula overnight – is that Italy controls Sicily and France controls 
Guadeloupe, raising the more appropriate question of “Why now?”, which is 
obviously answered by the fact that Crimea is contested land, and AP would 
rather not side with anyone involved. Again, fair enough, but why not just say 
so? (The New York Times has also apparently changed its style for Crimea: a 
story frombefore the referendum and annexation says “Ukraine” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/17/world/europe/crimea-ukraine-secession-vote-referendum.html?gwh=8C5AAF09139C98DA9D5A8AA65E87491D&gwt=pay>
, three days latera story reads “Crimea” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/world/europe/crimea.html?hp>. The Guardian 
sticks to cities alone unless the location is relatively obscure.)

AP has waded into controversy before on its quest to avoid controversy. A year 
ago,AP banned “illegal immigrant” and “illegal” 
<http://blog.ap.org/2013/04/02/illegal-immigrant-no-more/> to describe a 
person, explaining that “‘illegal’ should describe only an action”, especially 
as the editors decided it was important not to label people, “instead of 
behavior”. Like the Guardian, AP promptly announced it wouldrefer to Chelsea 
Manning with female pronouns 
<http://blog.ap.org/2013/08/27/more-on-aps-style-on-pvt-chelsea-manning/> and 
her chosen name, by the tried and true rule of “Use the pronoun preferred by 
the individual … if that preference is not expressed, use the pronoun 
consistent with the way the individuals live publicly.” AP even (and wisely)
applies the rule to transliteration 
<http://blog.ap.org/2013/06/24/rowhani-or-rouhani-ap-adjusts-its-spelling-for-irans-president-elect/>
, a style point notoriously inconsistent among news organizations.

By the same token, AP was right on time with its new dateline for South Sudan  
<https://www.facebook.com/apstylebook/posts/231287403561020>when it gained 
independence in 2011; go by what a nation’s people prefer. But when it’s 
unclear who’s in charge, or what may come, or how geopolitical powers will 
tussle over occupation and referendums, etc, copy editors would really rather 
just stay out of it. So the AP resorts to geography whenever it fears a 
kerfuffle, writing “Bethlehem, West Bank” and just “Jerusalem”; it’s just 
“Stanley, Falkland Islands” and “Taipei, Taiwan”. Based on the history of those 
territorial disputes, it seems AP’s copy editors – and those at the majority of 
American publications which rely on AP for guidance – are settling in for the 
long haul with Crimea.
 