
Australia has become an international pariah. Our policies and treatment of 
people fleeing persecution, war and torture are infamous for their cruelty and 
selfishness.

The number of refugees that Australia takes is trifling and shameful when 
compared with the rest of the world.

Australia hosts 0.3% of the world’s refugees and places 70th when ranked by 
wealth 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-opinion/fact-and-fiction-with-prime-minister-tony-abbotts-refugee-intake-numbers-20150906-gjgc7q.html>
 (2014 figures).

Fact check: do refugee claims made by Tony Abbott and Peter Dutton stack up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/08/fact-check-do-refugee-claims-made-by-tony-abbott-and-peter-dutton-stack-up>
The largest migration of people since the end of the second world war is 
happening right now. The number of displaced persons has reached 50 million.

Australians will have a lot of explaining to do to future generations on why 
we stood by idly watching yet another humanitarian tragedy play out.

The paltry offer of 12,000 places for Syrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/09/australia-to-accept-an-extra-12000-syrian-refugees-and-will-join-us-led-air-strikes>
 leaves me incredulous. Commentators praise the government in an attempt to 
encourage this sudden about-face. They add phrases like “it’s a good start”, 
like some form of positive reinforcement for a badly behaved child. What a sad 
reflection of the state of affairs, especially when considered in conjunction 
with the eager rush to join a bombing campaign. We have all seen, after all, 
how successful previous bombing campaigns have been in resolving humanitarian 
crises.

The current crisis has become symbolised by the image of a drowned 
three-year-old boy,Alan Kurdi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-kurdi>, 
washed up on a Turkish beach: an image that has galvanised the western world to 
acknowledge more must be done.

To this effect, the people of Iceland, by the thousands, are offering to take 
Syrians into their homes. Germans have thrown the borders open and people are 
welcoming refugees with cheering on the streets and train stations, with food, 
and with song. The Pope is calling for Catholics to shelter refugees.

It is a moving spectacle of how humanity should be.

 In Australia, there are those that have looked at that same image and used it 
as an excuse for our barbarous border policies. The repugnant irony is that 
there could be no stronger counter argument to the “stop the boats” dogma than 
that image. All our draconian boats policy has succeeded in is having people 
drown in other oceans, conveniently out of sight of Christmas Island.

But it is worse than that.

People are fleeing what Tony Abbott has repeatedly referred to as a “death 
cult”. Those that do make it to our shores are horribly mistreated. We persist 
in demonising these most vulnerable of human beings and placing them in unsafe,
uncertain and inhumane conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/10/australias-generosity-to-syrian-refugees-ignores-those-still-languishing-offshore>
.

Australia’s mistreatment of asylum seekers is now a fact. We have over a 
decade of inquiries, reports, documents, testimony, whistleblowers, doctors, 
lawyers, teachers, guards and humanitarian workers crying out to prove it.

We spend billions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/10/australias-generosity-to-syrian-refugees-ignores-those-still-languishing-offshore>
 locking up men, women and children that have exercised their human right to 
seek asylum.

We have being found in breach of the convention against torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/09/un-reports-australias-immigration-detention-breaches-torture-convention>
. We have seen allegations of a sittingSenator spied on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/04/nauru-guards-spied-on-sarah-hanson-young-senate-inquiry-told>
. We have seen an attempt tosilence whistleblowers 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-30/detention-centre-workers-face-imprisonment-for-whistleblowing/6584392>
 speaking up with threats of imprisonment. We have seen the reporting of child 
abuse successfully voted down.

The Senate inquiry into Nauru has also heard accusations of torture, including 
waterboarding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/20/former-nauru-guard-says-he-did-not-see-waterboarding-of-asylum-seekers>
. 

This is happening on our watch. This is our responsibility.

Everyday I wake daring to be hopeful that maybe today the rhetoric will 
change, maybe today there will be a shift away from the politics of 
divisiveness, fear, selfishness and bigotry.

Maybe that day is soon. 

I have spent this year working to gather the concern that exists in the 
healthcare sector about the lack of transparency in detention. This has centred 
on the endorsement of a joint statement calling for the government to uphold a 
bipartisan commitment to the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture
 <http://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/OPCAT/Pages/OPCATIndex.aspx> (Opcat).

The joint standing committee on treaties in 2009 signed Australia up to the 
Opcat, which parliament has since failed to ratify. The Opcat is aUnited Nations
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> treaty that would allow for 
monitoring of detention centres by national and international bodies. Its 
effect is broader than immigration detention, giving protection to prisons, 
police lockups, juvenile detention centres, locked psychiatric facilities, and 
secure disability and aged care facilities.

It is a lot harder to abuse people when you are being watched.

There is no argument of any substance against the Opcat. It is a mechanism put 
in place by 78 other countries including the UK and New Zealand. At its heart 
is transparency. The Opcat is a robust way to ensure that the human rights of 
people in detention are respected in Australia.

Australia's generosity to Syrian refugees ignores those still languishing 
offshore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/10/australias-generosity-to-syrian-refugees-ignores-those-still-languishing-offshore>
Personally, I would like to see an end to mandatory immigration detention. 
However, if it is going to happen, it must be open and everything done to 
minimise its harm.

This joint statement I have been working on already has broad representation 
from across the health sector calling for the Opcat to be ratified. Never, to 
my knowledge, have so many peak health bodies endorsed a single statement. It 
is a credit to all the organisations and those they represent that they have 
chosen to take this stand.

We need the Opcat, we need it now. 

Until we learn to act decently in the face of human suffering – perhaps by 
watching the example of our European brothers and sisters – this is the least 
that we can do.

This might be a small step on the path to reclaiming what Australia could be 
and should be; if we are brave enough to let go of fear and border hysterics; 
if we embrace compassion as we have successfully done in the past, resulting in 
great enrichment to ourselves, our culture and our nation.

If you would like to give your personal support to Australia’s ratification of 
the Opcat,sign this petition <https://www.communityrun.org/p/Ratifyopcat> and 
join the thousands calling for ratification.
 