
Aim

"To make provision about asylum and immigration 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2004/ukpga_20040019_en_1>." 

Main provisions

• Creates a single tier of appeal for asylum seekers, the asylum and 
immigration tribunal, to consider all appeals against immigration and asylum 
decisions. Further appeals to the high court can only be made on the grounds 
that the tribunal made an error of law.
• Creates criminal sanctions to punish people who arrive in the UK without a 
valid travel document unless they have a reasonable excuse not to have one 
(purposely discarding or destroying their travel documents is not a valid 
excuse), or will not cooperate with the authorities to get new travel documents 
when their claims fail.
• Limits eligibility for refugee support. Failed asylum seekers with children 
can be refused support if they are not "cooperating with the removals process".
• Allows the government to tag, track and use voice recognition technology to 
trace asylum seekers – this was viewed as alternative to detention.
• Makes provision of accommodation to failed asylum seekers who cannot return 
home immediately conditional upon the participation in community activities.
• Replaces back payments of income support and related benefits to refugees 
with a loans system.
• Targets "sham marriages 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2004/apr/23/highereducation.overseasstudents>
" andrequires <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4222511.stm> foreign nationals 
from outside the European Economic Area to get written permission from the Home 
Office before getting married in Britain.


Background

The 2002 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/15/nationality-immigration-asylum-act>
 was originally intended to be New Labour's comprehensive immigration act. But 
during 2003, immigration continued to be a hot topic. The tabloids clamoured 
for a government crackdown on asylum and the Sunmounted a campaign 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article155852.ece> to convince the 
government to clamp down on illegal immigration. It delivered to Downing Street 
amillion vouchers from readers 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article155852.ece> calling on the 
government to "end asylum madness now".

At that year's Labour party conference the prime minister, Tony Blair, 
promised the party that his government wouldchange the law on asylum 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2003/sep/30/labourconference.labour5> to 
"cut back the ludicrously complicated appeal process" in order to deport failed 
asylum seekers "without further judicial interference".

The new bill was touted as the "final phase of asylum reform 
<http://press.homeoffice.gov.uk/press-releases/Final_Phase_Of_Asylum_Reform_Wil?version=1>
" and according to the Home Office was specifically designed to introduce 
"speed and finality to the appeals and removals process and ensure traffickers 
and asylum claimants do not benefit from dishonesty or by attempting to mislead 
the authorities".

The act makes modifications to the system to further encourage legal 
migration, while cutting down on illegal migration and unfounded asylum claims.

The act's primary aim is to limit the role of courts 
<http://www.ein.org.uk/resources/full.shtml?x=183397> in immigration appeals. 
It replaces the previous system of immigration adjudicators and the immigration 
appeal tribunal with a single-tier asylum and immigration tribunal. 
Controversially, it also removes judicial review,cutting off all appeal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2004/mar/02/law.immigration>s to the court of 
appeal and the House of Lords except in cases that involve an error of law.

Defending this change in the Guardian, the home secretary said 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2003/nov/27/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices>
 a "single tier of appeal and a clampdown on thecowboy legal advisers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2004/jun/16/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices1>
 who milk the system while failing claimant is essential".

The government told MPs that the appeals succeed in only a small percentage of 
cases, and the changes would prevent asylum seekers from trying to "play the 
system" in order to remain in the UK.

This thinking was also behind the government's crackdown on asylum seekers who 
deliberately destroy or discard 
<http://press.homeoffice.gov.uk/press-releases/Destroy_Travel_Documents_And_Fac?version=1%20>
 their travel documents. The government claimed that more than 60% of asylum 
seekers had no documents and that this was thesingle biggest barrier 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/sharp-fall-in-number-of-asylum-seekers-571108.html>
 to dealing with their applications and returning them to their country of 
origin if their claim failed.



Criticism

In 2006 the high court ruled the government's "sham marriages" provisions were 
unlawful, asno certificate was required 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2006/apr/10/asylum.politics> for those who 
wished to marry in the Church of England. Thisdecision was upheld 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6682465.stm> by the court of appeal in 2007. 

Liberty voiced concern about the decision to refuse support to asylum seekers 
with minor dependants. They argued the act breaches article 8 of the European 
convention on human rights because it forces "parents to choose between keeping 
children with them on the streets or asking a local authority to provide the 
children with accommodation on their own".

Human rights groups were outraged by the clauses dealing with "missing" travel 
documents. A coalition including Amnesty International, the Refugee Council and 
the Refugee Legal Centre, argued thatasylum seekers are "powerless" 
<http://www.statewatch.org/news/2003/dec/ai-refugee-parl-briefing.pdf> to 
refuse to obey the instructions of ruthless traffickers and smugglers and 
therefore should not be punished. TheRefugee Council said 
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/policy/briefings/2004/act_2004.htm> the act 
was "a worrying trend within the UK's asylum procedures of judging an asylum 
application by looking at how an individual came to claim asylum rather than 
why they had to flee".
 