
Day one

I get off the bus stepping sideways because of my two enormous shoulder bags. 
S is there waiting, on time, just as he said he would be. He looks just as I 
remember him. We hug.

The nerves instantly fall away – I’m just happy to see him. He has a place in 
mind for lunch so we walk straight there; he takes the chair, leaving me with 
the padded booth, and we order. He fidgets and I probably do too. That act of 
catching up is always a bit strange strange when it’s someone you speak to 
often but rarely see – we alternate between trivial things we haven’t ever 
discussed and bigger topics we have.

On our way back to his, we go to three stores – two supermarkets and the post 
office – making plans to make no plans that night and intermittently bickering 
about my bag (“Just let me hold it for God’s sakes it’s so heavy”; “No, no I’m 
fine, S, honestly I’m totally fine”).

Asymmetric love, part one: I'm going to tell him how I feel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
We walk through the door of his small and welcoming apartment and S scoops the 
mail off the floor. While looking through the envelopes, he tells me that he 
received a letter from one of his exes two weeks ago but still hasn’t opened 
it. I ask about their relationship, how he feels, how it ended – he tells me 
that living so far apart proved too hard but doesn’t say much more.

He makes us each a vodka and soda and we sit down and do work for a while 
before dinner. As usual, I puncture all the silences with questions. Now that 
we’re still, face to face, I realize how hard it’s going to be to tell him how 
I feel. I contemplate just sending him the draft of the first column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
instead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/31/asymmetric-love-column-part-one-im-going-to-tell-him-how-i-feel>
.

He says “I’m going to read her letter” and I fall silent. I stop typing – the 
sound of the keyboard feels too rude, like I’m interrupting his emotions. 
Although I try to read, my stomach hurts too much. When we lived in the same 
city, when S had a girlfriend waiting over here, I would never have told him 
how I felt. Now I’m here, he’s still reading the words of someone else instead 
of hearing mine. I know I have no one to blame but myself.

Finally, he folds the letter and says “that was nice”. I believe him – as 
ever, his serenity about the situation feels good. I suggest another drink 
while we start to make dinner. He stands slicing pumpkin on the countertop and 
I watch, thinking of the exact same clip I’ve thought of so many times: how I 
want to stand behind him and hug him. He cuts his finger on the knife and I 
have to turn away; knowing I can’t touch him is even worse when he winces. 
Later I think it’s me, not the knife, that makes him wince.

We start to get ready for bed. S is subletting, which was obvious to me when I 
arrived: the wooden floors, the innumerable plants and the orange rug are not 
his. But it was only when he mumbled something about sorting out the sheets 
later on that I noticed the bed. The narrow (just about) double in the corner 
was clearly the only thing available for comfortable sitting or sleeping – the 
only other rooms in the apartment were a small bathroom and even smaller 
kitchen. After we washed the dinner dishes, he walked into the living room, 
picked up a corner of the bed’s mattress and dragged it to the floor, revealing 
another thicker mattress beneath it.

Asymmetric love, part two: I'm flying to see him, and he knows it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/07/asymmetric-love-part-two-im-flying-to-see-him>
“That one’s for you,” he said, pointing at the original bed.

“Oh don’t sleep on the floor – it’s fine, we can just share.”

“No, the bed’s too small.”

His voice was as depressing as his words.


After dinner, we lay sideways on the bed to watch a film, eating candy from a 
paper bag. Ten minutes in, I looked over at S. His arms were folded and his 
upper body slightly turned towards me while his legs hung off the bed, 
outstretched and crossed. He was sleeping heavily. As I looked at him, though, 
he woke up, smiled, took another candy from the bag and looked back to the film.

Later, when he was in his own bed, under his own duvet and I under mine, I 
thought about how there is no loneliness as lonely as the loneliness you can 
feel around others. The room was cold and, after managing to sleep for a few 
hours, I lay awake for many more feeling awful. Thinking about how badly I 
needed to say something, frightened it would discolour the rest of our time 
together and frustrated that I had let this first day slip away. I knew I would 
tell him the next day – on that, at least, I wasn’t wrong.

Day two

When I opened my eyes he was still in his bed, looking at his phone. I said 
good morning and climbed in alongside him and started to look at mine. We 
talked about what we might do that day – my only full one there with him. Not 
long after I had got into his bed, he got out and sat on the mattress where I 
had slept looking at his computer. Again, I felt that my body had repelled his. 
I stayed where I was until we left to go buy bread. The whole way there I 
thought about saying it. Then the whole way back. Then while we were having 
breakfast and while we were getting washed and changed to go out.

S sat looking at his phone, waiting for us to leave the apartment. Lying down 
behind him I thought again about how badly I wanted to touch his back. I held 
my hand up, but couldn’t bring myself to let it rest on him so I lowered it. 
Angered with myself, I raised it again and this time let it fall to his 
sweatshirt.

“What?” he said.

“Let’s go,” I said.

As we walked in silence to the train station, I thought about the words I 
would say to start. Then finally, I did. The conversation didn’t last long.

I called him by his name.

“Yeh?”

“You know that column I was telling you about? The one that I’m writing 
anonymously?”

“Yeh?”

“It’s sort of about you.”

“About me? What do you mean?”

“Well, I suppose I came here because I wanted to clear things up between us. 
Do you remember a few weeks ago, we were talking and you said that you didn’t 
email me after you left because you felt like I didn’t want to hear from you?”

“Yeh.”

“Why did you think I didn’t want to talk to you?”

“You told me why you didn’t want to talk. You told me emails made you feel 
guilty and that they were stressful to reply to.”

“Did I? I don’t remember saying that. I lied. That’s not what it was.”

“So what was it then?”

I paused for maybe a full minute. S doesn’t interrupt you when you’re thinking.

“It hurt too much to write – I was really upset you had gone.”

We walked in silence for a while.

“Were you angry at me for leaving?” he said as he climbed the stairs to the 
train platform.

“No, that’s crazy, why would I be angry at you? That would be so unfair.”

“Yeh but people can be irrational sometimes.”

“No. I wasn’t angry.”

A couple walked behind us, immaculately turned out in matching navy coats with 
a small, washed dog alongside them. S leaned to me and whispered: “Look how 
manicured they are.” Then he told me a story about something that happened a 
week or so before on that same platform. He had run into a family friend while 
standing there with a woman. Though nothing was said, the family friend had 
clearly assumed that S and the woman were a couple and it made S feel deeply 
uncomfortable.

I understood. S was telling me that he had no desire to be in a relationship – 
and if he had understood at all what I had told him three minutes earlier (I’m 
sure he did) he was also telling me to not take it personally. I had already 
felt this instinctively: it’s the reason why I didn’t leave my toothbrush in 
his bathroom, why I wandered away from him when we were in shops and why I 
didn’t loop my arm through his as we walked.

He nonchalantly looked at his phone while I took a few steps up and down the 
platform thinking about what it was that I wanted. Had I come here hoping for a 
relationship, or just to have sex with a man that I loved? I teetered on the 
brink of tears but thought I could hold them back. And I did – in fact, the 
whole time I was with him I didn’t cry once.


That night, S had arranged dinner with six of his friends. I half-dreaded it 
and thought it was the last thing I needed. I was wrong about that too. It was 
good to be with warm and funny strangers. I felt more like myself talking to 
his friends than I did alone with him, feeling so irrational. We sat apart most 
of the night.


The conversation turned to relationships. N, a girlfriend of one of S’s 
friends, asked me about my exes: “Were you ever crazy?” she asked.

“God yes.”

“How?”

I shamelessly tell her about one man I dated and dumped on a weekly basis just 
to see whether he cared about me.

“I know it sounds nuts but it probably just shows that there was something 
else that wasn’t right about the way we were together and that I needed that 
sort of reassurance.”

“Yeh, probably. Have you ever been with a man who was really affectionate?”

“No,” I say. “If they’re really into me I assume they’re morons who are into 
everyone.”

“Oh I think the total opposite!” N exclaims. “I assume they’re only into me! 
So, does that mean that you go after men who aren’t really interested in you?”

I know it sounds strange, but her question delighted me. She told me nothing 
new, but it’s rare for someone you’ve just met to repeat yourself back to you 
so clearly.

I don’t deserve to be loved by someone as wonderful as S when I say stupid 
things like “I don’t deserve to be loved by someone as wonderful as S”. I just 
need to work at that.

We got a cab home, ate toast and got into our beds.

Day three 

Even though I only managed to get around three hours of sleep, the next 
morning I woke up feeling good, unburdened. We listened to music, I hummed and 
danced and packed my bag as he made us coffee. I was just content to be with 
him.

Except for when he offered me the gift. S had already shown me so many 
kindnesses in such a short space of time – helping me with my bags, giving me 
his slippers to wear, taking me to see a national monument he knew I’d love, 
getting the alcohol for my favorite cocktail before I arrived, giving me the 
good bed.

“I want to give you a pair of these slippers - I bought some when I was in 
Moscow.”

“No!”

“What do you mean no? They’re in here somewhere.”

He stands on tiptoes, looking at me while his hand roots around in a cupboard 
above the door.

“I’m sure they’re in here somewhere.”

“No, no don’t be silly keep them and give them to someone else.”

“Shut up. Here they are, try them on.”

“I’ve got my sneakers on now anyway.”

“OK, but you’re taking them.”

We went out for a walk in the woods near his apartment. It felt remote and the 
snow, still lying on the ground since it fell the night before I arrived, made 
everything look stronger, reinforced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fasymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28f1861a4fc66cc6976d8a03fd167f1bf95afd97%2F0_251_3264_1962%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asymmetric%20love%2C%20part%20three%3A%20what%20happened%20after%20I%20stepped%20off%20the%20plane&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fasymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asymmetric%20love%2C%20part%20three%3A%20what%20happened%20after%20I%20stepped%20off%20the%20plane&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fasymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28f1861a4fc66cc6976d8a03fd167f1bf95afd97%2F0_251_3264_1962%2F3264.jpg>
 ‘The snow, still lying on the ground since it fell the night before I arrived, 
made everything look stronger, reinforced.’ 
My phone vibrated.


“Oh no.”


S looks at me. “What?”

I show him the text message. My flight had been delayed by four hours. Rather 
than heading back now, we had the afternoon together.

“I’m sorry,” I said.

“Don’t be silly.” S contemplated what we should do this afternoon. In the end, 
those extra hours helped – they reassured me about how I felt. And it meant I 
could rediscover S as I first found him: as a friend.

Walking back from the forest, I asked him if he was good at knowing when women 
liked him romantically. “No,” he said, “I’ve ended up in difficult situations 
with friends before who felt like they had been led on.”

It’s sad that I read so much into S’s behaviour – acts of generosity and 
respect that I do for my friends unthinkingly all the time. It’s just sad that 
I don’t have more than one S in my life to better understand the difference 
between tenderness and desire.


Knowing that our love for each other is unequal doesn’t anger me either. Even 
once I stop thinking of him romantically, I’ll be OK with the fact that his 
friendship means more to me than mine does to him. All love is asymmetric, 
really, in its totality if not in its parts.

We say goodbye and hug.

This time, walking alone to the train station, I thought about how much 
lighter my bags feel than they did on the way there, despite the fact that 
their contents haven’t changed. Then I cry freely and audibly. I cry for about 
five full minutes and then I simply stop. I had the same reaction walking away 
from his leaving party two years ago. At the time, I had I told myself I needed 
to move on. This time, I know I will.

On my way to the airport, S texts me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fasymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcad8bcce8bb395c3be9ffbda04e0703f7c247d75%2F0_0_738_259%2F738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asymmetric%20love%2C%20part%20three%3A%20what%20happened%20after%20I%20stepped%20off%20the%20plane&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fasymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asymmetric%20love%2C%20part%20three%3A%20what%20happened%20after%20I%20stepped%20off%20the%20plane&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fasymmetric-love-part-three-what-happened-after-i-stepped-off-the-plane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcad8bcce8bb395c3be9ffbda04e0703f7c247d75%2F0_0_738_259%2F738.jpg>
 ‘On my way to the airport, S texts me.’ 
I replied.
 ‘I meant it the way he had once said it to me.’ 
I meant it the way he had once said it to me. I feel sad but it’s a stinging, 
not a sense of loss – after all, I’m going home with the same friendship I 
arrived with. Better, even.

I land in the early hours of New Year’s Eve, knowing what I knew as soon as I 
realised he didn’t care as much as I do. I’ll be fine.

• Next week, S will write about his reaction to the column, and how he feels 
about the author.
 