
Police on Friday charged Atlanta Falcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons> linebacker Prince Shembo 
with aggravated animal cruelty after his girlfriend’s dog died from blunt force 
trauma.

Denicia Williams called police on 19 April to report that her ex-boyfriend had 
killed her dog, Gwinnett County police said in a news release Friday. Williams 
told police she had taken her Yorkie, Dior, to Shembo’s apartment on April 15. 
At some point, she left Shembo alone with the dog, and when she found the dog 
later he was unresponsive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fatlanta-falcons-release-linebacker-accused-of-killing-girlfriends-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432936186432%2Fb69736c6-184b-4069-aa08-48f64ed8e019-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atlanta%20Falcons%20release%20linebacker%20accused%20of%20killing%20girlfriend's%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fatlanta-falcons-release-linebacker-accused-of-killing-girlfriends-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atlanta%20Falcons%20release%20linebacker%20accused%20of%20killing%20girlfriend%27s%20dog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fatlanta-falcons-release-linebacker-accused-of-killing-girlfriends-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432936186432%2Fb69736c6-184b-4069-aa08-48f64ed8e019-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Shembo has been charged with aggravated animal cruelty after his girlfriend s 
dog died from blunt force trauma. Photograph: AP 
Williams took the dog to an animal hospital where he died a short time later. 
Shembo told her over the phone the next day that he had kicked the dog, and she 
ended their relationship, Williams told police.

A number could not be found for Shembo and it wasn’t immediately clear whether 
he had a lawyer who could comment on the charges.

The Falcons announced they had waived Shembo after the charges were filed 
against him.

“We are aware of the charges that have been filed against Prince Shembo,” the 
teamsaid in a statement 
<http://www.atlantafalcons.com/news/article-1/Falcons-Waive-Linebacker-Prince-Shembo/2b515727-3311-46ea-9c74-d7bbc4b37250>
. “We are extremely disappointed that one of our players is involved in 
something like this. Accordingly, we have decided to waive Prince Shembo.”

Shembo, 23, is 6ft 2in and weighs 254lbs, according to the Falcons’ website.

A necropsy on the dog’s body was done 21 April and tissue samples were sent to 
the University of Georgia for further testing. Police say the final results 
were available Thursday.

While waiting for those results, a police investigator spoke to Shembo several 
times by phone. Police decided to take out a warrant for Shembo’s arrest 
because of inconsistencies in Shembo’s account of what happened and because of 
the necropsy results, the release says.

The dog suffered extensive injuries, including a fractured rib, abdominal 
hemorrhage, head trauma, eye injuries and extensive bruising in the muscles of 
his front leg and shoulders.

Police said an investigator contacted the Falcons to let them know about the 
warrant.
 