

Terrible misdeed ... Briony, played by Oscar-nominated Saoirse Ronan. 
Photograph: Rex Features

Only seven more shopping days to go before Valentine's Day. This fact was 
brought home to me when I walked past a big billboard advertising the DVD 
release forAtonement 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000YGHBWU/km-21/ref=nosim>, which 
very prominently runs a quote from Grazia magazine telling us it's the perfect 
gift for ... Valentine's Day.

Oh yes. I can just see it. A spray of orchids. A heart-shaped box of 
chocolates. And the Atonement DVD, with a pink-ribbon round its snap-case. What 
are the Valentine's couple being led to expect, I wonder, as they settle down 
on the couch on February 14 to thatdark and challenging film 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/filmandmusic/story/0,,2163383,00.html>, faithfully 
based on adark and challenging book 
<http://books.theguardian.com/reviews/generalfiction/0,,555614,00.html>, with 
its perplexing variant realities, in which two lovers are painfully sundered 
without ever getting any exaltedLeo-and-Kate moment 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/film/2007/12/titanic_achievement_at_the_box.html> 
together, in which certain key emotional scenes turn out not to have happened 
at all, and in which in place of a happy ending there is an agonised rumination 
about whether it is possible or meaningful to make amends for a terrible 
misdeed in one's literary imagination?

I wonder. A few days ago, Steve Rose wrote a witty article about the 
misleading cinema trailer for Tim Burton'sSweeney Todd 
<http://film.theguardian.com/features/featurepages/0,,2252544,00.html>, which 
plays up the splatter and the gore and Gothiness, while failing to mention that 
it is a toffee-nosed musical. In the trailer,not a note is sung 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5brXozjbno&feature=related>. Some film-goers, 
expecting straightforward horror thrills, have reportedly been walking out. 
Similarly, when Michael Haneke's enigmatic surveillance nightmare Hidden 
arrived in this country, the trailer did rather sell it to the public as a
conventional thriller 
<http://film.theguardian.com/features/featurepages/0,,1738139,00.html>.

I have a sinking feeling that the Atonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> DVD Valentine's Day campaign, 
through a sleight-of-hand, is trying to do something similar, not just for 
people who haven't yet seen the film, but for those who actually have. It is 
trying to persuade them to remember the film differently, or at any rate 
hazily, to forget its head-scratching confusions and to recall instead a swirl 
of romantic images, and the simple juxtaposition of Keira Knightley and James 
McAvoy playing Robbie and Cecilia, the lovers whose lives are wrecked one 
summer in the 1930s by Cecilia's younger sister Briony, played by 
Oscar-nominated Saoirse Ronan.

Take the poster strapline, for example: "Joined by love. Separated by fear. 
Redeemed by hope." That's been used for the original release, for the paperback 
tie-in cover, and now again for the DVD. It has a snappy 1-2-3 sound, akin 
almost to a three-act structure, leading to what looks like a happy-ish ending.

Joined by love - yes, true, although joined very briefly indeed. Separated by 
fear -- yes, true. Redeemed by hope - er, hang on. Is it the lovers being 
"redeemed by hope"? Not exactly - after all, the lovers haven't done anything 
wrong. Isn't the redemption in question being sought by Briony, whose 
over-heated imagination and wicked fib caused all the trouble in the first 
place? Briony's "redeemed by hope" narrative - by no means settled, in any case 
- has been sneakily fudged into the lovers' own story by this strapline, 
subliminally suggesting a happier or at any rate clearer ending than any you 
will actually receive.

And it's part of a PR move, I suspect, to sell this opaque, sober and 
potentially baffling story as something conventionally romantic. My colleague 
Phelim O'Neill, in his review of the Atonement DVD in the Guardian Guidecalls 
the plot "dishonest" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguide/film/story/0,,2245996,00.html>, and 
though I wouldn't go that far, it could be accused of tricksiness. And that 
tricksiness, that experiment with meta-narrative (far more problematic than, 
say, the happy/unhappy ending dualities in The French Lieutenant's Woman) isn't 
going to shift many DVDs. So it's being dressed up as a lush, sad wartime love 
story.

So this Valentine's Day, dreamy romantic that I am, I shall be buying my loved 
one a single rose and a DVD copy of BÃ©la Tarr'sSatan's Tango 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0111341/>. Oh l'amour ... l'amour ...
 