

Dressed for success ... Keira Knightley wears the green dress on set. 
Photograph: Alex Bailey

It is a long time since a film costume made the headlines, and rarely has one 
ever received as much attention asAtonement's green dress 
<http://weblogs.variety.com/photos/uncategorized/2007/08/28/atonement.jpg>. It 
even made an appearance - solo - on NBC, while its genesis is already 
legendary. TheLos Angeles Times 
<http://theenvelope.latimes.com/fashion/env-en-style12dec12,0,1806204.htmlstory>
 whispers that the deep emerald dye was obtained from a mysterious combination 
of three pigments.

The dress was recently voted the best film costume of all time in a poll 
commissioned by Sky Movies and In Style. Which just goes to show that people 
have a short memory when dealing with costumes.

And yet for all that, I can't help feeling that the buzz surrounding 
Atonement's dress is entirely justified.

The green dress is beautiful. Crucially, it appeals to contemporary eyes 
because it follows the main directives of today's fashion (a period costume is 
never unaltered and purely historical, but is always 'corrected' to please the 
taste of its audience). The catwalks of the past two years have displayed 
numerous unadorned, bold-coloured gowns, which have been sported by trendy 
young Hollywood actresses (seeMichelle Williams 
<http://z.about.com/d/movies/1/0/4/V/8/oscars03050616.jpg> at last year's 
Oscars).

But if the cut of the dress follows fashionable lines, the colour boasts an 
older and more exotic heritage.

Green is rarely picked for film costumes. When chosen, it usually denotes 
bold, self-confident characters. It is the colour of the curtains that Vivien 
Leigh proudly wears in Gone With the Wind, and the flared skirt that Anne 
Hathaway dons near the end of The Devil Wears Prada - marking her 
transformation from style-insensitive casualty to super-smart fashionista.

Alternatively it has been used as sartorial shorthand for magic (The Wizard of 
Oz), invariably of the darker kind. No film makes better use of this quality 
than John Boorman'sExcalibur <http://imdb.com/title/tt0082348/>, where green 
appears every time the supernatural is evoked. The uniforms of the wicked 
Victorian orphanage in Cuar√≥n's Little Princess are green, and green is also 
the colour of the tailleur that Tippi Hedren wears for most ofThe Birds 
<http://youtube.com/watch?v=FVDT4bWPypk>. Hitchcock personally chose the dress 
because he felt that constant exposure to the acerbic, artificial green would 
whip up the right sense of discomfort and apprehension in the viewer.

The green in Atonement <https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> is a blend 
of all this: it exudes poise, mystery, and menace. The dress suggests both 
sexual power and the potential for harm. It controls the screen in a way few 
other outfits have done.

Moreover, green is the leitmotif of the film (the flooded tube station, the 
kitchen and bathroom of the villa, the verdant countryside). The costume is 
constantly re-evoked by other green elements. Its colour becomes the symbol of 
the night that affects the lives of all the main characters.

Few directors have emphasized costumes in this way. Visconti follows the 
architectural swing of the ball gown worn by Claudia Cardinale in The Leopard 
and Billy Wilder centres on Marilyn Monroe's ballooning skirt inThe Seven Year 
Itch 
<http://images.easyart.com/i/prints/rw/en_easyart/lg/1/9/Marilyn-Monroe---Seven-Year-Itch-Photo-Poster-19001.jpg>
. In those films, however, the dress is the focus of one scene and not woven 
into the fabric of the whole picture. Should the green dress in Atonement be 
regarded as unique?
 