
When Swiss conductor Baldur Brönnimann <http://www.baldur.info/> was a student 
25 years ago, "if you had more than 30 people at a concert it was a failure 
because it was populist crap". Today, there are growing signs that contemporary 
classical music is shrugging off its elitist reputation, with audiences 
flocking to work previously regarded as austere and impenetrable.

"It's the weirdest pieces which get the strongest reaction," says Brönnimann. "
Prometeo by Nono <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kq2FeEeNZgs> is an extremely 
difficult piece to listen to – two hours long with no break, either extremely 
soft or extremely loud, and with the audience in darkness surrounded by the 
performers – but it gets an amazing response. People are looking for something 
to get their teeth into."

Programmers are working hard to meet this appetite for sonic adventure. Last 
week, the Southbank Centre in London announceda year-long festival which will 
bring to life The Rest is Noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/23/southbank-rest-is-noise-festival>
, Alex Ross's250,000-selling history of 20th-century classical music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-rest-is-noise>, accompanied by a series 
on BBC4.

Before that starts in 2013, a plethora of "difficult" works will be performed 
in UK concert halls. From next month, the English National Opera (ENO) is 
staging four operas written in the past 30 years, including John Adams'sThe 
Death of Klinghoffer 
<http://www.eno.org/see-whats-on/productions/production-page.php?itemid=1664>, 
about the 1985 hijacking of an ocean liner by the Palestine Liberation Front, 
conducted by Brönnimann and staged by War Horse director Tom Morris.

In March, there are festivals of minimalist music in Glasgow and north-east 
England, and a John Cage-inspired "happening" calledMusicircus 
<http://www.eno.org/see-whats-on/productions/production-page.php?&itemid=2007> 
will be staged at the ENO, involving audience members, with musicians including 
John Paul Jones, formerly of Led Zeppelin.

In April, a festival devoted to Conlon Nancarrow <http://conlonnancarrow.org/> 
hits the Southbank. Nancarrow, whose fans include Stephen Fry, composed music 
which is impossible to play except by a mechanical piano. "It makes you laugh 
out loud," says the centre's head of classical music,Gillian Moore 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/classical/browse-the-season/festivals-major-projects>
. "You've got two or three completely different time signatures going on. You 
think there must be a third hand, they must have three brains, and then you 
realise it's a machine – but it's music of amazing accessibility."

In May, Philip Glass and Robert Wilson's opera Einstein on the Beach – five 
hours long, with no plot or interval – will make its UK debut at the Barbican 
in London. Last weekend, the venue offered "total immersion" in the work of 
British composer Jonathan Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/26/jonathan-harvey-not-very-british?newsfeed=true>
, who melds orchestras and electronics.

Moore says the increased audience for these works is the result of a campaign 
to reach people interested in the cutting edge of other contemporary art forms, 
rather than those who prefer to hear Beethoven. In 2003, when artistic director 
of theLondon Sinfonietta <http://www.londonsinfonietta.org.uk/>, Moore 
inaugurated a series of concerts which programmed avant garde classical works 
alongside music by artists onWarp records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/audio/2009/sep/30/music-weekly-warp-records>
. "We were hugely nervous but we wanted to make the connections betweenAphex 
Twin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/29/aphex-twin-six-albums-interview> 
andJohn Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/14/john-cage-night-review>, 
Squarepusher <https://www.theguardian.com/music/squarepusher> and Stockhausen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/dec/07/7>."

The concerts were a success, and Moore found the people who attended had "an 
almost unlimited appetite for music of richness and complexity". Better still, 
they kept coming back. "Immediately afterwards we did a weekend ofXenakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/17/iannis-xenakis-huddersfield-contemporary-music>
 and it sold out. A lot of the people had been at the Warp project, including a 
lot of the artists themselves. I remember picking the Aphex Twin out of the 
returns queue for tickets because it was so mobbed, and that was wall to wall 
Xenakis – no frills."

Brönnimann confirms that many people arrive at the avant garde of contemporary 
music via the wilder shores of pop. "I did a tour withJoanna Newsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joanna-newsom>, 15-minute songs arranged by 
Van Dyke Parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/21/van-dyke-parks-review>, and the 
audience who came are the ones who look at contemporary music. They look for 
something that goes deeper, to undiscovered worlds – the bottom of the sea."

Such audiences have a hunger for the new, says Esa-Pekka Salonen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/esa-pekka-salonen>, principal conductor of 
thePhilharmonia <http://www.philharmonia.co.uk/>. "There's a trend in our 
culture to be constantly up to date because we're connected through the 
internet, and an art form that would be entirely backward-looking and 
museum-like would make no sense. People are interested in what's happening 
right now."

Some also clearly enjoy the challenge of pitting themselves against some of 
the most forbidding art works in the world – an attitude encouraged by soprano
Barbara Hannigan <http://www.barbarahannigan.com/>, whose performance of 
Boulez'sPli Selon Pli <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MyGe6tD9Vfw> at the 
Southbank last year had, she says, even musician colleagues in the audience 
"saying 'I was scared.' But afterwards, they said 'My God, I was touched.' "

Hannigan cites a 2010 Guardian piece by Alex Ross bemoaning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/28/alex-ross-modern-classical-music>
 that modern classical music is not widely enjoyed in the same way as modern 
art or architecture. "He said that audiences expect classical music to be 'a 
spa treatment for tired souls'. I was thinking, maybe the public needs to think 
of it as a deep tissue massage. It's almost violent – but you know you're going 
to come out of it feeling a sense of release. If they go in knowing it's going 
to be intense and heavy, they come out with a feeling of being changed, of 
accomplishment, of going through something which was quite good for them."

The composer George Benjamin 
<http://www.fabermusic.com/Composers-Details.aspx?ComposerId=47>, whose opera 
Written on the Skin will debut in July, points out that modern classical music 
relies on individuals to champion it, like Salonen andVladimir Jurowski 
<http://www.lpo.co.uk/about/jurowski.html>, principal conductor of the London 
Philharmonic. "I came out of Pli Selon Pli very deeply fired up and inspired by 
it, but it only gets played once or twice a decade in the UK. Even more so than 
film or visual arts, we have to have not only promoters but performers who are 
willing to pay the extra expense of rehearsing new pieces and of taking a risk 
and knowing how to conduct these very difficult works – it's not only the 
public that are part of this equation."

Cellist and music curator Oliver Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/15/oliver-coates-cello-rising-star>
 says that while contemporary classical music has lost the academic air which 
made it so off-putting, it still requires effort. "I don't think classical 
music should be put on in bars and clubs – people shouldn't drink or talk over 
it, they need to be immersed in it. It remains quite serious music."

Moore recommends listening first on Spotify (see her picks below), adding that 
some awareness of context is required. "That's why The Rest is Noise festival 
is going to be great, because it shows why certain music was made at certain 
times, like Stockhausen after the war saying he couldn't write four beats in a 
bar because it reminded him of jackboots.

"So he exploded everything and created rhythms which were like stars and 
harmonies – constellations of sounds from the scientific world."

Brönnimann and Salonen agree that the shock of the new has worn off some 
works, making them more accessible to modern audiences. "So many of these 
sounds have become more daily for us," says Brönnimann. "Just as contemporary 
art has filitered into fashion or design, if you listen to film music or video 
game music, people are getting used to expecting sounds not to be 
straightforward but to have a life of their own."

Nevertheless, works like Role Player by Christian Lindberg 
<http://www.tarrodi.se/cl/>, in which Brönnimann was "shot" by the soloist, 
then carried offstage while the piece finished without him, are clearly not for 
everyone. "The great thing about contemporary music is that no one walks out 
and can't remember what they heard," says Brönnimann. "Some people hate it, 
some love it, but they all talk about it. That's the response you want from 
art."

Curious?


Gillian Moore picks five modern classical piece to get you started

Gyorgy Ligeti, Atmospheres <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aI0P1NnUFxc>

Shimmering clouds of orchestral sound, the soundtrack to Kubrick's 2001 

Conlon Nancarrow, Player Piano Studies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UPdX85cv_D8>

Superhuman piano music, hilariously impossible, crazy rhythms

Jonathan Harvey Mortuos Plango Vivos Voco 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nYdRzDx1_J4>

The sounds of a boy's voice and a bell morph into each other through computer 
magic

Toru Takemitsu, Tree-Line <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5BOpqZexzMU>

Gorgeous, exquisite Japanese modernism tinged with impressionistic harmonies

Louis Andriessen, De Staat

Hardcore Dutch minimalism: brass, voices, electric guitars

Listen on Spotify: http://spoti.fi/Ao9Fbm <http://spoti.fi/Ao9Fbm>

• Corrected on 31/1/12 Gillian Moore is no longer head of contemporary culture 
at the Southbank centre but head of classical music. Einstein on the Beach 
should also be credited toPhilip Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/philip-glass> and Robert Wilson, rather than 
just Glass. This has been corrected.
 