
Construction projects can often be besieged by problems. Planners typically 
work off paper blueprints and drawings, which makes it harder to capture and 
analyse data and share information with contractors to ensure quality control 
and smooth running.

The industry has, up to now, been one of the least digitised industries, 
according to research 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-projects-and-infrastructure/our-insights/imagining-constructions-digital-future>
 by global consultancy firm McKinsey & Company, but digitisation allows 
information to be shared in real-time and leads to better outcomes. For 
instance, by overlaying virtual data and images on to a physical space, 
potential flaws that may arise in complicated processes such as laying ceiling 
pipes can be spotted early. Workers are able to see how a construction schedule 
might be affected by potential problems and take measures to avoid them.

Virtual reality and sport: breaking ground on and off the pitch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/oct/21/virtual-reality-changing-sport-game-nfl-nba>
“The construction industry is in the midst of creative reinvention. Clients 
are increasingly wanting to speed up their time to market, and designs and 
systems are growing in complexity, with buildings being assembled in new ways,” 
says Sue Klawans, a senior vice president and director of operational 
excellence and planning atGilbane Building Company <http://www.gilbaneco.com>, 
a Rhode Island construction management firm, which tested Microsoft’s augmented 
reality (AR) headset HoloLens a few months ago. “We knew we needed to continue 
offering our team members the tools and technology to support the evolution of 
how we build.”

The market for digital AR tools is growing. Earlier this year, Californian 
startupDaqri <https://daqri.com> launched a smart helmet similar to HoloLens 
<https://www.microsoft.com/microsoft-hololens/en-us> and designed specifically 
for industrial settings. Meanwhile, apps likeSmartReality 
<http://smartreality.co/> from JBKnowledge, allow users to hold a smartphone or 
tablet over designs or plan files and see 2D drawings projected as 3D models.

AR is making it easier not only for planners and architects to collaborate 
with contractors, but to reassure clients and address any concerns they may 
have. Klawans says its immersive nature means they can “interact with their 
building and give feedback on the design before ground has been broken”.

The technology’s capacity to deliver cost savings and reduce the chances of a 
build falling behind schedule can also lead to less cautious investors.

“Using AR to showcase a building or piece of infrastructure to potential 
investors in its proposed real-world location will help them understand how 
that asset will connect with its surroundings,” says Dominic Thasarathar, 
construction industry strategist atAutodesk <http://www.autodesk.com/>, the 
software company that provides the building visualisation data for Gilbane’s 
system to work. “Such as what the view from the 30th floor of an apartment 
block might be like. This will make it a more attractive prospect.”

There are signs that, beyond bringing flat blueprints and designs to life in 
front of clients, reducing on-site problems and easing investor worries, AR 
could provide an end-to-end service. Software is being developed that enables 
companies to show clients what the inside of a build will look like when 
furnished a certain way or the finishing touches have been applied to the 
outside. Of course, virtual reality allows this to be done before a project has 
been completed and sometimes in more detail, but viewing it outside its context 
and environment has its limitations.

What does artificial intelligence mean for the creative mind?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/aug/10/artificial-intelligence-the-new-creative-mind>
“The beauty of AR is, if you go to a property that’s just been built and 
you’re not sure how your car will fit, you can stand outside the property and, 
with your car loaded into the software, position it on the driveway,” says 
James Barry, head of visualisation atArea Sq <http://www.areasq.co.uk>, a 
London-based office interior design firm passionate about the benefits the 
technology can have.

Area Sq is yet to use AR commercially – it has already integrated VR into its 
services – but is considering adopting it soon. Barry says that he expects the 
ability for clients to picture fittings and materials in place will be 
powerful. He adds that AR will not only be effective at bringing clients on 
board from an early stage, but at being a pipeline tool.

It makes sense. The technology is already being used to market and sell 
products to homeowners and shoppers. Apps such asDulux Visualiser 
<https://www.dulux.co.uk/en/articles/the-dulux-visualizer-app> enables users to 
hold phones up to a wall and picture how they would be painted a certain 
colour. And Ikea allows them to scan images from its catalogue and picture them 
in their house before they decide to buy.

Maximilian Doelle, the chief prototyper at Kazendi <https://www.kazendi.com>, 
the first UK developer for HoloLens, built the HoloLiving app, which allows 
users to virtually furnish a room, for its client Selligent. He says that the 
furniture industry, along with the construction sector, will benefit hugely 
from placing images and virtual objects in the real world. The caveat though is 
that 3D graphic designers may add things that, while they look good virtually, 
can’t be replicated in the exact same way. “There could end up being a 
discrepancy for customers, between what they expect to see and what’s actually 
there,” Doelle adds.

A true marker of AR’s ability to innovate and provide an end-to-end service 
may well be whether it will then be used to sell a piece of real estate. Could 
the future showroom see prospective buyers wearing a headset or walking round 
viewing it through a smartphone? Not as things stand, says Doelle, but as 
visuals become more photorealistic and software more sophisticated, the 
possibility of it being used to sell homes won’t be far off.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 