
Argentina’s decision to give up home advantage resulted in the third highest 
crowd of the Rugby Championship season, but it cost them on the field as they 
secured the wooden spoon in an exciting but messy encounter. Australia finished 
asrunners-up to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
 a month before they begin a grand slam tour of Europe, but they will inspire 
neither awe nor fear.

New Zealand claim largest victory over South Africa in nine-try blitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
Australia’s four tries all came from turnovers as Argentina continued their 
policy of running from everywhere. Some of their rugby was exhilarating and 
high on skill, but decision-making and discernment were lacking. TheRugby 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-championship> organisers 
have a two-year option to bring more matches here and it will be down to who is 
prepared to concede home advantage.

The match was not a sell-out, but hundreds of spectators were still trying to 
get into the ground when Australia scored the opening try of the match after 
five minutes. Or perhaps they were impeded by those trying to get out given the 
frenzied, slapdash opening. There is no gap between north and south, just 
between New Zealand and the rest.

Michael Cheika confident Australia will have edge on European tour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/australia-michael-cheika-bring-edge-european-tour-argentina>
Neither side had an element of control in a contest that seemed to be who 
could make the most mistakes and who could give away the most penalties. 
Australia lost two players to the sin-bin in the first half for high tackles, 
Michael Hooper and Adam Coleman, although Rory Arnold was their worst offender. 
In the second period, the replacement scrum-half, Nick Phipps, escaped with a 
penalty for shoving one of Argentina’s medical team to the ground in an 
incident which summed up an evening which had an air of the unreal about it.

Argentina were without two of their most influential players, the outside-half 
Nicolás Sánchez and the No8 Facundo Isa, and they lacked a general to steer 
them around the field. Some of their off-loading, forwards and backs, was 
breathtaking and they are second to New Zealand in their ability to create 
space rather than rely on a defender to miss a tackle. But they do not play 
what is in front of them, making them as one-dimensional as they were in the 
days when they played 10-man rugby.

A year ago, Australia defeated Wales here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/10/australia-wales-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 at the end of the World Cup group stage, a victory based on an impregnable 
defence and strategic nous. The Wallabies have lost a layer of experience since 
then, especially behind the scrum, but they had a better command of the basics 
than Argentina and their triumph was one of pragmatism over idealism.

They should have been behind after one minute when two mistakes by Will Genia 
would have resulted in a try for Santiago González Iglesias had the 
outside-half waited to be put onside before picking up the ball after Leonardo 
Senatore’s chargedown. Australia’s response was a try by Coleman after the 
Pumas had tamely kicked away possession, followed by the first of Bernard 
Foley’s three penalties.

Iglesias, initially, lacked Sánchez’s accuracy and missed two penalties as 
well as the conversion of Matías Alemanno’s try from a driving maul one minute 
after Hooper had been sent to the sin-bin. Coleman’s absence did not prove as 
costly for the Wallabies who capitalised on an Argentina overthrow at a lineout 
to stretch the defence right and left before Samu Kerevi fended off Matías 
Moroni to score.

Iglesias’s first successful penalty cut Australia’s lead to 10 points at the 
interval and within four minutes of the restart the Pumas were on the front 
foot when Jerónimo de la Fuente turned Martín Landajo’s quickly taken penalty 
into seven points, spinning away from Foley. But at the point when they needed 
to take stock and exert territorial pressure, Alemanno threw a hopeless pass in 
a congested midfield on his own 10-metre line and presented Kerevi with his 
second try.

Louis Picamoles beefs up Northampton for French test against Montpellier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/northampton-saints-rugby-louis-picamoles-champions-cup>
Two Iglesias penalties brought Argentina back to within four points but when 
Agustín Creevy lost control of the ball on the Wallabies’ line a spark went 
out. Foley’s penalty six minutes from time all but ensured Australia would not 
lose before Landajo’s wayward pass gave Dean Mumm the gift of a try.

“We deserved to win,” said the Argentina head coach, Daniel Hourcade. “That is 
to take nothing away from Australia but we lost because we made mistakes. 
Perhaps it would have been different had the game been played in Buenos Aires, 
but it was an honour and an experience to play in a cathedral of rugby.”

Errors cost Argentina in the World Cup semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/argentina-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 between the countries here a year ago when the Pumas were again grounded by 
their own daring. As countries look to emulate the all-conquering All Blacks, 
they should remember that one of sport’s maxims is to make the most of what you 
have got, something neither Argentina nor Australia are doing.
 