
A former head of Australia’s defence department says the country needs its own 
version of the Chilcot inquiry into theIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> war.

Sir John Chilcot’s report, published in London on Wednesday, delivered a 
series of critical verdicts on the Blair government’s decision-making in the 
run-up to the 2003 war.

Paul Barratt, who headed Australia’s defence department from 1998 to 1999, 
said Chilcot’s excoriating 2.6m-word report demonstrated the “fragility” of the 
process for deciding to go to war, a weakness that still existed in Australia.

Barratt said that, in the wake of the failed intervention in Iraq, the UK had 
strengthened the checks and balances around the country’s decision to go to war 
– adopting the practice of a debate in the House of Commons over the decision 
to commit troops. Australia did not have a similar mechanism.

“We need a similar inquiry here,” Barratt told Guardian Australia. “Chilcot’s 
report – it is four times the length of War and Peace – has revealed so much 
about what was going on behind the scenes, between Blair and his advisers, 
Blair and his cabinet, Blair and Bush. Australia needs a similar comprehensive 
independent inquiry into how the decision was made to commit Australia to this 
war.

“Chilcot has demonstrated the fragility of the decision-making process to go 
to war. That fundamental power of the sovereign is left in the hands of one 
person, the prime minister.”

John Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard>, the 
Australian prime minister who made the decision to commit Australian troops to 
the 2003 Iraq invasion, is mentioned only a handful of times in Chilcot’s 
report. One reference is taken from George W. Bush’s autobiography, Decision 
Points, where he quotes the Australian prime minister as saying that “a UN 
resolution was essential to winning public support” for the invasion.

However, there are several references to Australia’s role in the invasion in 
the report.

Chilcot notes that the Australian and US militaries had shown “agility and 
forethought” in responding to the challenges of fighting in Iraq, in particular 
countering the effects of improvised explosives.

In comparison the UK military was “grindingly slow and ponderous” in 
responding.

However, the most illuminating references to Australia’s role in the planning 
and prosecution of the Iraq war lie within the supporting documents to 
Chilcot’s report.


One reference is to a conversation in January 2003 in which Blair and Howard 
discussed obtaining a second resolution authorising military action from the UN.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Faustralia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d511b4a43606c36b0e07fc60a068ee000981b1%2F0_0_719_300%2F719.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20needs%20its%20own%20Chilcot%20inquiry%20into%20Iraq%20war%2C%20former%20defence%20head%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Faustralia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20needs%20its%20own%20Chilcot%20inquiry%20into%20Iraq%20war%2C%20former%20defence%20head%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Faustralia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d511b4a43606c36b0e07fc60a068ee000981b1%2F0_0_719_300%2F719.jpg>
 Photograph: Chilcot report 
Australia joined the initial coalition of forces invading Iraq in March 2003, 
deploying three ships and a clearance diving team as well as a 500-strong 
special forces task group, supported by three Chinook helicopters. Three 
Australians died during the conflict, though none in combat with the Australian 
military.

Paul Pardoel, an Australian citizen serving as a navigator with the British 
RAF, died in a plane crash in 2005. David Nary, a warrant officer, with the 
Australian SAS, was killing during a training exercise in Kuwait before 
deployment. And Jake Kovco, a member of the security detachment in Baghdad, 
died from an accidental self-inflicted gunshot wound inside his unit’s barracks.

Australia’s six-year involvement in Iraq is believed to have cost more than 
$5bn. Combat troops were withdrawn by July 2009.


Andrew Wilkie <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, the 
newly-re-elected independent MP for Denison, resigned in 2003 from his role as 
an intelligence analyst with the Office of National Assessments in protest 
against the Australian government’s decision to join the invasion of Iraq, 
arguing military intervention was not justified and intelligence was 
misrepresented by politicians.


He said Chilcot had clearly revealed the flaws in the planning and prosecution 
of the invasion and alleged the then prime minister, John Howard, had taken 
“Australia to war on the basis of a lie”.

“There was simply no imminent threat from Saddam Hussein, peaceful options had 
not been exhausted, there was great doubt over the claims about weapons of mass 
destruction, a military campaign contained enormous risks and ultimately the 
mission was a failure,” he said.

Wilkie said the mistakes of the Iraq invasion had helped create the current 
Islamist terrorist threat in the Middle East and around the world.


“The Iraq debacle turbo-charged al Qaida and created the circumstances for the 
eventual emergence of Islamic State. In other words the terrorist danger 
confronting Australians to this very day is a result of Australia’s involvement 
in Iraq.


“Frankly the blood of the Australians killed in the 2005 Bali bombing, and in 
the Lindt cafe siege and elsewhere, is on their hands.”

Wilkie said he fully supported calls for a Chilcot-style inquiry in Australia.

But Australia’s former chief of army Peter Leahy – who oversaw the army from 
2002 to 2008 – said a Chilcot-style inquiry was not needed in Australia. But he 
said the country should not “blindly” follow its ally the United States into 
war.


“Frankly, some of the decisions the United States, our senior partner in our 
strategic alliance, have made over the last 20 or 30 years have been a bit 
crook,” he told ABC TV.

“I think it does give us this really important guide to the future, that we 
need to be able to take independent, sovereign decisions based on our own 
national interests and what the strategies might be.”

Leahy said he did not believe there needed to be a similar review in Australia.

“Let’s have a discussion not an inquiry around our relationship with the 
United States, how we decide to go to war and very importantly how we decide 
every day when we are at war to stay at war.”

Blair told me the intelligence was clear. That was a disastrous failure of 
judgment | Hans Blix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/blair-intelligence-clear-failure-war-iraq>
The Chilcot report, which took seven years to complete, found:

 * There was no imminent threat from Saddam Hussein and that diplomatic 
options had not been exhausted before war was decided upon. 
 * Judgments about the severity of the threat posed by Iraq’s weapons of mass 
destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/spy-agencies-flawed-information-saddam-wmds-iraq-chilcot>
 – WMDs – were presented with a certainty that was not justified.

 * Despite explicit warnings, the consequences of the invasion were 
underestimated. The planning and preparations forIraq after Saddam  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/mod-left-uk-forces-in-iraq-ill-equipped-amid-lack-of-plan-chilcot-report-says>
were wholly inadequate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/mod-left-uk-forces-in-iraq-ill-equipped-amid-lack-of-plan-chilcot-report-says>
. 
 * The widespread perception that the September 2002 dossier distorted 
intelligence produced a “damaging legacy”, undermining trust and confidence in 
politicians. 
 * The invasion was a failure: “The government failed to achieve its stated 
objectives.”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Faustralia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd1a82e9a544984b971eb37a99ffb1adc47da821%2F10_0_1979_1188%2F1979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australia%20needs%20its%20own%20Chilcot%20inquiry%20into%20Iraq%20war%2C%20former%20defence%20head%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Faustralia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australia%20needs%20its%20own%20Chilcot%20inquiry%20into%20Iraq%20war%2C%20former%20defence%20head%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Faustralia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd1a82e9a544984b971eb37a99ffb1adc47da821%2F10_0_1979_1188%2F1979.jpg>
 An Australian soldier in an armoured vehicle on reconnaissance in Kirkush in 
Iraq in 2004. Photograph: Lance Corporal Neil Ruskin/AAP 
Retired Australian army general Jim Molan, who was chief of operations in the 
second year of the war and who authored a book, Running the War in Iraq, said 
he had no regrets about Australia’s involvement in the conflict.


“None at all,” he told ABC radio Melbourne on Thursday morning. “Because I 
didn’t do the planning or make the decision [to go to war],” he said.

He said Chilcot’s finding that all peaceful options had not been exhausted 
before invading Iraq was merely a “judgment”.

“There will always be someone you didn’t talk to,” he said. “Often there will 
be consequences for no action as there are for action. So no, I have no regrets 
at all.”

While there were those who argued that there were no weapons of mass 
destruction being harboured by Saddam Hussein, Molan said those beliefs were 
based on an “emotional or intuitive view” and that those people likely “have 
never dealt with intelligence”.

“At that time, there was an honest belief that there were weapons of mass 
destruction and that they could impact on our way of life,” he said.

Blair's Iraq war legacy leaves him damned for all time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/blairs-iraq-war-legacy-is-now-damned-for-all-time>
“A lot of people who complained or who put the view that [the presence of] 
weapons of mass destruction was not correct had no real grounds to make that 
decision.”

Asked if it should be made a requirement in Australia that no leader take the 
country to war without a parliamentary debate and vote, Molan said there would 
be dangers in doing so.

“The ability to make a decision to go to war should be based on the highest 
level of intelligence,” Molan said. “Can you give the highest level of 
intelligence to all of our legislators and then get them to indulge in a debate 
which may have to, by its nature, include very, very sensitive intelligence 
information? If you want to go down that route, that’s what you have to 
address.”

A better system would be to have a review period after joining a war after 
three to six months, he said.

In a speech <http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2003/03/20/1047749877481.html> 
in March 2003, Howard said the decision had been taken “to disarm Iraq because 
we believe it is right, it is lawful and it’s in Australia’s national interest”.

“We are determined to join other countries to deprive Iraq of its weapons of 
mass destruction, its chemical and biological weapons, which even in minute 
quantities are capable of causing death and destruction on a mammoth scale.”


Howard cited the 9/11 attacks as well as the bombing of a nightclub in Bali in 
2002, which killed 202 people including 88 Australians, as examples of the lack 
of regard for human life shown by “international terrorists” and a reason why 
removing weapons from “countries run by despotic regimes” was crucial.

The decision to commit Australian troops to Iraq was controversial. Before the 
decision had been announced, Simon Crean, the then leader of the opposition, 
made astatement to parliament  
<http://speakola.com/political/simon-crean-against-iraq-2003>in which he 
accused Howard of committing Australia’s young men and women to a war “without 
the mandate of the Australian people, the Australian parliament or the United 
Nations” but “solely on the say-so of George W Bush”.

But the foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop, who was a backbench MP at the 
time, insisted on Thursday the decision to go to war “was based on information, 
the best information at the time. I was in the party room. I recall the 
information that was presented to us. It was the best information that was 
available and we took a decision at the time. Of course the government takes 
responsibility for all decisions that a government takes and we take 
responsibility for this one.”


There has not been the same concerted effort in Australia as there has been in 
the UK to hold leaders to account for what they knew before committing troops 
to Iraq, butvarious colleagues have cast doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/25/could-john-howard-be-citizen-arrested-for-his-role-in-the-iraq-war>
 on Howard’s claims that he was working off the best evidence at the time.

 