
The Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> 
commissioner has vowed to ensure a culture of sexual abuse and harassment 
within the force is addressed and reformed.

Andrew Colvin’s comments on Tuesday morning follow the release of a damning 
independent review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/22/sexual-harassment-and-bullying-rife-in-australian-federal-police-says-report>
 of the organisation by former sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth 
Broderick which found 46% of women and 20% of men in the force reported being 
sexually harassed in the last five years.

These percentages are almost double the national average. 

Sexual harassment and bullying rife in Australian federal police, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/22/sexual-harassment-and-bullying-rife-in-australian-federal-police-says-report>
The report also found women are underrepresented in the AFP across a range of 
areas, but particularly in the upper echelons of the organisation. As of April, 
women comprised 35% of all AFP personnel.

“The significant occupational segregation in the AFP impacts on women’s career 
progression and their ability to reach leadership positions,” the report found.

Colvin told the ABC’s Radio National that while frameworks were in place to 
prevent and respond to sexual abuse and harassment in the force, “what we’re 
not doing is supporting them”.

“In the past when we’ve made attempts to change, we haven’t done it with 
enough leadership and we haven’t done it with enough conviction,” he said.

“There’s a range of possible causes. None of them are excuses. I think that 
organisations like ours that are male-dominated, that have a clear command and 
control operating model, give the ability for this to be masked.”

While 62% of men and 66% of women reported they were bullied in the workplace 
in the past five years, members also reported that they did not trust the 
reporting system, with many believing complaining would negatively impact their 
career or leave them ostracised.

Masa Vukotic had the right to be in a park alone. Victoria police must 
apologise for saying she didn't | Melissa Davey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/20/masa-vukotic-had-the-right-to-be-in-a-park-alone-victoria-police-must-apologise-for-saying-she-didnt>
Colvin admitted to Radio National presenter Fran Kelly that in his 27 years 
within the force he would be “naive and ignorant” to say sexual harassment had 
not occurred immediately around him.

“I have to look back now and think, did I witness, did I stand by, did I not 
say enough at the time? And and the answer to that has to be ‘yes’.”

Comments from some of the police force members surveyed and published in 
Broderick’s report including a woman who said: “I hear so many derogatory 
comments against the women sergeants, for example ‘she’s just a vagina’.”

Another woman described how “I was moved from my role because I wouldn’t sleep 
with the coordinator”. One woman told the researchers that: “When I got 
promoted (in late 2014) one guy said ‘you must give good blow jobs’.” A gay 
woman in the force said: “I have had men since college say that they will 
‘convert me’”.
 