
A group of Australian high school students have managed to recreate a 
life-saving drug that rose from US$13.50 to US$750 a tablet overnight afteran 
unscrupulous price-hike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/martin-shkreli-hiv-drug-daraprim-turing>
 by former hedge fund manager Martin Shkreli.

Martin Shkreli accused by Sydney high schoolers who cooked $2 malaria pills
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/02/martin-shkreli-rattled-by-sydney-high-schoolers-who-cooked-2-malaria-pills>
The Sydney Grammar students reproduced the drug, Daraprim, used to treat a 
rare but deadly parasitic infection, in their high school laboratory with 
support from the University of Sydney and global members of the Open Source
Malaria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaria> consortium.

Dr Alice Williamson, a postdoctoral teaching fellow with the university’s 
school of chemistry, said she could not stop dwelling on the story of Shkreli, 
who acquired Daraprim last year through his company, Turing Pharmaceuticals, 
and almost immediately and exorbitantly hiked the price. The drug is used to 
treat malaria and to prevent toxoplasmosis infection in people with HIV.

The move made him a public villain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/28/punch-martin-shkreli-good-cause>
, a label he embraced as he also became known as “Pharma Bro”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Faustralian-students-describe-how-they-made-copycat-malaria-drug-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20students%20describe%20how%20they%20made%20copycat%20Malaria%20drug%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Faustralian-students-describe-how-they-made-copycat-malaria-drug-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20students%20describe%20how%20they%20made%20copycat%20Malaria%20drug%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Faustralian-students-describe-how-they-made-copycat-malaria-drug-video&media=>
Australian students describe how they made copycat Malaria drug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/dec/02/australian-students-describe-how-they-made-copycat-malaria-drug-video>
“I couldn’t get this story out of my head, it just seemed so unfair especially 
since the drug is so cheap to make and had been sold so cheaply for so long,” 
Williamson said.

“I said ‘Why don’t we get students to make Daraprim in the lab’, because to me 
the route looked pretty simple. I thought if we could show that students could 
make it in the lab with no real training, we could really show how ridiculous 
this price hike was and that there was no way it could be justified.”

Martin Shkreli: I'm not upset about HIV drug hike; it was 'woefully 
underpriced'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/martin-shkreli-daraprim-hiv-drug-price-hike-interview>
Sydney Grammar could afford to pay for the equipment and chemicals, and had 
the facilities. The group of year 11 students were talented and confident, 
Williamson said, and decided to give it a go.

The students made their work open to the internet, and scientists anywhere in 
the world were able to view all the data generated and mentor the students to 
accelerate their progress. Williamson and the university’s associate professor 
Matthew Todd also mentored the students.

Todd told Guardian Australia that what the students had achieved was “a little 
Breaking Bad”, a television show about a struggling high school chemistry 
teacher who works with one of his former students to produce and sell crystal 
meth.

“With the right guidance they could do everything safely,” Todd said.

“There were clues in literature already from patents around these molecules, 
but they had to change things as some reagents were nasty and dangerous so some 
invention was needed on their part. The open source platform meant as they 
posted data in real time, Alice, myself and others could guide them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Faustralian-students-recreate-martin-shkreli-price-hike-drug-in-school-lab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facd70ebd68bc96183615dd276288ecff13a7def6%2F0_0_2955_1969%2F2955.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20students%20recreate%20Martin%20Shkreli%20price-hike%20drug%20in%20school%20lab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Faustralian-students-recreate-martin-shkreli-price-hike-drug-in-school-lab%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20students%20recreate%20Martin%20Shkreli%20price-hike%20drug%20in%20school%20lab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Faustralian-students-recreate-martin-shkreli-price-hike-drug-in-school-lab%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facd70ebd68bc96183615dd276288ecff13a7def6%2F0_0_2955_1969%2F2955.jpg>
 Ingredients for Daraprim with the powdered drug the students created in their 
school lab. Photograph: Dr Alice Williamson 
He said the open nature of the project demystified science and revealed the 
number of roadblocks the students had faced in coming up with the final 
product, which involved three complicated chemical steps.

“With science results you can be presented with a polished finished product 
that hides the false steps along the way,” he said. “The students’ real-time 
diary highlights their whole process, and is a very transparent way of doing 
things.”

The students realised they had succeeded two weeks ago when their teacher, Dr 
Malcolm Binns, brought Todd and Williamson a sample.

“Alice did the analysis and looked at the screen and said ‘Oh my god, they’ve 
done it’,” he said.

“And not only have they done it, it’s super pure. It’s A-grade. I couldn’t 
believe my eyes. That was the moment. I realised they had nailed it. The 
students were over the moon.”

He said unfortunately the students would not be able to sell their drug to the 
US market. While the drug can be bought in Australia for about A$13 for a 
packet of 50, there are a number of complicated legal roadblocks in the way of 
producing and selling it in the US.

Dozens of countries poised to drive out malaria by 2020
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/09/malaria-sri-lanka-china-iran-malaysia-end-for-disease>
“Turing has the exclusive rights to sell it, even though the drug is no longer 
under patent,” Todd said. “The ridiculousness of this legal loophole means if 
we wanted to launch it as drug in the US we’d have to go through a whole new 
clinical trial because we would have to compare the Sydney Grammar stuff with 
the officially sanctioned stuff, and Turing would have to give us the drug to 
allow those comparisons to be made.

“It’s not just a matter of going to the store and buying the Turing drug 
either, they would have to hand it over directly.”

In response to a question on Twitter about whether the schoolboys were 
competition, Shkrelisimply tweeted: “No” 
<https://twitter.com/TwitterMoments/status/804112685491163136>. 

• Watch Dr Alice Williamson discuss open drug discovery here 
<http://open%20source%20drug%20discovery./>
 