
Australia will deploy another 300 troops to Iraq to work with New Zealand 
counterparts on a joint mission to train Iraqi military in the fight against
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis).

The prime minister, Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, announced on Tuesday 
that Australia would increase its existing commitment of nearly 200 special 
forces soldiers assisting the Iraqi military and the 400-strong air force task 
group conducting air strikes.

Abbott said the decision, in line with requests from the US and Iraqi 
governments, represented the “next phase” of Australia’s contribution to 
disrupt, degrade and ultimately defeat Isis, describing the group as an 
“apocalyptic, millenarian death cult”.

Sending more troops to Iraq 'pointless' without more aid, says Tim Costello
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/03/sending-more-troops-to-iraq-pointless-without-more-aid-says-tim-costello>
But Australia’s benchmark for success remained unclear and the government’s 
two-year deadline was not firm. Labor offered its qualified support for the 
decision, but called on the government to clearly spell out its “exit strategy”.

Abbott said he would not be “too prescriptive at this stage” but the objective 
was to achieve an “effective Iraqi regular army that can take and hold ground 
so thatIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> can once more be sovereign 
over its territory”.

He said the number of Australian troops involved in the training mission was 
yet to be finalised, but he anticipated it would be about 300. The mission, 
expected to begin in May, would involve regular Australian forces based in 
Taji, northwest of Baghdad.


“I want to stress that we haven’t taken this decision lightly,” Abbott said. 
“Ultimately, it is Iraq that must defeat the death cult but we do not want to 
leave the Iraqis on their own.”


Although the government has decided to prepare troops for the expected 
training mission, the deployment will be subject to a final decision “in a 
matter of weeks”.


The defence minister, Kevin Andrews, said the decision was “not open-ended” 
and would be reviewed “from time to time”. Abbott suggested the new mission was 
likely to have a two-year timeframe with a review every 12 months.


A key indicator in those reviews would be the effectiveness of the armed 
forces, Abbott said, noting that the Iraqi regular army had “melted like snow 
in summer” in the face of the initial onslaught by Isis.

“What the Australian people want is security at home, but you can’t have 
security at home without doing your bit for security abroad, because it is the 
Daesh [Isis] death cult which is reaching out to us here in this country,” 
Abbott said.

Abbott confirmed most of the 170 Australian special forces soldiers currently 
in Iraq would leave Iraq when the current rotation ended in September.

He said these special forces were involved in advising and assisting the Iraqi 
counter-terrorism service, but attention needed to turn now to the Iraqi 
regular army.

The defence chief, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin, acknowledged the risks 
Australian personnel would face on the new mission, saying he took the matter 
“very seriously” and there was “a large force protection element involved in 
this deployment”.

Abbott, when asked about the cooperation of New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>, said there were “obviously 
historical parallels” with the Gallipoli campaign in 1915.

“I’m very pleased and proud that in this centenary of Anzac year that 
Australia and New Zealand will be contributing to this important mission,” he 
said.

The announcement follows sign-off at a cabinet meeting on Monday, and he 
advised his colleagues of the decision at a meeting of the Coalition parties on 
Tuesday. It is understood the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, was briefed 
shortly before Abbott addressed the media.

Shorten was initially prevented by the speaker, Bronwyn Bishop, from making a 
statement on the Iraq decision during parliamentary question time on Tuesday. 
Abbott then made a formal statement to enable Shorten to deliver his response.

“The last thing I would want is to have the opposition feel that they were 
deprived of a full statement by the government on this subject and deprived of 
an opportunity to respond,” Abbott said.


Tony Abbott denies reports he wanted Australian ground troops in Iraq
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/21/tony-abbott-wanted-australian-ground-troops-in-iraq-reports>
Shorten told parliament his thoughts were with the troops, whose bravery was 
widely admired as they performed valuable, important and dangerous work in Iraq.


“Australia’s mission in Iraq is not about pursuing territory or power but 
helping the displaced and protecting the vulnerable,” Shorten said.


“We do not seek to assert the supremacy of one faith or one people but defend 
the rights of all faiths and all peoples. Labor believes that peace and 
tolerance can and will prevail over poisonous hatred and fanaticism in Iraq, in 
the region and of course everywhere. That’s our shared hope and our common 
cause.”


Labor’s foreign affairs spokeswoman, Tanya Plibersek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, said the 
opposition’s support for the training commitment was “not without conditions 
and not open-ended”.

“I think it is important that the government continue to talk to the 
Australian public, through the Australian parliament, about exactly how the 
mission is progressing and what the expected exit strategy is,” she told Sky 
News.

The decision was foreshadowed a week ago, when the New Zealand prime minister 
John Key said his country was sending 143 troops to Iraq in what was “likely to 
be a joint training mission with Australia”. Late last week, Abbott travelled 
to New Zealand for talks with Key.

In an interview 
<http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO1502/S00329/the-nation-patrick-gower-interviews-john-key.htm>
, Key said New Zealand was determined to leave Iraq in two years because it did 
not want to be “in the Middle East forever” and had limited capability.

“I actually fully expect that it’s quite probable Australia will stay longer, 
so they’ll either backfill with more people of their own or maybe they’ll find 
another training partner or whatever,” Key said.

While Abbott was making the announcement on Monday, the Senate was discussing 
an attempt by the leader of the Greens, Christine Milne, to suspend normal 
business to debate the Iraq conflict.


“History will hold him [Abbott] responsible for Australian involvement in this 
appalling quagmire,” Milne said.

The independent MP Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> denounced the “bad 
decision” to deploy more troops, saying it would not help solve the crisis in 
Iraq.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fandrew-wilkie-condemns-aussie-troop-boost-in-iraq-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425361352996%2FAndrew-Wilkie--002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Wilkie%20condemns%20Australian%20troop%20boost%20in%20Iraq%3A%20'Their%20lives%20will%20be%20at%20risk%20and%20you've%20got%20to%20ask%20why'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fandrew-wilkie-condemns-aussie-troop-boost-in-iraq-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Wilkie%20condemns%20Australian%20troop%20boost%20in%20Iraq%3A%20%27Their%20lives%20will%20be%20at%20risk%20and%20you%27ve%20got%20to%20ask%20why%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fandrew-wilkie-condemns-aussie-troop-boost-in-iraq-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425361352996%2FAndrew-Wilkie--002.jpg>
“We are now reaping what we sowed in 2003 when we helped start a war that has 
run unabated for 12 years, which created the instability in that country which 
has allowed the emergence of Islamic State,” he said.

A Labor member asked, during the party’s caucus meeting in Canberra earlier on 
Tuesday morning, whether “mission creep” was occurring in Iraq.

In response, Shorten reaffirmed the four principles guiding Labor’s support 
for action in Iraq, including not deploying ground combat units to directly 
engage in fighting Isis.


 