
Australian police investigated an immigration detention whistleblower and 
accessed his phone records in part because of his criticism of the country’s 
asylum seeker policies.

Guardian Australia can reveal that the Australian federal police (AFP) 
compiled hundreds of pages of investigative file notes and reports surrounding 
Dr Peter Young following two news reports by theAustralian Broadcasting 
Corporation 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-12-08/ill-fated-asylum-seeker-forced-to-wait-for-medical-transfer/5952756>
 andthe Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/subscribe/news/1/index.html?sourceCode=TAWEB_WRE170_a&mode=premium&dest=http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/immigration/19-hours-to-act-on-critical-asylum-call/news-story/1be8138aa0fb192ebd3d3484b690da87&memtype=anonymous>
 newspaper in December 2014 that disclosed the medical records of Hamid 
Khazaei, an asylum seeker on Manus Island who died following a skin infection 
on his leg.

Young, who is a former medical director of mental health for Australia’s 
detention centres, urged workers from inside the system to be “angry and 
defiant” about attacks on whistleblowing.

What's the end game for Australia's border policy – a world of walled 
city-states? | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/whats-the-end-game-for-australias-border-policy-a-world-of-walled-city-states>
The circumstances of Khazaei’s death in 2014 sparked heavy criticism of the 
Australian governmentafter concerns were raised that his treatment had been 
delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/28/manus-island-asylum-seeker-in-critical-condition>
 on Manus Island.Four Corners reported in April 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-25/manus-island-blunder-blamed-for-asylum-seeker-death/7355858>
 that an initial medical recommendation to transfer him to Australia was not 
followed up by the immigration department. A coronial investigation into his 
death is still ongoing in Queensland.

But the AFP continued to investigate the disclosure of medical information 
about Khazaei, in what Young said showed the Australian government’s “total 
commitment to secrecy” surrounding immigration policies.

Details of the investigation have emerged after Young, who was employed by 
health provider International Health and Medical Services (IHMS), used the
Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> Act to request access to 
files held on him by the AFP.

The heavily redacted files offer only a small glimpse of the investigation, 
but state that Young was a suspect in the investigation because of “comments 
attributed to him being highly critical of [the immigration department] and 
IHMS in their handling of asylum seeker medical care” in two news reports.

The file note said: “Dr Young’s phone did not identify contact with any media 
outlets or journalists during the period surrounding the publication of the 
media articles.”

Although it was unclear what type of phone records the AFP accessed, it was 
likely to have included Young’s metadata – which would detail who he had 
communicated with across various periods of time.

The AFP files indicate that it was partly Young’s vocal criticism of the 
immigration detention system that drew him to the attention of the AFP. Young
first spoke to Guardian Australia in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/05/-sp-australias-detention-regime-sets-out-to-make-asylum-seekers-suffer-says-chief-immigration-psychiatrist>
, and is one of the most senior officials within the system to speak on the 
record.


A spokesman for the AFP said Young was not targeted because of his comments, 
and said the agency “does not predetermine persons of interest when commencing 
investigations”.

The documents also reveal that International SOS, the owner of detention 
health provider IHMS, provided evidence to the AFP early on in the police 
investigation.

The organisation provided an internal report into the disclosures undertaken 
by IHMS to the AFP in December 2014. That document has been redacted by the AFP 
in part on the grounds that it might “prejudice the future supply of 
information to the AFP” if it were released.

• Read the police files on Peter Young here  
<https://www.scribd.com/doc/313519975/Peter-Young-Australian-Federal-Police-files>

Young, who denies disclosing the records about Khazaei, said he was outraged 
by the “covert surveillance” the AFP had undertaken on him.

“It’s outrageous that the federal police have been used by the government to 
undertake this sort of covert surveillance,” he said. “These kind of laws 
weren’t meant to be targeting doctors, they weren’t meant to be targeting 
journalists, and those reassurances have proven to be false.

“It’s really telling that what they were concerned about here is the release 
of those medical records. It seems they were more interested in chasing this up 
than following up on the causes of his death.”

In regards to IHMS and International SOS’s role in the investigation, Young 
said: “We were told that IHMS were to be in lockstep with the department. This 
is an example of how they demonstrate their loyalty, their fealty.”

A spokeswoman for IHMS said: “IHMS refute the allegation that they have 
encouraged the AFP to target Dr Young.”

“The AFP approached IHMS with a request to review an internal investigation 
conducted into the leak of protected health information. IHMS cooperated with 
that request.”


A spokeswoman for International SOS also said it did not initiate the referral 
against Young, but that it “cooperates fully with authorised investigations – 
whether they be internal or conducted by external parties.”

The investigation into Young was eventually discontinued due to a lack of 
evidence. He urged doctors and other workers from immigration detention to 
continue to speak out.

“Doctors shouldn’t be intimidated but they should be angry and defiant,” he 
said.

The investigation into Young also contradicts comments made by the Australian 
Border Force commissioner, Roman Quaedvlieg. 

When people smugglers were seen as heroes, and we welcomed the dispossessed | 
Miriam Cosic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/14/when-people-smugglers-were-seen-as-heroes-and-we-welcomed-the-dispossessed>
Following the passage of the Australian Border Force Act, Quaedvlieg said 
<http://newsroom.border.gov.au/releases/d0e3ab05-52b6-47ce-addd-762791fddbfc> 
that former staff who spoke out generally about conditions in detention would 
not be prosecuted for disclosing information. Only those who leaked classified 
information could expect to be prosecuted, he said.

The investigation into Young occurred before the Australian Border Force Act 
came into force and the comments were made by Quaedvlieg. An immigration 
spokesman stressed the act could not be applied retrospectively.

The spokesman said: “The Australian Border Force Commissioner has made clear 
public statements on this matter and continues to stand by these statements.”

“As stated on multiple occasions, the ABF Act does not prevent general 
statements being made about conditions in detention centres, however the 
secrecy provisions within the Act can apply to the disclosure of protected 
information.”

The AFP inquiry was undertaken by head office investigations, a special 
division that handles sensitive political matters including investigations of 
government information in news reports. The offence the AFP was investigating 
was alleged unauthorised disclosures of information under section 70 of the 
Crimes Act.

A spokesman for the AFP said: “The AFP’s primary responsibility in this matter 
was to identify alleged criminality regarding the unauthorised disclosure of 
Commonwealth information.”

The section has been criticised by the Australian Law Reform Commission for 
essentially criminalising any disclosure of information.


The AFP’s investigation is likely to raise further concerns that journalists’ 
phone records may also have been accessed as part of the investigation. The AFP 
haspreviously sought access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/federal-police-admit-seeking-access-to-reporters-metadata-without-warrant>
 to journalists’ phone records as part of disclosure investigations. A 
spokesman for the AFP said that “investigative methodologies vary from case to 
case”.

There has been increasing attention to the role of the AFP surrounding 
investigations of whistleblowers to news outlets.

On Thursday the AFP raided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
 Labor party offices in Melbourne as part of an investigation into the 
disclosure of documents about the national broadband network. The investigation 
also fell under the same section of the Crimes Act.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fasylum-seekers-self-harming-seen-as-bad-behaviour-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407135868223%2FDr-Peter-Young-Bad-Behavi-002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asylum%20seekers%20self-harming%20is%20'seen%20as%20bad%20behaviour'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fasylum-seekers-self-harming-seen-as-bad-behaviour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asylum%20seekers%20self-harming%20is%20%27seen%20as%20bad%20behaviour%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F04%2Fasylum-seekers-self-harming-seen-as-bad-behaviour-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407135868223%2FDr-Peter-Young-Bad-Behavi-002.jpg>
Asylum seekers self-harming is ‘seen as bad behaviour’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/aug/04/asylum-seekers-self-harming-seen-as-bad-behaviour-video>
. Peter Young talks to Guardian Australia in 2014 
Contact Paul Farrell securely via the Guardian’s Securedrop server. 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>

• Disclosure: The author is currently engaged in a matter before the privacy 
commissioner surrounding access to documents about AFP disclosure 
investigations.
 