
The Australian federal police has this week admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/federal-police-admit-seeking-access-to-reporters-metadata-without-warrant>
 that it sought access to my metadata in pursuit of my sources.

In a submission to the privacy commissioner, it revealed it had sought 
“subscriber checks” and other forms of email checks relating to me as part of 
one of their investigations.

Federal police admit seeking access to reporter's metadata without warrant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/federal-police-admit-seeking-access-to-reporters-metadata-without-warrant>
What’s most extraordinary is that it was entirely lawful for the AFP to access 
my phone and email records. And that’s a real problem for journalists and their 
sources in Australia.

It’s become a sadly normal reality that journalists’ sources can be targeted 
in Australia in an effort to hunt down whistleblowers. Over the years, under 
both Labor and Coalition governments, sensitive stories by journalists that 
embarrassed or shamed governments have often been referred to the AFP.

And almost always it’s about politics. It’s not about national security. It’s 
about stopping embarrassing leaks that tell uncomfortable truths about power in 
Australia. Quite recentlythe Australian’s 
<http://www.afr.com/news/malcolm-turnbull-refers-leak-to-australian-federal-police-20160302-gn8euf>
 Greg Sheridan had his exposé about the draft defence white paper referred to 
the AFP for investigation. Last year the source of a story byFairfax Media’s 
Michael Gordon 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/leaked-cabinet-document-reveals-radical-citizenship-revamp-links-migrant-program-to-terrorist-attacks-20160204-gmm5v4.html#ixzz3zWdtF0pE>
 about radical reforms to citizenship laws were also subject of areferral to 
the AFP 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/asylum-seekers-awaiting-return-to-nauru-suffering-from-cancer-and-terminal-illnesses-20160207-gmo0wj.html>
. Has the AFP also sought to access their phone and email records?

The answer is unclear but it’s certainly possible. However, this is the first 
time the AFP has ever made such an admission in Australia. They’ve acknowledged 
generally that they made requests for journalists’ metadata in the past – and 
said they were rare – but never in a specific case. There are strict laws that 
prohibit the disclosure of information about such requests under the 
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979.

Journalism is not a crime. So why are reporters being referred to police? | 
Paul Farrell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/22/journalism-is-not-a-so-why-are-reporters-being-referred-to-police>
The AFP’s investigation into my sources arose from a news report into the 
government’s asylum seeker policies andAustralia’s unlawful incursions into 
Indonesian waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/17/australian-ship-went-far-deeper-into-indonesian-waters-than-disclosed>
. I requested access to files held by the AFP in this investigation and then 
complained to the privacy commissioner about the lack of details the AFP 
released in these files. The AFP’s admission was disclosed in the course of 
that privacy complaint.

From the AFP’s point of view, it has done nothing wrong. As it has indicated 
in its statement 
<http://www.afp.gov.au/media-centre/news/afp/2016/april/fact_check_afp_access_to_journalist_metadata>
, it has sought to undertake investigations within the scope of the law. It has 
“sought to identify the source of the disclosure, and then determine whether 
they had the appropriate authority to release that information”.

As I’ve mentioned before, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/the-afp-and-me-how-one-of-my-asylum-stories-sparked-a-200-page-police-investigation>
 the offence that relates to “unauthorised disclosures” of information by 
commonwealth officers is exceptionally broad. There are no public interest 
considerations or requirements to demonstrate harm from disclosures. It can 
apply to all and sundry.

The AFP and me: how one of my asylum stories sparked a 200-page police 
investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/the-afp-and-me-how-one-of-my-asylum-stories-sparked-a-200-page-police-investigation>
There are very limited avenues of appeal to resolve these kinds of privacy 
violations and interferences with press freedom. Australia has no broad 
constitutional framework like the US that protects freedom of the press. It has 
no regional human rights framework like EU nations that can be drawn into 
domestic law in the way that has been done in Britain.

A complaint could be lodged with the Commonwealth Ombudsman about the conduct 
of the AFP, but it’s hard to see what grounds such a complaint could be based 
on if the AFP was operating within the law. Another complaint could be 
initiated with the privacy commissioner but it would be limited to the narrow 
grounds of review set out in the Australian privacy principles, which have 
broad exemptions for the activities of law enforcement agencies.

It’s not right and it shouldn’t be normal. But unless the law changes, these 
kind of investigations will continue.
 