
A handful of Democratic and Republican senators are considering a rewrite of 
60 of the most consequential words to ever pass through Congress. The
Authorization for Use of Military Force 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Authorization_for_Use_of_Military_Force_Against_Terrorists>
 (AUMF), passed after the attacks of 11 September 2001, and provides the legal 
cornerstone for the so-called US "war on terror". Only one brave Congress member
opposed it 
<http://lee.house.gov/press-release/barbara-lee-introduces-legislation-repeal-2001-authorization-use-military-force>
. It allows the US government to wage war at anytime, any place and on anyone 
deemed a threat to national security – with remarkably little evidence needed.

The consequential nature of these words is self-evident: the AUMF opened the 
doors to the US wars in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya; attacks on Pakistan, 
Yemen, Somalia and Mali; the new drone bases in Niger and Djibouti; and the 
killing of American citizens, notably Anwar al-Awlaki and his 16-year-old 
noncombatant son. It is what now emboldens thehawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/04/resist-netanyahu-iran-hawks-push>
 on the warpath to Syria, Iran and North Korea.

Rather than doubling down on war policy, as some senators are inclined to do, 
Congress should repeal the 2001 law. This "blank check" approach to warfare has 
to stop. And while the rewrite is being framed by members of both chambers 
(Senators John McCain and Bob Corker, Representative Buck McKeon and others) as 
an act of congressional oversight, it is doubtful that these hawks will curb 
any military authority. They have only evercalled for more wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/24/military-intervention-wacko-birds-manifesto>
, not fewer. That means more Libyas, Yemens andal-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/sep/30/anwar-al-awlaki-yemen-live>
's.

It is time for members of Congress who truly care about rule of law, oversight 
and the financial security of this country to speak up. Why? Because, first and 
foremost, the AUMF continues to contravene congressional oversight. For 
example, when the Obama administration sent 100 "military advisors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/14/obama-sends-troops-uganda>" to 
Uganda in the name of counterterrorism in 2011, Congress received a simple note 
from President Obama. No oversight.

More recently, after unilaterally negotiating a "status of forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/29/niger-approves-american-surveillance-drones>
" agreement with Niger, the administration sent a note to Congress saying that 
it was sending 100 troops to the country. This week, we senttroops to Mali 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/pentagon-deploys-small-number-of-troops-to-war-torn-mali/2013/04/30/2b02c928-b1a0-11e2-bc39-65b0a67147df_story.html>
. Again, no oversight.

This is the new normal. Statistics provided by Special Operations Command (pdf)
 <http://www.sigir.mil/files/learningfromiraq/Report_-_March_2013.pdf> indicate 
that special forces groups were operating in 92 different countries in March 
2013. The AUMF premise, no matter how it gets tweaked, is enabling a system of 
eternal warfare, a reality that is not only financially untenable for a nation 
in deep debt, but also ethically indefensible.

Second, the AUMF continues to undermine rule of law. There are clear laws that 
apply to wartime situations or imminent threats, and a broadened AUMF could 
undermine these further. That the US already broadly categorizes individuals 
and groups that are loosely or tacitly associated with extremists – in secret 
and sometimes without evidence – is already setting a dangerous precedent.

As counterterrorism technologies, like drones, expand, the US and 
international community may soon see these tactics used in intra-state 
conflicts, with possible violations of human rights law. If targeted killings 
by drones are justified as acts of war, they must be subject to international 
law on the use of lethal force within the borders of another sovereign nation. 
Without a clear showing of permission to use lethal force within another 
nation, or an imminent threat from that nation, these killings seriously 
undermine prohibitions in international law against the use of deadly force.

Third, given the lack of campaign finance reform, too often defense policy is 
driven not by military strategy or legitimate threats, but by the defense 
contractor's bottom line. This is the case with the AUMF and the defense 
industry. The defense industry spent over$130m on lobbying efforts in 2012 
<http://wagingnonviolence.org/feature/how-would-participatory-budgeting-cut-spending/>
 alone, and in the first quarter of 2013, weapons maker Northrop Grumman spent 
$5.8m on Congress, posting its third biggest lobbying quarter in company 
history.

There's a reason why unnecessary weapons systems like the F-35 joint strike 
fighter, a program that now costs the American taxpayer hundreds of billions of 
dollars, never go away. It's the same reason why new systems will be developed 
to drive policy decisions: money. The industry continues to claim the need for 
new weapons to face new threats. It is becoming clear that the defense 
industry's loyalty is first to the financial security of its shareholders, and 
only secondarily to the security of this country.

It is time to send the 2001 AUMF into the sunset, and to return the checks and 
balances that policy-makers put in place: the executive and legislative 
branches must deliberate before waging war. We are making enemies through a 
feckless, dangerous approach, and it is time to return some censure to our 
defense apparatus. Otherwise, the AUMF will continue to make us hemorrhage – 
both blood and, especially, treasure.
 