
Reading the obituaries of Alexander Solzhenitsyn I was reminded of Philip 
Roth, who once confessed to something like envy of writers under communism. 
Talking to Ivan Klima he said he was struck by the "terrible pressure under 
which you people wrote and the clarity of the mission this burden fostered: in 
your society you were virtually the only monitors of truth." Roth summed up the 
marginality of literary novelists such as himself in the west with a neat 
little formula: "There nothing goes and everything matters; here everything 
goes and nothing matters."

Roth's own recent apotheosis as the bard of the American nightmare would seem 
to disprove him - even Barack Obama reads him. But he was only expressing what 
in the 1970s and 80s was a uniformly high regard for writers in the Soviet 
Union and eastern Europe opposed to or persecuted by their communist regimes. 
To look at the review pages of that period is to marvel at the extensive and 
respectful attention paid to these writers, many of whom - Milan Kundera, 
Klima, Josef Skvorecky - are still being published, but not nearly with the 
same fanfare. Solzhenitsyn himself, suitably long-bearded, seemed to wear 
Tolstoy's mantle in his rural retreat in Vermont - until he dismayed his 
American hosts by railing against western decadence and immorality in the 
manner we now associate with Muslim fanatics.

Unlike other Russian writers - Herzen, Dostoevsky - who recoiled from the west 
after some exposure to it, Solzhenitsyn barely left his farm in Vermont during 
the two decades he worked on what turned out to be an interminable and pretty 
much unreadable novelistic history of the Russian revolution. Returning to 
Yeltsin's Russia in 1994, he became a parody of a prophet, a monologist with 
his own TV show. He also revealed himself as a bigoted nationalist with a 
recipe for Russia's resurgence that, as Tatyana Tolstaya described it, "can, in 
essence, be reduced to a single primitive operation: the destruction of the 
demons by herding the swine - non-Russians, foreigners, adherents of a 
different faith". It is easy to imagine Solzhenitsyn cheering Russia's 
battering of Georgia.

Nevertheless, his earliest reputation as a courageous unmasker of Soviet 
repression is what seems to have endured in the west. "Speaking truth to power" 
was how Solzhenitsyn's overall position was defined on the cover of the 
Economist, a magazine usually known for speaking encouragement and advice to 
power.

The influence of realpolitik on metropolitan publishing and critical reception 
in the west should not be exaggerated. But admirers of Indonesia's Pramoedya 
Ananta Toer, Iraq's Abdul Rahman Munif and Pakistan's Faiz Ahmed Faiz have a 
point when they argue that these "dissident" writers who suffered imprisonment 
or exile never provoked much sympathy in the west because the dictatorships 
they opposed in their respective countries were allied to the Free World.

The cold war may have ended, but its cultural reflexes still flourish, 
particularly as new antagonists - China, Islamofascism - loom on the horizon. 
Rarely has the Nobel prize been awarded to a corpus as slender as Gao 
Xingjian's. Beijing Coma, Ma Jian's recent novel about the 1989 protests in 
Tiananmen Square, retraces a highly public instance of official brutality 
rather than unearthing, as The Gulag Archipelago did, a secret and colossal 
atrocity. Ma Jian is free to travel to, and presumably to live in, China; 
pirated copies of his work are not hard to find in a society that is 
increasingly more consumerist than communist. No matter: more than one notice 
in the press hailed Ma Jian as China's Solzhenitsyn.

Such stereotyping would be harmless if it didn't cause the neglect of other 
kinds of writing and writers: for instance, the many interesting Chinese 
novelists - Mo Yan, Zhu Wen, Han Shaogong - who have foresworn the drama of 
exile (actually, expatriation) in order to observe the drama of a society 
undergoing the biggest and swiftest change in modern history.

They seem a bit compromised to us because they chose to live in authoritarian 
China. Naguib Mahfouz, who is periodically recruited in the pantheon of 
"dissident" Muslim writers, actually held a government job all his life; and 
the remarkable fact about this Egyptian writer is not the assassination attempt 
on him towards the end of his literary career, but how shrewdly and 
resourcefully he wrote of life under successive despots while living in the 
heart of Cairo. The art of Mahmoud Darwish, Palestine's national poet, did not 
suffer from his prolonged residence in Israel or his proximity to the PLO's 
strongman Yasser Arafat.

The western writer's instinctive reverence for "dissidents" is driven at least 
partly by wounded egoism. As Roth hinted, the writer living in the consumer 
societies of Europe and America knows that he can never acquire the moral 
authority and political importance his dissident counterpart naturally 
possesses. After all, Stalin himself signed the order banishing Osip Mandelstam 
to Siberia; the Soviet politburo convened to decide what should be done about 
Solzhenitsyn.

But it is also true that writers in repressive societies embody an old and 
very powerful idea of the writer as outcast and rebel. So much of our literary 
education has been conducted by writers who were implacably and often bitterly 
at odds with the main tendencies of their time and place. The fundamental 
alienation of the artist was, in their cases, aggravated by material 
deprivation, political disenchantment or sexual inversion. Flaubert's rage 
against the bourgeoisie, Dostoevsky's chronic instability, Proust's solitude 
and Joyce's exile: they seem to confirm Thomas Mann's harsh dictum in Tonio 
Kr√∂ger: "Not one leaf from the laurel tree of art may be plucked without the 
artist paying for it with his life."

Compared with these ascetics, how really laid-back the major novelists of our 
time appear. Many of them are more likely to seek rather than spurn prizes, 
fellowships, festivals in increasingly exotic locations, knighthoods, academic 
boondoggles - all the endless opportunities to join, or at least mingle with, 
the great and the good. It is the furtive and indigent creator of samizdat 
literature who alone seems to hold out against a creeping and perhaps 
unavoidable embourgeoisement: the writer who maintains, with his unique 
suffering, if not with his work, our romantic faith in the nobility of the 
artist's vocation, and whom we'll continue to cherish long after our latest 
cold wars have ended.
 