
The former chief financial officer of British software company Autonomy has 
been indicted in the US for allegedly defrauding investors andHewlett-Packard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> about his firm’s 
performance before its sale in 2011.


 Sushovan Hussain, a British resident who was Autonomy’s finance chief at the 
time of its$11bn acquisition by HP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/aug/19/hewlett-packard-takeover-autonomy-software>
, was charged in an indictment filed on Thursday in federal court in San 
Francisco with conspiracy and wire fraud.

 The indictment alleged that beginning in October 2009, Hussain and others 
sought to deceive Autonomy’s investors and HP about the company’s performance, 
financial condition and prospects for growth.

Cambridge’s Silicon Fen shaken by the winds of change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/23/cambridge-university-silicon-fen-shaken-by-winds-of-change-arm-softbank>
 The scheme had several objectives, the indictment said, including to 
artificially increase and maintain Autonomy’s share price to make the company 
attractive to potential buyers like HP.

 Hussain, who remains in the United Kingdom, has not been arrested. John 
Keker, his lawyer, said in a statement on Friday that Hussain was innocent and 
would be acquitted at trial.

 “He defrauded no one and, as Autonomy’s CFO, acted at all times with the 
highest standards of honesty, integrity and competence,” Keker said.

 The indictment marked the latest fallout from the deal, which was supposed to 
form the central part of HP’s move into software but instead led the U.S. 
company a year later to write-off three-quarters of Autonomy’s value.

 Last year, HP sued Autonomy’s co-founder Mike Lynch and Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/05/hewlett-packard-unveils-details-of-5bn-autonomy-case>
, seeking $5.1bn in a lawsuit that accused them of engaging in fraudulent 
activities to boost the company’s value.

 Both men have denied wrongdoing. Lynch countersued HP last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/autonomy-founder-sues-hewlett-packard-for-150m-over-claims>
 saying at the time that “HP was simply incompetent in its operation of 
Autonomy, and the acquisition was doomed from the very beginning”.

Hewlett Packard Enterprise did not immediately respond to requests for 
comment. A spokesman for formerAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> management, 
including Lynch and Hussain, said that the group was certain of Hussain’s 
innocence and HP lied to the markets and shareholders.
 