
Autonomy founder Mike Lynch has reignited his war of words with 
Hewlett-Packard boss Meg Whitman, publishing anopen letter 
<http://autonomyaccounts.org/open-letter-from-mike-lynch-to-the-shareholders-of-hewlett-packard-2/>
 on the day of the computer company's annual meeting in which he accuses her of 
making "incendiary and defamatory" allegations.

Lynch has urged shareholders at the HP meeting 
<http://h30261.www3.hp.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=71087&p=irol-eventDetails&EventId=5080593>
 in Santa Clara, California, to demand HP release calculations it used to make 
an $8.8bn (Â£5.3bn)writedown on the value of Autonomy in November 2012, a year 
after acquiring it for $11bn.

He writes: "In the 16 months that have followed, HP has not provided 
information or evidence to theAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> team to substantiate 
any allegation. Instead, it has selectively leaked documents and information to 
the international media, frequently using material taken out of context to 
create false impressions and smear our reputations."

Lynch also claims that HP's senior executives were aware of certain Autonomy 
sales practices months before it told shareholders a whistleblower had flagged 
them.

The letter also calls for HP to release valuation reports prepared by its 
advisers, which he claims confirm HP paid a fair price for his business.

"HP's independent advisers carried out several valuation reports of Autonomy 
after the acquisition, which explicitly included Autonomy's hardware sales and 
confirmed the value of the company at $11bn? Does HP management deny this? Will 
they disclose these reports to shareholders?"

Lynch has repeatedly denied wrongdoing. Feted as Britain's most successful 
software entrepreneur when he sold his company in 2011, he is now fighting to 
save his reputation.

His letter states: "Meg Whitman has made incendiary and defamatory accusations 
on behalf of her company. She should now present the detailed evidence that 
justifies those allegations."

HP responded with a statement, saying: "As HP has previously reported, it 
uncovered numerous accounting irregularities at Autonomy prior to its 
acquisition by HP. HP reported those irregularities to appropriate civil and 
criminal regulators in the US and UK. HP continues to cooperate in ongoing 
investigations by those regulators."
 