
British tech entrepreneur Mike Lynch has said he will file a claim against 
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> for $150m 
(£98m) in damages over allegations the US company made about his role in the 
acquisition of his software firm Autonomy in 2011.

Lynch’s action marks the latest twist in a long-running battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> that has led to multiple 
lawsuits over who is to blame for a disastrous deal that cost HP shareholders 
billions of dollars of value.

HP’s $11bn purchase of Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> was supposed to form 
the central part of the US group’s move into software. But the deal turned sour 
a year later when HP wrote off three-quarters of the British company’s value, 
accusing Lynch and his colleagues of financial mismanagement.

In March, HP lodged a claim in London against Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/31/hewlett-packard-sues-autonomy-founder>
 and his former colleague Sushovan Hussain for damages of about $5.1bn over 
their management of Autonomy.

HP alleged Lynch and Hussain had conducted a systematic and sustained scheme 
to make Autonomy look like a rapidly growing, pure software company, when in 
reality it was the opposite.

Lynch has prepared a response to that case, saying that documents showed HP 
was made aware of practices at Autonomy, for example in a due diligence report 
prepared by KPMG.

Lynch, commenting on the lawsuit launched on Thursday, said HP had made many 
statements that were highly damaging to him and misleading to the stockmarket 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/10/01/us-autonomy-hp-claim-idUKKCN0RV4S220151001#>
, and the company knew, or should have known, these statements were false.

“HP’s own documents, which the court will see, make clear that HP was simply 
incompetent in its operation of Autonomy, and the acquisition was doomed from 
the very beginning,” he said.

Lynch said he hoped the claim would result in the HP chief executive, Meg 
Whitman, appearing in court. “This is about dragging them to be accountable, to 
actually explain the chaos, the mismanagement and the internal warfare, and 
then the attempt to cover it up,” he said.

HP said Lynch’s lawsuit was a “laughable and desperate attempt to divert 
attention from the $5bn lawsuit HP has filed and the ongoing criminal 
investigation”.

“HP anxiously looks forward to the day Lynch and Hussain will be forced to 
answer for their actions in court,” a spokeswoman said.
 