
“Dammit Hydra!” <https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525071656306626560> 
Marvel’s tweet showed they were taking it on the chin of their glitchy Mark 42 
Iron Man helmet when the trailer for Joss Whedon’s Avengers: Age of Ultron film 
was leaked online on Wednesday – a week before its intended preview during the 
Agents of SHIELD TV series.

Within a few hours, the studio did the smart thing and tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525093857772318720> its own official version 
in HD.
Marvel Entertainment (@Marvel) 
Here it is! Watch the @Avengers <https://twitter.com/Avengers>: #AgeofUltron 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AgeofUltron?src=hash> Teaser Trailer right NOW: 
http://t.co/pGnQIskF8c <http://t.co/pGnQIskF8c> #Avengers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Avengers?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525093857772318720> October 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525093857772318720> 
The trailer – eagerly awaited by much of Midgard since the credits rolled on 
the first Avengers film in 2012 – gives tantalising glimpses of further 
characters and references from Marvel’s comics being woven into its big-screen 
universe.

Most obviously, perhaps, Ultron, artificial intelligence and villain of this 
sequel, appears to don the Hulkbuster armour from the Iron Man comics – Tony 
Stark’s solution if sustained combat with his unpredictable ally becomes 
necessary.


The genius-billionaire-playboy-philanthropist’s renouncement of superhero 
duties, marked at the end ofIron Man 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man-3>, when he invokes the “clean slate 
protocol”, doesn’t seem to have worked out quite as planned, with Ultron 
appearing to build himself from discarded Stark armour. Captain America kicking 
open the door of what looks like a European mountain fortress suggests the Nazi 
offshoot Hydra might be rearing its many ugly heads once again.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtmeOjFno6Do&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtmeOjFno6Do>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtmeOjFno6Do&media=>
Andy Serkis, the Lord of the Rings’ Gollum, makes a brief appearance looking 
bearded, grubby, sweaty and harried. His part in the action is yet to be 
explained – Serkis wasoriginally thought 
<http://screenrant.com/avengers-age-ultron-andy-serkis-role/> simply to have 
been helping Marvel out with motion capture sequences. In the clip his short 
back and sides haircut and drab uniform-like shirt hint at a tie-in with 
Captain America’s second world war super-soldier back story.

James Spader voices Ultron in menacing tones, sounding a bit like yet another 
Hugo Weaving portrayal. Weaving, of course, is currently trapped in aMarvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> parallel universe as Red Skull.

While not in the trailer, Paul Bettany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-bettany>, who normally does the voice of 
Jarvis, Stark’s own artificial intelligence sidekick, is rumoured to be playing 
the Vision, a deceased superhero’s mind placed in one of Ultron’s earlier 
bodies. There’s further talk that Tony Stark may even sacrifice himself in this 
movie and Bettany as Vision will be the new Iron Man.

So what else does the trailer tell us? We’re still waiting to see whether 
Captain America will use his ability, as yet unmentioned in the films and 
unknown to Cap, to wield Thor’s hammer – and with it the demigod’s power. Was 
Anthony Hopkins’s whispered spell about being “worthy”, as he cast his defiant 
son out of Asgaard in the first Thor movie, a hint that this might come to 
pass? Is Thor dropping his hammer to the ground in the Ultron trailer a further 
clue?

Marvel can hardly complain about the leak, having taken a stand against 
official secrecy with the storyline ofCaptain America: The Winter Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/captain-america-the-winter-soldier-first-look-review>
. Let’s wait and see whether the Hydra agent lurking at the heart of the studio 
has further treats in store of us – or whether the forces of good will get in 
first.

• Trailer review of Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/23/avengers-age-of-ultron-trailer-review-tony-stark-raving-bananas>
 