
Shares in the engineering software maker Aveva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> have fallen by more than a 
third after it scrapped a complex tie-up with France’s Schneider Electric that 
would have reduced the UK company’s exposure to troubled oil and gas markets.

The companies agreed a deal in July in which Schneider was to buy £550m of new 
Aveva shares for a 53.5% stake and combine Aveva’s business with Schneider’s 
software division.

UK inflation turns positive again - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/dec/15/fed-meeting-inflation-uk-us-stock-markets-live>
The agreement, effectively a reverse takeover of Aveva, would have left it 
less vulnerable to the tumbling price of oil. Aveva makes programmes to design 
oil rigs, ships and nuclear power stations and some analysts have said the oil 
price influences about three quarters of its revenue.

While inspecting each other’s businesses, the companies found obstacles to a 
combination that made the deal too risky and expensive, Aveva said. These 
problems were compounded by the financial complexity of the proposed 
arrangement.

“As a result, the board has determined that the anticipated uplift in 
shareholder value was unlikely to have been realised to the extent previously 
considered,” Aveva said.

Shares in Aveva, founded in 1967 as a spin-off from Cambridge University, fell 
36% to £13.87. The shares hit a then four-year high of £23 when the deal was 
announced and reached £23.20 earlier this month.

Aveva said its trading was in line with the board’s expectations and that its 
outlook for the year ending in March was unchanged. The terms of the deal were 
not binding and no break fee is payable by either side, it added.

How low can oil prices go? Opec and El Niño take a bite out of crude's cost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/13/oil-prices-opec-market-share-strategy-el-nino-us-interest-rates>
Oil companies and businesses that feed off the industry have slashed spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/27/bp-cuts-spending-profits-fall-40-percent>
 to cope with theplunging oil price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/08/oil-producers-prepare-prices-halve-20-barrel>
, which has fallen by about two-thirds since summer 2014 because of slowing 
demand and a glut of supplies.

Some analysts think the price could halve again from less than $40 a barrel to 
$20. The price of Brent crudefell 15 cents 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-global-oil-idUKKBN0TX02E20151215> to $37.77 
on Tuesday and was heading for its eighth day of declines as mild winter 
weather exacerbated existing fears to send prices close to 11-year lows.

Julian Yates, an analyst at Investec, said another bidder might emerge for 
Aveva but that the fraught oil market could put off potential acquirers.

“It is disappointing that the deal has broken down as in our view, this seemed 
the logical next strategic step for the business, considering the pressures in 
its core market and the greater critical mass Aveva would have garnered,” he 
said. “We imagine there will be hopes that another suitor will step forward. 
Aveva is a quality asset, but one where trading is under pressure.”
 