
The Australian Rugby Union has used a few locations for its leg of the rugby 
Sevens World Series, with Brisbane, Adelaide and the Gold Coast all trying to 
replicate the fun and buzz and “brand” of Hong Kong’s famous rugby sevens 
festival. And with the success of the rugby action in Sydney, it seems they 
have found a home. Because, for whatever reason, the Sydney Sevens went off.

We’re on a full lap of the lower bowl of the second-finest purpose-built 
rectangular sports stadium in Australia, Allianz Stadium (Brisbane’s Suncorp 
Stadium is the best) and take in dinosaurs, Minions, Superman, Batman, 
Spiderman, chickens, cave-people, the Pope, William Wallace, Jesus, Cleopatra, 
Zorro, Darth Vader, stormtroopers and what appears a fair portion of Fiji. For 
the fans, the Sydney Sevens, like all the World Series events, is as much about 
playing dress-ups and drinking beer as it is about the rugby.

Australia pipped by New Zealand to title in thrilling Sydney Sevens final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/australia-pipped-by-new-zealand-to-title-in-thrilling-sydney-sevens-final>
Like Test match cricket and a day at the races, it’s a social event. It’s also 
a flow-on from kids playing pretends. Young adults enjoy dressing up and 
drinking beer. And the Sydney Sevens is awash with plastic cups of mid-strength 
lager and young adults dancing about dressed as chickens.

I head to a hospitality box and hook up with friends from Canberra Royals RFC, 
dressed to a man in the black hats and capes of Zorro. It’s 6pm and hot like 
the jungle. One of our number, Mick, has been to the Hong Kong Sevens several 
times and says authorities effectively rope off the South Stand there and let 
everyone within “do what they like”. He offers that as a reason the Wellington 
Sevens has lost its lustre.

On the field Fiji score a super try against Argentina, going the full length 
of the field, in an entertaining game. And the flag of their country waves a 
lot. It’s interesting to watch the players’ human movement. The Argentines run 
straight lines with a step, looking to carve incisions with laser-beam intent. 
The Fijians seem to float about and jag off a pin, stuttering with a jerky sort 
of running that begets hot action. They rip off floating passes and kicks that 
don’t seem obvious. Why an archipelago of 332 islands and 900,000 humans is so 
very good at sevens rugby is an anthropological study for another time. But 
good they are, Fiji. And everywhere, in fine voice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Faway-days-rugby-sevens-finds-a-home-in-colourful-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de54f940a7d2b08811a9e637a59aaca62aae3da%2F0_166_3915_2352%2F3915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20rugby%20sevens%20finds%20a%20home%20in%20colourful%20Sydney%20%7C%20Matt%20Cleary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Faway-days-rugby-sevens-finds-a-home-in-colourful-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20rugby%20sevens%20finds%20a%20home%20in%20colourful%20Sydney%20%7C%20Matt%20Cleary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F08%2Faway-days-rugby-sevens-finds-a-home-in-colourful-sydney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4de54f940a7d2b08811a9e637a59aaca62aae3da%2F0_166_3915_2352%2F3915.jpg>
 A battalion of stormtroopers enjoy the atmosphere at Allianz Stadium. 
Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images 
Sevens first came to notice for many in Hong Kong in 1990, when Fiji won the 
final against New Zealand by playing some of the most outlandish rugby ever 
played. The Kiwis of the time were effectively half their champion Test team: 
John Schuster, John Gallagher, the great Eric Rush, the inimitable Zin Zan 
Brook, my favourite All Black. But Fiji, led by 20-year-old 
player-of-the-tournament and legend Waisele Serevi, knocked over the Kiwis with
a try that should be frozen in time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cioXQWj_ndY> – see the ball float over the top 
to be tipped on to another man who shoots it out through his legs to a speed 
man who burns the Blacks with the extended gait of a galloping quarter-horse. 
Top stuff.

There is plenty of entertainment out here at Allianz, as 70,000 people over 
two days would attest. At any one time it doesn’t look like there are 35,000 in 
the stadium, at least not on the Saturday I’m there. But still, ARU suits will 
be stoked with the success of the tournament.

Rugby in Australia, you see, outside of well-attended Test matches, is the 
poor cousin of the rival football codes. The A-League runs in the summer, while 
the NRL and AFL rule in terms of TV numbers, really the sole arbiter of sports 
dominance in the land. So for the ARU to fill Allianz two days in a row and 
notch impressive television numbers while the NRL has a Nines tournament in 
Auckland and the AFL has nothing at all, well, they’ll be patting themselves 
all over each others backs in mahogany row. Especially given the two final 
games of each day is Australia versus New Zealand.

And then a samosa hits me in the face. Yes! How about that? Someone from 
another hospitality box, I never work out where, flings one of the hot little 
pastries, and socks me fair in the face. And it’s quite a shock. And I am 
briefly confused and angered.

There’s a break for dinner and the Veronicas belt out some tunes. They’re very 
good and so our troupe of Zorros dance about with airline pilots, and you 
think: every generation has done this, or something like it. They did it in
Happy Days – Richie Cunningham and Ralph Malph dressed up for a party at high 
school. Richie’s dad, Howard, would dress up in a leopard-print fez and head to 
the Leopard Lodge. True story.

Karaoke plays on the big screen. Tom Jones belts out I-yi-yi, Delilah as Japan 
play Wales and nobody cares. The US run out to play England. Both teams huddle. 
Flags of both countries flap about. And the footy action is good. There’s a 
dummy by England’s Alex Gray, who streets the field. Tom Mitchell, England’s 
captain, does some strong running, hard charges at speed. Lenny Kravitz belts 
out over the intercom.

Quade Cooper hopeful of Australia sevens debut with agreement in place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/08/quade-cooper-hopeful-of-australia-sevens-debut-with-agreement-in-place>
USA speedster Perry Baker sets sail and hares off for the try-line, running 
over. But he plants a foot on the dead-ball line and stuffs it up. And England 
win, later falling to Australia in the quarter-final. The Zorros from Canberra 
are advised they’re not allowed to take “selfie” photos with staff members 
because … there is a rule they cannot. Because security runs the world, or at 
least Sydney.

On the field a streaker tears out and about, and dozens of bright-bibbed 
security guards studiously face the other way, trained as they are to focus on 
the crowd, the poor drones. Eventually the man is collared by police, and 
thrown out along with 81 other people. If those numbers were thrown out of an 
A-league game there’d be tabloid terror. But it’s rugby, so there isn’t.

The last game of Saturday night is Australia versus New Zealand, and a bearded 
hipster-looking fellow on the big screen is dancing up a storm to John 
Farnham’s “You’re the Voice”, making a motion as if drawing the whole song into 
his very being. Mick says he was on the big screen earlier in the day, on 
“Oblivious Cam”, pretending to read theAustralian Financial Review. Would a 
young adult dressed in a black tie and jacket bring the business pages to the 
rugby? They would not. Is the hipster something of a plant, an actor? We may 
never know. But good luck to him.

And as we file out with the masses I think, good luck to the ARU. For all the 
entertainment of the rugby and the appreciation of the action and skill, if 
there wasn’t the party atmosphere, no-one bar Fijians and bearded plants would 
attend. But that’s OK. Because Sevens has found a home in Sydney town.
 