
The best place in the world to watch Brazil’s games during this brilliant 
World Cup is theEstádio do Maracanã in Rio de Janeiro 
<http://www.stadiumguide.com/maracana/>. Capacity 79,000; a giant mothership 
from space; the eyes of teemingbillions upon you. Super stadium.

The next best place in the world would be one of those “Live Sites” on 
Copacabana Beach, where 300,000 people reportedly gathered for Brazil’s first 
game against Croatia. Massive screens, a sandy beach, drinking, dancing, and 
cool, sexy people gyrating their midriffs to a rhythm Australians can’t hear 
much as humans can’t detect dog whistles. Lot to like.

Failing that, the next best place would be a bar, any bar, in Rio or São Paolo 
or anywhere, really, in the giant, teemingfutebol-obsessed mega-nation of Brazil
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>. The people love their footy 
like Buddhists love a gong.

Failing that the best place would be a bar with a big screen in Buenos Aires, 
Cancun, Biarritz, Honolulu, Phuket, Fiji, Bali, New Orleans, Tuscany, 
Queenstown, Cable Beach in Broome, southern France, the Greek Islands, Hamilton 
Island, the Black Forest of Germany, the less touristy parts of Spain, and Guam.

Failing that there’s Braza Churrascaria <http://www.braza.com.au/> in Darling 
Harbour, the firstcachaça <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cacha%C3%A7a> – an 
original Brazilian spirit made of sugarcane – bar in Australia, with 80 types 
of beers and 160 wines, which should be plenty. It’s 10pm and four hours before 
kick-off between Chile and Brazil, and the joint is jumping.

Top joint, Barza. Long bench tables, big groups of people of all ages and 
nationalities eating giant chunks of meat on a stick. Incredible meat. 
Char-grilled, salty chunks of goodness. They love their meat in Brazil, I write 
having heard someone say it once. They could love broccoli or oysters or the 
common turnip, all I know. The things I don’t know about Brazil could crash 
Wikipedia.

What I do know about Brazil is this: Pelé is from there. And Zico (a Guardian 
columnist, no less <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/zico>). And Socrates. 
There are copper mines.And a creepy film about blue-eyed Hitler spawn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H58H_kAZZsY> who live in Brazil and do stuff, 
I don’t know, I didn’t watch it.

Flags of the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> teams hang from the 
roof, green-and-yellow footballs line the balustrades, and young people in 
yellow shirts carry long, kebab-like prongs of delicious chunks of meat. Heap 
of different beers; super wine list; bar-staff mixing up mojitos. You could get 
used to it.

At 11pm, one of the last tables, a group in Brazil shirts and scarves, pay 
their bill and leave. And pretty soon the joint is empty bar me and the 
bar-staff, who are cleaning up. And I wonder … um … sign says the game’s on the 
telly here. What’s going on?

And then they come: Brazilians. Cool and well dressed, they speak with exotic 
tongues and play the table-soccer machine, and don’t pack the bar as Aussies, 
Kiwis or Brits, say, would, but rather hang back and talk. Men hug. Girls hug.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F02%2Faway-days-watching-brazil-v-chile-in-darling-harbour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F1%2F1404200114793%2Ff09c0904-0bae-44a6-a290-b4049424fd19-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Watching%20Brazil%20v%20Chile%20in%20Darling%20Harbour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F02%2Faway-days-watching-brazil-v-chile-in-darling-harbour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Watching%20Brazil%20v%20Chile%20in%20Darling%20Harbour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F02%2Faway-days-watching-brazil-v-chile-in-darling-harbour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F1%2F1404200114793%2Ff09c0904-0bae-44a6-a290-b4049424fd19-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fans watch the game in Brazil (not Australia, sorry). Photograph: Martha 
Morais/Fotoarena/Corbis 
Just before kick-off and my mates turn up, four hours late, blind off their 
nuts and babbling like fools.

“Come on, Chile!” asserts Walshy. Henry tells anyone who’ll listen that Brazil 
fears Germany, who he’s backed at 12-1. And so to kick-off, and we’re away. And 
all eyes are on the big screen. But the atmosphere’s lacking a bit, and you 
realise there’s no commentary.

“We want sound! We want sound!” asserts Walshy, trying to get the bar to join 
him in the chant. A bar manager comes over.

“We’re trying to get the sound on,” he says.

“Goodonya, champion!” says Walshy.

Neymar is chopped down by. 

“Puta!” yells a man. 

Henry comes back with three stubbies of Tooheys New.

“Exotic choice,” I muse.

“Asked the barman, ‘What do you suggest?’ He said anything but the Brazilian 
beer.”

“So you went with New,” I reply. “There are 80 different kinds of beer.”

“And that should be plenty,” says Henry. 

Walshy starts singing: “Come on, Chile, come on, come on. Come on, Chile, come 
one.” Those nearby are amused or bemused or both.

Henry continues: “So I said to this Brazilian bloke at the bar, ‘How do you 
feel? Y’know, lot of pressure on your country to win this World Cup. You’re 
expected to.’ Look at all these people here, they’ve just turned up expecting 
to win. As an All Blacks supporter, I know how they feel.”

And then … “GOOOOOOAAALLLLLL!” And the bar is up as one. Someone’s whipped a 
cross in and someone’s bunted the ball in, and the people cheer fit to lift the 
roof. Men celebrate like they’ve scored themselves. There’s double pumping 
fists, hugging, a man runs in front of the big screen doing an albatross’s 
wing-span morphed with Superman sort of thing, the Brazil flag around his neck.

When it dies down, Henry continues: “Arrogance, that’s what it is. Not in a 
bad way. But these Brazilian people, they expect to win.”

And then … silence. Or at least a low murmuring. Chile have equalised. Wow. 
And that’s how we go to half-time.

Second half and it’s the Hulk Show. Great player, cool name. Don’t they have 
good names, the Brazilian team. It’s all exotic and cool – Neymar. Pele, 
Socrates, Zico. And then there’s … Fred. Ha. Fred. That’s it. Big striker, 
Fred. Indeed all of Brazil’s defenders look like six-foot uber-men, while 
Chile’s forwards are nippy little terriers. Won’t be much going on in the air 
for them, one would warrant.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F02%2Faway-days-watching-brazil-v-chile-in-darling-harbour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F1%2F1404200218422%2Fa6deb6c6-2ec4-4ce7-93da-1c4d198a0b16-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Watching%20Brazil%20v%20Chile%20in%20Darling%20Harbour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F02%2Faway-days-watching-brazil-v-chile-in-darling-harbour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Watching%20Brazil%20v%20Chile%20in%20Darling%20Harbour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F02%2Faway-days-watching-brazil-v-chile-in-darling-harbour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F1%2F1404200218422%2Fa6deb6c6-2ec4-4ce7-93da-1c4d198a0b16-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brazil celebrate their shoot out victory while Chile look on in despair. 
Photograph: Ryan Pierse - Fifa via Getty Images 
And then … GOOOOOOAAALLLLLL!” The Hulk! Brilliant! And the bar is up as one. 
But then: the realisation.No goal. The Superman guy stands and spits venom at 
the screen:“PUTA! PUTA! PUTA!”

But Brazil come again. Hulk shoots! Gee, he’s good. Brilliant player. A right 
foot rocket draws a super save by the Chilean keeper. Brilliant stuff. 
Beautiful stuff. La jingo bonita? Something like it.

And so to extra-time. And 90 seconds from penalties. And … OOOOOOAAHHH! 
PINILLA! THE CHILEAN STRIKER LAUNCHES ONE WHICH HITS THE CROSSBAR!

OOOOH! HOW ABOUT THAT? BRAZIL ALMOST GONE IN THEIR OWN WORLD CUP!

Wow. 

But wait! BALL THE OTHER END! HULK! SHOOTS! MISSES! CORNER!

And people in the bar ride their seats like jockeys. And there’s the whistle. 
And we – all the people in this bar, all the people of Brazil – are going to 
penalties.

People now appear to be praying. Women put their hands over their mouths. 
Others hold their little fists together as if in prayer.

“Come on Chile, come on, come on,” says Walshy.

Both teams line up on the halfway, holding one another. People in the bar hold 
one another. First up, David Luiz. “GOOOAAALL!”

Chile man Pinilla lines up. Comes in. MISSES! AND THE BAR IS UP AS ONE AGAIN! 
HOW ABOUT THIS! Happy days in the Braza Bar, and no argument.

A big-haired dude, Willian, comes in … MISSES! HOOKS IT WIDE … OH! “Puta!” 
says a man.

Chile’s turn. Penalties. How about ‘em! Top theatre. Sport comes in. Hits it! 
MISSES! ANOTHER FINE SAVE BY THE GOALIE MAN OF BRAZIL! AND THE BRAZA BAR IS UP 
AGAIN. This is golden Brazilian bullion.

Marcelo, of Brazil. Lotta hair. Big man. HE SCORES! “GOOAALLLL!” His 
team-mates pray as if to Mecca.

No20 of Chile scores. Two-one in the penalties. Silence. Here’s the Hulk! He 
won’t miss. HE DOES! OH! HIS MIGHTY BOOMING LEFT BOOT CANNONS INTO THE LEGS OF 
THE DIVING GOALIE, AND CHILE CAN EVEN IT UP!

Wow. There are people who can’t look at the screen here in Braza Bar. David 
Diaz of Chile, comes in, makes it 2-2. Wow. And here comes … who is it? Oh - Mr 
Neymar. The wunderkind. The skinny spunk with the dud hair, the Hero of The 
Nation … he comes in … stutters … “GOOOAALLLL!”

And it comes down to this.

Here’s No18 of Chile. Gonzalo … he comes in … hits it! … CROSS-BAR! HE MISSES! 
AND BRAZIL ARE THROUGH! AND THE BRAZA BAR OF DARLING HARBOUR, SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA 
ERUPTS LIKE IT’S 1999 AND THEY’VE ALL WON LOTTO! OOOOOOH, YEEEAGGHHH, AND YOU 
WOULDN’T BE ANYWHERE ELSE!*

(* Except for Phuket, Cable Beach, the Black Forest, etc.). 
 