
“The greatest trick the devil ever pulled,” says Kevin Spacey’s Roger “Verbal” 
Kint in the 1995 sleeper hit The Usual Suspects, “was convincing the world he 
did not exist.” Similarly, sort of, the greatest trick the world of televised 
professional darts has ever pulled is actually existing at all.

 That people will tune in and turn up in big numbers to watch middle-aged men 
in very bad shirts throwing sharp little spears at a big wheel of cheese – and 
really, really enjoy it – is a piece of chutzpah Keyser Soze would appreciate. 
How the hell did they pull that off?

 But pull it off they have, and how. The professional darts circuit stages a 
hugely-supported, high-rating, broadcast-live-in-several-countries world series 
of darts. It’s a made-for-television mega-operation with raucous tournaments in 
Dubai, Shanghai, Auckland, Glasgow, Perth and Tokyo.

 We’re here at “The Star” in Sydney among upwards of 1500 merry Sydney-siders 
dressed as convicts and pirates and super heroes and Ghostbusters. Friday and 
Saturday they’ll get 2000 – as good as sold out. The format pits a travelling 
top eight of darts champions against the host country’s best local talent. And 
for one Tasmanian 21-year-old, it means tossing arrows against a legend.

 Corey Chadby is the “new sensation” of Aussie darts because he’s 21 and very 
good. His old man was a darts player and his old man before him, and there’s a 
huge mob of family up from Tasmania in “Team Cadby” T-shirts. They call him 
“The King”. His darts are 24 gram tungsten torpedoes. And if he continues on 
his current trajectory, he’s Aussie darts’ next big thing.

 Yet it wasn’t until five years ago that Chadby was allowed to play 
competitively. “My father wouldn’t let me play until I was sixteen, until I 
could count and chalk,” he says. “But I’ve been basically throwing darts since 
I was five years old.”

 Cadby competes on the Dartplayers Australia (DPA) tour, from which he wins an 
income capable of supporting his little family – partner, two-year-old, 
7-month-old. Not bad for a 21-year-old travelling Australia throwing little 
spears.

 Yet the real money is in Europe. It’s in his plans. “That’s the dream, mate,” 
he says. “That’s everyone’s dream. So I’m going finish off the Aussie circuit 
and have a word to the missus. In the DPA, you travel all over Australia. It’s 
a good experience though you get sick of planes. “But mate I’ve lived off it 
the last 12 months. It supports my family, that’s the main thing.”

 So what’s the plan? “I’m just going to keep playing like I am, and keep 
practising. And let the darts do the talking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Faway-days-team-cad-takes-on-the-power-as-big-time-darts-hit-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a60af7cbd43a40f9ceba397296db4e0dca7e29%2F77_0_4537_3712%2F4537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Team%20Cadby%20takes%20on%20The%20Power%20as%20big-time%20darts%20hit%20Sydney%20%7C%20Matt%20Cleary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Faway-days-team-cad-takes-on-the-power-as-big-time-darts-hit-sydney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Team%20Cadby%20takes%20on%20The%20Power%20as%20big-time%20darts%20hit%20Sydney%20%7C%20Matt%20Cleary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Faway-days-team-cad-takes-on-the-power-as-big-time-darts-hit-sydney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a60af7cbd43a40f9ceba397296db4e0dca7e29%2F77_0_4537_3712%2F4537.jpg>
 Phil ‘The Power’ Taylor hams it up before the Sydney Darts Masters. 
Photograph: Pacific Pres/REX/Shutterstock 
 Cadby trains every day, looking to get down from 501 in the least number of 
three-dart throws. He’ll do that for an hour, then take a break. Then he’ll 
practice for another hour. That’s his day. Unlike the cliche of the 
heavy-drinking arrow man, Cadby keeps largely to himself. “I’m a family man,” 
he smiles. “I don’t go out much.”

 And good luck to him – because he’ll need it. For tonight, in his first time 
on television, he’s about to take on the awesome Phil “The Power” Taylor, the 
greatest darts player there’s ever been. Even non-darts folk have heard of The 
Power; sixteen-time world champion; eleven World Grand Prix titles. He is the 
Bradman, Jordan and Gretsky of darts. And he looks like a lawn bowler from Woy 
Woy.

 We head out among the crowd of Mormons and Trumps and Space Rangers and nuns 
and Tellytubbies to watch the first match: local boy Rhys Mathewson – aka 
“Muffo”: 21g Spectres, resident of Hoppers Crossing near former state research 
farm at Werribee – taking on James “The Machine” Wade and his 20g Unicorns.

 The pair trade 180s, and the caller man’s larynx rasps long into the night: 
“One hundred and eiiiiiggghhtttyyyyyyy”. It’s like he’s giving birth to 
something. Something very big. And up they go, the Wallies and Ghostbusters and 
that alien dog thing from that ‘80s show, ALF, all leaping about in the way of 
these things. And it’s good to be at the darts.

 Things go to script in the match with The Machine out to a 5-2 lead in the 
best of 11 sets. But he misses a match-winning dart and our man Muffo wins the 
next three legs to square it up 5-all. When Mathewson hits his fifth 180 of the 
match followed by double-20, it completes a sensational win for the local lad, 
knocking off one of the big boys 6-5. It’s the first time this world tour 
season one of the challengers has knocked off a champ. The Australian media 
dude in the room punches the air repeatedly. Seems it’s kind of a big deal.

Away Days: boxer Joseph Parker's Rumble in Paradise thrills Samoa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/01/away-days-boxer-joseph-parkers-rumble-in-paradise-thrills-samoa>
 “It’s unbelievable,” Mathewson tells compere Paul Gow afterwards. “I felt 
comfortable up there and I wasn’t nervous, but usually when you miss your 
doubles against James you don’t get another chance. I thought I was in trouble 
at 5-2, but fortunately he gave me a chance and I took it. It’s amazing for me.”

 A few matches later, the one we’ve come to see – The Power versus The King. 
Cadby comes out through a ruck of punters. He’s hugging mates, waving, urging 
on the crowd. How about this for a young man? First time on television in front 
of a crowd a hundred times bigger than anything he’s ever known. But he’s into 
it, this big chunk of Tasmania with his Travis Bickle haircut and voluminous 
shirt. “Come on!” he urges the people. And come they do, bubbling about like so 
much fizzy drink.

And here cometh The Power, and the joint loses its mind. “There’s only one, 
Phil Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/phil-taylor>,” they sing to 
acclaim the great man, dancing about and drinking beers and revelling in the 
craic. Taylor takes the stage, waves, slightly stooped, shirt untucked, ambles 
up for his first three throws and boom – “One hundred and eightyyyyyyyyy,” 
yells the raspy-throated announcer man, and the joint is a cauldron of sound.

 When Cadby answers with his own “One hundred and eightyyyyyyyyy” and punches 
the sky, his supporters are up as one. “Come on Corey! Smash him!” implores one 
mate. “Smash hiiiiim!”

And so it goes, the pair of arrow-men trading 180s as Mormons dance with Power 
Rangers and groups of nuns scull beer and cheer. The air is thick with irony 
and incongruity. It’s great.

 Eventually, and though Cadby has his moments, The Power cleans him up, six 
legs to three. Cadby souvenirs the board and asks for a photo with Taylor. 
There’s some chat with media before we corner him out the back. He’s still 
sweating slightly. He looks his 21 years. But he’s smiling still.

 How was that? He shakes his head. “Mate, 21-year-old and I’m playing against 
the greatest darts player there’s ever been. It’s unbelievable, mate. It’s 
unbelievable.”

 That it is. Good luck to it.
 