
“This is Sparta!” roared Gerard Butler as he booted old mate into a really 
deep pit, along with all the other emissaries of King Xerses of Persia in the 
splendid film 300, the one with the massive wolf and the muscle men with 
swords, and the invading moron-hordes who thought the only way to conquer 
Sparta was by sending tens of thousands of increasingly fierce killers and 
swordsmen through a narrow gap in a sheer cliff. And of course there was 
slaughter, but they were mostly baddies.

 What? Sparta? We’re at Sydney’s ANZ Stadium, “Australia’s Home Ground” 
according to liars, for a Spartan Race, a “sprint” of seven kilometres over 
obstacles in around the bowels of the Great Olympic Stadium, ANZ. It’s round 
one of the Spartan Race series, and fit-heads have come from all over to throw 
themselves at the … thing. The course. The obstacles. On the course.

 People are crawling, jumping, sliding on a slippery plastic mat under thin 
wire, pushing really heavy sleds, pulling really heavy sleds, climbing across 
huge nets like that bit in War of the Worlds when the aliens scoop up the 
people in nets. They climb under triangular tubes and hop over them. They sweat 
and jog and climb ropes upside down like you see people do in training montages 
of movies about war.

 Shirtless men here, and hard-bodied women in lycra, hard little muscles, 
veins, varicose veins. All sorts of people, many age-groups, but mostly 20- and 
30-somethings. People with “Fat and Fit” written on their backs. There are 
“Dubbo Assassins” and “Aussie Invaders”. Heap of Invaders, heap of Assassins, 
Dubbo’s gyms will be empty today.

 And they’re all running about and leaping and climbing, and no-one appears to 
be winning, as such, they’re just all doing lots of different stuff inside and 
outside the stadium’s mighty jaws of entry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425796616556%2F143ab5c0-1adb-40d6-a3b1-2e0f60e5882c-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20the%20Spartan%20Race%20series%20at%20ANZ%20Stadium%20in%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20the%20Spartan%20Race%20series%20at%20ANZ%20Stadium%20in%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425796616556%2F143ab5c0-1adb-40d6-a3b1-2e0f60e5882c-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Like an excerpt from a training scene in a war movie. Photograph: Connect PR 
 ANZ Stadium? People bag it. I certainly do. There’s a huge “Soviet” feel to 
the whole one-time Olympic precinct. It’s a long way from anywhere, the beer 
comes in plastic cups and big events are policed by dull goons in bright yellow 
bibs. Yet it’s seen Cathy Freeman’s hot lap, John Aliosi’s golden penalty goal, 
andBilly Idol sitting mute aboard a flaming hovercraft shouting “We want some 
power!” as the entertainment for the 2002 NRL grand final fell flat 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcJcsWoD3fU>.

 And today it hosts a bunch of Spartans, running about, lifting things and 
jumping, and sliding, and crawling over huge industrial storage containers, and 
pushing really heavy sleds and sweating up a storm. And rather enjoying it, 
from the looks of it, as one would rather enjoy pushing a 50-kilogram sled 
across un-sanded wooden floorboards. Oh heck yes. That would be tremendous.

 Lot of merchandise stalls here. Fit people buy stuff, it’s a known thing, 
they have disposable income because they’re less likely spending $50 after work 
necking schooners and smoking cigarettes and eating chip butties. Fact*.

 *Not a fact. Probably not one. No-one checks this stuff anyway.

 And so! They run up and down steps, and hop up and down steps. They take 
photos of each other. Heap of phones. Quite a few of those Go-Pro head camera 
things taking movies that will be watched by one person and once only. Quite a 
few tattoos, headbands. There’s a kids’ race, little orange people in T-shirts, 
scuttling about.

 Evocative smell of Dencorub and Deep Heat. Who are these people? Gym-heads, 
mainly. Fit people. They’d be the ones who run about in those Tough Mudder 
events with the mud and the fire, and the machine guns shooting people and 
killing them. They don’t kill people, it would be bad. Yet people actively sign 
up for – indeed pay upwards of $700 – to undertake each of the 10 Spartan 
events around Australia, everything from 7km sprints to 42km “ultra beast” 
events which test one’s ability to overcome pain. Because through pain comes 
reward, apparently.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425797171377%2F59fb5593-268d-499d-91cb-d2b7bc614e8a-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20the%20Spartan%20Race%20series%20at%20ANZ%20Stadium%20in%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20the%20Spartan%20Race%20series%20at%20ANZ%20Stadium%20in%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425797171377%2F59fb5593-268d-499d-91cb-d2b7bc614e8a-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Wall climbing: one of the gruelling Spartan Race disciplines. Photograph: 
Connect PR 
 Damn but there’s a lot of assassins here from Dubbo. Heap of them. Crack 
squad of fit-heads from Dubbo’s gyms and karate clubs, maybe. What if they 
were, actual assassins. Trained killers, mercenaries. Stone killers. Political 
killers. Ninjas. Instead of a bunch of people from Dubbo. We may never know.

 And so to the slippery slide, the best bit for mine, with the wire over it. 
Electrified? Sadly not. But you wouldn’t want it electric-chair-electrified 
because that would be silly, and violate health and safety. But rather more 
like electric fences that give cattle a little jolt. And you might feel a 
slight sting but only to your pride, as Marcellus Wallace warned Butch Coolidge 
in Pulp Fiction.

Is this living? Do you have to really know living – life – by being close to 
death?

Heap of tattoos, as you’ll find among any grouping of Gen-Y types. Tattoos 
used to be tough-stickers for Navy men and Comancheros. Today they’re fashion, 
modern art, things that talk of who you are, which is usually something a 
25-year-old person is still working it out. But who knows, maybe this 
generation of 25-year-olds will be the one among all generations of human 
history that reaches 40 and looks back on themselves aged 25 and, as they look 
at the fading Polynesian tribal design on their sagging caucasian biceps 
thinks, ‘Yeah I’m glad I got this drawn on my arm forever, oh heck yes’.


 Obstinate sled section looks the hardest. It’s the last thing you do before 
you run out of the damned course, and receive your medal. Really heavy sleds 
with wooden tracks being pushed and then pulled along wooden tracks. A silly 
thing.

 There’s a mob called “Biceps” who are an “Obstacle Course Racing School”. So 
there’s a school one can attend, if one is of a mind. Rich tapestry, isn’t it, 
humankind? Headbands, long “socks” that hold in one’s corpuscles, or something, 
pumping pulmonary fluids, promoting pressure, and who knows, pleasure, like a 
second skin if the first one’s not up to it. Marketing miracle, selling 
something for which humans already have, like a head or ankles. You sell 
someone second ankles, you could sell … that’s going nowhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425795131519%2F24d4ed5e-0b47-42d9-a239-b3417e9f0dbb-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20the%20Spartan%20Race%20series%20at%20ANZ%20Stadium%20in%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20the%20Spartan%20Race%20series%20at%20ANZ%20Stadium%20in%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Faway-days-spartan-race-series-anz-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F8%2F1425795131519%2F24d4ed5e-0b47-42d9-a239-b3417e9f0dbb-2060x1373.jpeg>
 An athlete gets to grips with the obstinate sled section. Photograph: Connect 
PR 
 Yes! And so they finish, laughing, holding hands, thrilled with the flush of 
it, veins flush with happy white cells and haemoglobin, these happy 
hob-goblins, these fit-heads. And even through the thick smug fog of your 
sneering cynicism you have to smile along with these funny, happy, fit people 
who’ve just spent an hour flogging themselves near to death.

 Superman finishes, and two Spidermen who stop and high-five others who’ve 
escaped this odd, urban, stadium course of obstacles. Why? “You’ll know at the 
finish line” runs the tagline, and it appears people do. Everybody dies,” says 
another sign, “but not everybody lives.” And if you’re in a coma, you would 
agree, unless you’re able to have really good dreams like you’re in heaven and 
inventing your own universe like that movie with Robin Williams that was 
rubbish. That would be pretty good, though, and arguably quite a lot better 
than running around ANZ Stadium getting electrified by a fence on a 
slip-and-slide.

 Is this living? Do you have to really know living – life – by being close to 
death? Perhaps you do. Anyone who’s thought, “This is it, I’m done”, and come 
out the other end a sentient human being, they’ll tell you: the air smells 
sweeter, you don’t care if the dress is blue, black, white or gold, and Alan 
Jones seems human. And maybe that’s sort of why people enjoy these sorts of 
activities: the joy of finishing after enduring something really quite hard, 
something that may even have taken them close to death.

 Or maybe they just like sweating. We may never know. Unless we sign up for a 
Spartan Race <http://spartanrace.com.au/>. There are worse things to do on a 
Sunday morning.
 