
And so to the mighty stadium Allianz, a name you have to write in italics and 
pronounce like you’re a member of the French Resistance, as in “Bonjour, put 
your ’ands up, I am a partisan member of zeeallianz.” The Australian way of 
saying it would be like “alliance”, with emphasis on the middle syllables, 
notably the “i”, perhaps with one’s fingers squeezing the bridge of one’s nose 
to give it that dinkum Aussie drawl. “Where’s the footy on tonight? Allianz?” 
But you don’t, you call itAllianz like you’re a member of the French resistance.

If you want.

We’re drinking James Boag’s Premium Lager aboard the Manly Fast Ferry (a big 
tick for civilisation in a sometimes cloistered state) part of the teeming 
multitudes coming from across Sydney by all manner of conveyance for the Big 
One: NSW Waratahs and ACT Brumbies, semi-final of theSuper Rugby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-rugby> tournament. And it should be a 
ripper.

We toddle off the ferry and luck into a minibus taxi, alighting minutes later 
under bats and a black night sky, gazing upwards to the bulging mothership glow 
ofAllianz, the best footy ground in Sydney. 

And we’re in. And there’s a top crowd in, the joint is near-on chock-a-block, 
at 38,800 perhaps a couple thousand shy of capacity. Top crowd. For when this 
baby’s full it heaves and roars, the air thick with reverberating noise. Love 
this joint.

We take our seats – myself, three Irishmen, two Kiwis, a Pom – in the last row 
of Bay 22 behind the northern goal posts. Cheap seats but fine – atAllianz 
there’s a view from everywhere, unless you want to stand up, in our case, in 
which there’s concrete in the way. Otherwise, top vision.

The Brumbies run out and their supporter bay fizzes with yellow flags. 
Elsewhere there are sporadic outbreaks of yellow, daffodils shooting out an 
algal blue lake. For this is New South Wales land, Brumby People, 95% proof.

The Waratahs run out and the winner-lovin’ Sydney people are up as one, 
cheering and clapping and sayingYaaay. The players stream through a haze of 
smoke as if into battle. There’s a formidable look to these Tahs, the sky-blue 
ladder leaders with a dozen-plus Wallabies, the testing material of the 
Australian conference. They’ve been huge this year, the Tahs, and improving 
each week. Juggernaut look about them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Faway-days-nsw-waratahs-v-act-brumbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F29%2F1406619594546%2Fea68c67a-dccd-417f-a21b-f6cdd2afb5e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20NSW%20Waratahs%20v%20ACT%20Brumbies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Faway-days-nsw-waratahs-v-act-brumbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20NSW%20Waratahs%20v%20ACT%20Brumbies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Faway-days-nsw-waratahs-v-act-brumbies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F29%2F1406619594546%2Fea68c67a-dccd-417f-a21b-f6cdd2afb5e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Brumbies fans create a yellow bubble at the Allianz. Photograph: Joosep 
Martinson/Getty Images 
Yet these Brumbies believe. And they believe because they hate. The rivalry 
between the provinces goes way back, back to the amateur days when New South 
Wales – the bulging mega-state that can choose from five million people – would 
routinely hand out beatings to the men of the Australian Capital Territory, a 
pseudo-state shaped like an odd bunch of grapes, modelled on Washington DC, 
enclosed within NSW, a population of 300,000, effectively the town of Canberra.

Yet by the early 1990s the little brother began to believe as well as to hate, 
and in 1994 won a famous victory over the bully-boys, 44-28. Two years later 
ACT Brumbies were a fully-fledged province, taking the best of the locals – men 
such as George Gregan, Stephen Larkham and Joe Roff – and merging them with 
other-state “outcasts” such as Owen Finegan, Ewen McKenzie and Brett Robinson, 
serious players looking for love, and hate.

And so the Tahs kick-off and the Gilbert (the ball) punctures the smoke and 
flies into the black of the night, and two packs of forwards throw themselves 
at one another with hard-boned, meaty gusto. The Brumbies have made a Thing of 
“physicality” this season, winning games on the back of Test-like tightness. 
The Tahs have been tough, fast and high-skilled. Could be a cracker. Could be a 
crashing bore. That, friends, is rugby.

Brumbies halfback Nic White launches a box kick over his scrum and 
bouncy-haired Fijian wing man Henry Speight – whose half-madUncle George 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Speight> is serving life in Naboro Maximum 
Security Prison for kidnapping 36 government ministers in a coup in 2000 – 
screams after it, his afro streaming outwards behind him like the giant fan on 
one of those speedboats in that show with a giant brown bear in the Florida 
Everglades,Gentle Ben. 

Ha. Gentle Ben <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061255/>.

One of our party, Irish John, heads off for his shout at 7:58. Returns at 8:28 
(we time it), a disgraceful state of affairs. Lines for beer stretch 40 metres. 
And as we drink our plastic cups of beer that have taken so long, we whinge 
that “it’s an outage, disgraceful, and that in New Zealand they serve plastic 
bottles, just hand them out. In Sydney they don’t care how long it takes you to 
get a beer. You’ve paid your money, why make it quick and easy to buy a beer? 
Or anything?

Understaff the joint, stuff the punters. They wouldn’t cop it in New Zealand. 
Yet we Australians, we non-complaining, turn-up-anyway Australians, get shafted 
by The Man. And one day, and I see it happening sooner rather than later, 
people are going to come to the footy with devices such asthese ones 
<http://www.papabert.com/groupings/Sneaky-Drinking-Gear.asp>, chock-full of 
beer, or rum, or something. And all becauseAllianz don’t cater for the people 
properly. And it’s an outrage, etc.”

Kiwi Henry takes off, comes back with a tray-full of beers three minutes later.

“How’d you get back so quick?” asks John.

“Went to the front of the queue,” says Henry.

“How’d you do that?” asks John.

“Because I’m a Maori,” says Henry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Faway-days-nsw-waratahs-v-act-brumbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F29%2F1406619993101%2Facaf8e6f-11a3-45a3-b8d2-576418a5cc7f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20NSW%20Waratahs%20v%20ACT%20Brumbies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Faway-days-nsw-waratahs-v-act-brumbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20NSW%20Waratahs%20v%20ACT%20Brumbies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F30%2Faway-days-nsw-waratahs-v-act-brumbies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F29%2F1406619993101%2Facaf8e6f-11a3-45a3-b8d2-576418a5cc7f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kurtley Beale celebrates his try. Photograph: Matt King/Getty Images 
ALOFA! ALOFA ALOFA! EVEN! INTERCEPT! The Auckland-born wing-man, once a Sydney 
Rooster, latches onto a bouncing ball and scorches 50 metres to score, the buzz 
of his 23 years of life, one would warrant. What must that be like, the roars 
of 40,000 people? Andall for you, all for you. Actors and show business types 
crave this stuff. Ever seen those “celebrity” footy games that raise money for 
blah-de-blah? Organised and embraced by show-business (show-off) types who lust 
after the feeling that Alofa Alofa just enjoyed on his five-second piss-bolt to 
glory. True story.

POTGIETER! Jacques Potgieter, the giant South African, body of a 690-litre 
stainless steel Westinghouse, game of a poor man’s Victor Matfield, haircut 
like Conan The Barbarian’s, storms down field on a Viking raid, and the people 
roar him onwards,Go. Top stuff.      

Brumbies fight back. Their scrum pushes the Tahs’ one back, buckles them, 
momentum with the visitors. They win a penalty. Big men exult. Little ones flit 
in to gee the big ones up, pat them. It’s a Thing in rugby, the scrum, it’s a 
power generator, a fulcrum. Rugby league’s done away with scrums in an effort 
to “clean up” the game. Yet it’s league’s loss. A story for another time.

For now the Brumbies reserves are trotting the perimeter, booed by local 
partisans. Most of these players are Sydney people, yet dressed in these 
colours, they’re the enemy. Top stuff.

Gee there’s a great crowd in. Heaving, good as chock-a-block. If they could 
put another 20,000 in here, somehow, it’d be one of the world’s great football 
grounds, like the Bernabéu in Madrid or Celtic Park in Glasgow or even 
Brisbane’s Suncorp, the old Lang Park. But they won’t so it isn’t.

HOOPER! Michael Hooper, the Waratahs flanker and captain, this wonderboy, all 
of 22, drives fullback Jesse Mogg backwards in a driving, one-on-one tackle, a 
farm boy hefting a sack of wheat on his shoulder. Hooper’s mates pile in, and 
over. The Tahs win a penalty. Right on the wing, front of the stand, on 
halfway. The crowd lose their shit.

But the Brumbies aren’t done. Henry Speight screams into the corner, touches 
down. And from there the game fairly pulsates. The crowd gets the 
“New! South! Wales!” chant going. Kurtley Beale steals a ball in a ruck and 
screams into the corner, flashing a smile to the people with his Indigenous 
flag mouthguard. Brumbies win penalties, turn down “the points”, run it, the 
ACT way. Top stuff. They will lose. But top stuff.

Fools try to get a Mexican Wave going. Five times they try, during the most 
compelling part of the game. We yell at them, “Siddown, Muppets”. A security 
guard tells them to cease. This serves just to embolden others. Thankfully 
there’s still no wave. Annoying people.

Then, the match-winner. In the game-defining – perhaps season-defining – play, 
Waratahs reserve lock Will Skelton - 22 years, 201cm,138kg, the man is visible 
from space – roars up field, bumping off Brumbies like a Brahman bull storming 
through a ragged pack of cattle dogs. He shakes them off, fends them to the 
dust. As they finally haul him to the ground he pops a perfect pass for Bernard 
Foley,flying. And flying away. The five-eighth streets the cover defence, 
launches into a swan-dive, crashes over the line, exalts with The People, and 
that’s the ball game - it’s Waratahs 26 defeating Brumbies eight. And the 
Waratahs are into the grand final.

And then we go to the Pickled Possum <http://pickledpossum.com.au/>.
 