
We’re on the platform at Sydney’s Central Station under a blood red supermoon, 
a glorious chunk of lunar goodness, full and glowing like an all-seeing 
one-eyed sky god of the night. It’s a very good moon.

We’re joined by Genuine Italians, well dressed types in leather jackets, 
extras from that excellent crime showRomanzo Criminale, a gritty drama of drugs 
and Rome. Top drama.

We’re on the way to the A-League All Stars versus mighty Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, and we’re singing the Juve 
song. It goes to the tune of “Ole! Ole! Ole!” except “Ju-veeeee, 
Juve-Juve-Juve. Ju-veee. Ju-veeee.” And repeat. It’s like the Barmy Army’s 
self-referential ditty but with fewer syllables and reasons to kill yourself.

Juve’s Twitter feed has a picture of the team leaving their flash hotel on the 
harbour at The Rocks, with the caption “Here comes the Bianconeri!”. The magic 
of Google tells us that means “the White Blacks”, which are the colours of 
their strip, like Collingwood’s but heaps cooler.

Juve (Google says) are also nicknamed: la Vecchia Signora (the Old Lady); la 
Fidanzata d’Italia (the Girlfriend of Italy); le Zebre (the Zebras); la Signora 
Omicidi (the Killer Lady); and la Goeba (the Hunchback). So there you go.

And so to the mighty Leviathan that is ANZ Stadium, 20 minutes on the train, 
an hour along the Parramatta and Victoria roads if you’re fool enough to drive 
to the damned place, you damned fool. Damned place? No. Not really. It’s where 
Cathy Freeman scorched Olympic earth, where John Aloisi shot Australia into the 
2006 World Cup, where James Graham tried to eat Billy Slater’s ear. Massive 
stadium and sporting precinct with a Soviet feel about it, all those great 
thick Lenin statues, with worker-women in the fields with hoes, looking big.

We walk towards the ground singing Juve’s “ole” song, and then into a world of 
food. There is German, Chinese and, of course, Italian fare. We eat a felafel 
kebab, delicious meaty gozleme from Turkey and souvlaki from Greece via 
Lidcombe. Excellent fare, caterers.

And so to our seat high in the nosebleeds, top tier, beside old men in black 
berets and great coats and necklaces of garlic, which is true, except for the 
garlic.

Down on the field the teams warm up, trotting about like fancy people of 
enormous worth, hundreds of millions of dollars in Italian man-meat. And you 
wonder: should human beings value other ones like this? Is it healthy?

Just thoughts. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407833897660%2Fc13bcf56-00cb-4f03-86a8-fb3ee6c81462-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20A-League%20All%20Stars%20v%20Juventus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20A-League%20All%20Stars%20v%20Juventus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407833897660%2Fc13bcf56-00cb-4f03-86a8-fb3ee6c81462-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The teams prepare to do something slightly short of battle. Photograph: Mark 
Metcalfe/Getty Images 
Juve’s team is read out on the big screen, each player’s first name only. 
There’s “Carlos” for Carlos Teves and “Andrea” for … someone called that, I 
didn’t write it down. Pirlo, I later Google. Yet Matt Smith of the A-League 
isn’t “Matt”. Nor is Alessandro del Piero. But he is The Man, this man, and 
elicits the biggest cheer. Done a lot for Italy, Juventus, Sydney and the
A-League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league>, our ADP. He’ll 
receive a tunnel and a standing O later. Top fellah.

Sprinklers! Someone or something has turned on the sprinklers. And the ground 
gets wet in parts and millions (billions?) of dollars worth of Italian man-meat 
wanders off to have their legs rubbed, or something.

The players run back out and there are fireworks. The A-League boys circle 
huddle for quite a long time. Then we wait for television to let us kick-off. 
And then we do.

And we’re away.

Oh! Del Piero! Two minutes in the 39-year-old wonder-man pulls off a sublime 
touch, lofting the ball over the defence with the outside of his boot and 
putting Besart Berisha in space. Super skill. They reckon you never lose it. 
Mark Ella got fat, but his hands were ever of silk and honey. Shane Warne could 
still jag a leggie past any man alive.

Not a bad A-League team out here. Thomas Broich played for Germany B. Berisha 
is Albania’s greatest export after the çifteli, a long, banjo type thing, and 
patrols the box like a hunting dog on a truffle.

Couldn’t tell you who the Juventus players are but they reckon Pirlo is good. 
And Teves. And Paul Pogba, who scores goals on YouTube you should check out 
once you’re done here, they’re funky.

Another Juventus player you wouldn’t know is … me! Yes, your correspondent was 
goalkeeper for West Woden Juventus from 1977 to 1980, in the days when 
Australian football/soccer had teams with names such as Sydney Croatia, West 
Adelaide Hellas and Heidleberg United of Melbourne, their sons-of-immigrants 
supporters occasionally getting jiggy and revisiting the ancient enmities of 
their forefathers with flares and fighting and suchforth. Though it didn’t 
happen that often. Just that when it did it made the television news, because 
fighting is sexy – the TV people won’t admit it, but it is.

GOOOOOAAALLLLLL! The All Stars go one-up after some jiggy-pokery by Berisha 
leads to Marcelo Carrusca stepping off his right, noodling the ball to the top 
of the square and firing a low bullet past the despairing dive of captain, 
goalie and Italian famous person Gianluigi Buffon, who comes up with clutching 
at air. Nothing but net, baby. One-nil, All Stars.

So yes, West Woden Juventus. 

Our coach was an old painter named Otto, who drove a Kombi van and came from 
Turin. Team-mates included Martin Haywood, who would play cricket for New South 
Wales (and golf with me after we met up 30 years later), and David Borella, the 
gun player who would play for Inter Monaro SC in the National Soccer League and 
head up a lobby group for bike paths in Sydney like there are in Canberra.

Ha. So there you go.

Atmosphere? Muted. Indeed almost mute. We’re sitting high in the stands 
halfway to the supermoon, yet can hear the players barking to each other. Apart 
from the goal and the Juve fans singing their “Ju-ve” song, this feels like an 
exhibition.

Yes, Italy’s come to Homebush in great numbers. There are 55,000 here tonight 
and the green, white and red of the Italia flag glows upon the stadium. Yet the 
match lacks zest, it lacks spice. It lacks drama. It lacks much, if any, point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407834352607%2F4ac87a27-4e0d-4ac4-a003-47b348798847-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20A-League%20All%20Stars%20v%20Juventus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20A-League%20All%20Stars%20v%20Juventus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407834352607%2F4ac87a27-4e0d-4ac4-a003-47b348798847-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Humans – what are we like? Photograph: Joosep Martinson/Getty Images 
If it had been, say, Juventus versus Roma or Internazionale, or heck-fire, why 
not, Manchester United in a Champions League match, then oh hell yes, you would 
sell out Homebush and the people of Australia would go crazy-ape batshit for 
it. You could charge what you like for a corporate table and box to that 
bastard, it would be the hottest thing outside a burning branch on the highway 
to hell.

But it’s not, so it isn’t.

Oh. Must security people at these things sit 20 metres apart on the perimeter 
and stare at the crowd? Is this now our law? Or is it just how we do it? Do 
they do this in Italy? Or England? Or Albania? Do other sports grounds pay 
security guards to stare at the crowd?

A couple of lads nearby start slow clapping. And then other people start slow 
clapping. And then everybody is slow clapping. There’s nothing much else going 
on. It’s like that bit inThe Simpsons when they had a Mexico versus Portugal 
soccer match and Kent Brockman is commentating, “Centre passes to half. Centre 
holds it. Holds it…” while his Mexican counterpart is losing his mind: “Centre! 
Holds It! Holds it!”

Bit like that. 

But then: a superb long ball by Del Piero sets Bernie Ibini free down the 
right. The Sydney-raised Nigerian-born wing man swings the ball in for Berisha, 
who controls it, and … shoots! AndOH! Brilliant diving one-handed save by 
Buffon. Top stuff.

Soon enough Pogba comes up with a bit of skill that makes the people fairly 
gasp. Dribbling the ball centre field he comes to three defenders and rips off 
a step-over and body manoeuvre that sends everybody chasing a phantom footy. He 
doesn’t even touch the ball, it just rolls straight ahead. It’s like a dummy 
with his entire body. Great stuff.

Then centre holds it, holds it, etc. And the Mexican wave gets going, slowly 
at first but then thick and sweeping like an actual wave of humans. Generally 
Mexican waves suck like a Hoover, but this one’s actually OK, given everyone’s 
into it. An indictment on the spectacle? Perhaps. But that’s football anyway, 
isn’t it? Ninety minutes of “Centre holds it, holds it”, bit of a sing-song, 
punctuated by a dozen or so moments of hot, gasping action.

The big screen shows the results of a poll, that people entered by expensive 
text message, “Who has the best beard?” (I give up.)

Ten minutes to half-time and Juve fans hold up some plastic over their heads 
and form the famous stripes. Ingenious beings, human beings, given time we can 
create all sorts of shit. I wonder will apes and chimps and rhesus monkeys, our 
nearest relatives, will they evolve in the next hundred thousand years to drive 
cars and play Scrabble and form giant black-and-white striped zebra things. 
Hope so.

GOOOOOAAAAAALLLLL! Juve’s levelled it up after … oh. No, they haven’t. Carlos 
Teves has hit the post. He comes up on the big screen, all swarthy looks and 
tattooed badness. He looks like a Sardinian hit man, or a grizzled fisherman, 
an angry man of the sea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407834167372%2F79cebcfc-73ba-4b99-903f-d855b7e206cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20A-League%20All%20Stars%20v%20Juventus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20A-League%20All%20Stars%20v%20Juventus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Faway-days-a-league-all-stars-v-juventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407834167372%2F79cebcfc-73ba-4b99-903f-d855b7e206cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carlos Tevez and Besart Berisha in the meanest of bad-guy match-ups. 
Photograph: Paul Miller/EPA 
Half time, thank God, just 45 minutes and change of this silly jibber-jabber 
to go, a game with as much point as a show by your local amateur philharmonic 
society but with really expensive players.

But then … I dunno. Does it need to matter? It is a Friendly. Better than had 
they played an Angry, or a Surly, or a Miserable. “Who we got this week?” 
“Juve. Surly, away.”

Look, there’s a box where the coaches have to stand, white lines marking out a 
zone coaches aren’t allowed out of. The Juve coach stands on the very corner of 
his box, captive to an invisible force field.

Aren’t humans funny? I hope the apes and stuff catch up soon. We need some 
competition.

The game? Contrast of styles. The Italian team is more languid and graceful, 
and playing the “beautiful game”, if you will, and I do. The Aussie team is 
dogged and doing their best, the Aussie way, whacking the ball about, chasing, 
haranguing.

OH! Just wide! Juventus centre-back Claudio Marchisio gestures to the referee 
with one of those one-armed pointing gestures, palm upwards, asking the referee,
Why? How can this be? People in the crowd do that sort of praying motion with 
two hands, fingers close to their lips, like they’re crushing Doritos with 
their fingertips and taking a little nibble. It’s full body exclamation, body 
lingua franca. Top stuff.

GOOOOOOAALLLLLLLL! Juve level it up after Fernando Llorente gets his noggin on 
a cross and All Stars goalie Eugene Galekovic leaps like an electrocuted trout 
but cannot parry.

An hour passes. And … what? Oh, they’re substituting the great man, Alessandro 
Del Piero. He stands midfield and waves to The People. There’s a standing “O”. 
A-League players shake hands and pat his back. Juve players kiss him on the 
cheek and neck. Great man, great moment. But it’s time for our ADP. Nearly 40 
years of age. Slower than a ’74 Hunter Hillman. It’s time, faithful servant, 
noble steed. Time to go, to tend to your olives.

And then everyone else gets subbed off. And there are long periods of 
inactivity. We get two new goalkeepers. Some centre holds it, holds it. A Juve 
defender goes down as if harpooned. There’s a yellow card for replacement David 
Williams. Some semi-dramatic gesturing. Some singing. Berisha goes off. Broich 
goes off. Guilherme Finkler comes on. I’d change my name, if I was Guilherme 
Finkler. 

GOOOOOAALLLLLLLL! All Stars striker Tomi Juric, on for all of 30 seconds, 
rifles a left footer past the despairing famous goal man and our plucky little 
A-Leaguers, well, they’re making us proud.

Teves goes off. My but he’s a surly looking gangster. He’s like a rough-head 
Chicano from the barrios of East LA, a scary man, and dangerous. Probably a 
nice bloke.

GOOOOOAAAALLLLLL! Old mate of the confounding body language, Pauly Pogba, 
volleys one home and it’s 2-2 here at Homebush. Minutes later, into injury 
time, one of the blokes named in the best beard poll, Pirlo, sends a beautiful 
long ball out for Argentinian Roberto Pereyra, who doesn’t even bother trapping 
the ball but rather continues to run, the ball joined to his foot.

The ball is fed for diminutive new chum Sebastian Giovinco, who steps and 
weaves and shoots, the ball rebounding for Simone Pepe who smashes a 
half-volley flat and hard into the old onion bag, the net shaking as if it were 
a fisherman’s catch full of electric eels.

And that’s that: Juventus 3 defeats A-League All Stars 2. Probably deserved a 
draw, the local boys. But they’ve earned some respect here.

But, next time? Let’s have Serie A or something similar. Friendlies are fine. 
But let’s have one played in anger.

Thanks.
 