
It’s strange. In a country big on synthetic macho culture, the ability to down 
large amounts of booze is a key Australian Man Scout merit badge. Not drinking 
is for wimps. Adequate hydration is for wimps. Light beer is for wimps. 
Admittedly light beer is liquid sadness: in my brief flirtations with sobriety, 
even zero-alcohol variants don’t have that same taint of watery indecision. Yet 
throughout Queensland, the spiritual cradle of constructed manliness, the state 
where beef is considered a fruit, the most widely visible brew is XXXX Gold – a 
midstrength.

Perhaps this makes it easier to clang down jars in the heat. Perhaps the 
schoolmasterish governments that characterise this state have mandated 
provision of a low-grog standard. Perhaps Queenslanders know that full-strength 
beer is being whittled down decimal by decimal to curb alcohol volume taxation, 
and they’re staying ahead of the curve. Whatever the case, venue after venue 
has that blaring yellow sign on the wall, that tap on the rack, those 
inhabitants downing the booze equivalent of driving with the handbrake on.

It’s no surprise that they’re serving Gold out at Tony Ireland Stadium 
<http://www.tonyireland.com.au/tonyirelandstadium.html>, great racks of it 
lined up in the fridges like halfhearted artillery shells. Townsville, after 
all, is an army town. And an army ville. It’s two thirds of the way up the 
Queensland coast, deep into the tropics, almost as far from the state capital 
as Brisbane is from the distinctly different environs of Melbourne. We’re here 
to watch the next level down from Test cricket, Australia A versus South Africa 
A in an audition for each country’s upcoming summer season.

The trip to the ground on day one takes an epic traffic crawl through highway 
roadworks, deep into a westerly procession of suburbs. As the coast and the 
rocky exclamation of Castle Hill recede, Townsville subsides into flatlands, 
even this nominal winter hinting at the dryness and heat that must crash down 
in the hottest months. The car pulls up on a bend of the Ross River, naming 
point for that particular mosquito-borne fever that inflicts such aching 
langour of the body through the long months of its visitation.

Tony Ireland is an endearing stadium. Planted in the middle of a large park, 
its boundaries are enclosed by square hedges of thick tropical vegetation 
hacked into submission. The thrifty can watch the game while standing at 
sections of unvegetated chainlink, but it’s 10 bucks to come inside. The highly 
specific website can inform you there’s a 1,013-seat grandstand, a neat 
structure at one end of the ground. The other three quarters are ringed by 
sloping grass banks, the odd tree or strategic umbrella throwing shade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408501193930%2Fedfec418-e9ec-4ecb-9138-281a9a506eac-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Australia%20A%20at%20Tony%20Ireland%20Stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Australia%20A%20at%20Tony%20Ireland%20Stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408501193930%2Fedfec418-e9ec-4ecb-9138-281a9a506eac-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The view at Tony Ireland Stadium isn’t too bad. Photograph: Ian 
Hitchcock/Getty Images 
What I really like about Tony Ireland Stadium, though, is the chutzpah of Tony 
Ireland in naming it after himself. I had assumed that Tony Ireland must be a 
local giant of rugby league, but he’s a slinger of luxury cars. While I 
understand that car yards are named for their proprietor, and that businesses 
have sports grounds named for them, applying an individual’s name to an arena 
implies some sporting success of their own. Tony doesn’t care. Tony Ireland is 
a stadium, but Tony Ireland is also a man. Tony Ireland is a rock, he is Tony 
i-i-i-sland. Tony Ireland is strength. Tony Ireland is surety. Tony Ireland 
needs access to your internet history to keep this country safe. Trust Tony 
Ireland.

Townsville doesn’t feel real. Those of us from the southern half of the 
country have seasons, changes in weather and mood. When Townsville musters what 
passes as winter, one or two midnights are almost bordering on a bit cool for 
short-sleeved shirts. Some interstate friends arrive on day two, Townsville 
selected for the pre-wedding festivities of one of their number. If you want to 
see a mess of gender identity in motion, attend anything with “bucks” or “hens” 
in the title. Leave at home your will to live, in case it gets soiled.

Day two is lost to rain, long ropes of the stuff rolling in around 5am and 
trailing down persistently until the evening. By day three, Tony is once more 
blessed by sunshine. It’s a good set-up: as you walk in the bar is on your 
right, the canteen next to it. It’s like an old school tuckshop, chicken rolls 
and sausages, a tray of coins. They might be midstrength but beers are four 
bucks: you can get through a round and barely crack a twenty. There’s a classic 
old bloke on canteen duty, dishing jokes and stories, swapping on and off with 
a young feller suckling on a Coke like the milk from a magical sugar-cow. There 
are shade sails overhead, and chairs and tables to slouch around. There is no 
one telling you where you can or can’t have your beer. The queue is never more 
than one deep. We are the best customers.

Every Australian stadium now sells midstrength to deflate rowdy crowds. That’s 
not a grave concern for Tony, though, there are probably only a hundred 
spectators scattered throughout the ground. Half the hill is roped off. On the 
far side is a tiny scoreboard that you can neither read nor walk around to. 
“That’s… a long name. Is it Behrendorff? Or maybe Ferguson?” We revert to 
smartphones.

With South Africa out for 333 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/735811.html>, eyes are on Phillip 
Hughes. A fortnight ago he made the first 50-over double century by an 
Australian,on top of another recent hundred and a couple of fifties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/aug/13/phil-hughes-australia-selection-cricket>
. Today he’s in second gear though; with a draw almost certain these A players 
just want to bat out a decent score for the selectors. It’s a meandering day, 
Hughes essaying the occasional cut or drive when he feels right. Tom Cooper 
lifts a six off his pads that makes me freeze as it comes straight for me. 
Fortunately the spin makes it curve away, crashing down a driveway and nearly 
taking out a toddler who was exploring the area.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408501328312%2Fe5353b4d-2340-4b71-b765-73a22d78d91d-2060x1024.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Australia%20A%20at%20Tony%20Ireland%20Stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Australia%20A%20at%20Tony%20Ireland%20Stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408501328312%2Fe5353b4d-2340-4b71-b765-73a22d78d91d-2060x1024.jpeg>
 Attendants ready themselves for action. Photograph: Ian Hitchcock/Getty Images 
Enough familiarity is established to start gently hectoring the South 
Africans. “Still not out!” is the response to their fruitless appeals, 
“Spoilsport!” when a boundary is cut off. Touring spinner Simon Harmer goes on 
with robotic endurance through a bowling performance that will top out the next 
day at 61 overs. The groom’s father channelsDouglas Jardine’s famous heckler 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/bodyline/content/story/316186.html> when there’s 
an imperfect sliding save in front of us: “Leave our grass alone!” he yells 
after the South African fieldsman’s knee digs up divots from the green.

The applause for Hughes’s half century is genuine but sparse. It’s an intense 
contrast. Here is an Australian player on one of the reddest, hottest possible 
runs of form, but his audience is a handful of sojourners looking for a spot 
out of the sun. On watching domestic matches you realise that most cricketers 
play almost their entire careers in front of nobody. Their exploits and effort 
occur in a vacuum, only the eyes of their team-mates and officials to testify 
that these things happened, then the numerical returns to databases that will 
be mined by critics and advocates who never see them play. Promote them and 
they’re suddenly in the glare of slow-motion Hot Spot HawkEye scrutiny with 
9,000 replays and a full house watching on. Hughes, Matthew Wade, Clint McKay 
have played on the biggest stages. One step down and they’re hanging with a few 
dozen thumb-twiddlers in a regional city.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408501437949%2F71a9003e-7968-4c8b-8cdd-d21a31040984-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Australia%20A%20at%20Tony%20Ireland%20Stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Australia%20A%20at%20Tony%20Ireland%20Stadium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Faway-days-australia-tony-ireland-stadium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F20%2F1408501437949%2F71a9003e-7968-4c8b-8cdd-d21a31040984-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Players warm-up before the start of play. Photograph: Ian Hitchcock/Getty 
Images 
One good thing about mid-strength is that a day’s worth leaves you well placed 
to take on the evening. Even by stumps I’m still taking coherent notes. It’s 
that balance between enthusiasm and control. The promise of a fresh flavour 
alone makes visiting the Brewery an exciting prospect. Hughes has edged to 71, 
all the sting out of the game, heedless of our wish to see free-flowing play. 
The next day he will fly along to 243 not out with an attacking flurry, in the 
batting equivalent of free-form experimental jazz poetry. By then we will be 
sitting on the jellyfish-free beach wishing for sunglasses big enough to shield 
our entire hangovers. The epic journey through Kirwan will have proved a Ross 
River bridge too far. Tony Ireland Stadium will be short another half dozen 
units of applause.
 