
Leichhardt Oval is old. Well, Modern Australia old, anyway. It’s not a castle 
or church or ruin from medieval times like they have in Europe, say, and China. 
Rather it’s a rectangular sports field that’s hosted rugby league since 1934 
and changed only slowly since. And depending who you ask, it’s either a great 
little joint to watch footy or an embarrassment to modern rugby league.


Leichhardt – and it’s usually just “Leichhardt”, rarely “Leichhardt Oval”, 
never shortened to “Likey” in the Australian way – has been described as 
antiquated, quaint, dilapidated, precious, full of ghosts, the suburban soul of 
rugby league and Leichhardt. It’s surrounded by the red rooftops of suburban 
Lilyfield and by mighty Moreton Bay Figs that surround baby grandstands named 
after ancient league men. Walk through narrow old streets to the ground and 
people sell sausages on white bread from knock-up backyard barbecues.

The ground is home (one of them, anyway) to the Wests Tigers rugby league 
club. Previously it was home to Balmain Tigers who in 2000 formed a 
still-uneasy merger with Western Suburbs Magpies. The demon spawn becameWests 
Tigers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wests-tigers> presumably because 
Balmain Magpies would have further narrowed the supporter base, and they didn’t 
want to start afresh and call them Wests Goats, or Piranhas, or Kevins.

Yet walk among the crowd of 16,000 here on this rain-soaked Sunday and the 
jumpers confirm Balmain to be ascendant. There’s the odd black-and-white 
Magpies guernsey, sticking out like a placard at a protest against a protest. 
Otherwise Leichhardt is Balmain Tigers, orange and black. As in most modern 
families, there are dominant siblings. Illawarra Steelers would tell you that, 
and Northern Sydney Bears.

 But we’ll leave geopolitical ructions for another time and head instead to 
the back of the Leichhardt hill for the match between Tigers and visiting Manly 
Warringah Sea Eagles. Should be a fair old hit-out. The locals have shown some 
exciting form in patches and sport some brilliant colts. The visitors are comp 
heavyweights, grand finalists four of the last seven seasons. And if it wasn’t 
absolutely hosing down with rain we’d probably see some good footy. (We still 
do.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Faway-days-leichhardt-oval%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F8%2F1396942749154%2Fd794cf51-1c9f-4521-8b5e-df1bdc566e5e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20days%3A%20Leichhardt%20Oval&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Faway-days-leichhardt-oval%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20days%3A%20Leichhardt%20Oval&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Faway-days-leichhardt-oval%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F8%2F1396942749154%2Fd794cf51-1c9f-4521-8b5e-df1bdc566e5e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 It's not ideal weather for cheerleading as the rain comes down. Photograph: 
Renee McKay/Getty Images 
Hosing? Great thick sheets of white water strafe the ground like angry mist 
from Niagara ground zero. And this is where I’ve chosen to take my wife on a 
date. Dressed in a poncho and low-slung baseball hat, she spends most of the 
game just about guffawing at her partner’s choice of romantic way to escape our 
three small children. Perhaps she’s gone mad, but she doesn’t stop smiling. For 
there’s a lot to like.

The beer is cold and comes in cans and costs six bucks. The hot dogs are long 
and boiled in water and placed on a white roll. From there you have a choice of 
tomato sauce and/or mustard shot out a giant plunger. Meat pies come from 
little multi-tray ovens and not from microwaves, which are to pies as they are 
to pussy-cats. Perhaps not that bad. But bad, man. Bad.

Bad things probably happened to Friedrich Wilhelm “Ludwig” Leichhardt, a 
Prussian explorer and naturalist famous for exploring northern and central 
Australia and never coming back from one adventure; it says so on Google. And 
as his bones bleach in the sun somewhere in the Darling Downs of south-east 
Queensland, you wonder why the great Explorer of the North would have a suburb 
named after him in Sydney’s inner west.

But you don’t wonder for long because the Tigers are in! You beauty! And then 
they’re in again! And again! AND AGAIN! And though we don’t follow either team 
and haven’t seen a game together since Love’s Early Days when I was picked up 
drunk from golf and taken to see the Dragons at Kogarah-Jubilee, we leap and 
cheer and celebrate with our fellow man, hoo-ha, it’s good to be a fan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Faway-days-leichhardt-oval%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F8%2F1396942851574%2F53bef1a9-e584-4a30-a924-796fb264840c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20days%3A%20Leichhardt%20Oval&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Faway-days-leichhardt-oval%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20days%3A%20Leichhardt%20Oval&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Faway-days-leichhardt-oval%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F8%2F1396942851574%2F53bef1a9-e584-4a30-a924-796fb264840c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A streaker tries his luck for the Tigers. Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty 
Images 
And then it really starts to rain. Great thick thumping white sheets of water 
fairly strafe the place, and the hilarity of the hill folk goes up in kind. For 
there’s a commonality about the experience, a shared human … thing, you know 
what I mean. Everyone’s out here amongst it and it’s probably quite a silly 
thing to do, if you took a minute to think about it. But the heavier the rain 
gets the more people laugh about it. It helps that the Tigers are up 26-0.

And so we watch the game and drink our tinnies and banter with our fellow 
soaked footy fans. Up here back of the hill on this eastern side we can’t see 
the scoreboard or big screen or even the game when the umbrellas go up. The 
scoreboard is the size of your grandad’s brick shed and like the big screen 
faces the main stand. And if rain wasn’t streaming down as if from a massive 
bladder in space, we’d have to shield our eyes from the setting sun. Yet it’s 
bloody great fun.

 Some funny young Poms in front try on Aussie accents with varying degrees of 
success. Some nice gents behind us share their umbrella and we talk of rugby 
league and … that’s all, rugby league. When the Tigers score – as they do often 
– the hill mob roar and hug and high-five, and punch the air. It’s not 
aggressive, it’s more in acclamation. Yessss. And many of these fine jocular 
groups of people feature Tigers and Manly fans, standing together, shouting 
beers, and putting shit on each other in the time-honoured away.

Yes, the joint has its faults. There are very few seats, restricted corporate 
facilities (though they sold out last Sunday) and at various vantage points you 
can’t see the scoreboard, big screen or even the game. But every ground has its 
faults. The Soviet-sized mega-stadiums only rock when they’re full. 
Campbelltown Stadium – where the joint venture plays to its Western Suburbs 
base – has dud lights, disaffected locals, and the atmosphere of a sports event 
in space. The Tigers other home, ANZ Stadium, is a fine venue but poorly served 
by transport and unappealing at night when your team’s a dud.

But these Tigers aren’t duds and end up whipping Manly 34-18. To celebrate a 
streaker tears across the ground in his underpants. And then people begin to 
slide down the hill. Men, women, children – mostly men, it must be said – take 
a run-up and hurl themselves down the slope, skidding along the wet grass and 
mud, and finishing at the bottom muddy and wet and laughing their very heads 
off.

Would you want to stand in the rain every week? No. Would you head to 
Leichhardt to watch Tigers play Titans on a cold Saturday night in July? The 
hardcore would. But no. Yet standing (and it’s a thing advocates for all-seat 
stadia never get, standing up watching sport is social and good) among clumps 
of your friends and family – and even your wife on a half-deranged date – 
drinking tinnies and roaring on the home side, rain strafing the ground like 
cold white darts, it is recreational Sunday arvo gold. And it will never get 
old.
 