
And so to the Southern Highlands for the Southern Stars and a one-day 
international at Bradman Oval in Bowral. It’s the eighth and final match of a 
short-form series between Australia and the loose collection of Caribbean 
islands known as the West Indies, and the locals are well on top.

It’s just past midday and Australia are 3 for 127 in 30 overs, with two big 
guns on deck – all-round superstar Ellyse Perry on 20, and slashing opening bat 
and captain, Meg Lanning, on 43. And cricket nerdos could watch them all day.

Lanning’s batting, particularly, is copybook-attractive. High left elbow, 
timing, grace, balance, poise, the fluent co-ordination of the natural sporto. 
And she hits it hard, the ball “thocking” off the middle of the bat with that 
particular meaty cricket noise of Kookaburra on Gray-Nicholls twin-scoop, or 
whatever weapons they’re whacking about with today, and whistles across 
Bradman’s billiard table surface.

Bowral? Tidy little town. You can get a Devonshire Tea in Bowral, and buy an 
antique. A nice bureau, say, or an old chaise lounge. You could visit the 
Bradman Museum, if you were of a mind, it’s adjacent this delightful oval of 
the same name.

Don Bradman grew up in Bowral, spending untold hours whacking a golf ball 
against a corrugated iron water tank, developing the preternatural eye and 
concentration of the run-freak. Doesn’t sound like he had a lot of mates.What? 
Did someone just sledge the Don?Mayhap they did. The great man was not without 
barnacles, as none of us are, except for Dennis Lillee.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Faway-days-southern-stars-v-west-indies-bradman-oval-bowral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416526971437%2Fe99d9fe5-f6e6-4ace-a417-221c6098c1ee-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20days%3A%20Southern%20Stars%20v%20West%20Indies%2C%20Bradman%20Oval%2C%20Bowral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Faway-days-southern-stars-v-west-indies-bradman-oval-bowral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20days%3A%20Southern%20Stars%20v%20West%20Indies%2C%20Bradman%20Oval%2C%20Bowral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Faway-days-southern-stars-v-west-indies-bradman-oval-bowral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416526971437%2Fe99d9fe5-f6e6-4ace-a417-221c6098c1ee-1020x765.jpeg>
 A statue of the Don. Photograph: Matthew Cleary 
Bradman Oval sports a tight, green surface mowed in concentric circles, with 
fine big trees dotting the perimeter. There’s a tree-filled escarpment to the 
east over the ground. Does it have the majesty of Cape Town’s Table Mountain? 
No, it does not. But it’s not a bad little escarpment, a forested chunk of 
grey-black rock. And the ground is delightful. Delightful like a friand, say, 
or a funny gay play.

People lounge on deckchairs in that somnolent funk particular to the cricket 
fan and heroin users on the nod, the one that says I don’t care what’s on the 
television but I’m here watching, and enjoying it. People knit. People keep 
score. For the cricket fan, and we are legion, lying back slumped in a deck 
chair, refreshment in hand, sort ofabsorbing the soft ebb and flow of a game of 
cricket … it’s almost meditative, with moments of Top Excitement that can jolt 
one from one’s seat …woah! How about that? And then you slump back. And repeat.

The West Indians? Typically cool and exotic names. Chaquinta Quinton bowls 
quick and bats number six. Deandra Dottin bats number five and flings the ball 
from the boundary like it’s shot out a cannon. Shakera Selman is tall and 
quick, and languid like a long drink in a hammock. But they bowl a lot of pies. 
And the Aussies feast like fat kids.

The crowd? There might be a hundred people. Lot of kids. The girls from the 
Army, Navy and Air Force are here. Families, locals. Maybe a dozen brightl 
bibbed security men, standing about, practicing for a day when they might have 
something to do. Cracker of a day, a sky-blue peach. The most recent game last 
Sunday it was 35C with a 50-knot southerly, player’s comfort level akin to 
playing cricket inside Jacquie Lambie’s brain.

And so to drinks and Australia are 3/151 in 34 overs. A security man lumbers 
onto the field, build of a massive pavlova, a man more superfluous than a 
brassiere on a Brahman bull. Not that superfluous. But superfluous, man. 
Superfluous.

Back into it and … power play! That means the Windies can only put three 
fielders outside the inner white circle, a sentence lost anyway on non-cricket 
fans, not sure why I explained it. But what it means is this: The Windies best 
prepare to chase some leather. And it looks like the Windies know it. Their 
body language is that of kids in the field on a hot summer’s day.

Boom! Lanning smites a cover-drive along the turf for four. Boom! A lofted 
drive iscracked over mid-off, one bounce, four runs. She clips one off her 
toes, bottom of the bat, and it’s four more through mid-wicket. When she pulls 
a short ball to the square leg fence you know this: technically you can’t bat 
better, man, woman, cricket-playing kangaroo. It’s pure, copybook batsmanship. 
top stuff, Meg Lanning.

Full toss - boom, over mid-wicket. Lanning is 80. Australia 3/190 with 11 
overs to go. And the Windies’ fielding dies in the arse. Balls go for four 
through sweaty palms. It’s game eight of a series they’ve been belted, pillar 
to post. A wide brings up the Lanning-Perry hundred partnership in 95 balls. I 
take off for a wander. Giant security pavlova man instructs me not to go on the 
field. I wasn’t on the field, nor looking like I was going to go on the field. 
Why would I go on the field? Was it a pre-emptive strike? Does the man have 
nothing to do? Had he read my notes? And what would he do if I did go on the 
field? You could run faster than him while pushing a Pajero bogged in a swamp. 
The silly moo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Faway-days-southern-stars-v-west-indies-bradman-oval-bowral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416526891269%2Fad23fd16-e111-4cc0-a1c8-5fef9a734b33-1020x658.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20days%3A%20Southern%20Stars%20v%20West%20Indies%2C%20Bradman%20Oval%2C%20Bowral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Faway-days-southern-stars-v-west-indies-bradman-oval-bowral%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20days%3A%20Southern%20Stars%20v%20West%20Indies%2C%20Bradman%20Oval%2C%20Bowral&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Faway-days-southern-stars-v-west-indies-bradman-oval-bowral%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416526891269%2Fad23fd16-e111-4cc0-a1c8-5fef9a734b33-1020x658.jpeg>
 The scoreboard at the Bradman Oval. Photograph: Matthew Cleary 
Over to the scoreboard, a quaint and hand-operated job from days of yore. I 
take some photos of it, and a fellow scoring. A bloke in an official pink shirt 
tells me, “You can’t just stand in front of the scoreboard. Happy for you to 
take some photos after play.” “No worries,” I reply. And stab him in the face 
with a scimitar! No I don’t. But my, let’s consider old mate’s request. There’s 
maybe two hundred people here, all of whom can see the scoreboard over my head. 
I wasn’t likely to set up shop in front of the damned thing. Do I have a sign 
on my head that says, “Tell this person what to do.”?

Wicket! Lanning mistimes a drive and is caught in the deep. Alyssa Healy comes 
in. And then is gone. Caught. Aussies wobble? Against fellow world-power 
England, maybe. Against these West Indians they just send in some more top 
batters to slash and burn. Perry smashes an off-drive, hardest she’ll hit the 
ball today. Pure, hard, out of the screws. Jess Jonassen smashes a six long 
down the ground. And does it again! Over midwicket and into the gaggle of 
service girls who dive on the ball and fight over it, laughing their heads off. 
Australia, you funny big lug of a country, you beauty.

And so Australia finish 5 for 275 and it’s off to the airy outdoor press box 
to write. The West Indies openers swing early. Bunch of boundaries. Then … 
wicket! Kycia Knight is caught at first slip. In comes Brittany Cooper. And so 
the Windies swing and they hit, and they miss and it’s clear these top-order 
batters can play. But there aren’t enough of them. Perry’s and Megan Schutt’s 
swingers – a couple of which hoop in like those golden devil-ball things that 
Harry Potter had to fight in Quidditch – take seven of the nine wickets to 
fall. Perry will be player of the match and the series. Super cricketer.

And as you’re leaving, you see them: a group of tween girls eating icy-poles 
and waiting for the Aussie girls to come out. When I was a kid girls played 
cricket by fielding in groups at long on, plaiting their hair and making 
dandelion necklaces. Today they line up for Ellyse Perry’s autograph. Top 
stuff. And if you’re looking for a reason Australia should play West Indies in 
women’s cricket, there you are. Good luck to them.
 