
There used to be a time, not so long ago, when foreign football teams touring 
Australia would lure us with their Brad Pitts, Will Smiths and George Clooneys 
yet when they touched down on Australian tarmacs the cabin doors would open and 
out would come, blinking in the light like shameful secrets freed from attic 
chains, their Rob Schneiders, Brendan Frasers and Adam Sandlers.

Thankfully, those days are gone. The cashed-up Australian market has spoken. 
So tonight, as part of a three-team International Champions Cup, Real Madrid 
playManchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> at 
the hallowed Melbourne Cricket Ground — the city’s Colosseum, Sagrada Familia 
and Westminster Abbey rolled into one — and all the stars are on show. That 
means Karim Benzema, Sergio Ramos, David Silva, Isco, Toni Kroos, Yaya Toure, 
Raheem Sterling and, yes, Cristiano Ronaldo — a man whose every move in 
Melbourne in the lead up is breathlessly recounted in the press (Ronaldo gets a 
haircut! Ronaldo’s wearing ripped designer jeans! Ronaldo stocks up on dietary 
supplements!).

Considering such stellar talent, and the fact I have a media pass to an event 
that costs punters up to $220 to attend, it seems churlish in the extreme to 
say I’m not especially excited about seeing the game, and I doubt I would have 
bothered had I had to pay. Besides the fact I support neither team, it’s an 
exhibition game and, by definition, nothing is riding on it which robs it of 
drama and context, key ingredients, I feel, in the enjoyment of sport.

And it’s not as if both teams will throw the kitchen sink at it, given they 
have more to lose than gain. What’s a significant injury to Ronaldo or Silva 
worth against a victory they’ll have forgotten about by the time they’re on the 
plane home to Madrid or Manchester?

Real Madrid 4-1 Manchester City | Pre-season friendly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/real-madrid-manchester-city-fabian-delph-injured-friendly-match-report>
So it is with mixed feelings I jump on my trusty treadly for the 6km cycle to 
the MCG. And no sooner do I get started in the dark than a steady soft rain 
begins to fall, pattering my helmet with a sweetly melancholy staccato and 
creating a watery static in the weak beam of my headlight. Later I’ll pass an 
electronic billboard featuring a photo of Toure, the crest of Man City, and the 
slogan “Melbourne’s Our Kind of City”, and it’ll appear to me to be an obvious 
reference to the weather.

Usually the streets surrounding the ’G ahead of a big match hum like the 
bellies of cicadas on a summer’s evening; tonight it’s subdued. In the rain 
it’s heads down, hoods up, and there’s not a lot of chat among the punters 
traipsing in. Not until I pull up outside the stadium, and lock up beside a 
statue of Shane Warne about to let one rip (that’s not a baked beans quip by 
the way; Statue Warnie is about to bowl a leg-break), do I see any sign of a 
crowd. Standing outside Gate 1 is a human field of wheat swaying as one ahead 
of the imminent arrival of the Real and City team buses.

Elsewhere, men, women and children circle the ’G looking for their entry gate 
while many others brave the rain to queue at the merchandise tents for their 
chance to purchase scarves, T-shirts, and $110 replica shirts. Judging by the 
five-deep crush of people at the Real counter — as opposed to two at both the 
City and Roma counters — the Spanish giants are the main drawcard tonight. Last 
Friday, as further proof of that, some 10,000 fans paid $10 each to watch Real 
train. That said, there are plenty of other jerseys in the crowd, though I 
don’t spot an A-League one. It’s Arsenal, Manchester United, Bayern Munich and 
a large number of Liverpool strips. Clearly, a lot of people are here to wish 
Raheem Sterling all the best on his new endeavour.

I get inside just in time to see, on the big screen, a young couple in the 
crowd, both of whom are wrapped in plastic like Laura Palmer though, 
thankfully, in a much healthier state. With the camera on them, and a boom mike 
over him, the young man proposes to the young woman and she mouths “Oh My God” 
(which is the catch-all response these days to anything from finding a bug in 
your tea to hearing that an escaped jaguar has broken into your parents’ house 
and eaten your mother’s face) and “But I’m wearing a [rain] poncho!” She’d 
imagined this happening differently, clearly, but what else can she do, with 
tens of thousands watching in the stadium. To great cheers she says “yes!”

After checking in I leave the media room and head to the concourse which is 
swirling with fans. Alongside the concourse are bars full of punters, many of 
whom seem to keep their seats during the game, content to continue drinking and 
watch the game on the many TVs. Perhaps they don’t realise the game is on 
free-to-air TV and they could have done this at home? Or at a real pub.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Faway-days-real-madrid-v-manchester-city-at-the-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58f16caed681c58692c989d823fdea754ddc160f%2F0_0_3000_1938%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Real%20Madrid%20v%20Manchester%20City%20at%20the%20MCG%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Faway-days-real-madrid-v-manchester-city-at-the-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Real%20Madrid%20v%20Manchester%20City%20at%20the%20MCG%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Faway-days-real-madrid-v-manchester-city-at-the-mcg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58f16caed681c58692c989d823fdea754ddc160f%2F0_0_3000_1938%2F3000.jpg>
 A packed MCG looking resplendent under the lights. Photograph: Scott 
Barbour/Getty Images 
For what it’s worth, I don’t hear any football songs, or see a sizeable 
collective of Real of City supporters sitting together in a bay, and to me it 
feels more like a theatre crowd, or a cinema crowd. Which isn’t to say they’re 
not all fans of the game, I’m sure they are (at least here, away from the 
corporate boxes). It’s just that there’s little sense of passion, that the 
result matters to anyone. And that’s fine, I suppose. Why not watch some of the 
best players in the world go through their paces? It’s not every day Ronaldo’s 
playing down the road. But when I read the next day a newspaper report saying 
the atmosphere was akin to that at a big domestic football final I wonder if I 
was at the same game.

From the concourse, let alone the nose-bleeds, the pitch — which, if you were 
to compare it to a billiard table, would be the one at the local pub that has 
had more than its share of beer and blood spilt over it — is some distance 
away. It is a cricket ground after all, and a huge one at that. So it’s on the 
big screens we get the best view of the players warming up; Gareth Bale with 
his samurai top knot, a mahogany-coloured Ronaldo in gloves, and diamond 
earrings which reflect the floodlights and the adoration. And here’s Ramos, 
socks up, so it’s impossible to see if he’s wearing Man Utd shin guards. I 
watch the drills and see the whip-quick snap of the passes and am reminded 
there will be some talent on show tonight.

As the crowd shows its appreciation Ronaldo executes his goal celebration, 
Narcissus Exultant

After the players return to their dressing rooms I see an Ignatius J. Reilly 
lookalike in head-to-toe Liverpool livery tucking into a sauce-splashed pie. 
He’s eating like there’s nobody watching. Though reluctant to enter into his 
feeding zone I vox-pop him, asking him his thoughts on Raheem Sterling. “I 
wished him all the best on Tuesday night when he tripped on the ball and fell 
over,” he says, referencing Sterling’s first touch against Roma, “but I shut up 
a minute later when he scored. But I’m glad he’s gone.” Sterling will be booed 
all night. Perhaps Ignatius here is part of the explanation.

The players soon return to the field to the kind of cheer you’d hear when 
circus performers enter the big top and the players line up as if there’ll be 
anthems. Thankfully there aren’t, not even a rendition of Abba’s ‘Money, Money, 
Money’, or even a pretend anthem like the Champions League one that players are 
supposed to listen to reverently as if it means anything.

City are playing in what could be black or a deep, deep blue, with Joe Hart, 
having surely lost a bet, dressed in Tweety Bird yellow from head to toe. Real, 
meantime, are in grey, as if the bod responsible for washing Real’s white strip 
accidentally threw in a pair of Ronaldo’s new, black skinny jeans and they’ve 
run, depressing a timeless classic.

The game begins and immediately you get a sense that while the tackles will 
lack sting the players are happy to chance their arm a little, to showboat for 
the crowd. They must have got a memo after the Real-Roma 0-0 borefest on 
Tuesday. Ronaldo, in particular, seems in a generous mood, and over the first 
60 minutes he gives us his repertoire of step-overs, cut backs, sashays, pouts 
and what not. Up the other end Sterling is playing a lone striker role and he 
looks busy, always looking to make a run in behind.

Soon enough one such run isn’t in vain but he passes up a shooting opportunity 
on his left foot to cut inside onto his right. By the time he’s ready to hit it 
he’s shouldered off the ball and he goes down. Penalty? Don’t think so. But I’m 
more interested in what A$102 million buys you these days. A player who’s not 
two-footed if that’s any evidence.

In the 11th minute there’s a heavy collision between Toure and Real keeper 
Keylor Navas. Toure goes down hard, bringing to mind a speeding giraffe 
surprised by a low branch. But he gets up eventually and shakes hands with 
Navas confirming that, yes, this is a friendly in all respects. As play 
continues, and Silva begins to exert some influence, I overhear a spectator in 
a City shirt tell his mate that “generally you’ll find most people in 
Manchester go for City over United”. The mate nods, rather than ask for a 
citation, and we move on, happily accepting what we’re seeing and hearing as 
gospel. Why spoil a party?

At the 21st minute — by which time new City signing Fabian Delph has limped 
off — Real open the scoring, with Benzema doing well to hook in a cross with a 
first-time volley, beating Hart on his right. Three minutes later the crowd can 
say they’ve seen the great Ronaldo score a goal. Bringing down a Kroos through 
ball with a feather touch he instinctively tries to lob Hart and though the 
keeper parries there’s still enough on it. As the crowd shows its appreciation 
Ronaldo executes his goal celebration, Narcissus Exultant, but for once it 
feels like he’s just playing to the crowd, giving them what they want, instead 
of just being a knob.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Faway-days-real-madrid-v-manchester-city-at-the-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd18e2fafb9f7d696148b4dae8b0c18a8fe0046df%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Away%20Days%3A%20Real%20Madrid%20v%20Manchester%20City%20at%20the%20MCG%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Faway-days-real-madrid-v-manchester-city-at-the-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Away%20Days%3A%20Real%20Madrid%20v%20Manchester%20City%20at%20the%20MCG%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F28%2Faway-days-real-madrid-v-manchester-city-at-the-mcg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd18e2fafb9f7d696148b4dae8b0c18a8fe0046df%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Ronaldo celebrates his goal in trademark fashion. Photograph: Steve 
Christo/Corbis 
As the half winds down — and a Mexican wave begins inside the ground — we get 
two quick goals: a third Real goal, to Pepe, then City’s first and last, to 
Toure, who converts a penalty that should never have been.

The second half is less interesting, though the rain has finally stopped. Real 
have a fair goal ruled out for an offside that wasn’t, then Ronaldo, through on 
goal, tries and fails to beat Hart with a tricky dink shot after a step-over. 
His fun and games end shortly after when the raised boot of a Real defender 
hits him very high – dangerously high — on the inside thigh. As he doubles over 
and grimaces I hear a snatch of Channel Nine commentary coming from one of the 
TVs in a bar: “He’ll be feeling that tonight,” says commentator Michael Bridges 
in his Tyneside accent.Someone will, at least, I think. I don’t imagine Ronaldo 
has any shortage of people willing to address his intimate regions.

In the 64th minute — even before Real put the game to bed with a fourth goal — 
both coaches ring the changes. Toure goes off, Sterling, Ronaldo, Ramos too. 
Sensing it’s all over bar the long trek home fans in the upper deck begin 
launching paper planes. Some plummet, as if piloted by stones, but others are 
better designed and drift over the sea of spectators — incredibly, 99,385 of 
them — towards the playing arena. When some look like not only making the 
outfield but the actual pitch the crowd beneath them rides their journey and 
some of the night’s biggest cheers come when two in particular come within 
metres of crossing the whitewash. By the end of the game I begin counting the 
paper planes on the grass and stop when it’s clear there are considerably more 
than 200.

The whistle goes and I head for the gates and my bike and wonder about what 
I’d just watched. There were some nice passages of play, astute demonstrations 
of world class skill. And there too, in the flesh, were players — football’s 
equivalent of Hollywood stars — we can usually only marvel at on television. It 
was an occasion and a chance to perve on the world’s best. But the game had 
none of the passion and celebration I saw in January when Asian Cup matches 
were held down the road at AAMI Park. Lowly Palestine and Jordan, for instance, 
make the stands crackle one night yet you could have purchased all 22 players 
on the pitch with the money in the consoles of Real’s luxury cars.

Unlocking my bike I see a mate, Greg, leaving the ground with his teenage son, 
Charlie, who’s dribbling a football on the wet grass. Charlie is wearing a City 
top and I ask him if he’s disappointed about the result. No, he says. Then Greg 
explains that three nights earlier Charlie was wearing a Real shirt. And that 
he’s actually a Liverpool supporter.

I mull that one over as I cycle home in the dark.
 