
It is becoming increasingly difficult to criticise Islam and Muslims in 
western countries such as Australia, the Somali-born author and human rights 
campaignerAyaan Hirsi Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayaan-hirsi-ali> 
has said, because “we only see them [Muslims] through this prism of victims and 
victimisation”.

It was “perfectly fine” to question and criticise any religion, including Islam
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, Ali said on the ABC’s Q&A on Monday 
night.

The program was criticised on social media for discussing Islam without having 
a practising Muslim on the panel. The panel was selected as part of the the 
Sydney writers’ festival and featured international authors.

Heretic: Why Islam Needs a Reformation Now by Ayaan Hirsi Ali – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/27/heretic-islam-reformation-ayaan-hirsi-ali-highlights-scale-of-the-task>
There were some questions about philosophy and the arts, but much of the 
discussion focused on Muslims, Islam and radicalisation.

Ali, a former devout Muslim and now outspoken critic of Islam, was responding 
to an audience member who asked how she felt about her views and books being 
criticised by liberals. She replied: “I do think that it’s not only important 
to address the extremists and their agenda, but how the left contributes to 
that agenda.”
Ruby Hamad (@rubyhamad) 
Sigh. Why isn't there a Muslim on the panel? How about talking to Muslims not 
just about them? Come on.#QandA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/QandA?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/rubyhamad/status/732181593721180160> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rubyhamad/status/732181593721180160> 
She said she had Muslim friends who had been subjected to forced marriages and 
female genital mutilation, and who had been forced to wear a veil. Ali herself 
was subjected to female genital mutilation as a child. She urged people not to 
be “squeamish” about criticising those practices.

“This is what is happening to Muslim women,” she said. “If you have young 
girls who are subjected to forced marriage, it is not a marriage, it’s an 
arranged rape. It is a forced rape and I wish we were not squeamish about it. 
We were not squeamish about slavery, we were not squeamish about eradicating 
apartheid, and I wish that is one thing we would not be squeamish about.”

Ali’s latest book, Heretic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/27/heretic-islam-reformation-ayaan-hirsi-ali-highlights-scale-of-the-task>
, argues for the reformation of Islam.
Mariam Veiszadeh (@MariamVeiszadeh) 
And those are legitimate issues that Ayaan raised which need to be addressed 
but they are not religious practices.#QandA 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/QandA?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/MariamVeiszadeh/status/732182689348902913> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MariamVeiszadeh/status/732182689348902913> 
The author and co-founder of The Philosophers’ Magazine, Julian Baggini, said 
Muslims “are put in the category of the oppressed, which means you can’t say 
anything critical of them”.

“I think there are reasons why people like myself, white male westerners, are 
rightly queasy about going in and aggressively criticising people from other 
cultures,” he said.

“I have been travelling a bit this year and I go to places like India and 
speak to Islamic philosophers, and a huge number of them say they’re sick of 
being told how to live by white western imperialists. So I think some of the 
reluctance of liberals to be vocal about this is because in the past ... we’ve 
been too quick to assume our morality is superior and impose it on people.”

Writers' festival cheat sheet: how to bluff your way through the literary 
season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/16/writers-festival-sheet-how-to-bluff-your-way-through-the-literary-season>
Emma Sky, an author and teacher of Middle East politics at the Jackson 
Institute, said it was not her role to criticise Muslims or condemn Islam and 
that the appropriate people to address extremism within Islam were Muslims. 
Most of the world’s Muslims did not view members of Islamic State as Muslim, 
she added.
lydia_shelly (@lydia_shelly) 
At this point, I'm annoyed that we are always discussed & not part of the 
conversation. Wish@RandaAFattah <https://twitter.com/RandaAFattah> or @YMorsi 
<https://twitter.com/YMorsi> was on #qanda 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash> tonight
 <https://twitter.com/lydia_shelly/status/732184981737373698> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/lydia_shelly/status/732184981737373698> 
“Do I look at Ted Cruz or [Donald] Trump and think those are representatives 
of Christianity?” she said. “Do we want to have people of other faiths 
condemning Christianity because of the way that those people behave? Yes, 
there’s lots that needs to happen within Islam and I talk to many Muslim 
friends about that, but I don’t feel as a western, non-Muslim that my role is 
to stand up and criticise aspects of their religion.

“I will criticise acts of violence, and the horrible terrorist attacks that 
took place in France. Those are awful. But I will not say, ‘that is Islam’.”

British rapper, poet and author Kate Tempest responded by saying that terror 
was being inflicted globally, including at the hands of the British and 
Australian governments. But it was easier to point to violence as occurring 
outside our own culture, she said.

“It’s a very difficult thing to separate these acts of terror because I think 
that actually, there is so much disastrous terror being inflicted globally,” 
she said.
Sara Saleh (@SaraSalehOz) 
Rape, domestic violence occur beyond religion & geographic boundaries #Qanda 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Qanda?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/SaraSalehOz/status/732183540847153152> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SaraSalehOz/status/732183540847153152> 
“We can spot barbarity in other cultures and in our past, but when it’s in our 
midst we find it harder to accept and own up to it. We are in the middle of a 
barbarous time and greed is at the root of it. It’s interesting we’re talking 
about these diabolical regimes but there is an equally diabolical regime in 
power which is the regime of capitalism.”

A number of people following the program on Twitter also expressed 
disappointment that the panellists were not asked about the impact of the 
Australia Council’sdrastic funding cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/13/the-arts-industry-has-the-right-to-be-angry-about-funding-cuts-it-cant-possibly-work-any-harder>
, despite the panel being part of the writers’ festival.


 The arts sector has been left reeling over the past week, as many 
organisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/16/australia-council-cuts-theatre-companies-lament-dark-days-for-arts>
 found out they had not received funding grants.
Sir Jack Crowther (@kalisana) 
#QandA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/QandA?src=hash> What chance do we have to 
be a good society when the govt cuts arts funding as if our culture/soul was 
just a dessert to be skipped?
 <https://twitter.com/kalisana/status/732176564914290689> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kalisana/status/732176564914290689> Lisa Divissi 
(@lisadivissi) 
I'm expecting some questions about arts cuts tonight, 65 organisations had 
funding cuts reported last week#qanda 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash> #UJ16 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UJ16?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/lisadivissi/status/732173568616751104> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/lisadivissi/status/732173568616751104> Aiden More 
(@aidenmore) 
What is the panel's opinion on the extreme cuts in the arts in australia? 
#question <https://twitter.com/hashtag/question?src=hash> #qanda 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/aidenmore/status/732178894707531780> May 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/aidenmore/status/732178894707531780>  