
Near the end of our meal together, the actor Ayesha Dharker 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0223499/> looks up from her plate and asks 
suddenly: “Why are you here? Why are you interviewing me?” Well, I tell her, 
there can’t be too many actors whose careers incorporateShakespeare 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/whats-on/othello/?from=planner>, Coronation Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street>, Andrew 
Lloyd-Webber <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber> and Star 
Wars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, as hers does. That’s got to 
be noteworthy. She looks sceptical. But then she takes everything, even her 
work, with a pinch of salt. “I normally try to talk directors out of casting 
me. I like going up for things but I don’t always intend to do them. I’ll tell 
them what a terrible mistake they’d make if they cast me.” Do they listen? “No. 
Those are the jobs I usually end up getting. Once they’ve got me, I’ll work 
hard. I just want them to know that I’m a bit of a slippery fish.” She stabs at 
a chunk of broccoli with her fork.

Othello review – history is made with RSC's fresh take on the tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/12/othello-rsc-stratford-hugh-quarshie-lucian-msamati-joanna-vanderham>
We are in the restaurant at the RSC in Stratford-upon-Avon, the late-afternoon 
rain pelting the windows, and Dharker has just finished a matinee performance of
Othello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/12/othello-rsc-stratford-hugh-quarshie-lucian-msamati-joanna-vanderham>
, in which she is electrifying as Iago’s wife Emilia. As Iago’s single-minded 
campaign to destroy Othello escalates, she seizes her chance to be noticed by 
him again, reshaping herself in the face of his neglect into more of an 
accomplice than a spouse. “She’s realised that she can’t get his attention 
sexually or through being a good wife. All that’s left is this.” Though Dharker 
has been playing Emilia since early June, and will do so until the end of next 
month, the role remains enigmatic to her. “Why doesn’t she open her mouth when 
the consequences begin to dawn on her?” she demands. “Yes, she’s a victim of 
abuse, but so was Tina Turner!” Her eyes, already strikingly large, widen in 
exasperation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd92cedafc7907313d0021db21dd50f9af5178821%2F0_134_3345_2007%2F3345.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayesha%20Dharker%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20try%20to%20talk%20directors%20out%20of%C2%A0casting%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayesha%20Dharker%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20try%20to%20talk%20directors%20out%20of%C2%A0casting%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd92cedafc7907313d0021db21dd50f9af5178821%2F0_134_3345_2007%2F3345.jpg>
 Ayesha Dharker and Joanna Vanderham in Othello. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
Her conversation is characterised by an air of enchanted bewilderment; she 
recounts fascinating episodes in her career in the manner of a person wondering 
how these miracles could have happened to her of all people. Perhaps this comes 
from never wanting to be an actor in the first place. When she was nine, 
auditions were held at her school in Mumbai for the lead inThe Girl Who Lived 
Twice <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0095584/>, a French film about a child who 
realises she has been reincarnated. Discovering that anyone who took part would 
be exempt from that afternoon’s maths lesson, Dharker wasted no time in 
volunteering. Quite unexpectedly, she got the job. You could say her entire 
career sprang not from a love of acting but a loathing of maths.

Now 37, she makes everything that has occurred since then sound no less 
accidental or arbitrary. Only once, she says, has she desperately wanted a 
particular role: Shahrazad in Dominic Cooke’s production ofArabian Nights at 
the RSC <>. “I got it, thank God. But that feeling was not a pleasant place to 
be. It was so unfamiliar to me.” She accepts that her blase manner is a defence 
mechanism to stop herself getting hurt. “I’m obviously a control freak and I 
have issues with failure. It’s very convenient for me to say it’s no big deal 
if I don’t get something.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437152051528%2Ff8e6ca91-c063-4384-a244-f2d4235580a2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayesha%20Dharker%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20try%20to%20talk%20directors%20out%20of%C2%A0casting%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayesha%20Dharker%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20try%20to%20talk%20directors%20out%20of%C2%A0casting%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437152051528%2Ff8e6ca91-c063-4384-a244-f2d4235580a2-1020x612.jpeg>
 Dharker as Tara in Coronation Street Photograph: ITV/Rex Shutterstock 
She has a habit of affecting nonchalance about work she has already done. She 
refers jokingly to having sold her soul during a year-long stint on Coronation 
Street. (She playedTara <>, whose revenge on the shop-owner Dev <> for his 
infidelity was to unfurl a huge naked picture of him across an entire block of 
flats.) “I grew up looking down on commercial entertainment but I liked doing 
Coronation Street. If you’re going to do a soap, that’s the one to do. I did a 
musical, too, and that’s a big instance of selling my soul. But it was great.”


She’s referring to Andrew Lloyd-Webber’s Bombay Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/jun/20/theatre.artsfeatures>, in which 
she appeared in the West End and on Broadway as a Bollywood performer. “I based 
her on Bette Davis meets Miss Piggy. That was another job where I made it 
really hard for them to cast me.” How so? “Well, I didn’t turn up.” Having 
taken part in early workshops, she decided not to put herself forward for the 
show proper. One morning, she was shopping near where the auditions were being 
held when she ran into someone from the production. “He said, ‘You’re here! For 
the auditions!’ I said, ‘No, I’m on my way to the bead shop.’ He told me I had 
to come in because they’d made the part bigger especially for me.” And the rest 
is, well, typical of Dharker. She always seems to get what she says she doesn’t 
want.

I remind her that there is a school of thought that says there is no such 
thing as an accident. Why go shopping on that morning in that street when there 
was a chance you would meet someone from the show? She thinks on this. “It’s 
possible,” she concedes, then reverses her position. “But no. When you look at 
the strangeness of how something like Star Wars happened ...” She has a point. 
In 1998, Dharker had given a riveting, near wordless performance as a young 
suicide bomber in a Tamil drama calledThe Terrorist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Observer_review/0,4267,489965,00.html>
, inspired by the assassination ofRajiv Ghandi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rajiv-gandhi>. The picture was awarded the 
top prize at the Cairo film festival byJohn Malkovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-malkovich>, who later championed it in 
the US press. The lateRoger Ebert <> was another fervent fan. The casting 
director for the second Star Wars prequel,Attack of the Clones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-ii-attack-of-the-clones>, 
came across this rave review, borrowed a VHS copy of The Terrorist fromSamuel L 
Jackson <>, then managed to reach Dharker through a circuitous route of 
producers and directors and eventually her own father. “I didn’t bother calling 
when I got the message because I thought it was a joke,” she says. “When the 
casting director finally got hold of me, she said, ‘Don’t worry. We hear that a 
lot.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437152215082%2F93f1ba70-7621-4fd5-b8b3-899e88842c71-659x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayesha%20Dharker%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20try%20to%20talk%20directors%20out%20of%C2%A0casting%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayesha%20Dharker%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20try%20to%20talk%20directors%20out%20of%C2%A0casting%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F20%2Fayesha-dharker-i-try-to-talk-directors-out-of-casting-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437152215082%2F93f1ba70-7621-4fd5-b8b3-899e88842c71-659x720.jpeg>
 Dharker as Queen Jamillia in Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones 
Dharker was visually memorable as Queen Jamillia 
<http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Jamillia> despite having only five lines. But 
she has said that the costume – layered black-and-gold capes topped off with a 
fan of gold blades like petals on a flower – did most of the acting. Could she 
call it a performance? “I didn’t have enough to do to answer that question.” 
Still, she got to meetGeorge Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas>, even if she never saw the 
proposed doll of her character. “I don’t think they made one. I know the girl 
characters don’t sell as well as the boy ones. I feel sorry for any child who 
got given one of me – this small, Indian penguin.”

Despite her declaration that she has “major commitment issues generally”, she 
seems most contented when talking about her husband, who is in the vitamins 
industry, and their three-year-old daughter. Though now settled in London, 
Dharker never really had a permanent home in her adult life. “People used to 
ask me when exactly I came over here, and it was something I found impossible 
to answer. I bought a flat here, but then I was in the US working for ages. 
That’s why I have a lot of bedding. I’d always be put up in apartments or 
hotels when I was working, and I wanted a part of it to feel like mine, so I’d 
buy my own sheets. I’ve accumulated quite a lot.” She’s made her bed. After 
years of resisting, she’s finally getting to lie in it.
 