
The head of al-Qaida has accused the US of overthrowing the former Egyptian 
presidentMohamed Morsi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi>, but 
also said he was responsible for his own downfall by for trying to appease 
Washington.

Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, an 
Egyptian, said Morsi, who was deposed in a coup on 3 July, was targeted for 
being an Islamist by a conspiracy of secularists, Coptic Christians, and 
Egypt's "Americanised" army.

But in his 15-minute internet audio message posted online on Friday, Zawahiri 
condemned Morsi'sMuslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> for having "tried its 
best to satisfy America and the secularists" by relinquishing jihad, usually 
defined by al-Qaida to mean armed struggle.

Zawahiri said: "Crusaders and secularists and the Americanised army have 
converged â€¦ with Gulf money and American plotting to topple Mohamed Morsi's 
government."

He also attacked the vice-president, Mohamed ElBaradei, the Nobel Laureate and 
former UN nuclear chief who was an opposition leader during Morsi's single year 
in office as the "envoy of American providence".

In Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, the army-installed 
government promised supporters of Morsi a safe exit from their protest camps on 
Saturday, and urged them to rejoin the political process.

Interior ministry spokesman Hany Abdel Latif said the protesters were being 
manipulated by leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood. "Your continued sit-ins have 
no legal or political use. You have a safe exit, you will be politically 
integrated," he said.

Thousands of Morsi supporters have gathered in two camps in Cairo demanding 
his reinstatement. The army had threatened to remove them by force.

But on Friday, following appeals from religious leaders as well as foreign 
governments to avoid a bloodbath, the interim government said it would blockade 
the camps but not storm them.

Latif said many people wanted to leave but they faced threats from the protest 
leaders. Anyone involved in crimes, including torture, killing and kidnapping, 
would face prosecution, he said.

Morsi became Egypt's first freely elected president on 16 June 2012, 16 months 
after a popular uprising toppled the former dictator Hosni Mubarak.
 