
The body is among the greatest subjects in art, and one of the most varied. 
They can come in all shapes and sizes, from Jacob Epstein’s weightyJacob and 
the Angel 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/epstein-jacob-and-the-angel-t07139> to 
Alberto Giacometti’s spindlyMan Pointing 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/giacometti-man-pointing-n05939>. When 
curating Tate Modern’s current show,The World Goes Pop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/14/the-world-goes-pop-review-tate-modern>
, we dedicated a whole room to representations of the body.

The A to Z of Readers' Art: our new project for you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/01/a-to-z-of-readers-art-new-project-share-your-art>
Traditionally we might think of artists observing and evaluating the body from 
the outside, as in life drawing of models. Sometimes artists depict themselves 
in self-portraits or find other ways to portray their experience of their own 
bodies. In pop art – as in most of art history – the male depiction of the 
female body is a particularly common trope, from comic-book blondes to 
advertising models.

But at Tate Modern, our Pop exhibition highlights other approaches, such as 
how female artists in the 1960s represented interiority instead. Their projects 
wereoften connected with female liberation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/14/tate-modern-pop-art-women-ignored-sexist-establishment>
, a global political current of the period, and provide an alternative to the 
usual bodies offered up for the consumption of a heterosexual male viewer. 
Artists such asNicola L 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/video/nicola-ls-red-coat-tateshots> 
even dreamed of a collective, shared body, in which multiple people could 
inhabit the same skin.

So this month’s challenge, as part of our project The A to Z of Reader’s Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/01/a-to-z-of-readers-art-new-project-share-your-art>
, is to create your own work of art about the body. It might follow traditional 
ways of looking at it or thinking about it, or revolutionary ones.

Artworks about the body: your GuardianWitness contributions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/ng-interactive/2015/oct/01/artworks-about-the-body-your-guardianwitness-contributions>
How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.
 