
International Airlines Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/international-consolidated-airlines-group>
, the owner of British Airways, is to launch low-cost transatlantic flights in 
a bid to grab a slice of the nascent market for no-frills long-haul air travel.

The group said it would start flying from Barcelona’s El Prat airport to the 
US in June, either under the banner of a new airline, as part of “legacy” 
carriers BA and Iberia, or via its lowest-cost long-haul airline Aer Lingus.

As well as US destinations such as Los Angeles and San Francisco, it is 
considering cheaper routes to Buenos Aires, Santiago, Havana and Tokyo.

“This new operation will add another dimension to IAG and complement the other 
airlines in the group,” the company said in a statement.

Using Barcelona’s El Prat airport will allow IAG to feed passengers from its 
European short-haul budget carrier Vueling into the new routes, which will be 
flown by a pair of 300-seat Airbus A330 planes at first.

IAG, created via the £5bn merger of BA and Iberia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/29/british-airways-iberia-agree-merger>
 in 2010, has not ruled out following suit in the UK by launching a lower-cost 
alternative to its transatlantic British Airways fares.

Aviation analysts billed the move as a response to the growth in budget long 
haul flights offered byfast-expanding rivals such as Norwegian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/02/norwegian-low-cost-transatlantic-flight-gatwick-la>
, which is taking on established players on longer journeys by undercutting 
them on price.

“There’s recognition among management at IAG that legacy airlines responded 
late to the development of low-cost short haul,” said John Strickland, director 
of consultancy JLS Consulting.

“IAG have learned that lesson and won’t let that happen again by allowing 
low-cost long haul development without them. Norwegian have shown it can work 
and they’ve seen it’s going to take hold.”

Analysts at the CAPA Centre for Aviation, an airline analysis firm, said it 
looked like IAG was reacting to the growth of Norwegian, which already competes 
with BA on US routes out of Gatwick.

“Plans by the low-cost carrier Norwegian to launch long-haul routes from 
Barcelona in 2017 may have had a catalytic effect on IAG’s thinking,” they said.

Long-established airlines such as British Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways>, American Airlines and 
Delta are finding their formerly lucrative transatlantic routes tougher amid 
rising competition from budget newcomers including Norwegian, WestJet and Wow 
Air.

That has prompted the established or legacy carriers to develop their own 
low-cost exposure.


Earlier this year, Lufthansa’s Eurowings unit started flying long-haul to 
Cuba, Thailand and the Dominican Republic from Cologne and said this week it 
would also consider flying from Munich.

Air France said in November that was considering a budget offer to the US but 
has yet to decided on what it might look like.

Ryanair, Europe’s largest short-haul carrier and the no-frills specialist, has 
repeatedly toyed with the idea ofmoving into long-haul travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/19/ryanair-backtracks-on-transatlantic-flights-plan>
 but has yet to take the plunge.

But IAG’s entry into the market could speed up the race to win price-conscious 
travellers to the US, Caribbean and Latin America.

“The market is big and it’s price sensitive so it could be stimulated by an 
airline of this kind offering a lower fare proposition,” said Strickland, 
adding that IAG’s cost-cutting efforts would stand it in good stead to make 
money from a budget long-haul offering.
 