Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7smrTqD9ywk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7smrTqD9ywk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7smrTqD9ywk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click her to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/7smrTqD9ywk>

The collective of African and western musicians known as Africa Express 
<http://www.africaexpress.co.uk> has revealed details of the train trip they 
will take across the UK in September, with a cast including Damon Albarn, 
Amadou & Mariam, Kano, Baaba Maal, Charli XCX, Fatoumata Diawara and Noisettes.

Five years after their first full gig – an epic show at Glastonbury in 2007 – 
Africa Express will become "The Africa Express" when a lineup of more than 80 
musicians leaves London on a week-long journey. Other acts scheduled to board 
the train include the newly announced Bassekou Kouyate and Nick Zinner of the 
Yeah Yeah Yeahs, Rokia Traoré, Baloji, Jupiter & Okwess International and Jack 
Steadman ofBombay Bicycle Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bombay-bicycle-club>. More acts will be 
announced shortly.

As well as scheduled gigs in Middlesbrough, Glasgow, Manchester, Cardiff and 
Bristol, there are plans for pop-up performances at railway stations, schools, 
factories, offices, shopping centres and homes. Anyone interested in inviting
Africa Express <https://www.theguardian.com/music/africa-express> to play when 
they visit their town is asked to contact them online at 
info@africaexpress.co.uk.

The trip will culminate with the train's arrival into London King's Cross 
before a final concert in the new Granary Square at the back of the station on 
8 September.

Africa Express began in 2006 with a trip to Mali, when co-founder Damon Albarn 
took Fatboy Slim, Martha Wainwright and others to play with acts such as 
Toumani Diabate, Salif Keita and Amadou & Mariam. This was followed by the 
Glastonbury show, trips to Nigeria, Congo and Ethiopia as well as further gigs 
in Liverpool, London, Paris and on a beach in northern Spain. Spin-off outfit 
the Africa Express Soundsystem playedthe Great Escape festival 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/great-escape-festival> in Brighton. Read more 
about Africa Express. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/10/all-aboard-africa-express>

Africa Express <http://www.africaexpress.co.uk/> will play Middlesborough Town 
Hall on 3 September; The Arches in Glasgow on 4 September; The Ritz in 
Manchester on 5 September; Solus in Cardiff on 6 September; The Big 
Top@Creative Common in Bristol on 7 September and Granary Square at King's 
Cross, London, on 8 September.

The Africa Express trip is part of the London 2012 <> festival and is produced 
in association with the Barbican. The Guardian is the train trip's media 
partner.
 