
Bafta have announced the nominations for their television awards 
<http://www.bafta.org/television/news/television-awards-2015-nominations-announced>
, recognising the best in British TV during 2014 – and have championed a slate 
of relentlessly grim but powerful crime thrillers.

Bafta TV awards 2015: full list of nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/08/bafta-tv-awards-2015-full-list-of-nominations>
The Bafta TV awards nominations spread the love around
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/08/bafta-tv-award-nominations-2015-utopia-detectorists-prey>
The leading actress prize is perhaps this year’s strongest category, with 
Sheridan Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sheridan-smith> in Cilla 
facing down a trio of embattled crime heroines: Georgina Campbell in BBC3’s 
sleeper hit Murdered By My Boyfriend, Sarah Lancashire in Happy Valley and 
Keeley Hawes in Line of Duty.

The latter two shows were joint top of the nominations with three each, with 
another similarly hardboiled crime drama, The Missing, also netting a trio of 
nods. Murdered By My Boyfriend was also recognised in the single drama 
category, where it faces competition from Dylan Thomas biopic A Poet in New 
York, Jimmy McGovern’s Common, and Marvellous, the drama about the 
inspirational Neil Baldwin, which also scored three nominations.

Benedict Cumberbatch is the biggest name in a similarly strong leading actor 
field, for his socially awkward Sherlock. He’s joined by Toby Jones for 
Marvellous,James Nesbitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/james-nesbitt> for The Missing, and 
Jason Watkins, for his eerily accurate portrayal in The Lost Honour of 
Christopher Jefferies.

Ant and Dec scored a brace of nominations for their cheesy and raucous 
Saturday Night Takeaway, as did Graham Norton, whose talk show was recognised 
in both comedy and entertainment categories. The US imports nominated in the 
international category were True Detective, The Good Wife, House of Cards and
Orange is the New Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/orange-is-the-new-black>, the latter 
pair continuing Netflix’s success at major awards shows.

Olivia Colman <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/olivia-colman> is 
nominated for the fourth year in a row, this time for her stoically cheerful 
reverend’s wife in BBC sitcom Rev, following her leading actress award last 
year for Broadchurch.

Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/26/wolf-hall-review-an-ending-so-great-we-forgot-we-knew-it-was-coming>
, one of the most critically acclaimed and talked-about dramas of recent years, 
might appear notable by its absence, but it falls outside Bafta’s remit for the 
2015 awards – only shows screened during 2014 are eligible.
 