
It was fifth time unlucky for Sherlock star Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>, who failed to break 
his Bafta duck on a night when there were double wins for BBC2 drama 
Marvellous, ITV’s The Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies and the perennially 
youthful double act of Ant and Dec.

Cumberbatch, nominated for the fifth time at the Bafta TV awards, was beaten 
to the lead actor prize by Jason Watkins, star of ITV’s real-life drama The 
Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies. The drama about the slandered Bristol 
schoolteacher also won the mini-series prize, one of a number of double winners 
at the ceremony at the Theatre Royal Drury Lane, London, on Sunday night.

Peter Bowker’s BBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> drama Marvellous, 
about Stoke City kit-man Neil Baldwin, won best single drama and best 
supporting actress, for Gemma Jones. Another drama based on a real-life story, 
BBC3’s Murdered by My Boyfriend, won the best actress prize for its star, 
Georgina Campbell, who beat Sheridan Smith, Keeley Hawes and Sarah Lancashire 
to the award.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbafta-tv-awards-ant-and-dec-sherlock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F10%2F1431293265422%2Fc2692abf-1bfb-410a-9563-9bd4dad1855e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bafta%20TV%20prize%20eludes%20Sherlock's%20Benedict%20Cumberbatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbafta-tv-awards-ant-and-dec-sherlock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bafta%20TV%20prize%20eludes%20Sherlock%27s%20Benedict%20Cumberbatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbafta-tv-awards-ant-and-dec-sherlock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F10%2F1431293265422%2Fc2692abf-1bfb-410a-9563-9bd4dad1855e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sarah Lancashire in Happy Valley. Photograph: Red Productions 
It was a night when many of the best-known dramas failed to win, including 
BBC1’s acclaimed James Nesbitt series The Missing and BBC2’s police drama Line 
of Duty, which were each nominated three times but failed to pick up any 
awards. BBC1’s drama Happy Valley, also nominated three times, won the award 
for best drama series.

Murdered by My Boyfriend was one of two awards for BBC3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3>, the channel which will close in the 
new year and go online only under controversial cost-saving plans announced by 
the BBC last year.

Winning the best factual series prize for Life and Death Row, BBC3 matched the 
haul of BBC1, which could only win twoBaftas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/baftas> – the entertainment prize, 
for the Graham Norton Show, and best drama series, for Happy Valley. It also 
won the Radio Times award, voted for by viewers, for Sherlock.

Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> were also 
double winners, repeating their feat of last year, winning best entertainment 
programme and best entertainment performance for their ITV show, Saturday Night 
Takeaway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbafta-tv-awards-ant-and-dec-sherlock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F10%2F1431293372089%2Fd49d46ce-4c06-4188-8a7b-3fe8ed7eb8d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bafta%20TV%20prize%20eludes%20Sherlock's%20Benedict%20Cumberbatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbafta-tv-awards-ant-and-dec-sherlock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bafta%20TV%20prize%20eludes%20Sherlock%27s%20Benedict%20Cumberbatch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fbafta-tv-awards-ant-and-dec-sherlock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F10%2F1431293372089%2Fd49d46ce-4c06-4188-8a7b-3fe8ed7eb8d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Toby Jones and Mackenzie Crook in Detectorists. Photograph: Matt 
Tiller/BBC/Channel X North and Lola Entertainment 
Matt Berry, the co-writer and star of Channel 4’s Toast of London, won the 
award for best male performance in a comedy programme, with the female 
equivalent picked up by W1A star Jessica Hynes.

A number of winners referred to last week’s general election in their 
acceptance speeches. Peter Bowker, writer of Marvellous, said: “Thank you, at 
least one vote went the right way this week.”

Bowker said his drama was a “celebration of the positive contribution everyone 
can make, a celebration of diversity and community and the spirit of optimism. 
These are values worth fighting for more so now than ever”.

Hynes used her speech to protest against the impact of government cuts in 
education funding and urged support for a mentoring charity, Arts Emergency.

Hynes said she was “really worried” about the impact of the cuts on people in 
low-income families. “I don’t think low income means low talent or low 
imagination or low intelligence,” she said.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> won six awards, with 
five each for ITV and BBC2. There were two Baftas each for BBC1 and BBC3. BBC4 
won a single Bafta, for its comedy The Detectorists, with Sky News winning the 
news prize for its reporting of the Ebola crisis. International winner True 
Detective is made by HBO and shown in the UK on Sky Atlantic.


Channel 4 winners included Grand Designs, which beat BBC1’s The Great British 
Bake Off to the features prize, Grayson Perry: Who Are You?, which won the 
specialist factual award, and reality winner The Island With Bear Grylls.

Special awards went to Clive James, who had pre-recorded his acceptance 
speech, and writer and producer Jeff Pope. Channel 4 News anchor Jon Snow 
awarded the Bafta fellowship.

James said he had a wonderful time working in television and “missed it very 
much” since he retired in 2001. “I think it was the right time,” he said. “The 
young people were getting very good, very quick, and a lot of the stuff we 
invented, like pre-YouTube footage and satellite interviews, had become 
standard.

“But I was very glad to have been there and I missed it sorely. I suppose I 
could have struggled on for a bit, after all when I entered my career Bruce 
Forsyth was just beginning his – he did his first shows under Queen Elizabeth 
I. But I can’t dance like him, all I could do is speak and I have spoken too 
long.”

Coronation Street producer Stuart Blackburn dedicated the ITV soap’s win to 
Anne Kirkbride, who died of cancer in January and played the role of Deirdre 
Barlow for 42 years.

In his role as host, Graham Norton had some fun at the expense of Jeremy 
Clarkson, in the wake of his axing from BBC2’s Top Gear, and theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. “There are more stars of stage and 
screen here than Jeremy Clarkson has had hot dinners,” Norton told the audience.

He said BBC1’s Poldark had “done very well for the BBC. A drama about a 
Cornish miner … it’s the first positive story involving a miner they have had 
for years”.

Neither of Shelock’s stars, Benedict Cumberbatch or Martin Freeman, were at 
the ceremony to collect the Radio Times audience award.

Sherlock showrunner Steven Moffat, said: “Sherlock Holmes and Doctor Watson 
cannot be here tonight. Martin is looking after the kids, and Benedict is 
looking after his pregnant wife which is what real men do.”


Bafta TV awards 2015: the full winners list

Leading actress Georgina Campbell, Murdered by My Boyfriend, BBC3

Leading actor Jason Watkins, The Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies, ITV

Supporting actor James Rea, The Honourable Woman, BBC2

Supporting actress Gemma Jones, Marvellous, BBC2

Entertainment programme Ant and Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway, ITV

Soap and continuing drama award Coronation Street, ITV

Drama series Happy Valley, BBC2

Mini-series The Lost Honour of Christopher Jefferies, ITV

Single drama Marvellous, BBC2

International True Detective, HBO

Comedy and comedy entertainment programme The Graham Norton Show, BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1>

Male performance in a comedy programme  Matt Berry, Toast of London, Channel 4

Female performance in a comedy programme  Jessica Hynes, W1A, BBC2

Scripted comedy The Detectorists, BBC4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4>

Entertainment performance Ant and Dec, Ant and Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway, 
ITV

News coverage Sky News Live at Five

Features Grand Designs, Channel 4

Factual series Life and Death Row, BBC3

Single documentary The Paedophile Hunter, Channel 4

Sport and live event WW1 Remembered – From the Battlefield and Westminster 
Abbey, BBC2

Current affairs Dispatches: Children on the Front Line, Channel 4

Specialist factual Grayson Perry: Who Are You?, Channel 4

Radio Times audience award Sherlock, BBC1

Reality and constructed factual The Island With Bear Grylls, Channel 4

Special award Clive James

Special award Jeff Pope, writer and producer

Fellowship Jon Snow, Channel 4 News
 