
Indian heavyweights

First of all, let’s catch up with the Indian big boys not mentioned on 
Rentrak’s chart. After a leaden first six months at the box office there, July 
has thrown up a titanic tussle between two megastars: moustachioed Telugu 
supremo Prahbas, and his war epicBaahubali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/12/baahubali-the-beginning-review-fantastic-bang-for-your-buck-in-most-expensive-indian-movie-ever-made>
, and Muslim main manSalman Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/salman-khan>
, and his cross-border dramaBajrangi Bhaijaan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/19/bajrangi-bhaijaan-review-salman-khan-india-pakistan-movie>
. Baahubali, the country’s much-trumpeted most expensive production to date, at 
$40m, was looking unbeatable after its record-breaking debut weekend on 10-12 
July; its global take was 450 crore ($70.1m) after 17 days on release at the 
close of this weekend,according to the International Business Times 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.in/baahubali-bahubali-3rd-weekend-box-office-collection-prabhas-starrer-grosses-rs-425-crore-17-640590>
. Which puts it in third place on the list ofhighest grossing Indian films 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_highest-grossing_Indian_films>, 
overtaking Shahrukh Khan’s 2013 romcom Chennai Express (423 crore) and leaving 
just Aamir Khan vehicles Dhoom 3 (542 crore) and PK (740 crore) above it. But 
on the strength of what looks like a phenomenal overseas performance – 
reflecting Salman Khan’s wider celebrity, not to mention the interest in the 
manslaughter case hanging over him – Bajrangi Bhaijaan looks to be on almost 
level pegging after just 10 days on deck. Wikipedia currently quotes it at 437 
crore globally, which would mean it’s taken nearly 200 crore outside of India,
better than any Bollywood release apart from PK 
<http://www.koimoi.com/overseas-bollywood-box-office-top10-movies/>. Bajrangi 
Bhaijaan is a very Bollywood affair – an attempt to gild Salman Khan with some 
of his namesake Aamir’s altruistic grace. A broad-shouldered CGI spectacular 
that holds its own with the best of Hollywood, Baahubali has more crossover 
appeal, so let’s hope non-Indian audiences get the opportunity to lap it up.

Bajrangi Bhaijaan review: Salman Khan strong even when wet as he escorts mute 
six-year-old back to Pakistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/19/bajrangi-bhaijaan-review-salman-khan-india-pakistan-movie>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvyX4toD395U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvyX4toD395U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvyX4toD395U&media=>
Local hero

Lost in Thailand: did China's comedy hit get lost in translation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/13/lost-in-thailand-lost-in-translation>
The Chinese box office has a new champ: Monster Hunt 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3781476/>, the $35m CGI/live-action fantasy from 
Hong Kong-bornShrek the Third 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jun/29/family.animation> director Raman 
Hui, had reached $220m at time of writing, passing 2012 buddy comedy Lost in 
Thailand ($204m) to become the highest grossing domestic film ever. It’s 
undoubtedly benefitted from the July moratorium on new Hollywood films, but its 
performance has been explosive all the same – taking almost as much asAnt-Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/08/ant-man-review-paul-rudd-michael-douglas>
’s international run so far in just its home market plus a handful of Asian 
territories. Following a medieval village official impregnated with the 
tentacled heir to the monster kingdom, Monster Hunt is, according to Screen 
International’s tentatively positive write-up 
<http://www.screendaily.com/reviews/monster-hunt-review/5090933.article>, 
“wholly Chinese in its portrayal of mythology, folklore and politics”. At the 
same time, it feels like a step forward for the industry: the traditional 
elements that often restrict native film-makers have been finally lathered up 
into something new.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFbhsvxqoCG4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFbhsvxqoCG4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFbhsvxqoCG4&media=>
The inability to dream up new, galvanic formats has beenpartly responsible for 
Chinese cinema’s lack of progress abroad, so it’ll be interesting to see if 
Monster Hunt attracts attention beyond the diaspora. No questioning progress on 
the box-office front, though: in the first six months of this year, China was 
up 52% on the same period in 2014 (which was a 35% improvement on 2013). The No 
1 local-film record has been broken three times since the turn of the decade: 
by 2010’s earthquake dramaAftershock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138946/aftershock>, Lost in Thailand, 
and now Monster Hunt. Compare that to three times in nearly 40 years in the US: 
Star Wars in 1977, Titanic in 1997 and Avatar in 2009.


Top five Chinese domestic films

1. Monster Hunt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbhsvxqoCG4> (2015), 1.370bn 
yuan ($220m)
2. Lost in Thailand <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UqZb1bUKJQ0> (2012), 
1.268bn yuan ($204m)
3. Journey to the West <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CmKrgPr7PA8> (2013), 
1.247bn yuan ($201m)
4. Breakup Buddies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dNOxQ94DM8Q> (2014), 
1.170bn yuan ($188m)
5. The Monkey King <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zCj-XP5cjOY> (2014), 
1.045bn yuan ($168m)

Arcade dire

After scoring an implausible 14 $100m+ US domestic hits since 1998, lowbrow 
king Adam Sandler may have dented his commercial prospects trying to reinvent 
himself for the blockbuster crowd inPixels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/pixels-review-just-another-adam-sandler-movie-cgi>
. Sony’s high-concept sci-fi comedy – based onPatrick Jean’s short film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ugV6cLgwomo> in which aliens unleash 80s 
videogame favourites on the Earth – had outsider potential in this year’s 
box-office race, and with his track record, Sandler’s presence in the ensemble 
looked like a bonus. But it’s opened at $24m in the US, a long way under $69m 
for The Lego Movie, which the studio was using as a yardstick overseas. If the 
marketing whizzed along appealingly thanks to Pac-Man, Donkey Kong et al, an 
awkward fact couldn’t be avoided in the actual film: Sandler unbalances 
proceedings, his typical lazy comedy filling the film with indulgent, nostalgic 
skits that continually threaten to bog down the neat visuals. Caught between 
this generational wallowing and the more urgent needs of an action film, Pixels 
was neither the four-quadrant all-embracer it might have been, nor did it 
successfully home in on any one group. It was too Sandler-ish and not sharp 
enough for the hipster crowd who might have been seduced by retro airs; not 
full enough of Sandler schtick for his core fanbase (his PG-13 work tends to 
open in the $40m vicinity); and surprisingly, with 62% of the US audience under 
25, it looks like not too many 80s arcade-heads showed up either.

 Lingering international appeal ... Pixels Photograph: Sony 
But stop me if you’ve heard this before: Sandler’s lingering international 
appeal may win Pixels an extra life. $21.4m from 56 overseas territories isn’t 
particularly strong, but there were enough bright spots to give Sony some hope, 
especially on a frugal $88m budget. Latin America, where Sandler’s comedies go 
down a treat, was pumping in the quarters: Mexico ($3.7m) was almost level with 
The Lego Movie ($3.8m), and fellow No 1 debuts Brazil ($3.1m/$1.7m) and 
Argentina ($2.3m/$657K) were well ahead. The Argentine figure was the eighth 
highest opening in the country ever, and a record for Sony. The $200m or so 
needed by Pixels for a slender profit will take some recovery. But backed 
partially byChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Film Group, the 
film is sure to get a big push there when it opens there on 15 September. So 
not quite game over yet.


Brain trust

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437658953789%2FKP_367683_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Out%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Out%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Finside-out-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437658953789%2FKP_367683_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Inside Out - video review 
While Minions has been noisily swarming all over the summer CGI animation 
front, Pixar’s interior trekInside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/inside-out-review-cannes-film-festival-pixar>
 has quietly claiming hearts and minds – and deserves more attention. Its 
staggered rollout, a few territories a week from mid-June onwards, means it 
never bashed the big box-office gong. But it’s discreetly amassed $550.1m 
already, making it the company’s eighth most successful film so far; $320.3m of 
that is the extremely impressive US take. Writer-director Pete Docter’s 
creative intrepidness and emotional acuity has been rewarded with consistent – 
40ish% holds in the States – and Inside Out has been commanding similar loyalty 
elsewhere. Japan and Korea both dropped just -27% this week, and Australia 
actually saw +35% and +27% leaps in its third and fourth frames. The big 
opening this time ($10.9m in the UK) was one of Pixar’s best 21st-century 
starts here, only bested by the more obviously commercialFinding Nemo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/28/finding-nemo-3d-review> ($12.3m), 
The Incredibles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/nov/19/the-incredibles-film-review> 
($18.4m) andToy Story 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/15/toy-story-3-review> ($32.7m). 
Heartening to see that emotional depth can still put bums on multiplex seats. 
Inside Out should comfortably passCars 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/21/cars-2-review> ($559.9m 
worldwide),Ratatouille 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/oct/12/animation.bradbird> ($623.7m) and 
The Incredibles ($631.4m) for fifth placeon the Pixar scoreboard 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=pixar.htm>. A really stellar 
performance in its 20 or so remaining markets, which include a reputed October 
Chinese release, could see it past Docter’s ownUp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/09/up-review> ($731.3m) and Monsters 
University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/11/monsters-university-review> 
($743.6m), and in the Pixar stratosphere with Finding Nemo and Toy Story 3; 
unimaginable for what looked like their trickiest proposition for years.


Inside Out: a crash course in PhD philosophy of self that kids will get first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/jul/27/inside-out-philosophical-mind-pixar-philosophy>
Beyond Hollywood

Elsewhere, Chinese superhero spoof Jian Bing Man (Pancake Man) was still 
cooking, with audiences there in the mood for more homemade fare after Monster 
Hunt – it took another $35.7m for fifth place on the worldwide chart. Not 
included in those figures, for some reason, was a scorching screen average from 
a 13-screen US release, in what Chinese apparatchiks will be praying is the 
start of an international surge for their wares. In ninth place globally with 
$19.5m was South Korean period thrillerThe Assassination 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CK9pxabm9BI>, with Choi-Dong Hoon, director of 
2012’s fantastically exciting Ocean’s Eleven ripoffThe Thieves 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=28qTsiPhYCI>, returning with a tale of 1930s 
resistance fighters striking back against Japanese occupation. Only You, a 
Chinese remake of the Marisa Tomei-Robert Downey Jr comedy starring Lust, 
Caution actor Tang Wei, nabbed 15th place with $7m. And also from that way, the 
fifth in the Seer animated series based on an online game touted as the local 
Pokemon made $4m this weekend, and 18th global spot.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv2Y4VL1v1KE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv2Y4VL1v1KE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv2Y4VL1v1KE&media=>
The future

It’s round five of global-espionage hokum for Tom Cruise and Paramount as 
Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/mission-impossible-rogue-nation-review-tom-cruise-just-wont-let-this-franchise-self-destruct>
 slinks forth in close to 40 markets, about half of its rollout. The fourth, 
Ghost Protocol, arresteda decline in the series 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/franchises/chart/?id=missionimpossible.htm>, with 
an upswing in international-playboy globe-trotting and its star putting his 
life on the line on Dubai’s Burj Khalifa lifting it to a series high of 
$694.7m. But the Cruiser is going higher this time in his pursuit of 
jaw-dropping real-life self-endangerment – clinging to the side of an airplane, 
a piece of madness he apparently performed eight times – so for his pains he’ll 
be hoping the box office follows suit.


Hollywood is still persona non grata in China, until Terminator: Genisys 
emerges from the portal on 23 August. So a little time remains to shore up 
local market share, and the coming weekend’s triple salvo should chip in. John 
Woo casts off with thesecond part <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WS7_-Kt_7pA> 
of his “Chinese Titanic”, The Crossing, about the 1949 sinking of the steamer 
Taiping en route to Taiwan; judging by the first part’s disappointing December 
run ($32.4m on a $48.6m budget), audiences there prefer their maritime 
disasters skippered by James Cameron. It’s up against $20m Chinese epic romance
Lady of the Dynasty <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hls3TRiOGnQ>, starring 
local fave Fan Bingbing, and a first film in seven years for Hong Kong stalwart 
Ringo Lam, best known for 1987 classic City on Fire. This one’s calledWild City 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v2Y4VL1v1KE> – a theme is emerging here.


On the subcontinent, meanwhile, Singham <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1948150/> 
headcracker Ajay Devgn headlines psychological thrillerDrishyam 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AuuX2j14NBg>, a remake of the 2013 Malayalam 
film of the same name. Playing a cinephile family man implicated in a murder in 
a Goa village, Devgn is taking a sidestep from his more flamboyant chest-baring 
extravanganzas. Probably good timing, with Baahubali still in town.


Top 10 global box office, 24-26 July

1. Minions, $66.1m from 61 territories. $759.4m – 65.6% international; 34.4% US
2. Ant-Man, $60.2m from 49 territories. $226.5m – 53.2% int; 46.8% US
3. Monster Hunt, $46m from 5 territories. $211m – 100% int
4. Pixels, $45.4m from 57 territories. $49.4m – 51.4% int; 48.6% US
5. Inside Out <https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out>, $35.7m from 52 
territories. $550.1m – 41.8% int; 58.2% US
6. Jian Bing Man, $25m from 1 territory. $132m – 100% int
7. Paper Towns, $20.5m from 38 territories. $28.5m – 56.1% int; 43.9% US
8. (New) Southpaw, $20m from 5 territories – 17.5% int; 82.5% US
9. (New) The Assassination, $19.5m from 1 territory. $23m – 100% int
10. Trainwreck, $17.5m from 4 territories. $61.7m – 0.4% int; 99.6% US


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. This week’s figures are based 
on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

 