
Models <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/models> have urged MPs to consider 
tougher rules for the fashion industry, describing catwalks full of models with 
advanced eating disorders, some surviving solely on popcorn.

Rosie Nelson, whose Change.org <http://change.org/> petition calling for new 
laws for health standards in the fashion industry has attracted more than 
110,000 signatures, told the all-party parliamentary group on body image that 
she had constantly been urged to lose weight, with one agency saying she needed 
to be “down to the bone”.

“Friends at shows saw models who fainted and had to be dragged off the stage, 
quickly replaced by another girl,” the Australian-born model said. “At one 
stage, all I ate was fruit and vegetables, nothing else. One girl I knew only 
ate popcorn.”

The committee, which is chaired by the Conservative MP Caroline Nokes, is 
considering pressing for legislation. It heard from models and agencies for 
both traditional and plus-size models, as well as health experts and the 
models’ union, on whether Britain should follow countries such as France, Spain 
and Israel, which have rules to prevent models with eating disorders being used 
on catwalks and in fashion spreads.

Why is a size-six woman too big to model clothes, demands Tory MP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/08/super-skinny-models-mp-caroline-nokes-ban-debate>
Nelson, 23, told the MPs she had been turned away by British agencies for not 
being thin enough. “I went back after I lost weight, and I was told I had to 
lose more. I couldn’t physically have lost more weight at that time. And it’s 
upsetting that 16-year-olds could, at this very minute, be being told the same 
thing.

“Every time I went into an agency, I was prodded and poked and measured with a 
tape measure,” she said. “I used to dread it.”

The founder of the modelling union at Equity, Dunja Knezevic, a former catwalk 
model who once developed hypothermia on a fashion shoot, told MPs it was not 
unusual to see extreme symptoms of eating disorders at shows.

“I saw queues of girls at Milan fashion week with this fur all over their 
bodies, what the body produces to keep warm when there is no fat left. They 
were covered in it and I was just mesmerised by how hairy they were,” she said.

“It is not true that girls who are unhealthy don’t work. Some agents like that 
unhealthy look, with drawn cheekbones, and make-up can cover up any effect on 
your skin that an eating disorder could have.”

Knezevic called for a crackdown on underage models on the catwalks, whom she 
described as “cheap labour, 14-year-olds from Siberia who come over, are paid 
badly and end up even owing money to the agencies because when they grow, 
develop into women, they can’t fit the sizes”.

The Bosnian model, who has developed a fashion industry code of conduct with 
the artists union Equity, said she had never herself been told to lose weight. 
“I was always naturally very small, my concern was always for my friends.

“A voluntary code [for model’s health] will not work,” she continued. “Of 
course the industry knows the effect it is having, but it doesn’t care, it 
likes being the ‘glamorous bad guy’.”

But modelling agencies were defiant at the meeting, with one top agent 
insisting he had seen only two girls in 15 years whom he considered to be too 
unwell.

John Horner, managing director of Models 1, which discovered the models Twiggy 
and Yasmin Le Bon, said he rarely encountered models who made themselves unwell 
from extreme diet and exercise regime. “I think I’ve seen two who looked unwell 
and we needed to have a conversation,” he said.

Yves Saint Laurent ad banned for using 'unhealthily underweight' model
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/03/yves-saint-laurent-ad-ban-underweight-model>
The Conservative MP Rebecca Harris said the figure of two models in 15 years 
seemed very low. “I wonder if the industry might be inured to the very thin, 
and you don’t recognise the signs as well as you think you do,” she said, which 
Horner’s Models 1 colleague Karen Diamond said was possible.

Diamond said the agency’s “new faces” were given a copy of James Duigan’s book 
Clean & Lean Diet, which she said promoted a “very healthy, very toned physique 
which we would all benefit from if we stuck to this regime”.

The agency knew signs of an eating disorder to look out for, Diamond said. 
“There is a certain skin palette,” she said. “If a girl is making herself sick, 
she might have bad breath, it could affect her teeth, sometimes you see a downy 
hair appearing on the body.”

But the former fashion editor Caryn Franklin, who co-founded Allwalks Beyond 
the Catwalk, an organisation that promotes diversity in beauty ideals, said 
those symptoms were “the extreme end of eating disorders, models can keep 
themselves just below the radar”.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> experts who also addressed 
the panel of MPs said eating disorders could not just be assessed on 
appearance. “You wouldn’t be able to see if a girl has thin bones, you wouldn’t 
be able to see if they weren’t having periods, you wouldn’t be able to see if 
they had mental health issues,” the GP Dr Ellie Cannon told the Guardian after 
giving evidence.

Diamond said she would encourage designers to send bigger sample sizes, saying 
some labels had asked for as small as 33in (84cm) hips, which she regarded as 
“bordering on being physically impossible – I wouldn’t try to make a girl fit 
that.”

Different laws have been passed worldwide to try and tackle the issue. Spain 
already bars models with a body-mass index (BMI) below 18 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/5341202.stm> from taking part in Madrid fashion 
shows, and models on Italian catwalksmust show health certificates under a 
self-regulation code. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-423522/Italian-fashion-designers-ban-size-zero-models-catwalks.html>
 TheWorld Health Organisation guidelines 
<http://www.who.int/gho/ncd/risk_factors/bmi_text/en/> state that an adult with 
a BMI below 18 is considered malnourished, and 17 severely malnourished. The 
average model has a BMI of 16.

Diamond said she would be open to an age restriction on catwalk models under 
18, but cautioned against using BMI to measure health. “Fashion models have a 
certain physique,” she said. “Most fashion models are under 18 in BMI, that 
doesn’t make them unhealthy, but it is very difficult to police.”

Former Vogue editor: The truth about size&nbsp;zero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jul/05/vogue-truth-size-zero-kirstie-clements>
Nokes, who will now write a report on whether to push for any legislation on 
the issue, said she was inclined to agree that BMI was not the right way to 
measure models’ health. “But it’s clear designers and agencies are a million 
miles away from the general public on this,” she said.

Nelson told the Guardian after the meeting she was frustrated that the fashion 
agencies, who gave evidence first, had not stayed to hear from the models. 
“They were not willing to hear personal stories and it shows they don’t expect 
change to happen,” she said.

Among the models speaking at the session was the plus-size model Hayley 
Hasselhoff, whose father, the former Baywatch star David Hasselhoff, was 
watching in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> committee room.

Hasselhoff said she had not faced the same pressures. “But I heard of models 
who started at 14-year-old with such small hips, and then at 16 agents said 
‘are you slacking off?’ and they would say back, ‘what, no, I’m just growing, 
I’m developing.’ Girls feel they have to go to extreme length to live their 
dream.”

Models 1’s Horner said there was very limited demand for plus-size models. 
“They are paid less than regular models, there is certainly discrimination 
there,” he said. “The vast majority will work in catalogue, not editorial.”
 