
Allied Irish Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allied-irish-bank> 
failed to check the credentials of a supposed Greek shipping tycoon before 
embarking on a series of deals through which it would lend him £740m, a court 
has heard.

The testimony, which shines a light on corporate lending practices during the 
credit boom, came on the eighth day of the trial of Achilleas Kallakis, who is 
alleged to have used forged documents to give the illusion of vast wealth as 
part of anelaborate scam against AIB and Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/sep/29/accused-fraudster-kallakis-used-forgeries-court-told>
.

When asked by Victor Temple QC, prosecuting counsel for the Serious Fraud 
Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>, whether AIB had 
made attempts to verify Kallakis's wealth, Michael Cooke, a former senior 
manager at AIB, said the bank had asked for "references" but had not 
"independently assessed [his] wealth at that time". He added: "Subsequently we 
got a specialist firm to do background checks."

Kallakis and his business partner, Alexander Williams, are charged with 21 
counts of conspiracy to defraud relating to a series of alleged deceptions 
devised to secure loans to buy 16 large properties and convert a former 
passenger ferry into a luxury superyacht.

Appearing at Southwark crown court, the two have pleaded not guilty to the 
charges, which are said to have taken place between 2003 and 2008.

The jury has already heard that the men had changed their names since pleading 
guilty at the same court 16 years ago to a forgery conspiracy relating to a 
scam to sell bogus honorary titles to unsuspecting Americans. Kallakis had been 
convicted under the name Kollakis, and Williams had been convicted under the 
name Lewis.

Testimony referring to the AIB vetting process also comes after the court 
learned that the accused created a "virtual office" in Greece to fool 
unsuspecting bank representatives.

When the yacht loan was provisionally agreed in June 2007 with HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos>, which is now part of Lloyds, the 
bank asked to see contracts from a supposed guarantor.

In a meeting between the pair and an HBOS banker, Paul Stirrat, Kallakis 
"feigned indignation" and became "aggressive", Temple said: "Kallakis was 
possessed of a forceful personality, and his blandishments had the desired 
effect.

"After much negotiation, potential revisions to the terms of the facility 
offer, and some considerable hesitation, the bank eventually modified its 
stance. In particular, the bank did not require written evidence of the 
shipping contracts, but instead was content to rely on telephone contact with 
[a guarantor]."

The prosecution says the bank was persuaded to telephone a company set up by 
the accused in a serviced office in Greece.

AIB is said to have lost £56m, and Lloyds claims to have lost €5.8m (£5m).
 