
Bank of Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bank-of-ireland> has 
reported pre-tax losses of €950m (£845m) for 2010 as it continues to fight off 
full nationalisation and its chief executive battles to save his job.

The stricken bank, which is 36% owned by the state, said its losses were 
significantly down on the previous year when it lost more than €2bn.

The losses included higher than expected writeoffs – about €2.2bn – on 
property developer loans transferred to the country's "bad bank", the National 
Asset Management Agency (Nama).

Bank of Ireland is one of six domestic banks engulfed by a financial meltdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2011/mar/30/ireland-main-banks-state-ownership?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and the only one that has a fighting chance of avoiding nationalisation.

Its chairman, Patrick Molloy, said: "Trading conditions in the first months of 
2011 remain challenging due to higher funding costs, in particular the cost of 
customer deposits and the continuing liquidity environment."

Molloy said the bank had made progress on its "key priorities" but was "badly 
impacted by the severity of the economic downturn in Ireland" which has made it 
reliant onemergency funding from the European Central Bank (ECB)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/apr/01/ireland-fifth-bailout-end-years-corruption-greed?intcmp=239>
to maintain liquidity and keep credit flowing and cash points open.

Bank of Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> revealed it had 
€1.8bn "impaired" loans on its books, a fifth of this in the home loans market. 
But it said impairment on non-Nama loans had peaked in 2009, reduced in 2010 
and would shrink further this year and next.

The fate of chief executive Richie Boucher depends on his ability to acquire 
fresh funds from the private markets to end the dependence on the ECB and to 
bring capital reserve levels up to IMF-EU bailout requirements.

Stress tests conducted last month by the Irish central bank require Bank of 
Ireland to raise more than €4.2bn in capital. If it fails, the state will step 
in with IMF-EU cash.

Boucher refused to comment about his position when interviewed on Irish radio. 
"I focus on my job. We've made a lot of progress, we've a lot of challenges 
ahead and that's what my focus is on."

He was appointed chief executive of the bank after the departure of Brian 
Goggin in 2009. At the time, his appointment was criticised as he had been a 
senior figure at the bank – head of its Irish retail division and an existing 
board member – during the years of reckless lending.

Boucher said he was confident the bank was through the worst. "I think we've 
moved from survival," he said. "We're certainly in the stabilisation phase.

"I think the most important thing – having done this work and put all this 
effort into reducing our costs and taking the risks out of our balance sheets 
and making a significant tax return to the tax payer – is the relationship we 
have with our customers."

He said the bank had more customers this year than last. "It's extremely 
important that we retain the customers we have and win new customers in these 
difficult times."

Boucher said he expected to end the bank's reliance on emergency ECB funding 
by 2013. "Well within that time frame we won't be relying on monetary authority 
support," he said.

"We don't have to generate a huge amount of deposit growth to get there. We 
are expecting some deposit growth but it is primarily through the asset 
deleveraging."

The bank acknowledged that the sovereign debt crisis that hit Ireland in the 
second half of last year had made it impossible for banks to raise money on the 
financial markets.

The bank's chairman said the sovereign debt issues arising in that period 
"adversely impacted our ability to term out our funding and caused significant 
outflows of ratings sensitive deposits", adding that the situation had 
stabilised since November.

This week Allied Irish Banks revealed record losses of more than €10bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/apr/12/aib-hodgkinson-record-loss-apology?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and 2,000 job cuts.

Bank of Ireland said it was making progress with an agreed plan to reduce 
staff numbers, which had fallen by 2,200 since 2008.
 