
The referral fee merry-go-round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/may/14/referral-fees-ban-solicitors> will 
soon grind to a halt. That, at least, is the intention of the Ministry of 
Justice, which last week bowed to calls from Lord Justice Jackson and Jack 
Straw toannounce a ban 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/news/features/feature-090911a.htm> on referral fees 
in personal injury cases.

Where motor accidents lead to a legal claim for damages, the injured person 
usually finds their way to a solicitor through a middleman, often a claims 
management company (CMC) or insurer, who receives a generous fee for the 
introduction.

Speaking in the House of Commons 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm110913/debtext/110913-0001.htm#11091385000522>
 this week, Straw accused CMCs, personal injury lawyers, credit hire companies 
and repair and recovery firms of building
 "a lucrative and self-serving merry-go-round in which the personal 
information of anyone involved in any collision with another vehicle, no matter 
how trivial its effects, is traded like a commodity, typically for £600 to £800 
a shot, with the aim of pursuing a claim – any claim – provided that it brings 
rich rewards to all those involved in this industry". 
He also didn't spare insurers when handing out blame for the growth of the 
claims industry (although it was an industry given legs by Labour'sAccess to 
Justice Act 1999 <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1999/22/contents>). 
Despite their active campaigning against referral fees, many insurers actually 
receive them too, working on the principle that if you can't beat them, you 
might as well join them.

The government had been putting off a decision pending the Legal Services 
Board'sinvestigation of referral fees 
<http://www.legalservicesboard.org.uk/what_we_do/consultations/closed/pdf/20110527_referral_fees_decision_press_release_final4.pdf>
. This concluded in May that there was noregulatory case for a blanket ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/may/31/lawyers-referral-fees-neil-rose>, 
calling for greater transparency instead, but left it open for public interest 
arguments and sector-specific bans. It was a much more nuanced finding than has 
been reported, and it does not reflect well on the justice secretary, Ken 
Clarke, to announce simply that he had rejected the board's advice.

By contrast Clarke was generous in his praise of Straw's campaign for 
prompting a decision – and certainly his high-profile intervention in June 
appeared to change the government's previously relaxed mood on the issue.

There are strong arguments on both sides: on one hand referral fees push up 
costs and encourage a grasping compensation culture; on the other they have 
enabled access to justice and represent an unexceptional business practice, 
indeed just another form of marketing. Further, the "no win, no fee" system 
means there is no benefit to solicitors in running duff claims – unless 
insurers make a commercial decision to pay out rather than spend time and money 
defending them.

But whatever the rights and wrongs, this is a policy that is likely to be far 
more effective in grabbing headlines than in actually stamping out referral 
fees. For one thing, the government admits that there is no accepted definition 
of a referral fee. So if I, as a solicitor, decide to outsource all of my 
marketing activity to someone else, and pay them for bringing in clients, 
should that be banned? It is a hard argument to sustain in a free market and 
shows how hard it will be to capture the many types of arrangement that can be 
thought up (and were before referral fees were allowed in 2004).

Currently CMCs bring in the clients, while some also provide investigation 
services. The advent of alternative business structures in the coming months – 
strongly supported by Clarke in aspeech on Wednesday 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/news/press-releases/moj/pressrelease140911a.htm> – 
means that CMCs will be able to employ lawyers and then just handle the entire 
case themselves, from initial inquiry to settlement cheque, without a referral 
fee in sight. The government won't be able to stop that.

Speaking on the Today programme 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_9585000/9585263.stm> last week, 
the justice minister Jonathan Djanogly suggested that the ban, along with 
Jackson's other reforms currently going through parliament in the legal aid, 
sentencing and punishment of offenders bill, will stop claims text pests and 
cold callers. But nothing here directly does that; the reforms are attacking 
the business model of the claims industry, presumably in the hope that they 
will be squeezed out (this is an industry worth nearly £600m, however). In fact 
earlier this year Straw expressed regret that he didn't ban claims management 
companies when he was justice secretary.

And referral fees are just the Trojan horse. There is no gain to insurers if 
the fees paid to solicitors do not fall following a ban and that stage of the 
campaign is now well under way. For a basic road traffic accident solicitors 
are paid £1,200; Straw reckons it should fall to £600.Solicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/solicitors> in turn will argue that the money 
they spend on referral fees will now be spent on other marketing methods. 
Everyone else builds marketing costs into their fees, so why not solicitors? It 
will not be easily resolved.

Side by side with this is an assault on whiplash claims themselves, the 
incidence of which is rising fast. Are British necks weaker than those of our 
European counterparts? Is it a made-up condition that gets you a couple of 
weeks off work and a couple of thousand quid from a gullible insurer? Or is the 
modern manufacture of cars to blame?

What insurers would really like is to resolve claims themselves without the 
need for a lawyer at all. They produce statistics to prove that claimants would 
be no worse off if this happened, but it is hard not to be sceptical. A good 
start would be for insurance premiums to go down in the wake of all these 
changes.

Referral fees are actually a bit of a sideshow. The motor insurance debate has 
a long way to run.

Neil Rose is the editor of www.legalfutures.co.uk
 