
The Barcelona midfielder Andrés Iniesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andres-iniesta> has acknowledged there is 
much more than just three points at stake in Saturday’s first clásico of the 
season at the Bernabéu.

Luis Enrique’s unbeaten side head to the Spanish capital top of La Liga and 
knowing a win would open up a seven-point cushion over their arch rivalsReal 
Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> nine games into the 
season.

Iniesta accepts victory would provide a big psychological boost.

“It’s not just any other game – it never is. If you win, it makes you feel 
great,” the Spain international said. “Theclásico is always a battle in 
footballing terms. You have to be the best in everything to win.

“We have to go there with the mentality to win – not thinking about what will 
happen afterwards, no matter what happens. That would be a mistake. It will be 
a closely fought game. Madrid have a lot of potential and it’s never easy to go 
there and win.”

Luis Suárez is available to make his long-awaited debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/oct/23/luis-suarez-return-real-madrid-barcelona-clasico>
, having so far been unavailable following his summer transfer from Liverpool 
due to his four-month ban for biting the Italy defender Giorgio Chiellini at 
the World Cup.

Iniesta is looking forward to linking up with the Uruguay striker. “It has 
been good since he arrived but is in an awkward situation because there is 
nothing worse for a player than not playing,” the 2010 World Cup winner said. 
“But now he can finally return. He’s happy and so are we.”

Barça go into the game on the back of a 3-1 Champions League victory over Ajax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/21/barcelona-ajax-champions-league-match-report>
 at Camp Nou on Tuesday, while Real Madrid were 3-0 winners at Liverpool 24 
hours later.

Cristiano Ronaldo expressed his bemusement at the clásico being scheduled for 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/oct/23/luis-suarez-return-real-madrid-barcelona-clasico>
, giving his side only two full days’ rest to Barça’s three, but Iniesta was 
paying little attention.

“Cristiano speaks of the calendar, but it is what it is,” he said. “We have 
also played games with fewer days of rest – you have to adapt.”
 