
Arda Turan is excited to play alongside his “idol” at Barcelona, Andrés 
Iniesta. The Spanish champions unveiled their big summer signing following his
€34m (£24.1m) transfer from Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/arda-turan-barcelona-atletico-madrid-five-year-deal>
.

“I always said [Leo] Messi is the best,” Turan said to the Spanish press at 
the Camp Nou. “But my idol is Iniesta. I can’t wait to play with him.”

One player Turan will not go into battle with is Xavi because the long-time 
captainleft Barça last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/31/xavi-barcelona-la-liga-sid-lowe>
 for the Qatari side Al Sadd after 24 years with the Catalan club.

“No one can replace Xavi,” the midfielder said. “I am here to give all that I 
have but I’m not here to equal Xavi. Xavi is a world football icon and will 
always be a symbol of Barça.”

Arda Turan completes £24m move to Barcelona but cannot play until January
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/06/arda-turan-barcelona-atletico-madrid-five-year-deal>
The Turkey captain, who was a reported target of several top Premier League 
clubs, has signed a five-year contract withBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>.

“Everyone who knows me, knows that ever since I was a boy I always aspired to 
play for Barcelona,” Turan said. “This is the best club in the world and I am 
delighted to be here. It’s a dream for me. I had many offers but once I got 
Barça’s, I put the others to the side.”

Turan will not be able to play an official game for Barcelona until January 
2016. That is when theclub’s transfer ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/aug/20/barcelona-two-window-transfer-embargo-fifa-reject-appeal>
, imposed by Fifa for breaching rules regarding the signing of under-age 
players, comes to an end.

“It will be hard not to play for six months,” he said. “The only thing I want 
is to adapt to the team as soon as possible. [Barcelona’s coach] Luis Enrique 
really wanted me and that makes me very happy. I’m going to do everything I can 
to repay that trust.”

Barcelona won the Primera División 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/17/atletico-madrid-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
,Copa del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/athletic-bilbao-barcelona-copa-del-rey-final-match-report>
 andChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/06/barcelona-juventus-luis-suarez>
 titles in the 2014-15 campaign after finishing empty-handed the previous 
season. “I want to win every title with Barça,” Turan said. “I’m joining a 
great side.”

Turan made it clear that Atlético would have a special place in his heart. He 
joined the in 2011 from Galatasaray and won a Europa League title, a Copa del 
Rey and La Liga with the club. “I want to thank Atlético because if I’m here is 
also partly down to their work,” Turan said.
 