
Andrés Iniesta says he heard the silence and knew that all he had to do was 
wait for Isaac Newton. The ball sat up; gravity would bring it down again and, 
when it did, he would score. It wasthe 116th minute in Johannesburg and he did 
score 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/11/world-cup-final-holland-spain1>
, running to the corner and pulling off his shirt to reveal the message 
underneath, written in blue marker by Hugo the kit man: “Dani Jarque, always 
with us”. Ten thousand miles away Spain erupted and Jessica cried. Through the 
tears she saw it: Dani, her Dani.

The 2010 World Cup final was the first game Jessica had watched since her 
husband had died 11 months earlier, aged 26. She watched on television with her 
mother, María, and daughter, Martina, 10 months, as the ball sat up. What 
followed was more than just a goal, Iniesta reveals – for all of them. It is 
sunny in Sant Joan Despí as, six years on, he explains how that moment pulled 
him from “a dark place”.

Iniesta might not have been there then and without that goal he does not know 
where he would be now. Perhaps not here at Barcelona’s training ground, one of 
the world’s most celebrated footballers. Late on the night before the final, 
with everyone asleep, he quietly opened the door and, without leaving the 
hotel, set off for a run. Down the corridors he sprinted until he believed he 
could do this. All tournament the physios, working past 4am, had promised he 
would be OK even when they thought he would not be. Now, he was – vulnerable 
but ready.

This was more than Iniesta’s muscles, though; it was his mind. The security of 
waiting for Newton masked the insecurity and suffering of the months before. In 
2009 he won the European Cup and the following summer the World Cup. It should 
have been the best year of his life; instead it was the hardest. Between the 
two titles he suffered. “Not depression exactly, not illness either, not 
really, but an unease,”he says in his book, The Artist, published today 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artist-being-iniesta.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
. “It was like nothing was right.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905b99e0119d964e0056996f65e9831e047a6cf0%2F0_103_4182_2510%2F4182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F905b99e0119d964e0056996f65e9831e047a6cf0%2F0_103_4182_2510%2F4182.jpg>
 André Iniesta celebrates scoring the winning goal in the 2010 World Cup final 
against Holland. Photograph: Jamie McDonald/Getty Images 
Iniesta had played the 2009 final injured, warned not to shoot. In pre-season, 
still not fit, Carles Puyol delivered news: his friend Jarque, captain of 
Espanyol, had died. The impact was profound, body and mind suffering together. 
Tests showed nothing specific physically but Iniesta could not complete 
sessions, Pep Guardiola telling him to walk whenever he needed, which he did 
often. They would wait, Guardiola said, and the wait went on. When Iniesta 
played he was not the same and April brought another injury. The World Cup, the 
light he sought, risked being extinguished.

Iniesta says he had felt as if he was in “freefall”. Unable to go on, he 
turned to the club’s doctors, seeking professional psychological treatment. If 
doing so can carry a stigma, especially in sport, he says: “When you need help, 
you have to look for it: at times it’s necessary. People are specialists; 
that’s what they’re there for. You have to use them.”

I understood that I was enduring a delicate moment but I took refuge in my 
people and, above all, in football

So Iniesta did – quietly, privately. He needed help; he talks about being “on 
edge”, “vulnerable”, “victim of something that terrified me”. Team-mates did 
not know. Nor had he said anything publicly. There is a kind of catharsis, or 
perhaps a closure, in doing so now. He had talked about Newton before but not 
what lay beneath, how significant that moment was. What would have become of 
him without it? What ifSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> had 
not won the World Cup? It is not a glib question.

Despite his reluctance to define what he suffered as “depression”, there is a 
passage in his book where Iniesta writes that he can “understand” how people 
end up committing a “locura”: how they can end up doing something “crazy”, an 
act of “madness”. What does he mean? In the context it is a powerful word, 
frightening and uncomfortable: mental health can be delicate, the desperation 
debilitating and the consequences dreadful.

“When you’re not right, you experience moments that impact upon you, that 
worry you,” Iniesta says. His words –te imponen respeto – defy simplistic 
translation but imply fear, a sense of the situation being bigger than you, 
beyond you, not entirely under control. “Those are difficult, uncomfortable 
moments [but] to go from there to certain extremes,” he says, “… well, every 
case has its peculiarities…”

“There are moments when your mind is very vulnerable. You feel a lot of 
doubts. Every person is different, every case. What I’m trying to explain is 
that you can go from being in good shape to being in a bad way very quickly.

“I never reached the point of saying: ‘I’m giving up.’ I understood that I was 
enduring a delicate moment but I took refuge in my people and, above all, in 
football. I never felt I didn’t want to continue playing. I knew one day I’d 
take a step forward, maybe the next it would be three, then five … it’s a 
process and that’s how you overcome it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0c9d0500b9c3ae54cf603d4d421635cee6ee29%2F0_182_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0c9d0500b9c3ae54cf603d4d421635cee6ee29%2F0_182_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Andrés Iniesta celebrates after Barcelona’s 2-0 triumph against Manchester 
United in the 2009 Champions League final. Photograph: Claudio Villa/Getty 
Images 
“People see footballers as different beings, as if we’re untouchable, as if 
nothing ever happens to us, but we’re people. Of course we’re privileged but in 
the tangibles we’re the same.”

The same? Or perhaps even worse off? Does the exposure, the pressure, the 
competition and need to perform, the public profile, make it harder? And few 
jobs expose people so young. The response is swift: “We’re not martyrs,” 
Iniesta says. “Lots of people would swap with us. Every job has its 
difficulties. Every time my dad, a builder, went up on the scaffolding, he 
could have fallen. But he accepts that risk; he had to. Or the lorry driver, or 
any job… the footballer knows; he grows up with pressure, criticism, having to 
be strong. I’m convinced there are many who wouldn’t make it.”

Iniesta left home to join Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> as a 12-year-old, crying alone 
in a corner daily. He says the worst night of his life was the first he spent 
at La Masia while his parents drove back to Fuentealbilla, Albacete in a Ford 
Orion that kept breaking down.

“We’re lucky to be footballers; my intention in explaining that bad moment is 
not to make people say ‘poor thing’, far from it. Just that elements of [a 
footballer’s] life, the feelings, the difficulties, are like anyone else’s. 
This is how people’s lives are. I don’t think I’m an exception. It costsuna 
barbariedad – a colossal amount – to get to the first team and even more to 
stay there. I spent my whole life at Barcelona, living with the pressure from 
the age of 12. But you’re born a footballer, wanting to be one, so it doesn’t 
matter how old you are.”

For almost a year it was as if he was not one, his identity lost. South Africa 
brought him through and brought him here; Iniesta admits that it allowed him to 
“feel like a footballer again”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07370698661eb4fad8720801f4fdec9060e1dd41%2F0_105_5504_3303%2F5504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07370698661eb4fad8720801f4fdec9060e1dd41%2F0_105_5504_3303%2F5504.jpg>
 Andrés Iniesta strikes the winning goal against Holland to secure a first ever 
World Cup title for Spain. Photograph: Matthew Ashton/Corbis via Getty Images 
Some footballer: captain of Barcelona, universally admired, the man of whom 
Lionel Messi says that, when there is a problem on the pitch, the thing he 
wants most is to have Andrés close. Winner of over 30 titles; two trebles; 
every trophy there is; a European Cup winner in 2006 (although he admits that 
Frank Rijkaard’s handling of the final, which he began on the bench, “doesn’t 
sit well at all”), 2009, 2011 and 2015; a European champion in 2008 and 2012; 
World champion in 2010, scorer of that goal.

And he is not about to stop. At 32, no longer playing alongside Xavi Hernández 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-barcelona-xavi>
 and with Barcelona embarking on a stylistic shift, more direct, it might have 
been natural for Iniesta’s career to draw towards a close. He might have 
appeared the natural victim; instead he is enjoying this as never before. He 
became more central in every sense, a kind of Iniestaand Xavi.

The qualities that define him have not diminished; his game is, he says, 
“intuitive”. Recognisablyhis: summed up in that photo surrounded by opponents, 
bigger and more numerous than him. Almost as if it is deliberate, drawing them 
in, even if he protests: “I prefer one than five!” He explains: “I’ve never 
seen being small as a disadvantage; everyone has his qualities. Don’t ask me to 
beat a guy who’s 1.80m in the air: ask me to do other things I’m better than 
him at.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8af05769db42720a5cebbc4954ea3f2e2f75b999%2F0_0_5000_3206%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8af05769db42720a5cebbc4954ea3f2e2f75b999%2F0_0_5000_3206%2F5000.jpg>
 Andrés Iniesta finds himself outnumbered five to one against Italy at Euro 
2012. Photograph: Markus Ulmer/Motivio/Cleva Media 
“Most things come from inside, they’re intuitive; that’s the way I am. There’s 
tactics, strategy but I understand football as something unpredictable, because 
you have to decide in a thousandth of a second. If the ball is coming and 
there’s someone behind you, I’m not thinking: ‘I’m going left or should it be 
right?’ I just go and it comes off … well, sometimes it doesn’t.”

From across the room a friend is listening. “It always does,” he shouts, 
laughing. Iniesta squirms a bit and heads in another direction.

“Things have changed a bit but the essence will always be the same,” he says. 
“Everything evolves and changes need time: we didn’t play as well in September 
[2014] as in [the final] in the 2015 final in Berlin. The style is a product of 
the players; you have to use [Messi, Neymar, and Suárez] and maybe the 
midfielders have more pitch to cover, but I’m not someone who can only play a 
certain style or system. Last year was one of the seasons I most enjoyed. I 
broke my kilometre record, for sure, but that’s not incompatible with my style.”

The balance under Luis Enrique bears that out: a treble and a double. Now as 
they begin another season, a familiar face stands before them in the Champions 
League: one that looked out from posters by Iniesta’s bunk. The coach who 
changed the club and changed his career – and whose career Iniesta changed too. 
Barcelona versus Manchester City: it is not the draw they wanted but better now 
than a knock-out. And the reunion will be a fond one.

Pep Guardiola is a radical who will perfect his ideas at Manchester City | 
Xavi Hernández
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/10/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-barcelona-xavi>
After two games under Guardiola in 2008 Barcelona had not won and the pressure 
was huge. Why they had chosen this novice over José Mourinho? One day there was 
a knock on Guardiola’s door. It was Iniesta. “Keep going, mister. We’re 
training bloody brilliantly,” he said.

“Things hadn’t started well but I believed in [Guardiola],” Iniesta says. “I 
felt a connection. When things come from inside, you know they’re real. I felt 
that way, like I had to tell him, support him.

“We came back from Euro 2008 and went to St Andrews and you could already see 
that this was different: the training, the communication, how the manager was. 
Until then there hadn’t been such a defined style and I identified with it. It 
changed everything and we needed that.

“Since then, if you watch, there are things other coaches have taken on that 
weren’t done until then: the central defenders coming out to play, or the 
full-backs. Pulling the pivot further back to begin [moves]. In sessions, 
instead of the twointeriores coming back to receive, he pushed us further 
forward for the next wave, supporting players higher, offering passing options. 
You could only comeso far; you can’t go past this line,” Iniesta says, 
signalling the limits with his hand. “And they’d watch to make sure, or there’d 
be cones marking out [that limit].
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9041291373b16057e86f7f743ef5aa33e98e439%2F2_57_1102_661%2F1102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%E2%80%99s%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20a%20victim%20of%20something%20that%20terrified%20me%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fbarcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9041291373b16057e86f7f743ef5aa33e98e439%2F2_57_1102_661%2F1102.jpg>
 Pep Guardiola and Andrés Iniesta will be reunited when Barcelona face 
Manchester City in the Champions League. Photograph: Alvaro Barrientos/AP 
“All those ideas were expressed early in sessions. Or, the pressure on the 
ball after losing possession… There’d be drills where, if the opposition plays 
six passes without you getting it off them, they get a point.” Or the 
goalkeeper? “Yes, he’s always been important for us, another player: when the 
ball comes out from deep, depending on whether your opponents have one or two 
[forwards], the goalkeeper plays. He allows you to have numerical superiority.”
The Artist: Being Iniesta 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artist-being-iniesta.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Headline on 8 September 2016. 
Joe Hart has found that out already. But will Guardiola’s philosophy work in 
Manchester? “Pep knows how to adapt and I’m sure he’ll do so in England,” 
Iniesta says. “He’s also got staff like Mikel Arteta who’ll help that process, 
who know the league.

“City have signed well and have a very competitive squad. I know Nolito well 
because he was a team-mate here at Barcelona and with Spain. He’s had a great 
start and hopefully can continue. I’ve admired David Silva for years: I think 
he’s exceptional. Players learn day to day, from experience, team-mates and 
managers. I learnt a lot with Pep; he helped me to improve and he’ll do the 
same at City.”

Above all, though, Guardiola wanted Iniesta to be Iniesta, not least during 
those months when he was not. Because when Iniesta is himself, he is unique. 
Fuentealbilla with his friends is not the same as the Camp Nou with 98,000 fans 
– “If only,” he says – but while the stage marks you, the pressure too, some 
things remain. “What I do in the stadium, I did on the school playground,” 
Barcelona’s captain says. “What I did at 12, I still do now.”

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.Hotlines in other countries can be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>

• The Artist: Being Iniesta by Andres Iniesta (Headline, £9.99). To order a 
copy for £8.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artist-being-iniesta.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 