
The centenary in 2012 of the birth of Alan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> might have passed largely 
unnoticed but for my colleague Barry Cooper, himself a major figure in 
mathematical logic, who has died aged 72. As it was, the celebration’s global 
impact did much to bring Turing the public appreciation he deserves, 
culminating in a royal pardon in 2013.

Barry invested seemingly boundless energy in the Alan Turing Year, 2012. He 
led a six-month programme, Syntax and Semantics, at the Isaac Newton Research 
Institute in Cambridge, and became the celebration’s spokesman on Twitter and 
in the media, including in theGuardian’s Northerner column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/apr/17/alan-turing-computerscienceandit-centenary-gay-barry-cooper>
. One outcome wasAlan Turing: His Work and Impact 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Alan-Turing-His-Work-Impact/dp/0123869803> (2013), 
edited by Barry and Jan van Leeuwen, a hefty and definitive volume which won 
the Association of American Publishers’ RR Hawkins award.

Son of Edna (nee Mason), who ran a grocery shop, and Richard, a cabinetmaker, 
Barry grew up in Bognor Regis, West Sussex, and went to Chichester high school 
for boys. On graduating from Oxford in 1966, Barry studied for a PhD at 
Leicester, but worked mainly in Manchester with Mike Yates, the only 
established UK researcher in Barry’s chosen field: the structure-theory of the 
Turing degrees, an exciting emerging field, then largely confined to North 
America.

Barry was appointed a lecturer at the University of Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofleeds> in 1969, and remained 
there throughout his career, except for regular sabbaticals and invited visits 
abroad, becoming professor of pure mathematics in 1996. The years 1971-73, 
which he spent in the US at the University of California, Berkeley, were 
especially formative for his research career, and his leftwing politics found 
common ground with student activism and the civil rights movement.

His research focus was always computability – the study of the theoretical 
limits of the power of computers (or Turing machines). Towards the end of the 
20th century, this blossomed into a mathematical discipline of astonishing 
beauty and profundity, a programme in which Barry played a prominent 
international role, publishing numerous important papers, a monograph, 
Computability Theory (2003), and various edited collections.

Enviably successful at securing research funding, he supervised many 
successful PhD students, several of whom are now well-established 
mathematicians. He was also founder and president ofComputability in Europe 
<http://www1.maths.leeds.ac.uk/cie/>, a flourishing association that now has 
more than 1,000 members.

Barry’s achievements extended well beyond mathematics. Having played rugby for 
England under-16s, he became a keen marathon runner. Another passion was jazz, 
and, more generally, experimental music. He co-founded the Leeds Jazz 
non-profit organisation in 1984, and helped attract top artists includingArt 
Blakey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/10/17/obituaries/art-blakey-jazz-great-is-dead-a-drummer-and-band-leader-71.html>
 and theArt Ensemble of Chicago <http://www.artensembleofchicago.com>.

A committed leftwinger, Barry was involved in various campaigns, notably the 
Chile Solidarity Campaign for refugees and the miners’ strike of 1984-85.

Barry is survived by his wife, Kate, and their sons, Evan and Mark, and by his 
daughters, Carrie and Shirin, from his previous relationship with Sue Buckle.
 