
1) Royal gamers

Around 20 minutes after closer Wade Davis struck out the Mets’ Wilmer Flores 
in the bottom of the 12th inning of Game 5, dozens of friends and family of the 
newly crownedKansas City Royals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kansas-city-royals> were stationed on the 
field, waiting for their World Series champs. A champagne-drenched Mike 
Moustakas emerged from the clubhouse, spotted his wife, and delivered an all 
conquering leg-lifting hug. “I told you” said KC’s third baseman. Moustakas 
never had any doubt about the outcome. His manager, Ned Yost, had no doubt. His 
teammates had no doubt.

Dodgers' hiring of first black manager represents important step in modern era
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/23/dodgers-appointment-of-dave-roberts-represents-important-step-in-modern-era>
There was no show-stopping ace pitcher on the KC roster, nor an all-world 
slugger to knock fear into opposing pitchers. What these Royals did have was 
inextinguishable self-belief, a deep and evenly spread stock of athletic 
talent, a spirit-crushing bullpen, and, most importantly, a roster overloaded 
with gamers.

How else could you explain Eric Hosmer’s ninth inning gumption, taking off for 
home on a routine ground ball to the left-side of the infield with just one out 
and down a run to Mets mighty closer Jeurys Familia. David Wright made the 
right play at third base, checking Hosmer, before firing over to first. It 
didn’t matter: Royal aggression forced Lucas Duda into a wild throw to the 
plate, and suddenly the game was tied, Matt Harvey’s gem unwound. Three innings 
later KC broke a 29-year title drought.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6hYry9F2QRM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6hYry9F2QRM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6hYry9F2QRM&media=>
 Eric Hosmer slid into Royal lore in Game 5 of the World Series. 
Statistically speaking, Hosmer’s daring sprint probably wasn’t the smartest 
move, but Ned Yost’s 2015 Royals regularly refused the playbook. Instead, KC 
opted to place enormous pressure on opponents whenever and wherever possible, 
even if that meant an occasional, unpopular strategic fail. The ninth inning of 
Game 5 was one of those times, and the play showcased the rollicking Royals to 
a tee.

We wondered about the validity of these Kansas City Royals after they streaked 
to a surprise World Series appearance in 2014, falling a game short of 
championship against the San Francisco Giants. A year later we now know that 
not only was their breakout season not a fluke, but that if it wasn’t for the
historic performance of a single Giants pitcher, Madison Bumgarner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/30/madison-bumgarner-san-francisco-giants-world-series-title>
, we’d be talking about back-to-back Royals titles, and KC’s shot at becoming 
the first true baseball dynasty since the 2000 New York Yankees.


2) Mets rise from the valley of ashes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8795afa475b57b115b125f11a8749d13312d0fe6%2F0_88_5184_3113%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baseball's%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC's%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baseball%27s%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC%27s%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8795afa475b57b115b125f11a8749d13312d0fe6%2F0_88_5184_3113%2F5184.jpg>
 Wilmer Flores became a Queens cult-hero for his on-field reaction to a trade 
that never was. Photograph: Tim Clayton/Corbis 
For the Mets, 2015 was much more like a series of seasons: pushed, pulled, 
squeezed and jammed into one single epic drama, masking as a Major League
Baseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> campaign.

With ownership continuing to operate in the long shadows of Bernie Madoff’s 
pillaging of Mets “profits”, New York, blessed with never-in-a-generation 
starting pitching talent, paired the rotation with a no-frills, minor-league 
offense that was mostly missing David Wright and could barely scratch out a 
run, further frustrating their desperate fan base. Meanwhile, Matt Harvey, 
Jacob deGrom, rookie Noah Syndergaard and company somehow kept the team in NL 
East contention, mostly thanks to the about-to-implodeWashington Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nationals>.

Then came the stuff you just can’t make up.


Tears of renown: Wilmer Flores offers rare proof that stars are just like us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/30/tears-of-renown-wilmer-flores-offers-rare-proof-that-stars-are-just-like-us>
On 29 July, Wilmer Flores caught wind of a trade that would send him to 
Milwaukee with Zach Wheeler for Carlos Gomez, a center-fielder that was himself 
a former Met. Rather than be pulled from the game as most traded players are, 
Flores, who had been with the organization since he was 16, was not removed, 
and began shedding tears from his second base position for the baseball world 
to see. As it happened, that was because there was no trade – Mets management 
found themselves embroiled in yet another public relations mess having pulled 
out of the deal out of concern for Gomez’s hip. Two nights later, holding a new 
lease on his Mets life,Flores hit a dramatic, walk-off home run against the 
Washington Nationals <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UmL4rNYmJ9U>, and the 
drama in Queens continued.

The following night, Yoenis Cespedes, a player that was closer to being 
Alderson’s plan-D than anything else, arrived after a deal with Detroit, and 
proceeded to go on one of the most torrid post-trade-deadline streaks baseball 
has ever seen. Thanks to the presence of abat that crushed 17 home runs in 29 
games <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/gl.cgi?id=cespeyo01&t=b&year=>
, New York’s moribund bats became an improbable juggernaut, blowing the Nats 
away in the NL East and propelling them into the post-season in a manner 
unimaginable in mid-July.

Then, in the playoffs, Daniel Murphy, the line-drive hitting, messy-fielding 
Met mainstay, somehow transformed into one of the greatest postseason 
performers in MLB history. He would hit a home run ina record six consecutive 
playoff games <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nQQvMmiUooY>, off the likes of 
Clayton Kershaw (twice), Zack Grienke, Jon Lester and Jake Arrieta. The Mets 
ended yet another disappointing season for the Dodgers in five dramatic NLDS 
games, before sweeping the Chicago Cubs in the NLCS.

But there was no World Series ring: their disjointed season came to a 
disappointing close against the Royals in five World Series games. Still, 2015 
somehow provided more to Mets fans than they could’ve ever dreamt up.

3) An empty feeling
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D72dxSi8yK54&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D72dxSi8yK54>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D72dxSi8yK54&media=>
 Only press were permitted inside the ballpark when the Baltimore Orioles 
played host to the Chicago White Sox on 29 April. 
On Monday 27 April, Baltimore was in the midst of a crisis. Over 140 vehicles 
and 15 structures were set ablaze while over 200 were arrested during riots 
which began during the funeral of Freddie Gray, the 25-year-old African 
American man who died in police custody.

After canceling the Tuesday game, and consulting with the city of Baltimore, 
the Orioles and MLB made the call to play their match-up against the White Sox 
in an empty stadium. Commissioner Rob Manfred said the decision was made “to 
ensure the safety of fans, players, umpires and stadium workers.” Apart from 
the bizarre scene, a first for MLB, the occasion elicited thoughtful and 
profound opinions fromO’s manager Buck Showalter 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mixed-media/2015/04/orioles-manager-buck-showalter-baltimore-protests>
 and Baltimore outfielder Adam Jones on the events.

“I say to the youth: your frustration is warranted,” said Jones. “The actions, 
I don’t think are acceptable. If you come from where they come from, you 
understand, but ruining the community that you have to live in is never the 
answer. This is their cry. This isn’t a cry that is acceptable, but this is 
their cry and therefore, we have to understand it.”

Showalter was asked after the game what advice he would provide the black 
youth of Baltimore.

“I’ve never been black, OK?” Showalter said. “I’ve never faced the challenges 
that they face. It’s a pet-peeve of mine when somebody says ‘Why don’t they do 
this? Why doesn’t somebody do that?’ You have never been black, OK? So just 
slow down a little bit. I try not to get involved in something that I don’t 
know about.”

The riots also forced Baltimore to move their series against the Rays to Tampa 
where they batted last as the “home” team.

4) Chase Utley, bowling ball
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D223PCnEGV1U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D223PCnEGV1U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D223PCnEGV1U&media=>
 Did Chase Utley break bonesand baseball rules in Game 2 of the NLDS? 
It was one of the most widely debated sporting acts of 2015: was LA’s Chase 
Utley’s take-out of the Mets’ Ruben Tejada in Game 2 of the NLDSa clean, 
hard-nosed baseball play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/12/on-nycs-sporting-victimhood-and-why-chase-utley-is-an-american-hero>
 or just plain filthy?
Jose Reyes (@lamelaza_7) 
that was a really weak attempt at a slide by utley😡😡😡😡
 <https://twitter.com/lamelaza_7/status/653053550117818370> October 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/lamelaza_7/status/653053550117818370> Justin Upton 
(@JUST_JUP) 
If that was a superstar shortstop we would have a Tulo Rule being enforced 
tomorrow
 <https://twitter.com/JUST_JUP/status/653073179942895617> October 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/JUST_JUP/status/653073179942895617> Chipper Jones 
(@RealCJ10) 
That was not a slide and that is not how u 'go in hard'!
 <https://twitter.com/RealCJ10/status/653234853266063360> October 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RealCJ10/status/653234853266063360> 
It was the type of maneuver that had helped Utley build a reputation as an 
old-school type of player who would sacrifice himself at all costs. Ruben 
Tejada, who suffered a broken leg during the complex play which asked all sorts 
of other baseball questions, had tangled with Utley before, most specificallya 
startlingly similar <http://m.mlb.com/video/topic/6479266/v12416779>moment back 
in 2010.

Baseball suspended him for a game for the late slide that was deemed late and 
“aggressive”, but his appeal, which is still pending, meant Utley could suit up 
for Game 3. Despite the calls in Queens for revenge, Utley never made it into 
the batter’s box, and so that’s a matter still to be settled: LA host New York 
on 9 May, and then Utley returns to New York on 27 May. Meanwhile,baseball 
continues to consider changes to the rule book 
<http://nypost.com/2015/11/19/mlb-eyeing-rule-change-after-chase-utleys-vicious-slide/>
 that could limit contact at second base.

5) The bat flip
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-UdsVO7HaJg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-UdsVO7HaJg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-UdsVO7HaJg&media=>
Game 5 of the ALDS provided a fitting climax to a Blue Jays season that 
brought David Price and Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto, helping tore-ignite a 
semi-dormant fan base in Ontario and much of Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/13/why-troy-tulowitzki-and-david-price-may-not-be-the-blue-jays-biggest-assets>
.

Jose Bautista, capped off one of the wildest innings many baseball fans will 
ever see 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/15/toronto-blue-jays-seventh-heaven-mlb>
 with a bat-flip for the ages in the deciding game against the Texas Rangers, 
the latest sign that baseball may finally be shaking off its stale “respect the 
game” rhapsody, and that perhaps one day, bat-flipping fun can be had without a 
pitcher sticking it in someones ear. Watch it again and again, and then watch
this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIUYGT6iFVNg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIUYGT6iFVNg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIUYGT6iFVNg&media=>
6) Pete Rose

It may seem like an afterthought, but that the Pete Rose matter has finally 
been dealt with in a concrete fashion 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/documents/8/4/6/159619846/Commissioner_s_Decision_on_Pete_Rose_Reinstatement_u35dqem0.pdf>
 means it deserves to be on the list. Former commissioner Bud Selig had a habit 
of stalling on select issues –just ask the Oakland A’s 
<http://www.murraychass.com/?p=7657&utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+MurrayChass+%28Murray+Chass+On+Baseball%29>
 – and Rose was one of them. The all-time hit king, banned from the game for 
violating rule 21 which forbids players from betting on baseball, was ousted 26 
years ago. Some 18 years ago Rose applied for reinstatement, but Selig sat on 
his appeal, and sat on it, and then sat on it some more.

Just nine months into his stint as commissioner, Rob Manfred actually ruled on 
the appeal, saying in earlier this month that his return to the game would 
provide an “unacceptable risk of a future violation by him of rule 21” and 
elected to keep him on the ineligible list, meaning he may not associate with 
any major or minor league club. Here are a few reasons why:

 * Rose told Manfred he continued to bet on sports including baseball. 
 * Rose never seriously sought treatment. 
 * Rose didn’t remember betting on baseball as a player, only while managing. 
Manfred did, however, distinguish between MLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> and the Hall of Fame, pointing out that 
he has no authority over the rules governing who gets in and who doesn’t. In 
theory, the HOF could one day overturn rules that say any person on the 
ineligible list can not make it on to a ballot. That was always true, but 
Manfred’s mention could in theory ignite a debate amongst the HOF board of 
directors , an extremely small slice of daylight for Rose who has nowhere else 
to turn.

7) The fight
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt1HjwToIdSU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt1HjwToIdSU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dt1HjwToIdSU&media=>
 Fight! 
Heading into late July the Washington Nationals hadn’t lived up to 
expectations: far from it. Still, they were hanging on to a one-game NL East 
lead over the then offensively challenged New York Mets. Then they acquired 
Jonathan Papelbon, undermining their then closer Drew Storen, who completely 
and totally fell apart in his new set-up role, taking the Nats with him. With 
DC’s new crotch-grabbing agitator as closer, Washington went 30-33 in their 
final two months, while manager Matt Williams dealt with another helpful 
ex-Phillie, Jayson Werth, who would eventually ask skip the question: “When 
exactly do you think you lost this team 
<http://thebiglead.com/2015/09/30/jayson-werth-to-matt-williams-when-exactly-do-you-think-you-lost-this-team/>
?” The Nats were quality group for sure: they’re Dusty Baker’s problem now. 
Perhaps he can keep Papelbon from grabbing the throat of NL MVP Bryce Harper 
next season.

8) Early arrivals
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd788e01ffa84bacfe59af16cab29a2751ab49518%2F0_35_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baseball's%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC's%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baseball%27s%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC%27s%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd788e01ffa84bacfe59af16cab29a2751ab49518%2F0_35_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Jake Arrieta helped the Cubs compete ahead of schedule. Photograph: Jon 
Durr/Getty Images 
It was a season that brought youthful teams fronted by an incredible rookie 
class to the forefront earlier than predicted.

The Chicago Cubs <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-cubs> 2015 season 
was supposed to be about bleacher renovations, big ugly scoreboards and the 
continued development of a a kiddie core. Instead they were locked in a pennant 
race all season, one which saw the late promotion of eventual rookie of the 
year Kris Bryant, fellow rooks Kyle Schwarber, Addison Russell and Jorge Soler, 
plus the thorough dominance of Jake Arrieta.

Only a historic second half like the one Arrieta enjoyed, which included a 
no-hitter, a 12-1 record, a 0.727 WHIP and a 0.75 ERA could wrestle the NL Cy 
Young award from the likes ofZack Grienke 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/g/greinza01.shtml>. Chicago made it 
all the way to the NLCS before being undone by New York’s power pitchers, but 
steep investment this offseason means they’ll continue to flirt with undoing 
their title drought in 2016.

Count the Twins and Astros as other teams which matured unexpectedly. Big 
swinging Dominican rookie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/sep/22/why-twins-slugger-miguel-sano-still-stings-the-pirates-six-years-on>
 Miguel Sanó was a main reason why the Twinkies competed in the AL for as long 
as they did.

Then there were the Astros, whose years of tanking and stacking up high draft 
picks began to pay dividends. Dallas Keuchel won the AL Cy Young, rookie phenom 
Carlos Correa came up and was as every bit advertised, Jose Altuve continued to 
rack up hits and Evan Gattis, Colby Rasmus and Luis Valbuena brought additional 
power to a lineup that featured seven players with 15 or more home runs. 
Houston recovered from a late-season slump that saw them fall out of first 
place after 139 days, beating the Yankees in the Wild Card before failing to 
kill off the Royals in the ALDS. Not bad a season after losing 92 games.

9) A-rousing return
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07c92ca602cc2762a07293eeceb62ed2f32c9e23%2F0_11_4892_2934%2F4892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baseball's%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC's%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baseball%27s%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC%27s%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07c92ca602cc2762a07293eeceb62ed2f32c9e23%2F0_11_4892_2934%2F4892.jpg>
 A-Rod is all smiles after his 3000th hit - a home run into the Yankee Stadium 
bleachers. Photograph: Frank Franklin II/AP 
Who had A-Rod coming back after a year in the wilderness, becoming a model 
citizen, putting up his best numbers in four years, being embraced by Yankee 
management, leading aJeter-less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/06/a-rod-and-fans-attempt-to-redefine-themselves-in-yankees-post-jeter-era>
 playoff push and being absolutely amazing as a FOX television post-season 
analyst? You in the back row with your hand raised: stop lying to us.

Alex Rodriguez’ 2015 turnaround was as stunning as they come. Best case 
scenario coming out of training camp was to stay in the lineup and hit, say 
10-15 home runs, while keeping the league-wide hatred to a minimum. Then he 
somehow became an irreplaceable part of a Yankee team that slowly began to 
embrace a player for whom the label of pariah was too mild.

He was ignored by Yankees management during and after his 660th and 661st home 
runs which pushed him past Willie Mays on the all-time list (partially for 
contractual reasons) and left it alone, one of the early signs that we were 
seeing a very different A-Rod. Rodriguez put team first, always deflecting 
credit to his peers, keeping the traditional A-Rodish awkward situations to a 
minimum. By the time his3000th hit landed in the Yankee Stadium bleachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/alex-rodriguez-3000th-hit-home-run-ball-fan>
, management were happy enough to donate $150,000 to charity to help A-Rod get 
the prized possession from the ball collector who caught it. Perhaps its 
because they knew they’d be nowhere without A-Rod, whose at-bats were must-see 
all season long.

He would eventually slow down, likely thanks to his 40 years and dual hip 
replacement surgeries, but not before finishing with 33 home runs and an OPS of 
.842. Another season or two like this and A-Rod may even see his number retired 
one day. Seriously.

10) Another mess in Miami
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcef517658c553876ac8403398b7f5e1b66db3e09%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baseball's%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC's%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baseball%27s%20top%2010%20of%202015%2C%20from%20KC%27s%20royal%20masterpiece%20to%20the%20mesmerizing%20Mets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbaseball-2015-mlb-royals-mets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcef517658c553876ac8403398b7f5e1b66db3e09%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘Hey, believe me, I know it’s crazy,’ new Miami Marlins manager Dan Jennings 
didn’t say on Monday, but totally could have. Photograph: Walter Michot/ZUMA 
Press/Corbis 
What a day in May it was when Dan Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/19/the-miami-marlins-are-baseballs-most-compelling-sideshow>
, who never played the game on any level, and hadn’t filled out a lineup card 
since his players were squeezing zits in high school, took over a dugout filled 
with burly multi-millionaires.

“The one thing I’m certain of: managers do not win games in this league. They 
can lose them,” said Jennings after Mike Redmond was fired and then-GM was 
hired as Jeffrey Loria’s ninth Marlins manager in 14 years, signaling the start 
of a great experiment.

After going 55-69, that experiment not only failed but cost Jennings two gigs: 
the GM job he gave up and the skipper’s job. Actually, Jennings had been 
offered a chance to take his old job back after the season and accepted. But in 
the wild world of Loria, the opportunity never materialized. Reports surfaced 
that he wasn’t to report back to the team offices until speaking with Loria, 
and that call apparently never took place. And so it goes in Miami, where Don 
Mattingly is now Loria’s no10.

Now Jennings is surely even more confident of a manager’s ability to lose 
games. His greatest contribution? Allowing Ichiro to fulfill his dream of 
pitching in a Major League Baseball game, which is reasonably admirable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH80xg3aCx0A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH80xg3aCx0A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DH80xg3aCx0A&media=> 