
BBC Worldwide is planning to set up a new programming joint venture in Germany 
withAll3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, the UK independent 
producer of shows including Peep Show and Midsomer Murders.

The new company, Tower Productions, will seek to make a range of BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Worldwide's formats for German 
broadcasters and also work closely with corporation commercial arm's 
international format development team in London. The new company will also be 
developing its own formats.

Based in Cologne, Tower will be headed up by managing director Stefan Oelze, a 
board member of All3Media's German subsidiary, MME Moviement, and Markus 
Schäfer, managing director of All3Media Deutschland.

BBC Worldwide's director of international formats, Colin Jarvis, will also be 
on the management team of Tower.

However, the BBC said the plan to set up Tower is still, "subject to approval 
by the relevant competition authorities".

Today's announcement comes just weeks after the BBC Worldwide managing 
director of content and production, Wayne Garvie, saidthe BBC Trust's critical 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/24/bbc-worldwide-lonely-planet-trust>
 on the corporation's commercial divisionwould not curb its growth 
interntationally or any future investments in TV production companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/02/bbc-trust-curb-worldwide>.

Garvie told a Broadcasting Press Guild lunch earlier this month: "They are 
quite clear that we should look for growth outside the UK, we should become an 
international media company and I am OK with that."

BBC Worldwide has a growing global production network that includes wholly 
owned subsidiaries in Mumbai, Paris, New York and Los Angeles, as well as 
partners in Toronto, Sydney and Buenos Aires and preferred partners in Moscow 
and Sao Paolo.

The operation's activities came into the spotlight in late November when the 
BBC Trust said it must not buy companies unless there were "exceptional 
circumstances" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/24/bbc-worldwide-lonely-planet-trust>
 and ruled out any acquisitions on the scale of the controversial £89m purchase 
of a 75% stake in travel publisher Lonely Planet in 2007.
 