
The Thick of It creator Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> has joined those calling 
on the BBC to axe the licence fee in favour of subscription and pay for 
homegrown programmes by "ruthlessly" selling itself abroad.

Iannucci, who created Alan Partridge with Steve Coogan, said the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> could "make a fortune" by switching to 
a subscription model.

He said the corporation was on "cracking form", flagging up shows such as 
Gillian Anderson drama The Fall, James Corden's The Wrong Mans and BBC3's 
supernatural offering In The Flesh.

"The BBC would make a fortune if it ran as a subscription service abroad. It's 
revered across the world, and rightly so,"Iannucci said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Aiannucci/status/473753108045398016>.

"Money made from subscriptions abroad would fund even better programmes at 
home and take pressure off falling licence fee collection.

"If the international model works, BBC could replace licence fee at home with 
a subscription fee, set lower than current licence fee."

He added: "Current exemptions would still apply. So no one would pay more for 
a subscription than they do now for a TV licence.

"The subscription would give you access to BBC archive too. We'd get a quality 
service at home, by ruthlessly selling ourselves abroad.

"Having lived abroad, I know many people (expats and locals) who would pay to 
access the BBC abroad (iPlayer PPV access)."

Iannucci spoke out on Twitter <https://twitter.com/Aiannucci> after he said in 
aLondon Evening Standard interview 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/london-life/armando-iannucci-veep-the-beeb-and-i-9470171.html>
 published on Monday that the licence fee model was being outmoded by the 
changing way people are watching television.

"The BBC should make a mint from the brand internationally. It needs a new 
attitude that says it's not filthy to make money," he said.

"As for the licence, you have people on laptops saying: 'What is a 
television?' There will be a subscription model."

He echoed his criticism of the BBC in his Bafta lecture two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/10/armando-iannucci-bbc-fight-critics>
, when he said the corporation had to be more gung-ho in taking on its critics.

He also said the BBC was not as bold as commercial rivals such as US cable 
networkHBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo>, for whom he makes political 
satire, Veep.

"HBO is on the side of the creative. It is a bit like how the BBC was 10 or 15 
years ago when they said, 'Oh yes, we trust you,'" Iannucci told the Standard.

"The BBC lost that with competition from Sky and Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> and started hiving off the 
commissioning side from the programming side.

"People were making decisions who hadn't come up through programming. But I'm 
optimistic now that, because Sky and Netflix and Amazon andYouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> are putting money in, people 
who make stuff are realising there's more than one game in town."

On the BBC's response to the recent controversy over Jeremy Clarkson, Iannucci 
said: "There is a lot of headless chickening going on. I will man the 
barricades for the BBC, they have been good to me, but they have a tendency 
when accused of a crime just to hand themselves into the police station.

"What is the worst that could happen if they were rude to the Daily Mail?"

Iannucci first called on the BBC to launch an HBO-style subscription channel 
in 2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/aug/25/bbc.television>.

His comments come with the future of the BBC and its funding up for grabs in 
the run-up to licence renewal in 2016. MPs have said the £145.50 charge could 
be decriminalised, a prospect that has been fiercely criticised by the BBC 
which said it could cost it up to £200m in funding.

Overseas viewers already pay for BBC programmes on the iPlayer, an annual pass 
for the global iPlayer costing as little as £52 a year.

The BBC's director of strategy and digital James Purnell has warned against 
any move to introduce subscription payments, saying it would lead to "first- 
and second-class" licence fee payers and cost £500m to implement.

"You get into first- and second-class licence fee payers, you would be taking 
stuff away from people which they value,"he said in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/13/bbc-strategy-subscription-payments-licence-fee>
. "You would only be reducing the licence fee by £10 or £20."

He added: "We don't think [subscription] would be simple at all. There are 40m 
Freeview sets out there, you would have to visit all of those. You'd have to 
put conditional access on them, give them subscription cards, and that would 
cost £500m.

"We think the overall system would be more expensive to run than the licence 
fee, and we think that would be significantly worse than the current system."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 