
Presenters, producers and former BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
bosses have voiced concern about the impact of the government’s decision to 
make the broadcaster pay the £750m cost of free licences for over-75s, amid 
warnings that its 24-hour news channel could be forced to close.

The Guardian view on the BBC deal: it could jeopardise, rather than underpin, 
public support | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/07/guardian-view-on-bbc-deal-jeopardise-public-support>
Broadcaster and Labour peer Melvyn Bragg and Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>, the creator of The Thick 
of It, were among those to criticise the surprise funding agreement announced 
on Monday. Lord Bragg described it as a “millstone” around the BBC’s neck, 
while Iannucci accused the government of “demonising” the BBC.

 Lord Patten, a former chairman of the BBC Trust, said it was an “awful” and 
“quick and dirty deal” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/07/bbc-cuts-lord-patten-treasury-john-whittingdale>
 that would see services cut. He said: “The BBC will have to make cuts in 
services and this cannot be blamed on anybody except the scale of this 
settlement.”

It also emerged that the BBC has already begun work on assessing the impact of 
closing its BBC News channel and distributing its content online only 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/07/bbc-considering-move-news-channel-online-only>
 – following on from the decision to do the same to BBC3. BBC Newswas launched 
18 years ago and its running costs were £66m in 2013. The decision on its 
future has yet to be made.

George Osborne forces BBC to pay for over-75s' TV licences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/06/osborne-slashes-bbc-budget-pay-over-75s-tv-licences>
Earlier on Tuesday, Tony Hall, the BBC’s director general, had defended the 
deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/07/tony-hall-licence-fee-deal-bbc-dwp-george-osborne>
. He said the £750m cost of taking on free licence fees for over-75s was more 
than matched by the deal he had struck with with the Treasury. Other estimates 
have suggested the BBC’s funding will be cut by as much as 12%.


Appearing on Radio 4’s Today, Hall pointed to George Osborne’s vow to allow 
the licence fee to increase in line with inflation, the “modernisation” of the 
£145.50 fee structure to incorporate online viewing and an end to top-slicing 
of money to fund rural broadband.

Bragg, the presenter of Radio 4’s In Our Time, told the Guardian: “The BBC 
being asked to be part of the social services and look after [Welsh language 
channel] S4C and the World Service, and now the over-75s, is completely and 
utterly mistaken and wrong.


“The BBC is there to make programmes for domestic licence fee payers; paying 
for the licence fees of over-75s is the government’s responsibility. That price 
is inevitably going to increase over the years and will be another millstone 
around the BBC’s neck.

“I wish there had been a great deal more discussion before the decision had 
been made. There are lots of opinions from all sides worth listening to.

“Cutting corners has always struck me as a bit dodgy. Tony Hall obviously 
thinks it’s a good deal and I hope they have got a good a deal as they think. 
Like all friends of the BBC, I am anxious about this settlement.”

Iannucci, the acclaimed writer, producer and director, said the government was 
intent on diminishing and belittling the BBC.

“Why does everyone, government included, seem so insistent on diminishing and 
belittling one of our greatest British success stories?” he said.

“From my time out in the US working with HBO I got a real sense of how admired 
the BBC was for its consistent quality and extraordinary output. If we want to 
make more money to give back to licence-payers, we should be out there 
championing the BBC around the world, not playing petty point-scoring with it 
at home.”

Iannucci later said on Twitter: “So sad to see the government’s demonising of 
the BBC. Best in the world at what it does, the BBC is a British success story.”

BBC executives have previously failed to guarantee the future of another of 
its channels, BBC4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/06/bbc3-no-guarantee-future-bbc4-danny-cohen>
, saying last year it would depend on any future licence fee settlement.

The shadow culture secretary, Labour MP Chris Bryant, called for full details 
of the government’s deal with the BBC to be published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/07/full-details-of-bbc-deal-should-be-published-says-labour-mp>
 in order for the public to decide whether it represents a “good use of money”.


In a letter to culture secretary John Whittingdale, Bryant has demanded to see 
the correspondence sent between the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, 
the Treasury and Hall formalising a deal bashed out in just a few days.

“This really doesn’t look like a good deal for the BBC,” said Bryant. “It 
feels as if the BBC had a gun to their head and chose to get shot in the leg 
instead. It is bound to lead to cuts in jobs, services and quality. It could 
well mean the end of free TV licences for the elderly.”

Diane Coyle, the former acting chair and deputy chair of the BBC Trust, said 
the decision to use licence fee money to fund free licence fees for the 
elderly, agreed by Hall, was “profoundly unconstitutional” and a “further and 
massive attack on the broadcaster’s independence”.

This attack on the BBC is scandalous | Diane Coyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/07/bbc-attack-public-future-licence-fee>
Coyle said: “It is a scandal that such a profound cut to the BBC’s ability to 
deliver its services to the people who pay for it was imposed in a bullying 
backroom deal over a couple of days.

“There will probably be service closures as a result of the raid. The amount 
involved – £650m a year and rising – is so large that it is about the same as 
the budget for BBC2, or all of BBC radio, or all of BBC3, BBC4, Radio 5 and 
Radio 6 Music, plus local radio.”
 