
During the 62 year period of the Bedside anthologies the Guardian has 
undergone enormous change.The Manchester Guardian  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1>changed its name to the 
Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/uk> in 1959. The move from Manchester to 
London began in 1961. Pagination of the paper has increased, additional 
sections have developed, magazines have been added and new designs introduced. 
Thewebsite  <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/guardian-website-timeline>
was launched in 1995 and there are now offices inUSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us> and Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/au> 
producing content for an online audience of over 90 million readers.

The first end of year anthology in 1952 was originally designed for the 
Christmas market. The first editor,Ivor Brown 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivor_Brown#Biography>, explained: "Good readers 
are natural addicts of good writing." Brown, literary editor of the Manchester 
Guardian, was editor of the first four Bedside Reads and wrote the foreword for 
the first eight. In the foreword to the first Bedside he opined: "The task of 
selecting from a year's issues of the Manchester Guardian has been agreeable 
but difficult; there was so much material with equal claim." This problem has 
faced the editor of all 62 editions. Brown had had to choose from a year when 
"A beloved King died, a young Queen took his place; the Labour Government fell; 
Mr Churchill returned to power and faced his first peace-time Premiership."

The most recent and 62nd edition was edited by Martin Wainwright. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinwainwright> He explains that whereas 
Ivor Brown scoured the 12 or occasionally 18 page paper for his gems to include 
in the anthology the modern editor has to choose the 'best' from "the millions 
of words and images now poured out by the Guardian online as well as in print." 
The change of time and pace is reflected in the latest anthology: "It includes 
dashed-off blog chatter as well as crafted features which smell of lamp, a neat 
paragraph of TV preview and a Twitter stream."

There was a ten year period when there is no record of an editor of the 
Besides until the 1965-66 edition, which was edited byGerald Fay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2004/aug/18/1>, the former London 
editor. Remarkably the next 21 anthologies were edited byW L Webb 
<http://www.themanbookerprize.com/people/w-l-webb>, the Guardian's literary 
editor.

Momentous events can sometimes dominate a year's selection. In the 2001 
edition edited byIan Katz  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/iankatz>there 
were 11 articles in a section called 'September 11 and after'.Luke Dodd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/dec/08/history.pressandpublishing1> was 
the editor of the 2003 edition. Dodd explained that the year was dominated by 
the war in Iraq. "In the pages of the Guardian, the impact of the war and its 
consequences for international relations were rigorously examined, debated and 
contextualised."

One of the features of the Bedsides has been to invite a well-known reader to 
write a foreword, includingWilliam Golding <http://www.william-golding.co.uk/>, 
Dennis Potter <http://intranet.yorksj.ac.uk/potter/>, Shirley Williams 
<http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/lords/baroness-williams-of-crosby/740>, 
Helena Kennedy <http://www.helenakennedy.co.uk/>, Shami Chakrabarti 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/who-we-are/structure/liberty-director> 
andSteve Coogan <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0176869/>. Green MP Caroline Lucas 
<http://Caroline Lucas - 
http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/commons/caroline-lucas/3930> reviewed the 
2009 edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/dec/12/bedside-guardian-review-caroline-lucas>
 and the former Labour MP and cabinet minister,Tony Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tony-benn>, reviewed the 2010 edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/dec/18/bedside-guardian-elliott-benn-review>
.

During the life-time of the anthologies readers have been invited to 
contribute their suggestions to the Bedside Reads. In 2003, Luke Dodd asked 
readers to submit their favourite articles of the year and their suggestions 
were printed in an article called'You, the editor' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2003/dec/29/features11.g23?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
. In 2011 a blog post in the Guardian asked readers for theirstand-out story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/insideguardian/2011/jul/22/bedside-guardian#start-of-comments>
.

Alistair Cooke 
<http://ttp://calm.guardian.co.uk/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f203&pos=1>
 was the chief correspondent in the US of the Guardian from 1948-72. His 
articles appeared in the Bedside Reads for over 20 years and some years up to 
11 articles were featured in one edition. In the first anthology Ivor Brown 
comments: "Cooke's wide range from politics to playground, his fluent 
narrative, his easy evocation of atmosphere, and his flick of wit reveal a 
journalistic flair that I think of as typically Manchester Guardian."
 Alistair Cooke, circa 1973. Kenneth Saunders for the Guardian 
He reported on many aspects of American life with elegance and style. Matthew 
Engel <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthewengel> edited The Bedside 
Years, <https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/nov/26/features11.g21> a 
fiftieth anniversary edition of the anthologies. He explained that when he 
asked two Guardian writers, Geoffrey Moorhouse and Derek Brown for their 
favourite article from the previous 42 Bedsides and seven Guardian Years they 
both chose Alistair Cooke's'Farewell on P Street' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/nov/26/features11.g2> from 
January 1953, when Harry Truman left the presidency.

Cooke reported the assassination of President Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1963/nov/23/mainsection.fromthearchive> in 
1963. His articles on the traumatic day of the assassination and the remarkable 
days that followed were remembered in'from the archive blog'  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/nov/22/jfk-assassination-tragedy-world-archive>
and some of these articles were selected for the 1962-63 anthology including an 
article called 'Oswald shot dead' about the shooting of Lee Harvey Oswald, 
arrested for the assassination and 'President at home' describing Kennedy's 
successor, President Johnson's task: "Between now and the first Tuesday in 
November he must obliterate the impression of the Southern conservative who was 
a Senate "fixer" and become all things to all Americans."

Cooke reported on the turbulent times of the 1950s and 1960s including the 
civil rights movement and the assassination of Martin Luther King.
The Guardian Education Centre <https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre> 
offers acivil rights newspaper workshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/14?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 which covers this period using original articles from correspondents including 
Alistair Cooke. Further information on Alistair Cooke can be found in theGNM 
Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>. 

Past teaching resources of the month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month> 
from the GNM Archive
Information about the GNM Archive  <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>
may be accessed here. More teaching resources can be found on our resources for 
teachers page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers>.
 