
It is a show that promises to change minds about haute couture. Bigger than 
any fashion exhibition ever mounted at the Victoria and Albert Museum and one 
of the major cultural events of the spring,Savage Beauty 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty/>
 will celebrate the radical designs of the late Alexander McQueen.

Details of the show, which has been in preparation for two years, have been 
closely guarded, but this weekend the museum’s senior researcher, Kate Bethune, 
has drawn back the curtain a little to reveal key elements – and some of the 
challenges faced by the museum.

“As well as being the biggest, this is the most varied show the V&A has put 
together in terms of the materials used,” she told theObserver.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F121478500&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F121478500>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F121478500&media=>
 Video: Behind the Scenes of Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty. 
“From dresses made of glass microscope slides or razor shells to plywood or 
feathers, it is the breadth of materials that has made it fascinating for us. 
McQueen’s collaborations with skilled craftsmen, with glass blowers and metal 
workers were fundamental to his design genius.”

Most of the clothes have come from the McQueen archive, but a quarter have 
been sourced from private owners. Each garment, however, is treated as if it 
belonged to the V&A for the duration of the show, said Bethune. “They are all 
checked by our conservators and some did have to be rejected if we felt they 
would not withstand the show. The shells, in particular, are exceptionally 
fragile. Luckily McQueen’s creative output was so absolutely vast, there was no 
shortage.”

McQueen’s bespoke mannequins also caused problems: “We had to reinforce them 
because some of the dresses are so heavy. The Bell Jar dress is covered in 
Swarovski crystals and weighs an incredible amount.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Falexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F7%2F1425730621079%2F5303896c-11a8-4509-a4fb-7efb14b80e0f-1371x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20V%26A%E2%80%99s%20Alexander%20McQueen%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Falexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20V%26A%E2%80%99s%20Alexander%20McQueen%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Falexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F7%2F1425730621079%2F5303896c-11a8-4509-a4fb-7efb14b80e0f-1371x2040.jpeg>
 A creation from the autumn-winter 2003-04 collections in Paris. Photograph: 
Jean-Pierre Muller/AFP 
The exhibition is largely a recreation of the show that took Manhattan’s 
Metropolitan Museum of Art by storm in 2011, but with important additions and 
more space, said Bethune. “It is about a third bigger, with 66 additional 
pieces, including some that have never been displayed. The cabinet of 
curiosities element of the New York show has been extended because we have a 
double-height gallery and are showing 20 pieces that were worn on the catwalk 
but never intended for sale.

“I am particularly pleased with our new inclusion of some of McQueen’s early 
experimental work, done before he was famous. It is a nice point of contrast to 
his later, refined work for Givenchy.”

Savage Beauty will range across 10 rooms filled with displays of womenswear, 
from his MA graduate collection in 1992 to his unfinished collection of 2010. 
The first section of the show, London, will highlight the power of his 
unsettling early collections, The Birds, Highland Rape and The Hunger. Ten 
designs, including his notorious “bumster” trousers, will feature next to 
footage of his earliest catwalk shows.

During the final weeks of the show in New York, the Met had to stay open until 
midnight to cope with four-hour queues. It also offered 17,000 people $50 
tickets to allow them in on a Monday, when the museum is normally closed. The 
show was eventually seen by 650,000 people.

Hilary Alexander of the Daily Telegraph called it “an absorbing, astounding 
walk through the extraordinary convolutions of his mind, and the technical 
virtuosity he could summon up in order to turn his ideas and thoughts into 
reality”.

Among unseen work this time around is a red ballet dress from his 2008 
autumn/winter collection, The Girl Who Lived in the Tree, and a white feathered 
dress from The Horn of Plenty, his last, feted 2009 show in Paris, just a few 
months before his suicide. There are also rare early pieces borrowed from 
private owners, such as his friend Annabelle Neilson. “We are borrowing a clear 
sequinned top from her, laid over an image of the Romanov children. It is a 
haunting piece,” said Bethune.

Unique photographs from this last show, taken by McQueen’s friend Nick 
Waplington, arecurrently on display at Tate Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/nick-waplingtonalexander-mcqueen-working-process>
. In aninterview with Observer Magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/08/why-mad-again-about-alexander-mcqueen-nick-waplington-savage-beauty>
 last month, Waplington revealed that McQueen had been accepted to study for an 
MA at the Slade art school in London. He wanted, Waplington said, to pursue his 
passion for fine art and find “a way out of fashion”. McQueen was a fan of the 
V&A and once said its collections “never fail to intrigue and inspire me”. He 
added: “The nation is privileged to have access to such a resource … it’s the 
sort of place I’d like to be shut in overnight.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Falexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F7%2F1425730745644%2F37e1b5c5-23c9-42e8-b664-50edc7ff3702-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20V%26A%E2%80%99s%20Alexander%20McQueen%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Falexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20the%20scenes%20at%20the%20V%26A%E2%80%99s%20Alexander%20McQueen%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Falexander-mcqueen-victoria-albert-museum-behind-the-scenes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F7%2F1425730745644%2F37e1b5c5-23c9-42e8-b664-50edc7ff3702-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A creation from the autumn/winter 2006-07 collections in Paris. Photograph: 
Photograph: François Guillot/AFP 
The production company that collaborated with McQueen on many of the catwalk 
shows, Gainsbury and Whiting, has worked with the museum and a gallery has been 
dedicated to recreating the spectacular moment in one show when a supermodel 
appeared as a holographic image, dressed in rippling organza.

His involvement with the museum dates from the 1997 show Cutting Edge: 50 
Years of British Fashion 1947-1997 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/exhibition/the-cutting-edge-50-years-of-british-fashion-1947-1997/15/>
. He was represented in theFashion in Motion 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/f/fashion-in-motion-alexander-mcqueen/> 
series in 1999 and then with Shaun Leane in 2001 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/f/album-with-nested-carousel12/>.

“It has been a dream of Martin Roth, the museum director, to bring Savage 
Beauty here. It has just taken a long time to get to all the stakeholders,” 
said Bethune.

Alongside Savage Beauty and the Tate Britain show, a new series of McQueen 
catwalk photographs taken by Ann Ray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/01/alexander-mcqueen-va-exhibition-unseen-fashion-show-photographs>
 has been acquired by the V&A this year. Another exhibition marking the fashion 
designer’s impact, five years after his suicide, is also running at the Proud 
gallery in Chelsea until 5 April.McQueen: Backstage – The Early Shows by Gary 
Wallis <https://www.proudonline.co.uk/exhibitions> includes a collection of 
unseen archive photographs of the early days taken by a fellow student who 
continued to work with McQueen for several years.

Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty/>
 is at the Victoria and Albert Museum, London SW7, from 14 March to 2 August.
Nick Waplington/Alexander McQueen: Working Process 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/nick-waplingtonalexander-mcqueen-working-process>
 is at Tate Britain, London SW1, from 10 March to 17 May
 