
The European Union has agreed to suspend sanctions against Belarus after 
presidentAlexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko> won a fifth term, even 
though observers said the poll was flawed.


Once dubbed “Europe’s last dictator” by the US, Lukashenko, 61, won a fifth 
consecutive termon Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/alexander-lukashenko-expected-to-remain-as-belarusian-president>
, picking up 83.5% of the vote, according to official figures.

EU foreign ministers have agreed to suspend sanctions for four months, after 
the elections passed off without incident, France’s European affairs minister 
Harlem Desir told reporters after a meeting in Luxembourg.

Belarus president shows how to win five elections – without even trying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/belarus-lukashenko-election-dictator>
German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said there appeared to have 
been less repression than in past elections, but Washington voiced 
disappointment, saying the ballot fell “significantly short” of the country’s 
commitment to free and fair polls.


Ahead of the vote EU diplomats had said Brussels was ready to reconsider the 
sanctions, which are set to expire on 31 October, provided the polls passed off 
in an “acceptable climate”.

But observers from the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (OSCE) said earlier on Monday 
the ballot’s integrity had been undermined by “significant problems”, 
especially during the counting of the votes.

“It is clear that Belarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> still 
has a long way to go towards fulfilling its democratic commitments,” said Kent 
Harstedt, head of the OSCE mission.

In the capital Minsk, the streets were calm on Monday evening after Lukashenko 
warned the opposition against staging protests over his re-election.


A shrewd operator who has played Brussels against Moscow, Lukashenko has 
raised his standing with the EU by seeking to distance his former Soviet nation 
fromRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

Current EU sanctions imposed for rights abuses include travel bans and asset 
freezes against Lukashenko and around 170 other individuals and 14 groups.

Some of the other sanctions against his regime date back to 2004.

Russia, which props up Lukashenko’s regime financially, has been warily eyeing 
the president’s attempts at rapprochement with the West.

Days before the start of Moscow’s bombing campaign in Syria in late September, 
Russian presidentVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> reiterated his interest in 
setting up an air base in Belarus.

Putin, whose already difficult ties with the west have been further 
complicated by the air strikes, congratulated Lukashenko in a phone call Monday 
and expressed readiness to ramp up ties.

The two are expected to discuss the airbase at a meeting in Kazakhstan this 
week.

The Guardian view on Europe and Belarus: engage without illusion | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/13/the-guardian-view-on-europe-and-belarus-engage-without-illusion>
While pilloried by rights defenders, Belarus’s moustachioed leader of 21 years 
enjoys a degree of popular support for his folksy, outspoken style and his 
regime’s durability.

He is believed to be grooming his 11-year-old son Kolya as his successor. 

In an attempt to assuage western criticism, he released six jailed opposition 
leaders ahead of the election. He also won some praise for hosting Ukraine 
peace talks earlier this year.

Leaders of the embattled opposition had urged Brussels not to lift sanctions 
and warned they would not recognise the results of the poll, pointing to what 
they said was widespread fraud.


“If they are together with this murderer, this criminal, then democracy is 
just words,” said Mikola Statkevich, who was among those released from jail 
ahead of the vote.

Independent Belarussian observers also slammed the polls, saying a record 36% 
of the voters had cast their ballots during early voting.

“Belarus lacks basic conditions to conduct fair elections,” said opposition 
politician Sergei Kalyakin.

The newly-crowned winner of the 2015 Nobel literature prize, Svetlana 
Alexievich, last week warned Europe to beware of Lukashenko, describing his 
regime as a “soft dictatorship.”

Svetlana Alexievich: 'Stalin and the Gulag are not history'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/oct/09/svetlana-alexievich-stalin-and-the-gulag-are-not-history>
In power since 1994, Lukashenko unleashed a crackdown on the opposition after 
thousands took to the streets to protest his disputed re-election in December 
2010.

Five years later, the veteran leader ran against three virtual unknowns, with 
opposition leaders barred from standing in Sunday’s polls. His nearest rival, 
Tatiana Korotkevich, mustered just 4.42% of the ballot.

The result is the highest ever for Lukashenko, whose government worked hard to 
ensure an official turnout of over 87%.

“Lukashenko won but mass protests and arrests of the opposition did not take 
place this time,” Alexander Klaskovsky, an analyst with Belapan think tank, 
told AFP.

“It would be enough, in these conditions, for minimal progress in order for 
the normalisation of ties with the United States and EU to continue.”

While Lukashenko allowed an unauthorised opposition rally in the capital to go 
ahead without police intervention on Saturday, he warned he would not tolerate 
such protests after the vote.

“You know what will happen,” he said.
 