
Before a group of Belarusian artists and intellectuals chose it as their 
headquarters, Minsk drinkers would line up outside the run-down building for 
cheap vodka on tap.

These days the Lohvinau House of Literature is one of the city’s few outlets 
for local contemporary art. It houses a gallery, a wine bar and a bookshop, and 
is dedicated to publishing works by authors marginalised by state-run media 
houses.

One of these is Svetlana Alexievich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/svetlana-alexievich>, the recipient of this 
year’s Nobel prize for literature. Despite being Belarusian, Alexievich’s books 
are hard to find in her home country because of her criticism of the 
authoritarian president, Aleksander Lukashenko.

For the past 15 years, Lohvinau has been the only publisher to print 
Alexievich’s books in Belarusian, says owner Ihar Lohvinau.

The cultural hub was founded in 2009 as a physical expansion of the publishing 
house. It has an atmosphere that evokes the salon culture of the communist era, 
when dissident artists would hold covert expositions for culture-starved 
intellectuals, including Alexievich herself.

“The concept is to create a platform, especially for young artists, and to 
organise lectures and debates,” Lohvinau says.

The 500 or so titles arranged on the book shop shelves are a mix of fiction, 
poetry, art magazines and academic journals. Some works have been smuggled in 
from abroad or produced by sympathetic local printers. They are distributed 
through personal networks, passed on tothe offices of opposition political 
parties and private enthusiasts who sell them from home.

Belarus bookshop rallies against publishing crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/03/belarus-bookshop-lohvinau-publishing-crackdown>
The government does not carry out overt censorship, says bookstore manager 
Pavol Kastiukevich, but rather relies on bureaucracy and red tape to control 
the dissemination of controversial literature.

In 2014, a law requiring publishers to obtain a government license for each 
new title caught Lohvinau by surprise. The publisher continued to print 
illegally, earning a €60,000 fine. Faced with closure the owners organised a 
successful online campaign to save the bookshop from financial ruin.

Competing in the state-run system has other obstacles. Printing licenses are 
state-controlled, and state-run bookshops enjoy special conditions– they don’t 
pay rent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fsvetlana-alexievich-nobel-belarus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6155e507a9d883218becbd3c25a4f36f55e8b35b%2F162_96_3344_2006%2F3344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Belarus%20bookshop%20braves%20the%20state%20to%20publish%20Nobel%20winner's%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fsvetlana-alexievich-nobel-belarus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Belarus%20bookshop%20braves%20the%20state%20to%20publish%20Nobel%20winner%27s%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fsvetlana-alexievich-nobel-belarus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6155e507a9d883218becbd3c25a4f36f55e8b35b%2F162_96_3344_2006%2F3344.jpg>
 A reading at the Lohvinau book shop in Minsk. Photograph: Lohvinau book shop 
State institutions often dictate to the sellers what should be displayed on 
bookshelves by placing all publications into two categories: “socially 
significant” and “others”, says Kastiukevich.

The state-owned book trade monopoly Bielkniha (Belarusan book) may forbid the 
sales of selected titles on “ideological” grounds.

Russian-language books make up about 95% of the market. “Belarus-produced 
books have no chance, as they’re more expensive and less numerous,” says 
Kastiukevich.

The situation for independent publishers and booksellers is aggravated by high 
VAT rates of 20%.

Two years ago, Lohvinau printed 500 copies of Alexievich’s latest novel, 
Second-hand Time, translated into Belarusian by Valer Stralko and Cichan 
Carniakievič. Despite the modest print run, her books have not been as popular 
as expected, Kastiukevich says.

Part of the reason is that Alexievich writes in Russian, which alienates her 
from a generation of Minsk intellectuals dedicated to resuscitating the 
Belarusian language.

Everything you need to know about Svetlana Alexievich, winner of the Nobel 
prize in literature
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/oct/08/everything-you-need-to-know-about-svetlana-alexievich-winner-of-the-nobel-prize-in-literature>
“Some people are still arrogant towards Russian language itself as being part 
of ‘Russian world’ and the main means of Putin’s propaganda in the former 
USSR,” says Kastiukevich.

But for younger readers, publishing Alexevich’s books in Belarusian is 
symbolically important in a country still trying to overcome national amnesia 
caused by the centuries of suppression, says bookshop patron Iryna Vidanava, 
the publisher of an independent Minsk-based cultural magazine and an expert on 
Belarusian history.

 “To me she is like conscience, making you to think about hard issues which 
you would probably rather forget or ignore. Whether she writes about the war, 
Chernobyl or Soviet past, a simple human being is in the centre of her books 
and the difficult dilemmas about good and evil each of us faces.”
 