
In a school hall on the outskirts of Minsk, an unusual event is taking place. 
It’s a week before Belarus’s presidential election and voters are questioning 
an opposition candidate about the legitimacy of her campaign.

“I came here to make sure you’re not a KGB agent,” says one woman in the 
audience of about 50 people. Then a man asks why he should vote at all when the 
results are sure to be falsified.

The candidate’s reply does little to instil confidence. “The regime counts the 
votes for itself,” says Tatyana Korotkevich, the only presidential challenger 
claiming to represent Belarus’s democratic opposition. “If a different 
candidate wins it will know, and it won’t be able to ignore us. Then I will be 
able to continue agitating for peaceful changes,” she adds.

The event is unusual in Belarus because there are few government critics 
standing for election – and there is not much campaigning going on. There was
one televised debate 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgcDD6zEt4k&feature=youtu.be>, but President 
Alexander Lukashenko, who no one doubts will emerge victorious after Sunday’s 
vote, did not take part. He doesn’t hold rallies, answer questions or go out of 
his way to meet voters at all.

“He doesn’t need to,” says Korotkevich. “He’s on the screen every day anyway. 
The conditions for this race aren’t fair.”

Lukashenko, the self-declared authoritarian president famously dubbed the last 
dictator in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-belarus-remains-revolution-behind>
, is certain to win a fifth term, and some wonder why Korotkevich was allowed 
to stand against him. Other opposition leaders have accused her of serving as a 
sparring partner to provide legitimacy to the process.

Although observers expect a flawed vote as in past elections, most agree 
Lukashenko would win even without cheating after the tumultuous events in 
neighbouring Ukraine.
 Tatyana Korotkevich on the campaign trail. She claims to be the only 
candidate representing the democratic opposition. Photograph: Tell the Truth 
“The economic situation has got worse, but everyone understands there are no 
worthy candidates besides Lukashenko,”says Alexander, an employee of the 
state-owned Minsk tractor works who, like most Belarusians speaking to the 
media, will give only his first name. The government owns 80% of all industry, 
and many workers equate Lukashenko with job security.

But as low oil prices and the Russian financial crisis 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2014/dec/15/fears-russian-rouble-oil-price-markets>
 push the country into recession, real wages are falling. Former central bank 
head Stanislav Bogdankevich says this will intensify unless Lukashenko 
restructures his ineffective economic model, which subsidises loss-making state 
enterprises with profits from refining and selling cheap Russian oil.




Yet there is no mood for rebellion. In a country where Russian state news 
channels are even more popular than their Belarusian counterparts, the conflict 
in Ukraine is seen as a warning.

“I was in Ukraine this summer and compared life there to here. People live 
very modestly there,” says Natalya, an engineer at the tractor works. “The 
people tried for a better life [by protesting andbringing down the pro-Russia 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/22/ukraine-president-yanukovych-flees-kiev>
], but it only gets worse.”

Is this the end for Belarus and Russia's 'brotherly love'?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/28/belarus-russia-brotherly-love-ukraine-crisis>
Another engineer, Sergei, agrees: “People killing each other over their 
beliefs, we definitely don’t need that.”

The question is not who will win the election, but whether, when he does, 
Lukashenko will introduce reforms to move towards the west or fall further into 
Moscow’s tight embrace.

Lukashenko has ruled Belarus with a heavy hand since 1994 and delivered GDP 
growth every year until 2015 – despite being criticised in the west for human 
rights abuses, including thestifling of independent media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2012/sep/04/journalist-safety-belarus>
 and the arrests and mysteriousdisappearances of critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/04/belarus-free-theatre-protest-feature>
.

After the last election in December 2010, riot police had to disperse thousands
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/20/belarus-protest-alleged-vote-rigging>
 who took to the streets to protest against a result that awarded Lukashenko 
nearly 80% of the votes.

International observers called the process flawed, and hundreds of 
demonstrators were beaten and sent to jail. Several opposition leaders were 
also jailed, including Lukashenko’s rival candidate,Andrei Sannikov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/23/andrei-sannikov-world-complacent-belarus>
.

Lukashenko pardoned Sannikov in 2012, and in August he released six jailed 
opposition figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/24/belarus-president-lukashenko-pardons-six-jailed-opposition-figures>
 including his most prominent critic, Nikolai Statkevich. In response, theEU is 
now reportedly considering lifting 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/09/17/us-belarus-sanctions-eu-exclusive-idUSKCN0RH1KY20150917>
 sanctions and a travel ban on Lukashenko.

Before Sunday’s election, Sannikov and Statkevich dismissed the apparent thaw 
as an attempt to win western money. “If you sawLukashenko in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/belarus-president-alexander-lukashenko-kolya>
 [for the UN general assembly], his first meeting was with IMF head Christine 
Lagarde,” Sannikov said. “That shows he needs money – that’s why he released 
prisoners. I’m happy for them but it doesn’t change anything.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fbelarus-lukashenko-election-dictator%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8943835b92ab4875d2edd3004b8b2a98a1d8599a%2F0_204_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Belarus%20president%20shows%20how%20to%20win%20five%20elections%20%E2%80%93%20without%20even%20trying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fbelarus-lukashenko-election-dictator%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Belarus%20president%20shows%20how%20to%20win%20five%20elections%20%E2%80%93%20without%20even%20trying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fbelarus-lukashenko-election-dictator%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8943835b92ab4875d2edd3004b8b2a98a1d8599a%2F0_204_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Alexander Lukashenko and his son, Kolya, with Barack and Michelle Obama during 
the UN general assembly in New York. Photograph: Lawrence Jackson/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Belarus has been struggling to pay nearly $4bn in foreign debt due this year. 
AlthoughMoscow allowed Minsk to delay payment 
<http://www.kp.by/daily/26440.4/3311148/> of $1.2bn until next year, President 
Vladimir Putin has also been pushing for the establishment of aRussian airbase 
in Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/16/russia-bolsters-military-presence-former-soviet-states>
 that would bring the country still further under his influence and the 
positioning of his warplanes closer to Latvia, Lithuania and Poland.

This week Lukashenko said Belarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> 
“didn’t need a [Russian] base at the moment” and suggested Moscow’s proposal 
was meant to make Europe “doubt that we want a normalisation of relations”. But 
he has played the west off against Russia before, and Moscow already has 
fighter aircraft stationed in its smaller neighbour, as well as a radar station 
and a submarine communications centre.

Lukashenko’s behaviour has split the opposition. While Statkevich, who is not 
eligible to stand because of his conviction for “organising mass riots”, has 
been calling for a boycott off the vote, another group,Speak the Truth, has 
registered Korotkevich <http://belarusinfocus.info/p/6971>, a political 
unknown, in the race. Her platform calls for “peaceful changes” but she keeps 
her criticisms of Lukashenko polite.
 Tatyana Korotkevich at a meeting in Mogilev, eastern Belarus. Photograph: 
Tell the Truth 
Few expect that Korotkevich, who has had only a month to campaign, will make 
an impact. ASeptember survey <http://news.tut.by/politics/466573.html> 
predicted Lukashenko would get 64% and Korotkevich 25% of the vote.

But observers suggest the official result will give him about 80%, like last 
time. Sergei Musiyenko, a political analyst who advises Lukashenko, says 
officials pad the count so it is not seen as too low.

Welcome to Zapad-4, the blind district of Belarus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/belarus-blind-district-zapad-4> 
A repeat of 2010’s mass protests, however, is unlikely. Recent opposition 
rallies attracted hundreds, rather than thousands, of supporters, and a 
gathering has been planned for Saturday to discourage people from going out on 
the day of the vote.

After five years without any viable opposition, Belarusians are afraid, says 
Statkevich — whose five-year prison term served as a warning.

Analyst Yaroslav Romanchuk says that after the elections Lukashenko will be 
forced to introduce economic reforms as part of his quest for western loans. 
But there’s a limit to how much of a western ally Belarus can ever be, Sannikov 
adds.

“It was not coincidence that Putin launched plans to have a military airbase 
in Belarus before Lukashenko gets elected,” he says. “He wanted to show the 
west thatRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was still in charge, 
and if you recognise Lukashenko you recognise Russia’s dominance.”
 