
Spread across four venues, the Worlds in Collision 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/visual_arts/adelaide_international-worlds_in_collision>
 exhibition is the Adelaide festival’s headline visual art show. A group 
exhibition of nine artists, including such internationally renowned names as
Susan Hiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jan/30/susan-hiller-tate-britain-interview>
, it’s a head trip into both outer and inner space, the frontiers of 
technology, the human psyche and the occult.

The artist with the strongest Australian connection is Benedict Drew 
<http://www.benedictdrew.com/> – he was born here, although his family left for 
the UK when he was one, and he now lives in London. His work, The Persuaders, 
has a gallery all to itself (theSASA <http://www.unisa.edu.au/sasa-gallery> in 
the University of South Australia). Originally shown in 2011, though Drew keeps 
adding elements, it takes you through three rooms.

The first contains several flatscreen TVs showing fluorescent colours and, on 
two of them, revolving monsters that look to be made of mud. In the second, 
there are overhead projectors with protractors and the kind of cardboard stars 
used to show prices in discount shops arranged on them to look like faces. In 
the third, there is a row of more mud monsters arranged on plinths, watching a 
film projected on a large pull-down screen. The film consists of a swirling 
pattern and the instructions to “breath in/breath out” [sic]. As it gets faster 
and faster, it’s intercut with images of building sites and railings overlaid 
with slogans like “stop fucking changing things” and “stop it being so solid”. 
It’s a complicated, beguiling work about our relationship with an increasingly 
sophisticated digital world – one that is starting to make as many demands on 
us as we are on it.

“The video is based on an app I downloaded that was designed to help you 
meditate and lower your heart rate,” says Drew over the phone. “Except I 
reversed it so it gets faster rather than slower. The idea was that I would 
make a complaint about the world as I perceived it at that moment and suggest 
to the audience that they should do my bidding, really that they should agree 
with me. The idea was that these encounters in the previous rooms would relax 
you into a state of being able to receive this single screen video projection.”

It transpires that this viewer didn’t need any persuasion to agree with Drew’s 
“stop fucking changing things” slide – it was inspired byCrossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail>, an egregious transport development 
in London which has cut right through the West End, demolishing five music 
venues in the process, including the legendaryAstoria 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/London_Astoria>. 

“I saw the greatest bands there and there’s no other venue which is of a 
similar size and intimacy,” says Drew. “It’s kind of ridiculous but there’s 
this sense of the absurd that Camus talks about and I was really feeling that, 
like ‘You’ve destroyed my memories and I have no recourse.’ I can’t win against 
these huge, solid objects.Crossrail <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> 
has cut up central London so my psychogeographic map of London that I’d spent a 
lot of time working on was now fucked, and I no longer knew which street to go 
down automatically in Soho – there were just building sites everywhere. It felt 
like psychogeographic warfare was being played out in my head. Part of that 
work is a personal scream about living in London, really.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fbenedict-drew-adelaide-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394603522037%2F173cc2ca-620f-47f0-9dc8-2a47c438c912-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benedict%20Drew%3A%20'It%20felt%20like%20psychogeographic%20warfare%20in%20my%20head'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fbenedict-drew-adelaide-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benedict%20Drew%3A%20%27It%20felt%20like%20psychogeographic%20warfare%20in%20my%20head%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F11%2Fbenedict-drew-adelaide-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394603522037%2F173cc2ca-620f-47f0-9dc8-2a47c438c912-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Like punk: Benedict Drew's projectors from The Persuaders. 
The monsters, meanwhile, reappear elsewhere in Drew’s work. “The lumps of mud 
or shit if you like are the opposite to rare earth minerals that are at the 
heart of digital processing. They’re the stuff that’s left over in the mine and 
in The Persuaders they’re quite friendly. They act as empathetic mascots that 
watch the video with you. In other works I have they’re a bit more radicalised 
and pissed off.

“Maybe they reflect the digital as well because of the golem myth 
<http://www.jewishideasdaily.com/718/features/the-golem-universal-and-particular/>
 in Jewish mythology, in which a character made of base materials is brought to 
life through a code that is written on its forehead. I see a parallel between 
that and the digital in terms of these base materials being animated through 
code. And there’s also a sort of concern with the absurd nature of a world in 
which inanimate objects speak to us, which is happening more and more.”

The variety of screens Drew uses in The Persuaders – projectors, flatscreens, 
a pull-down screen – is also a comment on, he says, “an art-world hierarchy of 
projected or screen-based images, a value attached to the quality. So, for 
example, nowadays 16mm film projection is very rarified and expensive” –three 
years ago Tacita Dean railed against its lack of availability in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/feb/22/tacita-dean-16mm-film> – 
“whereas in the 70s 16mm people just used it because it was cheap, available 
and current. Nowadays it’s like casting something in bronze, it gives it 
instant value.” Drew wanted the overhead projectors to be put on an equal 
footing with hisoil wheel projector 
<http://www.mathmos.com/mathmos-space-projector-light-with-oil-wheel-1516-0.html>
 and expensive flatscreen TVs, and also to pay tribute to their immediacy and 
ease of use. “Those projections are very quick to make – it takes seconds to 
arrange – so there’s a gesture there that has a resonance like the three chords 
of a punk song in its ease of creation.”

There are also the fluorescent colours, which Drew says – drawing on the 
Romantic idea of the sublime 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/research-publications/the-sublime/the-romantic-sublime-r1109221>
 – are his comment on the web itself. “The work’s about this oversaturated 
digital realm and the psychedelic nature of this techno sublime. If the sublime 
can be defined as something too awe-inspiring to understand and overwhelming, 
the internet sort of fits that.


“I see my work as trying to create an alternative universe that I can 
inhabit,” he says, chuckling, “because the real one is so desperately terrible.”
 