
Presumably the Danish supporters understood the irony of hanging a "Welcome to 
Hell" banner behind one of the goals. This little Lego-like ground, with its 
10,500 capacity and family atmosphere, is far removed from the bearpit 
otherwise known as Istanbul's Ali Sami Yen, and this was about as easy as it 
ever gets forManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchesterunited> in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

It was, however, a victory that came at a cost. Paul Scholes left the ground 
on crutches after damaging knee ligaments in an accidental tangle of legs with
Aalborg's <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aabaalborg> Thomas 
Augustinussen and there was a look of sad resignation on his face when he was 
taken off the pitch, sitting upright on a stretcher. Wayne Rooney also had to 
be taken off, with a twisted ankle, so Sir Alex Ferguson is entitled to have 
mixed feelings when reflecting on his team going top of Group E. "There's a 
price you have to pay sometimes and it was a bad one for us tonight," he said.

In terms of the performance, however, Ferguson can be encouraged because in an 
attacking sense this was possibly United's best of the season, even allowing 
for the low calibre of opposition. Their football was so slick, their 
domination so

complete, the only surprise was that they did not make it a rout. Instead they 
made do with a classy first-half effort from Rooney and then, most pleasingly 
for Ferguson, two goals from Dimitar Berbatov, his first since joining the club 
from Tottenham Hotspur for Â£30.75m a month ago.

The second was particularly impressive and Ferguson will like to believe the 
goals can have therapeutic qualities if, as alleged, the Bulgarian has been 
undermined by confidence issues over the past few weeks. Berbatov, 
paradoxically, had been the one United player not to impress throughout the 
opening 45 minutes - missing an open goal in the process - but his contribution 
in the second half should soothe any lingering fears about his ability to 
settle into life with theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> holders.

"You always want to get that first goal early when you have been signed for 
such an amount of money," said Ferguson. "He missed a good chance in the first 
half and was frustrated but he has taken his goals very well. He'll be happy at 
that."

On a night of differing emotions, Ferguson's mood was also tempered by an 
injury to Rafael Da Silva, the 18-year-old Brazilian who had been chosen ahead 
of Wes Brown at right-back because, as Ferguson said, "the boy has got 
something special". Da Silva had lived up to the billing on a night of almost 
unremitting pressure on the Aalborg goal. From the holders, it was quick, 
incisive football, full of attacking invention and enterprise. From the side 
currently two points above the relegation zone in Denmark's Superligaen, there 
was the occasional counter-attack but never any concerted pressure.

United should have had six, maybe even more. Ronaldo, in particular, will 
wonder how his own performance did not include a goal. He and Nani shimmered 
with menace on the wings, Rooney was alert and impressive and Ryan Giggs, 
Scholes's replacement, delivered a masterclass in the centre of midfield.

Giggs, according to Ferguson, can no longer be expected to "continue tramping 
up and down that bloody wing" but this was the kind of performance that 
demonstrates why he can prolong his career as a playmaker. He might not have 
the speed of a decade ago but his passing has become increasingly subtle over 
the years and the through ball with which he found Rooney for the opening goal 
was exquisite. Rooney had peeled away from his marker and was on to the ball in 
a flash, striking his shot first time, hard and low, into the bottom right-hand 
corner of Karim Zaza's net.

Berbatov, at this point, was the one player who was barely contributing, his 
performance in the first half incorporating a bewildering number of misplaced 
passes. Ten minutes into the second half, however, his United career was given 
a lift-off. He was helped by some atrocious defending, Andreas Johansson 
playing a pass across the edge of the penalty area and Augustinussen allowing 
the ball to spin off his toe. It sat up nicely for Berbatov and he fired a 
right-foot volley past Zaza.

Berbatov barely celebrated, as if embarrassed perhaps by his earlier miss, but 
his face was suffused with a smile after making it 3-0. This time the goal came 
from a more familiar supply line, Ronaldo cutting in from the right and picking 
out the Bulgarian with his cross. Berbatov leant back, pulled back his right 
boot and slashed another volley into the net. Soon afterwards, Aalborg's 
supporters did the decent thing and pulled down their banner.
 