
There are certain rare shows that you want to see again and again. Bronze 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibitions/bronze/> was such an event. Three 
thousand years of sculpture condensed into a single, vast spectacle of creative 
genius 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2012/sep/22/bronze-royal-academy-in-pictures>
, it had the power tochange one's view of art 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/sep/23/bronze-royal-academy-review?intcmp=239>
.

I can't forget the opening room: the shattering sight of a wild figure with 
golden eyes and metal-bright curls twisting in the deep blue darkness, head 
thrown back in ecstasy, or was it anguish? We didn't know if he was dancing or 
dying, and everyone fell silent with amazement. This life-sized satyr was 
fished out of the Mediterranean only a few years ago, lost beneath the waves 
for centuries. He was made in the 4th-century BC, possibly by the legendary 
sculptor Praxiteles, but here he was again, this ancient Greek – split new, and 
contemporary.

The show collapsed time. It put Picasso's bric-a-brac baboon 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=81119> on a level 
(literally: the floor to ceiling staging was marvellous) with an Etruscan 
bulldog and a Renaissance turkey. There was no chronology and no geographic 
boundaries. You were simply seeing what artists could make – a liberation from 
revisionist theories and scholarly arguments – and in particular, what artists 
could make with bronze.
 Chimera of Arezzo, Etruscan, c400 BCE 
Bronze can be cast on a staggering scale. The statue of Lucius Mammius Maximus 
 <http://www.flickr.com/photos/70125105@N06/6938007592/> stood three metres 
high, as intimidating at the Royal Academy as it must have been to the citizens 
of Herculaneum over whom it watched. And on the tiniest scale, bronze can be 
intimate as a whisper. Donatello's tiny cherub bursting with mirth as he shakes 
a tambourine had more eloquence in its single up-curled toe than all the muckle 
monuments of Rodin, the only conventional choices in this show.

Lord knows how the curators managed to borrow some of these treasures, 
including the renownedChimera of Arrezzo 
<http://www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/chimaera/english.html> – a mythical 
fire-breathing hybrid of lion, goat and serpent regarded as the masterpiece of 
Etruscan casting.
 Head of King Seuthes III, Thracian, early Hellenistic period. Photograph: 
National Institute of Archaeology and Museum, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
And if not for Bronze, I would never have seen the bust of King Seuthes III 
recently unearthed in Bulgaria. With its tense frown and irascible eyes, this 
was a miracle of portrait sculpture: a live presence held intact down the 
centuries. It might have been made by a Renaissance sculptor of unparalleled 
skill, but was in fact created two thousand years earlier. There is no progress 
in art, as they say, only change.
 