
Digitisation of healthcare is moving apace but when our hospitals capture 
information about emergency care, they rely on a dataset developed in the early 
1980s.

It seems odd in an age which aspires to delivering integrated care and digital 
interoperability that we’re making do with a functional but pretty basic 
dataset.

The accident and emergency commissioning data set does a good job of providing 
us with the key information required to benchmark A&E performance, such as the 
four-hour waiting time standard. Trusts’ efforts to meet the 95% goal were 
front page news for the first few months of this year,when A&E departments 
across the country came close to breaking point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/20/accident-emergency-departments-miss-patient-target-20th-week>
.

But richer data could give us the opportunity to better design and deliver 
more joined-up care.

What the dataset can’t do is help us to accurately determine capacity and 
demand on the service. While coding standards have improved and become much 
more consistent, variation still exists, with a valid diagnosis recorded for 
only around half of A&E attendances.

Also, the lack of granular detail on patient attendances, discharges and 
admissions, and the difficulty of linking A&E data to inpatient datasets, makes 
it hard for providers and commissioners to allocate appropriate resources for 
their local populations.

The need for change in emergency care data practices has become increasingly 
apparent as demand at A&E has surged. According tothe King’s Fund 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/urgent-emergency-care/urgent-and-emergency-care-mythbusters>
, A&E attendances rose 30% over the decade to 2013-14, reaching 21.7 million.

A&E is broken – but it can be fixed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/sep/22/ae-is-broken-but-it-can-be-fixed>
Dr Cliff Mann, president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine 
<http://www.rcem.ac.uk/>, has been a strong advocate for A&E reform. He has 
also called for more co-located urgent care centres to allow out-of-hours GPs 
to attend to the estimated2.1 million patients 
<http://m.hsj.co.uk/5070973.article> who turn up at A&E but who don’t need 
emergency department care.

Central to the Royal College’s vision is a new dataset – known as the 
emergency care data set <http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/tsd/ec-data-set/> 
(ECDS) – which will capture, for the first time, the true complexity and detail 
of A&E attendances, so we can start to understand where all this additional 
demand is coming from and how we might manage it better.

At the recent NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> Innovation Expo in 
Manchester, Tim Kelsey, national director for patients and information, spoke 
of patients having a barcode, allowing their real-time electronic record to be 
viewed by clinicians across the patient pathway, to improve care quality and 
finally dispense with paper.

The opportunity is there to take significant steps forward if we both 
implement the new ECDS and find ways to encourage NHS organisations to capture 
and record the information as accurately as possible.

This would have numerous benefits, for example:

 * More detail on patients who are discharged without receiving treatment or 
being offered advice – as many as40% of all A&E visits 
<http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/keogh-review/Documents/UECR.Ph1Report.FV.pdf> – 
would be immensely valuable for commissioners planning alternative services 
that could prevent some A&E attendances, or guide improvements to services like 
NHS 111. 
 * Closer monitoring of certain population groups could be trended over time, 
for instance adolescents, people with mental health problems, or people with 
comorbidities who shouldn’t be heading to A&E. This could help us pinpoint 
deficiencies in community services or tailor public health campaigns. 
 * A fuller appreciation of patients admitted with a range of comorbidities 
could lead to more appropriate care from the outset, helping to reduce delayed 
transfers of care. 
It’s well established that the NHS needs to find efficiency savings of £22bn 
to meet its part of the bargain with the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> for an extra £8bn in funding by 
2020.

The integrated care models of the Five Year Forward View – including eight 
vanguard sites 
<http://www.hsj.co.uk/news/mapped-the-urgent-and-emergency-care-vanguard-sites/5088167.article>
 that will launch the transformation of urgent and emergency care for more than 
nine million people – are a crucial step towards achieving that.

But the transformation envisaged over the next few years needs to be 
predicated on accurate information. It is data that will provide the impetus 
for evidence-based change.

A&E must be a central component of this. We need to address the problem of 
acute care demand at one of its main points of entry to stop the whole system 
being placed under extreme strain and seizing up. Better data can help us 
tackle this key issue and start to unblock some of the wider issues affecting 
the health service.
 