
Bob Dylan by Andrew Motion 

Dylan’s Nobel laureateship has proved controversial – which was presumably a 
part of the reason for awarding it to him in the first place. To shake things 
up a bit. But as a counterweight to those who think he shouldn’t have got the 
prize under any circumstances, and those who think the lyrics to the songs 
depend on their melody and delivery, which disqualify them from such an award, 
there are plenty of admirers, and plenty of ways to argue, that his words alone 
are certain good. The great protestations (“Blowin’ in the Wind”), the great 
love-murmurs (“Love Minus Zero”) and love-twists (“Tangled Up in Blue”), the 
great surrealist masterpieces of theBlonde on Blonde era (“Visions of 
Johanna”): all these contain the qualities we look for in poetry that matters. 
Concentration of language, formal expertise of one kind or another, and a 
clever balancing of articulacy and mystery. The same goes for his great 
ballads, which I love as much as any of these songs just named, and none more 
than his Baltimorean tragedy, “The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll”. Here 
Dylan gives his account of the murder committed by William Zanzinger, of the 
criminally light sentence he received, and of “high office relations in the 
politics of Maryland”, in four headlong and largely unpunctuated verses. 
Everything about them is alert to the literary tradition in which they work, 
but everything stretches and extends that tradition, walking a fine line 
between lyric and narrative to catch the essence of both, and tumbling through 
rage into sorrow at its conclusion, without diminishing either: “Oh but you who 
philosophise disgrace and criticise all fears / Bury the rag deep in your face 
/ For now’s the time for your tears.”

• Andrew Motion’s latest collection is Peace Talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/14/peace-talks-andrew-motion-review-craiglockhart>
 (Faber).

Cole Porter by Carol Ann Duffy 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553097fb6a33fcb8f999363689d40d456ec8c61f%2F0_318_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553097fb6a33fcb8f999363689d40d456ec8c61f%2F0_318_2400_1439%2F2400.jpg>
 Sublime … Cole Porter. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Getty Images 
The earliest poems, as the Swedish Academy is trying to remind Bob, were sung, 
and this lyric DNA – from Sappho, Robert Burns and Christina Rossetti to Linton 
Kwesi Johnson – persists, both off and on the page.Kate Tempest’s work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/06/kate-tempest-let-them-eat-chaos-review-pop-poetry-and-politics-collide>
 is at its electrifying best when she performs it. Other poets (Simon Armitage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/simonarmitage>, Paul Muldoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/paul-muldoon>) enjoy concealing the rock 
star’s leather jacket beneath the Oxbridge full-drag of the academic gown. (Of 
Armitage, the late Simon Powell, founder of Poetry Live, once affectionately 
remarked “he is a poet who knows his RS from his Elbow”.) One of the loveliest 
things I know is Christie Moore’s setting of Yeats’ “The Song of Wandering 
Aengus”.

I’m envious of and thrilled by just one line from Little Richard – A wop bop a 
loo bop a lop bam boom

I remember first hearing (in November 1967, aged nearly 12) the Beatles’ “I Am 
The Walrus”; how John Lennon’s lyrics, splicingAlice in Wonderland with a sexy 
surrealism, seemed to lead me, Pied Piper like, out of childhood. Thereafter, 
the albums I first bought as an adolescent were as much for the lyrics as for 
the music (teenage bedroom favourites committed fervently to memory: Leonard 
Cohen’s “Suzanne”; Joni Mitchell’s “Both Sides, Now”; David Bowie’s “Oh! You 
Pretty Things”; Simon and Garfunkel’s “Kathy’s Song”; Lou Reed’s “Perfect 
Day”). I think our most cherished song lyrics come from our youth, when they 
seem to be written especially for us, and in this sense poetry has the upper 
hand. Lacking a backing band, it necessarily has to do more with language. It 
also has a less fixed relationship with time. Cole Porter’s songs have 
delighted me my whole life, so I will choose his sublime “Ev’ry Time We Say 
Goodbye”:

Every time we say goodbye, I die a little.
Every time we say goodbye, I wonder why a little.
Why the gods above me, who must be in the know,
think so little of me they allow you to go.
And when you’re near, there’s such an air of spring about it.
I can hear a lark somewhere begin to sing about it.
There’s no love song finer but how strange the change
from major to minor,
every time we say goodbye.

But I’m also envious of and thrilled by just one line from Little Richard in 
1955 – “A wop bop a loo bop a lop bam boom” – as, I am sure, Shakespeare would 
have been. Anyone who disagrees should leave the gig.


• Carol Ann Duffy is poet laureate. Her latest books is The Map and the Clock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/15/the-map-and-the-clock-carol-ann-duffy-anthology-poetry>
(Faber).

Connie Converse by Emmy the Great
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e495a5ed0c02d1a1e941d3a1cd56f0b0dfd8f8a%2F35_256_933_560%2F933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e495a5ed0c02d1a1e941d3a1cd56f0b0dfd8f8a%2F35_256_933_560%2F933.jpg>
 Fiercely intelligent … Connie Converse. Photograph: PR 
Connie Converse lived in Greenwich Village in the 1950s, where she wrote 
self-reflective, poetic songs that broke free of the folk tradition far ahead 
of their time. In 2004 some of her recordings were played on a radio programme, 
and her music was rediscovered, poignantly late. She’d been a missing person 
for 30 years.

When I listen to Connie Converse, I hear the internal world of a fiercely 
intelligent woman. With a knack for rhyming that foreshadowed Paul Simon, she 
used sparkling wordplay to throw light on roving women and misfits, and find 
beauty in the ordinary. On my favourite song, “Playboy of the Western World”, 
she sings, “When he walked through a room, it looked as handsome as Napoleon’s 
tomb / and the Ford he rode could have been Mercedes-Benz a la mode …”

Her story, marked by doomed ambition and the mystery of her disappearance, 
creates a satisfyingly tragic myth of an outsider artist, but her recordings, 
which were made by a friend at his kitchen table, are warm and alive. As her 
voice tumbles playfully over her melodies, pausing for funny, self-deprecating 
remarks, there is no room for the troubles of the future, only the fragile 
charm of Connie and her compositions.

To me, she’s a patron saint of singer-songwriters, a reminder to leave 
something of yourself in that moment, no matter who ends up listening.

• Emmy the Great is touring the UK in November and December. Her album Second 
Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/13/emmy-the-great-second-love-review-emma-lee-moss-algorithm-hyperlink-dance-w-me-lost-in-you>
is out now.

Leonard Cohen by Polly Samson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc066f24e7ead39bf58305e29fd74c2c5357af98e%2F0_196_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc066f24e7ead39bf58305e29fd74c2c5357af98e%2F0_196_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 ‘His lyrics cut to the core of human existence’ … Leonard Cohen. Photograph: 
Edmond/Sipa/Rex/Shutterstock 
I don’t feel militant about Bob Dylan’s Nobel prize. I can argue it from 
either side: on behalf of pop music, which is an art form that doesn’t need to 
be validated with a prize for something it isn’t, or conversely as someone who 
writes lyrics and knows it sometimes doesn’t feel very different from writing 
words that are not intended to be sung.

That said, most great lyrics work because they are wedded to the right piece 
of music and the union of their parts is more potent as a song.Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen> rewards reading on the page 
and this is why to my mind, it is Cohen who lives alone above them all, Dylan 
included, on the uppermost floor of the Tower of Song.

Maybe this is because Cohen started out as a poet and words have always been 
his primary form of expression. He had published several collections, two 
novels, and garnered praise as well as at least one literary prize before he 
ever set his words to music. His lyrics exist like poems or short stories that 
cut to the core of human existence, and many of them have the same impact and 
interest when read divorced from their music. He can be brilliantly funny too: 
On ageing: “I ache in the places where I used to play.” On sexual jealousy: 
“And then I confess that I tortured the dress that you wore for the world to 
look through.” On the competition: “And all the lousy little poets coming round 
trying to sound like Charlie Manson.”

There isn’t another singer-songwriter whose lyrics I’d read before listening.

• The Kindness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/08/the-kindness-polly-sansom-review-novel>
 by Polly Samson is published by Bloomsbury.

Nicki Minaj by Naomi Alderman 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b40012a051bb57d81f930a066e4424c329ed4a7%2F0_135_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b40012a051bb57d81f930a066e4424c329ed4a7%2F0_135_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Cultural references and tricksy wordplay … Nicki Minaj. Photograph: Chris 
McKay/WireImage 
I taught a class on the lyrics of Nicki Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj> during a week of thinking about 
“experimental literature” at the Arvon creative writing centre in Devon. “We’re 
going to have to work on this,” I told them, “like you’d work on a page of 
Chaucer, going over it again and again until we understand it.” And the lyrics 
repay the work.

It’s easy to think that – bar a few notable exceptions such as Eimear 
McBride’s wonderful writing – the dense, allusive stream-of-consciousness style 
of Woolf and Joyce is these days just an experimental backwater of mainstream 
literature, loved by a few aficionados, ignored by the majority. But 
“difficult” writing, filled with cultural references and tricksy wordplay 
hasn’t vanished at all: it’s taken up residence in rap lyrics.

When I taught Nicki Minaj, we spent a long time looking at the lyrics of her 
verse in Kanye West’s song “Monster”. As the title suggests, it’s a piece about 
monstrosity, about knowing oneself to be an ego-monster but also realising that 
monstrosity is demanded by one’s audience. It features not only West but also 
Bon Iver, Rick Ross and Jay-Z. But Minaj’s verse blows them all out of the 
water.

Minaj namechecks familiar brands and characters: Willy Wonka, Tonka trucks, 
Bride of Chucky. They’re children’s toys, or childlike … but monstrous. Minaj 
is comparing herself to them: she might look like a toy, but she’s as sinister 
as Wonka, as deadly as a murderous doll, as powerful as a monster truck. And 
there’s a beautiful piece of wordplay in the line: “You could be the King but 
watch the Queen conquer.” Just swap the words King and Queen and say it out 
loud. I may be a woman, says Nicki Minaj in this verse, I may dress in pink, 
but underestimate me at your peril. “I’m a motherfucking monster.”

• The Power  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/02/the-power-naomi-alderman-review>
by Naomi Alderman is published by Viking.

Lou Reed by Johnny Marr 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aac6dc0ba1db43bde2a1dfb6cb8c64032ab480e%2F0_65_2362_1417%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aac6dc0ba1db43bde2a1dfb6cb8c64032ab480e%2F0_65_2362_1417%2F2362.jpg>
 Documenting the more subversive side of human nature … Lou Reed Photograph: 
Adam Ritchie/Redferns 
“I’ll Be Your Mirror” by Velvet Underground is just one example of Lou Reed’s 
genius:

When you think the night has seen your mind
That inside you’re twisted and unkind
Let me stand to show that you are blind
Please put down your hands
cause I see you.

Lou Reed turned slang into poetry, using modern language to tell his stories 
of the city

His reputation for documenting the more subversive side of human nature is 
well known, but it doesn’t tell the whole story of a writer who had real 
insight into human frailty and vulnerability – cruelty too; “Caroline says, as 
she gets up off the floor, Why is it that you beat me?, it isn’t any fun.” He 
turned slang into poetry, very deliberately using modern language to tell his 
stories of the city, and he made street talk into literature. His titles alone 
make him as good as anybody; “Satellite of Love”, “Venus in Furs”, “White Light 
/ White Heat” almost define the rock era, and that the young man who first 
became known for writing a song called “I’m Waiting for the Man” at the age of 
23 could turn his talent to write “Perfect Day”, a song which would surely be a 
contender for “song most universally loved”, says it all.


• Set the Boy Free by Johnny Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/29/johnny-marr-the-smiths-morrissey-simon-hattenstone>
 is published on 3 November by Century.

John Lennon by Amit Chaudhuri 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7622cbd15d3f7f560de433a72fdca029d8bc69d%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7622cbd15d3f7f560de433a72fdca029d8bc69d%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Musical and conceptual intelligence … John Lennon with Yoko Ono in 1968. 
Photograph: Jane Bown 
Unlike Paul McCartney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney>, after 
the breakup of the Beatles, Lennon never returned to the remarkable and 
noticeably unusual songs he’d written when he was in the band. McCartney sang 
“Yesterday”, “Hey Jude”, and other Beatles numbers in his concerts, putting his 
seal of ownership on them; Lennon only occasionally emerged from 
semi-retirement, and it’s no longer clear what he thought of “Norwegian Wood”, 
“Being for the Benefit of Mr Kite”, “In My Life”, “Revolution No 9”, or “Across 
the Universe”. Like Rimbaud, it was as if he’d sloughed off his former self 
like a skin while crossing a border.

Yet Lennon’s musical and conceptual intelligence, and his approach to the pop 
record, were fundamental to the Beatles’ evolution: there is no challenge 
presented, post-Beatles, by the recordings of its other members. Only Lennon 
continued to shock, delight, move and surprise. There’s the first album,John 
Lennon/Plastic Ono Band, which was made as if it were meant to have no listener 
but Lennon, counsellor to his own pain, assessor of his own worldview: “God is 
a concept by which we measure our pain / I’ll say it again … / I don’t believe 
in magic / I don’t believe in I-Ching / I don’t believe in Bible … / I don’t 
believe in Gita … / I don’t believe in Elvis / I don’t believe in Zimmerman / I 
don’t believe in Beatles / I just believe in me, Yoko and me, and that’s 
reality.” In this album, Lennon turned the flu-afflicted scream he’d unleashed 
long ago in “Twist and Shout” into a hurt, spiritual roar, a hurt he also 
expressed in the most tender melodies, in “Love” and “Hold On”, and in the 
tranquil, scathing detachment of “Working Class Hero”. Lennon’s greatest 
achievement in the artistic domain was his ability to say “no”; this, rather 
than ideology, was what made him political, as well as philosophically unique. 
This unforgiving but liberating quality of refusal is there in the second album,
Imagine, and though the title song became a bestseller, its message, if you 
ignore the comforting hook, sweetly advocates the same radical loneliness that 
“God” had earlier: “Imagine there’s no heaven / It’s easy if you try / No hell 
below us / Above us only sky’. Very different from Zimmerman.

• Odysseus Abroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/07/odysseus-abroad-amit-chaudhuri-review-audaciously-redraws-modernist-map>
by Amit Chaudhuri is published by Oneworld.

Joni Mitchell by Kathryn Williams 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb213d1ad50c911c4c83982379ead8761b658e849%2F0_661_4474_2685%2F4474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb213d1ad50c911c4c83982379ead8761b658e849%2F0_661_4474_2685%2F4474.jpg>
 Conversational, poetic, philosophical, barbed … Joni Mitchell. Photograph: 
Jack Robinson/Getty Images 
What do Joni Mitchell’s songs mean to me? Well, she says it best on the title 
track ofBlue – they are permanently under my skin: “Songs are like tattoos, you 
know I’ve been to sea before … crown and anchor me, or let me sail away.”

The first Joni Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonimitchell> 
record I bought was her first album, on vinyl. I grew into her way of speaking 
in song, started to learn her phrasing and began to collect more of her albums. 
It was like collecting glass marbles. The spherical shape was the same, but 
with a different coloured flame inside, twisted in a different spiral.

Joni can be conversational, poetic, philosophical, barbed – and make all that 
happen in one line: “Just before our love got lost you said / ‘I am as constant 
as a northern star’ / and I said, ‘Constantly in the darkness, where’s that at? 
/ If you want me, I’ll be in the bar … ’” The shapes of the words and how they 
move alongside each other are perfectly formed, perfect to sing. “The Last Time 
I Saw Richard” is the prophetic song for all of us romantics to fear. It 
unfolds like aRaymond Carver <https://www.theguardian.com/books/raymondcarver> 
poem. Showing not telling, and utterly heartbreaking.

As a songwriter, a female one at that, people comment on my singing voice far 
more than my lyrics. It’s as though they think we are not responsible for the 
words, just our voice. And I think that Joni Mitchell is often overlooked as 
the amazing lyricist she is. But she is a painter and her lyrics are a full 
sensory event. Pictures form in my head, I feel her pain, and I am taken to the 
places she sings about. I see her as a patron saint. She makes writing lyrics 
seem effortless … but there is only one Joni Mitchell.

• Resonator by Kathryn Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kathryn-williams> is released on 11 November.

Paul McCartney by Blake Morrison
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fa24ef304cb3ec3c25371e7da8dd289541d4ad1%2F0_728_4631_2778%2F4631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fa24ef304cb3ec3c25371e7da8dd289541d4ad1%2F0_728_4631_2778%2F4631.jpg>
 ‘He can do sad as well as happy’ … Paul McCartney. Photograph: David 
Redfern/Redferns 
Not many songwriters appear in poetry anthologies. Cole Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/cole-porter>, Bob Dylan and Leonard Cohen 
are among those who have, or who deserve to, but the odds are always against 
it, both for good reasons (without voice, melody, orchestration and 
arrangement, few lyrics work on the page) and for bad (literary snobbery on the 
one hand, and the exorbitant cost of permission fees on the other). Karl Miller 
was sticking his neck out when he included “Eleanor Rigby” (and Pink Floyd’s 
“Arnold Layne”) in his Penguin anthologyWriting in England Today (1968), along 
with Philip Larkin, Seamus Heaney and Thom Gunn. But he was right to recognise 
its poetic resonance – from the surreal image of Eleanor Rigby “wearing the 
face that she keeps in the jar by the door” to the detail of Father McKenzie 
“wiping the dirt from his hands as he walks from the grave”, it’s a plangent 
evocation of modern day loneliness.

McCartney is sometimes dismissed as sentimental (the schmaltzy foil to the 
bad-boy cool of Lennon) but “Eleanor Rigby” is as bleak as anything by Samuel 
Beckett: no one listens to Father McKenzie’s sermon, no one comes to Eleanor 
Rigby’s funeral, “no one was saved”. It’s a reminder of the range of tones 
McCartney is – or was – capable of: in this case melancholy (“all the lonely 
people”) but elsewhere parody (“Back in the USSR”), comedy (“Lovely Rita”), 
satire (“Paperback Writer”), nostalgia (“Penny Lane”) and raucous boogie-woogie 
(“Lady Madonna”). He can do sad as well as happy, moody monologue as well as 
sing-along. And at best the words escape whatever it was that set him off, 
leaving room for us to inhabit them: I’ve been listening to “Fixing a Hole” 
since its release and I’m still working out what it means.

• Shingle Street  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/08/shingle-street-review-heartfelt-bravura-blake-morrison>
by Blake Morrison is published by Chatto & Windus.

Mary Margaret O’Hara by Lavinia Greenlaw

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea320c0515e018c2ea7ebe7740a9c595d25e83d6%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea320c0515e018c2ea7ebe7740a9c595d25e83d6%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 An impression of distillation and deep thought … Mary Margaret O’Hara 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
When I was 19 and newly in the grip of writing, I joined a band. Asked to 
produce lyrics, I intensified my poems. Perhaps I thought that they could be 
freeze-dried and then rehydrated with a tune. The results were ungainly. Good 
singer-songwriters must have an extra layer of judgment that enables them to 
see what most of us need to be shown. Mary Margaret O’Hara is best known for
Miss America (1988), and has released just one album since. 

O'Hara builds songs out of spare phrases that light each other as the parts of 
a poem should

She builds songs out of spare phrases that light each other as the parts of a 
poem should. She sings this way too, as if making a series of gestures which 
have taken their time to become clear. You get the impression of distillation 
and deep thought in the making of songs that resist their own weight: “You just 
want to push somebody / And a body won’t let you. Just want to move somebody / 
And a body won’t let you.” O’Hara resists stabilisation, something I understood 
when I saw her perform live. She has a decisive but off-kilter way of moving – 
a lurch, a flick of the hand, a foot stamp that are impossible to relate to 
what you’re hearing. It’s as if she has a sense of detail so latent that no one 
else can detect it. Her lyrics are published in brief lines full of quiet 
swerves: “So sorry if I can’t stop pretending / So sorry if I don’t let you go 
/ Like this but not like this is ending / I think you know. / I think you know. 
/ Help me lift you up.” They can be heartbreaking in their generosity.

• A Double Sorrow: Troilus and Criseyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/14/double-sorrow-review-real-poetry>
by Lavinia Greenlaw is published by Faber.

Nick Cave by Ian Rankin 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfe51bd52cf658a988e49ff9e9dae13f8252f435%2F0_53_3581_2148%2F3581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfe51bd52cf658a988e49ff9e9dae13f8252f435%2F0_53_3581_2148%2F3581.jpg>
 Darkly compelling … Nick Cave. Photograph: Kerry Brown 
“Hands up who wants to die?!!” Those were the first frantic words I heard Nick 
Cave sing. They’re from the opening track of a 1983 four-track EP by the 
Birthday Party, a thing of Grand Guignol excess culminating in a four-minute 
horror film (“Deep in the Woods”). From the beginning, Cave was an artist who 
immersed the listener in revelatory imagery and creeping doom. The Old 
Testament, delta blues, and Sergio Leone westerns infused his song writing. He 
could be urgent and kinetic, or mellow and thoughtful. “The Ship Song” could 
have been penned by Leonard Cohen, but it’s hard to imagine anyone other than 
Cave creating darkly compelling narratives such as “Red Right Hand” and 
“Jubilee Street”, while his albumMurder Ballads has a body count that would 
shame Tarantino. Cave’s new album,Skeleton Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/09/nick-cave-and-the-bad-seeds-skeleton-tree-first-listen-review-a-masterpiece-of-love-and-devastation>
, is a starkly intense listen, foregrounded by personal tragedy. That he makes 
art from his loss is testament to his sense of duty to the songwriter’s craft, 
and the title track (which closes the album) is full of quiet yearning, along 
with acceptance and resolution. The album as a whole reminds me a little of 
Dylan’s masterpiece “Blood on the Tracks”. Cave himself may not be getting the 
Nobel any time soon, but right now he is one of our very best lyricists and 
storytellers. It will be fascinating to see what he does next.

• Rather Be the Devil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/02/rather-be-the-devil-by-ian-rankin-review>
by Ian Rankin is published by Orion.

Jake Thackray by Roger McGough 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5736ac8bbc8e7d3984f92245a48a4da17081044b%2F0_0_4610_2767%2F4610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5736ac8bbc8e7d3984f92245a48a4da17081044b%2F0_0_4610_2767%2F4610.jpg>
 A craftsman of form, language and melody … Jake Thackray. Photograph: David 
Redfern/Redferns 
I have always had a soft spot for the artists who came out of the northern 
music hall, folk club tradition, singer-songwriters like Stan Kelly, Mike 
Harding and Victoria Wood, and above all, Jake Thackray. Born in the West 
Riding in 1938 and educated by Jesuits in Leeds, he graduated from Durham 
University before leaving the country to teach in France for a number of years. 
And so, while we were dancing down at the Cavern, he was falling under the 
influence of Georges Brassens and Jacques Brel. He left as a gruff Yorkshire 
lad and came back a smooth, silver-tongued chansonnier.

His deep, rich baritone voice, intricate jazz-flavoured guitar playing and 
saucy yet timeless and sentimental lyrics made him enormously popular on the 
folk club circuit, and although he found nationwide fame following regular 
appearances on TV programmes such asThe David Frost Show and Esther Rantzen’s 
That’s Life, he found little pleasure in performing in large theatres. 
Staunchly Catholic and leftwing, he could never understand why people would 
spend their hard-earned wages listening to him.

A craftsman of form, language and melody, he wrote of jilted lovers turning to 
drink, of grotesque relatives, lusty blacksmiths and gabby ladies, but with 
more compassion than venom. His was a gentle humane satire. At the jumble sale, 
“Where ladies of the village fight like visigoths for pillage” he found love 
and assonance among the bric-a-brac: “Romance perchance prevails at humdrum 
jumble sales”. Sadly, and puzzlingly to his many fans, he disappeared from 
public view, and died in Monmouth aged 63. Had he been born in France where the 
poet/singer tradition is long-established and where there is little distinction 
between “serious” and “popular” music, Thackray would surely be recognised as 
the major artist many believe him to be.

• The Likes of Us 
<http://www.little-machine.com/news/roger-mcgough-little-machine-album-the-likes-of-us/>
, featuring Roger McGough and LiTTLe MACHiNe, is out now.

Tamara Lindeman by Richard Williams
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a85a2da8b62f06975f3ea96b3c2d48cb34bcf5b%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a85a2da8b62f06975f3ea96b3c2d48cb34bcf5b%2F0_0_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 A quiet refusal of emotional simplicities … Tamara Lindeman. 
Bob Dylan aside, the singer-songwriter I’ve listened to most over the past 
year, and to whom I expect to be paying attention for many more to come, is 
Tamara Lindeman, a 31-year-old former actor from Toronto who, under the name 
the Weather Station, performs songs notable for a conversational fluency, a 
diarist’s powers of observation and a quiet refusal of emotional simplicities. 
“I see everything from multiple perspectives,” she has said. “That’s sort of 
been a weakness in life but also a strength. I’m really interested to write a 
song where I can encompass all the different truths about a situation or all 
the different ways in which I see something, because it feels like that’s the 
way things really are.” The Weather Station’s third album,Loyalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/feb/24/the-playlist-americana-american-wrestlers-the-weather-station-alabama-shakes-and-more>
, significantly expanded her audience last year through songs that captured 
moments in life with a subtle acuity, set to flowing melodies. One of them 
begins: “You looked so small in your coat, one hand up on the window, so long 
now you’d been lost in thought.” Another: “I don’t expect your love to be like 
mine. I trust you to know your own mind. As I know mine.” Reading her verses, 
with their finely wrought understatement, punctuated like prose but weighted 
like poetry, it’s hard to imagine them being turned into songs; hearing them 
sung, it’s impossible to imagine them being anything else. Comparisons with any 
other folk-rooted Canadian singer-songwriters, female or male, are facile and 
misleading: this one, too, has her own voice.

• The Blue Moment: Miles Davis’s Kind of Blue and the Remaking of Modern Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/22/blue-moment-richard-williams-review>
 by Richard Williams is published by Faber.

Steve Kilbey by Michel Faber
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8c27567bccc564b57a43a2c7c2545ccbc87946d%2F27_219_5157_3094%2F5157.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyond%20Bob%20Dylan%3A%20authors%2C%20poets%20and%20musicians%20pick%20their%20favourite%20songwriter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fbob-dylan-nobel-favourite-songwriter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8c27567bccc564b57a43a2c7c2545ccbc87946d%2F27_219_5157_3094%2F5157.jpg>
 Lyrics infused with loss and addiction … Steve Kilbey (right) with other 
members of the Church. Photograph: Mal Viles 
Dylan’s Nobel win was long overdue given the influence his songs have had on 
culture worldwide, but to be honest lyrics don’t mean much to me: I go for the 
music every time. And on Dylan’s records, the music is just there to provide a 
non-intrusive backdrop for the words, which is exactly the opposite of what I 
prefer. I want voices to function as instruments, abstract as an oboe or a 
squall of feedback.

That’s not to say I’m immune to good words. Leonard Cohen is a fine poet 
(although I’m mainly attracted by that sepulchral croon haloed by his female 
backing vocalists), Joni Mitchell is good too (although I mainly admire her as 
a bandleader), Loudon Wainwright, Peter Gabriel, Kevin Coyne … they all touch 
me. The other day I read the lyric booklet of Chris Cutler’s Domestic Stories 
and was struck by how strong the poems were. Then I played the CD and the 
meaning of the words evaporated in a puff of sound.

The only wordsmiths who seem to be able to get through to me are Steve Kilbey 
of the Church and John Balance of Coil. Kilbey’s lyrics are suffused with loss 
and addiction, lightened by wry humour. I’ve loved them for 30 years, despite 
never having taken an illegal drug. Likewise Balance’s voice – increasingly 
haunted by childhood traumas and the alcoholism that would kill him – resounds 
in my head, clear as the saddest bell in the world. “Wise words from the 
departing / Eat your greens / Especially broccoli / Wear sensible shoes / And 
remember to say ‘thank you’ / Especially for the things / You never had.”

• Undying: A Love Story 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/undying.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 byMichel Faber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/08/books-interview-michel-faber-undying-a-love-story-under-the-skin>
 is published by Canongate.
 