
Bill Shorten says it seems “ridiculous” a refugee would be banned from coming 
to Australia as a tourist or on a business trip, as several Labor MPs came out 
against the government’s proposal to prevent refugees in offshore detention 
ever visiting the country. 

But the Labor leader has not committed to opposing the government’s plan.



Labor senator Lisa Singh and MP Linda Burney have expressed personal concerns.

Singh said: “I don’t know what Labor will decide to do … Obviously I hope we 
vote this down and see it for what it is.”

Under the proposed laws announced on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/30/asylum-seekers-face-lifetime-ban-on-entering-australia-if-they-arrive-by-boat>
, refugees and asylum seekers on Manus Island and Nauru would not be able to 
come to Australia even on a tourist visa, unless they were children when placed 
in detention.

New asylum laws pave the way for third-country resettlement, Peter Dutton says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/new-asylum-laws-third-country-resettlement-peter-dutton>
Singh, who has been seconded to the Australian delegation at the United 
Nations, believed the policy was “clearly contrary tothe New York declaration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/the-guardian-view-on-the-new-york-declaration-better-than-nothing>
” on refugees and migrants that the Australian government agreed to in 
September.

In a Facebook post <https://www.facebook.com/senatorlisasingh/?fref=ts>, she 
said the proposal was “cruel” and “out of step with the rest of the world”. She 
said it was “stupid” because of the economic contribution of refugees to 
Australia and the harm it would cause Australia’s bid for a UN human rights 
council seat.

“And if their turning boats back is working, why on earth is this needed? 
Sounds like a government with no ideas, no policy solutions and no heart.”

 Burney said she was “deeply concerned” by the proposal.

“I have had many people contact me today and yesterday who were very 
distressed at the prospect that this is what government is moving,” she said. 
“Their concern is that it’s inhumane, that it’s something they can’t reconcile 
as decent Australians.”

Shorten said the opposition would “look closely at the legislation when the 
government can be bothered releasing it”.

“It seems ridiculous to me that a genuine refugee who settles in the US or 
Canada and becomes a US or Canadian citizen is banned from visiting Australia 
as a tourist, businessman or businesswoman 40 years down track,” he said.

Shorten said “people who come via a people-smuggler should not be allowed to 
settle here” but labelled the proposal a distraction from “the Liberals’ total 
failure to secure any durable and credible third country resettlement”.

Shorten accused Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> of “sucking up to 
One Nation to fight off Tony Abbott and keep his job”.

Addressing concerns the law would breach international law because it amounted 
to penalising people for seeking asylum, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, 
said on Monday the proposal was “absolutely consistent with our international 
obligations”.

According to the immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/new-asylum-laws-third-country-resettlement-peter-dutton>
, the attorney general’s department, the Australian government solicitor, and 
the immigration department’s counsel have all cleared the proposal.

At a press conference in Sydney, Dutton said Labor “either supports it or they 
don’t” and were acting like an “undisciplined rabble” by declaring their 
personal views on social media.

At a press conference in Yalata in South Australia on Monday, Turnbull said 
Labor had failed to stop asylum seeker boats and the government was now dealing 
with that failure.

“All we are seeking for them to do now is to support this legislation,” he 
said. “It sends a strong and unequivocal message. It is critically important.

“There is a battle of will between the people of Australia and their 
government and the people smugglers.”

The treasurer and former immigration minister, Scott Morrison, said Bill 
Shorten had “already blinked” because he had not responded to the policy within 
24 hours.

“There’s no time for blinking” he said. “You need to know what you stand for, 
and you need to know what you’re going to do.”

He said Labor was “vexed” and “totally paralysed” on the issue. “The Labor 
party is being asked to legislate their articulated policy before the 2013 
election … The fact that they’re tying themselves in knots tells everybody what 
they need to know about theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> on this issue.”

Asylum seekers face lifetime ban from entering Australia if they arrive by boat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/30/asylum-seekers-face-lifetime-ban-on-entering-australia-if-they-arrive-by-boat>
Labor MP Terri Butler said the government must explain the motivation for the 
law. “They must explain why it is consistent with international law – not just 
make assertions to that effect,” she said.


A number of other Labor figures including the former MP Melissa Parke and the 
former New South Wales premier Kristina Keneally have expressed opposition.
Melissa Parke (@MelissaParke01) 
Govt's new asylum laws will be another flagrant violation of Int'l law. 
Meanwhile Aust seeks seat on UN human rights council...
 <https://twitter.com/MelissaParke01/status/792858239968739329> October 30, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MelissaParke01/status/792858239968739329> Kristina 
Keneally (@KKeneally) 
So now we're banning refugees who found refuge in other countries from even 
visiting Australia? That's ridiculous. Shameful. Appalling.
 <https://twitter.com/KKeneally/status/792601421073887232> October 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KKeneally/status/792601421073887232> 
On Monday Labor frontbench MP Andrew Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-leigh> told Sky News the key 
was to ensure the 800-odd people on Manus and a similar number on Nauru were 
resettled, and the bill would do nothing to achieve that.

Dutton has said the law may pave the way to a resettlement deal with a third 
country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/new-asylum-laws-third-country-resettlement-peter-dutton>
 to clear the camps, as it would prevent those resettled from returning to 
Australia through a “back door”.

The Greens leader, Richard Di Natale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/richard-di-natale>, told Radio 
National the government’s plan was “barbaric, cruel, shameful, cynical 
politics”.


“I just hope and urge the Labor party and the crossbenchers to join with the 
Greens and make sure it doesn’t get past the Senate,” he said.

Nick Xenophon and Derryn Hinch have said they will wait to see the details; 
One Nation strongly supports the move.
 