
An Oxford company hailed as a star of British biotechnology lost almost 
two-thirds of its stock market value on Monday after it revealed that its 
experimental cat allergy treatment had failed in a late-stage trial.

Circassia Pharmaceuticals <http://www.circassia.com/> floated on the stock 
exchange in 2014 and was seen as one of thegreat hopes of the sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/26/cat-allergy-treatment-could-net-billions-for-uk-pharma-circassia>
 for its research into cat allergies, which affect 24 million people in the US 
alone.

Scientists link allergies to hyperactive immune cells in babies' cord blood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/14/scientists-link-allergies-to-hyperactive-immune-cells-in-babies-cord-blood>
Circassia’s treatment aimed to improve patients’ basic resistance by making 
their immune systems tolerate allergens. But its vaccine failed to meet the 
main goal in a third-phase study because of a significant placebo effect among 
patients not receiving treatment.


All patients taking part in the study suffered less from itchy eyes, runny 
noses and sneezing. The results of those taking Circassia’s vaccine were not 
significantly better than those taking the placebo.

Steve Harris, Circassia’s chief executive, received the findings from the 
clinical trials at the weekend. He said he was surprised and disappointed 
because earlier tests had not registered a large placebo effect.

He added: “In this large-scale trial [the placebo effect] eliminated the 
ability to identify a treatment effect despite dramatic improvements in 
subjects’ allergy symptoms and rescue medication use,.”


He added that Circassia would analyse the data and its implications for the 
company’s other allergy treatments before reporting back to investors. The 
company will halt work on grass and ragweed allergy treatments and concentrate 
efforts on asthma and respiratory products.

Circassia shares were down 64% at 96p in afternoon trading on Monday. The 
company sold shares on the London Stock Exchange in March 2014 at 310p each, in 
what was the biggest UK biotech flotation for a decade.

The company has received backing from prominent investors Invesco and Neil 
Woodford. They increased their holdings this year to 35.1% and 19.2% 
respectively.
 