
Australia’s education department paid Bjørn Lomborg’s Copenhagen Consensus 
Centre $640,000 to help produce a report that claimed limiting world 
temperature increases to 2C was a “poor” use of money.

The $640,000 cost, incurred before the CCC’s controversial $4m Australian 
program was junked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/bjrn-lomborgs-4m-centre-rejected-by-flinders-university-academics>
, is revealed inthe 2016 incoming ministerial brief 
<https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/parnell_heri_section_of_incoming_secretary_brief.pdf>
 published under freedom of information laws.

An education department spokeswoman told Guardian Australia the $640,000 
represented the Australian government contribution to the CCC for the SmarterUN 
Post-2015 <http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/development-beyond-2015.html> 
Development Goals project.

Bjørn Lomborg's $4m centre rejected by Flinders University academics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/bjrn-lomborgs-4m-centre-rejected-by-flinders-university-academics>
The project concluded 
<http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/files/post2015brochure_m.pdf> 
that for every dollar spent on keeping global temperatures to the 2C target, 
less than $1 of social, economic or environmental benefit resulted, which it 
described as a “poor” result.

Other spending with “poor” returns included cutting outdoor air pollution, 
increasing protected biodiversity areas, better disaster resilience for the 
poor and reducing child marriages.

Projects with “phenomenal” returns included reducing world trade restrictions 
through the Doha trade round, which it said would produce $2,011 for every 
dollar spent, and universal access to contraception which would return $120 on 
the dollar.

Some environmental projects rated as good investments, with “more energy 
research” rating an $11 return, and phasing out fossil fuel subsidies likely to 
yield $15 or more.

The education department spokeswoman said the CCC had provided a comprehensive 
report on 169 funding possibilities across 22 core issues, which was published 
as the Nobel Laureates’ Guide to the Smartest Targets for the World, 2016-2030.

Australian taxpayers funding climate contrarian's methods with $4m Bjørn 
Lomborg centre | Graham Readfearn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2015/apr/23/australia-paying-4-million-for-bjrn-lomborgs-flawed-methods-that-downgrade-climate-change>
The project explained its conclusions were “based on peer-reviewed analyses 
from 82 of the world’s top economists and 44 sector experts”.

Its brochure 
<http://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/files/post2015brochure_m.pdf> 
notes financial support was provided by the Australian government. A spokesman 
for the CCC said the $640,000 was for costs incurred and that the intended work 
of the Australian Consensus Centre, which included the development goal project,
was a matter of public record 
<http://www.news.uwa.edu.au/201504027455/events/new-economic-prioritisation-research-centre-uwa>
.

In April 2015 Guardian Australia revealed the then Abbott government’s plan to 
spend $4m over four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/17/abbott-government-gives-4m-to-help-climate-sceptic-set-up-australian-centre>
 to bring the Copenhagen Consensus Centre methodology to Australia at a new 
centre in the University of Western Australia’s business school.

UWA rejected the funds after a public backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/08/climate-contrarian-bjrn-lomborgs-centre-dropped-by-wa-university>
 leading toa search for a new home for the Australian Consensus Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/03/universities-told-to-speak-to-bjrn-lomborg-if-they-want-4m-in-funding>
.

The project was axed later in 2015 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/bjorn-lomborg-climate-centre-dropped-by-turnbull-government-simon-birmingham-20151021-gkek0s.html>
 when Malcolm Turnbull became prime minister, which the brief explains was 
caused by the government’s conclusion it was “unlikely to enjoy success and 
that the funds could be better utilised elsewhere”.

Flinders University staff and students keep fighting Bjørn Lomborg centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/flinders-university-staff-and-students-keep-fighting-bjrn-lomborg-centre>
The brief notes the centre’s Australian program was to cost $4m to provide 
“policy information and advice on smart, cost-effective solutions to national 
and international challenges” before it was dropped in mid 2015.

“The department has negotiated a funding agreement which will provide a 
one-off payment to the CCC for a total of $640,000 to cover costs incurred in 
relation to the establishment of the Australian Consensus Centre prior to the 
decision to cancel this project,” it said.

The shadow innovation, industry, science and research minister, Kim Carr, 
questioned why the government had “felt the need to keep [the $640,000] secret”.

“The department of education needs to explain why in one document the 
secretary is told that this money was establishment costs around the centre, 
but now states that the $640,000 was for a specific research project,” he said.

The Liberals must explain their actions.
Kim Carr 
“When government research money is in such sort supply for Australia’s best 
and brightest scientists and researchers, the Liberals must explain their 
actions here.”


Carr accused the Abbott and Turnbull governments of “using taxpayers’ money in 
an attempt to promote an anti-science conservative agenda”.

An education department spokeswoman refuted the suggestion it had sought to 
hide the payment, and cited the fact the $640,000 grant was alsodisclosed in a 
log of education grants 
<https://docs.education.gov.au/documents/grants-announced-1-july-2015> created 
on 2 July 2015 and made public on 22 April 2016.
 