
It’s unbelievable. No, no, it’s nevozmozhno. Nevozmozhno?” Grigoriy Dobrygin 
looks to his translator. “Impossible,” he’s told. “Yes, yes, impossible that a 
snobby British newspaper wants to talk to a Russian.” Dobrygin genuinely seems 
startled. He’s sitting at his kitchen table in Moscow, his fridge covered in 
postcards from all over the world, squeezing his eyes together and running his 
hands through his hair as he tries to find the right words. “This is very 
serious for me,” he says.

A serious event for a serious man. “Grigoriy takes things very seriously, very 
much to heart,” says Kevin Macdonald, the director who has cast Dobrygin in his 
upcoming Anglo-Russian submarine thriller Black Sea. “He has the acting talent, 
no doubt, even if he gets very anxious about it. And he has a lovely face, too. 
But I can see him finding the flippancy of Hollywood difficult to cope with. 
He’s an earnest man, and the movie industry is not the most earnest place. 
Whether or not he’ll pursue it, I don’t know.”

Dobrygin, 28, has stealthily risen to become Russia’s biggest cinematic 
export; one of the last actors to share a scene with Philip Seymour Hoffman 
when he played the suspected Chechen jihadist Issa in this year’sA Most Wanted 
Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-most-wanted-man>, and now a 
scene-stealer opposite Jude Law in Macdonald’s underwater chamber piece Black 
Sea.

“Grigory was different, right away, to the other Russian actors,” says 
Macdonald. “He got very, very worried about the reality of certain scenes. He’d 
often tell me: ‘My character wouldn’t say this’ or ‘I’m not trained to do 
this.’”

He can only play a scene, Macdonald soon realised, if it genuinely feels 
truthful: “Not many Russian actors, or actors, actually, have his sensitivity 
or awareness. He has a very western approach, more of a method about him, for 
want of a more nuanced word. He wanted to inhabit the character, whereas the 
Russian way seems to be a lot more craft-based in its mentality.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUrrve_J9F_g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUrrve_J9F_g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUrrve_J9F_g&media=>
Dobrygin seems aware of how he’s perceived. “I asked questions, a lot of 
questions,” he says of making Black Sea. “Every step, I ask questions. When we 
read the script, I asked a question for every page. I would raise my hand and 
look at the others and assure them this would be my last question. Everyone 
wanted to kill me, I think.”

To better understand his character, it perhaps makes sense to look at the 
actor’s upbringing. Dobrygin was born in February 1986 to a ballerina and a 
submarine captain. His father, Grigory says, “grabbed my mother” from the 
Moscow StateBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> and moved her to 
Rybachiy-Vilyuchinsk, a closed military port on the eastern tip of the USSR, 
from where his father would disappear underwater and spend weeks at a time 
navigating Soviet submarines around the East Siberian sea.

By Dobrygin’s third birthday, though, everything changed direction again. The 
family realised that he shared his mother’s talent, and made the move back to 
the capital the year that the Berlin Wall fell. Dobrygin was enrolled in 
Moscow’s Bolshoi Theatre ballet school, the oldest and most exclusive of its 
kind in the country, and indeed the world. He danced “every day” for seven 
years until, at the age of 12, he appeared onstage with theBolshoi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bolshoi> in a professional performance of 
The Nutcracker. “He’s still a very highly regarded dancer in Russia,” says 
Macdonald, before offering a brief critical appraisal of his talents: “I saw 
him do a pirouette once and I remember thinking: ‘Wow, this guy really is 
fucking good.’”

At the age of 17, however, Dobrygin abruptly left the dancing behind. His 
father had gone through a conversion and was now a Seventh-day Adventist Church 
preacher, touring Russia to spread the word. Dobrygin admits to being deeply 
religious himself, and enrolled at the Zaokskaya Christian academy in Tula 
Oblast, partly in solidarity with his parents and partly because of his own 
faith. “The Bible is the base of life, the base of culture,” he says. “But if I 
was asked about literature or theatre, I would try and make it about the Bible. 
They used to call me the philosopher because I had a lot of questions.”

After two years at the Christian school, he chose a new direction again, 
starting at Moscow’s Russian University of Theatre Arts (GITIS) and splitting 
his time between acting and directing. An agent signed him up and, at 23, he 
was the star of Chernaya Molniya (Black Lightning), Russia’s very successful 
attempt at a superhero movie. His western breakthrough came soon after, with 
2010’s How I Ended This Summer, a harsh thriller set in a weather station on an 
Arctic island in Chukotka, which earned Dobrygin the Silver Bear for best actor 
at the Berlin film festival.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D45_2ZZlbirY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D45_2ZZlbirY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D45_2ZZlbirY&media=>
All of Grigoriy’s directors talk of a performer willing to go a lot further, 
and a lot deeper into his character, than most. On his own time, Macdonald 
says, Dobrygin pitched up and lived at Sevastopol, an old submarine port in the 
Crimean peninsula, to learn from the mariners there. Once the shoot was 
underway, he refused to stay in the same nicely serviced apartments as the rest 
of the cast, insisting they were too grand for his character. They had to book 
him into the local youth hostel.

Why does he feel he has to go these lengths? “I don’t know,” he says, and 
shrugs. “I’m not a method actor. I don’t create my character, I collect my 
character.”

Work is now plentiful. He’s currently shooting Grain, a new film from the 
Turkish director Semih Kaplanoglu, and has just finished on Susanna White’s Our 
Kind of Traitor, with Ewan McGregor, Damian Lewis and Naomie Harris.

To listen to him talk, though, it sounds as though Dobrygin is set for yet 
another change of direction, with his future plans not really featuring acting. 
He’s currently learning to be a director, with two short films – both comedies 
– already in the can. “But my big plan is to go back to ballet,” he says. “Five 
years after every year I stopped dancing I thought about going back. Now it’s 
been 10 years, so it’s going to be a documentary experiment for me: I’m going 
to go deep into ballet, prepare my body and then travel the world with a 
professional coach, an international choreographer and a camera.”

Why do it now, I ask, when his profile as an actor has risen so quickly? He 
pauses, before answering in Russian: “We have a political situation. The 
country is in crisis. The borders are being closed in Russia. My purpose is to 
connect the different countries divided by the iron border with dancing. If 
there’s a time, it’s now, I think.”

What are his hopes for it? “It’s written in the Bible not to dream about 
yourself,” he says, then laughs. “OK, OK, sometimes I dream.” And with that he 
raises the peace sign, and signs off – a most wanted man, and a serious one, 
too.

Black Sea is in cinemas from 5 Dec
 