
How is Anthony Burgess <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> 
remembered these days? In his own mind, he was a composer by nature and a 
fiction writer by default; one day, he hoped, his musical works would be as 
well known asA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/14/clockwork-orange-anthony-burgess-review>
 andEarthly Powers. There were also plays, screenplays, poems and excursions in 
linguistics. But what he excelled at was literary journalism. He was a master 
of op-ed features and book reviews.

In the hierarchy of forms, literary journalism comes near the bottom. Its 
practitioners are hacks, whose domain is Grub Street and who produce mere copy. 
Despicable rats, Burgess called them, and his fiction reinforces this 
impression. InInside Mr Enderby, the eponymous poet-protagonist is lured into 
writing for a women’s magazine with disastrous consequences. Radio and 
television should be avoided, too, Burgess thought, though for a time he 
interviewed novelists for the BBC (Paul Scott and Arthur Koestler among them) 
and whenStanley Kubrick <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>’s 
film ofA Clockwork Orange <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> 
came out, he went on a lot of chat shows. One of these was hosted byJimmy Savile
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jimmy-savile>, presciently described in 
Burgess’s memoirs as a man “noted for bipartite hair dyes and his love of the 
young”. The experience left Burgess wishing “to inflict GBH on Savile” and 
vowing never to appear on a chat show again.

Anything that distracts you from your writing is to be avoided, he said. 
Offered a post as distinguished professor, he turned it down, fearing 
acceptance would make him an “extinguished novelist”. But journalism was the 
great Satan, and Burgess’s memoirs show a peculiar desperation to devalue the 
part it played in his life. In the index, there’s not a single entry for the 
Observer (for which he wrote for many years), though there are several for the 
Yorkshire Post, where he began his reviewing career. The implication is clear – 
that his own trajectory was the opposite of the typical hack, not downwards but 
upwards, and ending in international celebrity, with Hollywood producers and 
Broadway theatre directors desperate to avail themselves of his talents.

But Burgess was a prodigious literary journalist. For the Guardian and 
Observer alone, he wrote more than 400 pieces. For the Yorkshire Post, in 
a two-year spell as fiction reviewer, he reviewed more than 350 novels. Then 
there was the Daily Mail, the press in Italy, France and the US, and in the 
last years of his life, the newly founded Independent. At university, under the 
initials ABW, he’d published poems and reviews in a student magazine. And after 
a break from journalism during his 20s and 30s, he resumed with a vengeance: 
during one manic period in the mid-1960s, he was simultaneously drama critic 
for the Spectator, opera critic for Queen and television critic for the 
Listener, as well as contributing unsigned reviews to the TLS. He paced himself 
more slowly after that, but still wrote at an extraordinary rate and continued 
till the end of his life – indeed, even beyond it, since three book reviews 
composed while he was dying appeared in the Observer on successive Sundays 
after his death.

He cared about reviews. Time and again in his memoirs, he quotes from the 
notices he received for his books, often at some length, and often from the 
most negative ones. Reviewing mattered to him. And he was good at it – in the 
national press awards of 1979, on the strength of his Observer book reviews, he 
was named critic of the year (the award was presented byMrs Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>). Even before that, his 
publishers thought well enough of his literary journalism to collect it in a 
book calledUrgent Copy. Though Burgess’s preface to that book is 
characteristically disparaging – requiring “an apologetic grimace, tinged with 
irony, on behalf of a whole profession” - he was obviously pleased to see his 
journalism between hard covers, because he allowed it to happen again in a 
second collection,Homage to Qwert Yuiop.

At the Observer, for which I worked in the 1980s, he was on a lucrative 
retainer, which precluded him from writing for rival broadsheets. Not that 
Burgess was there to put on circulation, but he was undoubtedly an asset – 
quick, reliable, authoritative, a good name to have associated with your pages. 
By the mid-80s, he was getting £600 for each 1,000-word piece (almost as much 
as the New Yorker’s legendary rate of a dollar a word) and writing up to 40 
reviews a year. The fee is well above average even today, and back then it was 
a considerable sum. But Burgess was worth it. You’d post a book to him in 
Monaco or Lugano on a Wednesday, and by the following Monday the review would 
be back; sometimes it seemed the review had come in even before the book had 
been sent out. Once there was a muddle over two books that were being 
dispatched – the novel that should have gone to Burgess went to our China 
expert, the book on China to Burgess. The China expert called to alert us to 
the mistake – but not before Burgess had filed his copy.

In his early days as a reviewer, living in Sussex and writing for the 
Yorkshire Post, Burgess’s chief motive was financial. He supplemented his 
meagre freelance income by selling review copies to a bookseller – every 
Monday, he’d stagger to the local station carrying two suitcases, catch the 
train to Charing Cross and proceed to Simmonds bookshop in the Strand, where 
he’d be given money to spend on “cigars, cognac and gentleman’s relish”. The 
arrangement worked well until the first of his Enderby novels was published, 
under the name Joseph Kell, and he made it the lead in a batch review. The 
review was no rave. “This is in many ways a dirty book,” it said, “and those of 
my readers with tender stomachs are advised to let it alone.” But his emphasis 
on the novel’s interest in sex was a come-on – a way of praising it with faint 
damns. And when the truth came to light, Burgess was sacked from the paper.

By the 1980s, when he was living abroad, reviewing fulfilled a different 
purpose – not as a source of income but as a way of staying in touch with life 
and literature in the UK. His energy was inexhaustible and his range of 
interests incomparable. The Tarot pack,The Pleasures of Gaelic Poetry, Princess 
Grace (the Monaco connection), Nadia Boulanger, the ethics of human 
biotechnology, the origins of analytical philosophy, monastic writings of the 
12th century – all were grist to his mill. He’d review a biography ofOrson 
Welles <https://www.theguardian.com/film/orsonwelles> one week and one about 
Robert Graves <https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-graves> the next. A 
history of pagans and Christians, then a history of British musical theatre. 
Language always interested him – a dictionary of the Khazars, a dictionary of 
Yiddish. And biographies, of course, no matter who the subject was – the Pope,
Leonardo <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/davinci>, Tchaikovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pyotr-tchaikovsky>, St Anselm, Boris 
Pasternak <https://www.theguardian.com/books/boris-pasternak>, Saddam Hussein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saddam-hussein>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fanthony-burgess-book-critic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F16%2F1424101831576%2Ffc22da49-1b49-4360-85ba-ac74a989d85a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blake%20Morrison%20on%20Anthony%20Burgess%20the%20critic%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98he%20aspired%20to%20know%20everything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fanthony-burgess-book-critic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blake%20Morrison%20on%20Anthony%20Burgess%20the%20critic%20%E2%80%93%20%E2%80%98he%20aspired%20to%20know%20everything%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fanthony-burgess-book-critic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F16%2F1424101831576%2Ffc22da49-1b49-4360-85ba-ac74a989d85a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Anthony Burgess in 1973. Photograph: Jean-Regis Rouston/Roger Viollet/Getty 
Images 
He was choosy about the fiction he reviewed, or we were choosy in what we sent 
him –Greene <https://www.theguardian.com/books/grahamgreene>, Naipaul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vsnaipaul>, Golding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamgolding>, Umberto Eco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/umbertoeco>, Muriel Spark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/murielspark>. Mostly he reviewed his seniors 
or contemporaries, but there were a couple of exceptions. He reviewedDavid Lodge
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/davidlodge>’s Nice Work and Martin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis>’s Money, for example, acclaiming 
Lodge as one of our finest living novelists, while ticking Amis off not just 
for failing to make the narrator likable but for allowing him 386 pages “when 
half of that might well have been more than enough”. He rarely reviewed poetry 
but his review ofSeamus Heaney <https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney>
’sSelected Poems in 1990 had astute things to say. “Some day we will talk 
of his greatness,” he said, disallowing greatness to the living.

He didn’t go in for hatchet jobs. Literary editors tend to like them, as 
do readers – it’s whatKarl Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/25/karl-miller> called “the 
attraction of detraction” – but Burgess discovered their pitfalls as a student 
at Manchester University in the late 1930s, with a splenetic review of Graves’s
Collected Poems. Graves had visited the university the previous year, and 
Burgess’s review included a portrait of Graves as a “burly six-foot-two 
red-faced farmer … flicking cigarette ends into the fire” and invariably 
missing the target – just as the poems did, said Burgess. That was too ad 
hominem for Graves, who wrote a letter in protest.

The experience taught Burgess to be less intemperate as a reviewer (though as 
a novelist he was always incurring libel suits). He also learned how hard it is 
to write even a bad book, with all the “untold misery” entailed 
(“tobacco-addiction, an over-reliance on caffeine and Dexedrine, piles, 
dyspepsia, chronic anxiety, sexual impotence”). Least of all did he feel able 
to attack fellow novelists, for fear of being accused of jealousy. The jealousy 
sometimes creeps in subtextually, between the lines, when he’s writing about 
those more praised than they deserve to be (ie, more than he is). WithJohn le 
Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre> for instance, whose 
merely “competent novels of espionage” suggest he has never heard ofJames Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>; or with William Golding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamgolding>, to whose Rites of Passage 
Burgess lost out for the Booker prize in 1980 and whose “banal” next novel,The 
Paper Men, is judged to disprove his publisher’s claims for his greatness.

Burgess was sparing about including personal material in his reviews, so that 
when he does it carries more weight. A biography ofJoseph Conrad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephconrad> led him to contrast the 
pampered life writers used to enjoy (valets, butlers, maids, gardeners, 
chauffeurs, etc) with his own: before sitting down to read it, he says, “I 
shopped in the supermarket, dragged three bags up three flights, peeled 
potatoes, cleaned brussels sprouts, put the joint in the oven, washed 
yesterday’s dishes, made the beds [and] swept the floor”. It was probably no 
exaggeration.

At the Observer, most of our contact with him was by phone. The hope was that 
he’d answer if you called him, but usually his wife, Liana, picked up and that 
would usually mean some sort of harangue from her about how poorly we were 
paying Burgess or how hard we were overworking him, and never mind that all 
this had been agreed with his agent. Eventually, Burgess would wrest the phone 
from her, and after a moan or two about his health or the uselessness of 
publishers, he’d agree to review whichever book we had in mind. I can’t ever 
remember him saying no.

I sometimes wonder if reviews didn’t fill a space for him that other novelists 
fill with short stories; incisiveness is required in both forms. Or perhaps it 
was the theatrical side of Burgess (as a teacher he directed plays) that his 
journalism expressed – a love of performance. Sometimes reviews fed directly 
into his work: struggling to finishEarthly Powers, he was sent a book about the 
life of St Nicholas of Bari, and its themes of betrayal and humiliation helped 
to clarify what happens to his protagonist. Book reviews exposed him to new 
ideas and writers. They also imposed a discipline that – aside fromA Clockwork 
Orange, the most heavily drafted and edited of his works – his fiction often 
lacks. Unlike his novels, his journalism is largely free of lavatorial humour, 
literary self-absorption and whatKingsley Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis> called “facetious seriousness”.

The literary-journalistic world in which Burgess flourished seems remote now. 
Today’s is more pluralist and fragmented – busier, too, with online reviews 
and blogs as well as book pages. Burgess claimed that the only response he ever 
had to the many reviews he wrote for the Yorkshire Post was from a woman 
disputing a passing claim he had made that British orchids have no smell. 
Reviews have little effect, he concluded, though a New Statesman review of one 
of his books once came in handy, by implying he was homosexual. At the time, a 
lady dentist who was treating his teeth had been making advances; when she 
proposed they make love in her surgery, he showed her the review, to prove 
she’d be wasting her time.

In an article in the spring of 1993, after the James Bulger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bulger> murder in Liverpool, the man who’d 
writtenA Clockwork Orange performed a remarkable volte face and mea culpa, 
deciding that violent films and books can have a corrupting influence. It was a 
typically thought-provoking cultural intervention. Six months later he was 
dead. But even the most ephemeral of his writings survive (along with 
his death-mask) in the archives of the Anthony Burgess Foundation in 
Manchester. They show him to be what Carlyle called a “professor of things in 
general”, a man who knew everything or aspired to know everything or carried 
off a brilliant pretence of knowing everything, and who did this best in his 
literary journalism. “We have our uses,” he said of book reviewers, if only for 
the conviction that “nothing is as important as the Box of Organised Knowledge, 
which is acronymised into Book.”

• The Observer / Anthony Burgess Prize for Arts Journalism 
<http://www.anthonyburgess.org/about-the-foundation/observer-competition> will 
be announced on 26 February.
 