
In 1911, the famed American medium Anna Eva Fay 
<http://www.themagicdetective.com/2011/09/life-of-anna-eva-fay.html> held 
a public seance at the London Coliseum, inviting audience members to ask 
questions that she would answer by channelling the dead. Seated in the 
auditorium was Violet Coward, whose beloved 11-year-old son, Noël, had just 
begun his stage career after Violet spotted an advert in the Daily Mirror 
looking for a "talented boy" to appear in a play called The Goldfish.

Violet was ambitious for her child and the Coward finances were precarious, so 
Noël's debut was welcome. But had she done the right thing in putting him on 
the stage so young? Violet decided to ask the opinion of Fay and those in the 
afterlife. The answer was unequivocal: "Keep him where he is! He is a great 
talent and will have a wonderful career!"

The prediction was spot on. Noël Coward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/21/kenneth-tynan-noel-coward-observer>
 went on to become one of the most successful playwrights, actors and 
entertainers of the 20th century. One of his most enduring hits is Blithe 
Spirit, which has just returned to London in a production starring Angela 
Lansbury. In this "light comedy about death", as Coward put it, theatre and 
spiritualism meet head-on. Written in just five days, and premiering at the 
Piccadilly theatre in 1941when a Britain at war seemed to be staring defeat in 
the face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/21/noel-coward-blithe-spirit-blitz>
, Blithe Spirit is a delicious comedy about a writer called Charles Condomine, 
who recently remarried after being widowed. His first wife, Elvira, comes back 
to haunt him and his new partner after a seance conducted by the eccentric 
medium Madame Arcati, played by Lansbury. "I shall be for ever grateful," said 
Coward, "for the almost psychic gift that enabled me to write Blithe Spirit 
during the darkest days of the war."
 Eva Fay, the 'High Priestess of Mysticism' 
So Coward's theatre career was founded on advice from the deceased, delivered 
by a medium who may have been every bit as delusional about her gifts as Madame 
Arcati. Throughout her career, Fay was denounced as a fake, most notably by the 
escapologist Harry Houdini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/mar/24/harry-houdini-google-doodle-137>
, who claimed she once confessed her fraudulence to him. Whatever the truth, 
there is no denying that Fay was a consummate show-woman, well aware that 
seance was a form of theatre, a visual spectacle. This made her a natural 
successor tothe Fox Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/oct/20/seances-and-science>, her 
fellow Americans and the founders of modern spiritualism, who in the mid-19th 
century were engaged to perform three times a day by the impresario PT Barnum.

The medium's task was to make visible what is invisible. Often they drew on 
music hall and popular theatre, using songs, ventriloquism, puppetry and 
comedy. There are clear parallels with later 20th-century performance art, with 
their use of their own bodies and their manifestations of ectoplasm. A few 
months after Blithe Spirit opened, a medium calledHelen Duncan 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/scottishhistory/modern/oddities_modern.shtml> 
held a public seance in Portsmouth, in which she apparently madea dead sailor 
from the HMS Barham <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HMS_Barham_(04)> materialise 
before the audience's eyes. Given that the Barham's sinking had not yet even 
been made public, this brought Duncan to the attention of the authorities, 
who brought her to trial on a charge of falsely claiming to procure spirits.

It's a charge that could perhaps have been laid at the door of Madame Arcati, 
although her sincerity is never in doubt inBlithe Spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/blithe-spirit> in the play: she escapes 
lightly, cycling blithely away from the Condomine house and all the troubles 
she has unleashed. Duncan was not so lucky: she was the last person in England 
to be prosecuted under the 1735 Witchcraft Act, receiving a nine-month prison 
sentence.

Despite this, many people in the audience believed what they saw and heard at 
Duncan's seances, according to theatre and social historianSimon Featherstone 
<http://www.dmu.ac.uk/about-dmu/academic-staff/art-design-humanities/simon-featherstone/simon-featherstone.aspx>
, although he says what they actually witnessed was "a theatrical process". He 
compares Duncan's act to "that of an old-fashioned variety artiste, designed to 
meet the needs of the audience". In a blitz-shattered London, Blithe Spirit was 
doing exactly the same in theatrical form, even if the novelist Graham Greene 
dismissed its "bad taste" in making light of death.
 Angela Lansbury as Madame Arcati in Blithe Spirit in New York in 2009. 
Photograph: Robert J Saferstein 
But then, theatre has always been a place to raise the dead and let ghosts 
walk, from Hamlet's father on the battlements to Banquo at the feast – and 
there is hardly a theatre in the country that doesn't claim to be haunted. 
"Reinventing the dead is one thing theatre and spiritualism share," says 
Featherstone. "They both involve the suspension of disbelief and the creation 
of illusions." He points tomagicians Maskelyne and Cooke 
<http://www.magicians-scrapbook.co.uk/maskelyne-and-cooke-house-of-mysteries/>, 
who took Victorian London by storm with their staged supernatural happenings 
involving theatrical trickery: "It was as if people wanted and enjoyed being 
deceived." That willingness to believe was played upon by mediums, many of whom 
saw spiritualism as just another branch of showbusiness, involving curtains, 
props, misdirection and in some cases machinery – the very paraphernalia of 
theatre itself.

Simon Higlett 
<http://www.stellarichards.com/index.php/clients/79-client/79-simon-higlett>, 
the designer of this new Blithe Spirit, has firm views on how to make ghosts 
walk. "The more technology involved, the worse the effect often is," he says. 
Every time I've worked on Blithe Spirit, there has been a conversation about 
whether you make Elvira look grey and ghostly. But in my experience, the less 
you do, the more effective it is." Although Higlett knows how to make rosebowls 
fly through the air, or books tumble from shelves, he says such trickery "fills 
me with dread, because modern audiences are always looking to see how it's 
done. In the past, people were happy not to know, to just wonder and believe."

When Coward wrote Blithe Spirit, the need to believe, particularly in an 
afterlife, was strong in a world that was being touched daily by death. The 
audience for early performances had to pick their way round a bomb crater to 
enter the theatre. Margaret Rutherford, who played Madame Arcati on stage and 
on screen, was herself a believer and initially refused the role because she 
saw the play as an attack on spiritualism. The producer Binkie Beaumont 
eventually persuaded her, but Rutherford always insisted that Blithe Spirit had 
to be taken seriously. "I regard this as a very serious play," she said, 
"almost a tragedy."

While Blithe Spirit is an outlandish comic fantasy, it has its origins in a 
bizarre true-life situation. In her bookKindred Spirits 
<http://www.stanford.edu/~castle/cgi-bin/wordpress/writing/books/kindred-spirits/>
, Terry Castle traces Coward's friendship with the lesbian author Radclyffe 
Hall and her lover, Una Troubridge. The two women were involved in a ghostly 
menage a trois, having begun an affair while Hall was still in a relationship 
with the salon singer Muriel Batten. When the spurned singer died suddenly, the 
pair – out of a need for forgiveness, perhaps, or mere curiosity – tried to 
contact Batten via seances conducted by Gladys Osborne Leonard. This woman may 
have been the inspiration for Madame Arcati.

Hall never saw Blithe Spirit. She was already ailing on its premiere, and died 
in 1943. But had Hall managed to catch a performance, says Castle, "one hopes 
she would have been capable of seeing the love – as well as the joke".

• Simon Callow on Noël Coward's blitz spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/21/noel-coward-blithe-spirit-blitz>

• Kenneth Tynan on demolishing Noël Coward – and then dining with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/21/kenneth-tynan-noel-coward-observer>
 