
The history of Jean-Paul Sartre’s refusal of the 1964 Nobel prize for 
literature (Silence broken on Dylan’s Nobel – after five days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/bob-dylan-website-acknowledges-nobel-prize-win-after-five-day-wait>
, 21 October) is complicated. Sartre did in fact get wind of his imminent 
Nobelling from an article inLe Figaro littéraire shortly before the Swedish 
Academy was to announce it, and wrote immediately to the Nobel committee to ask 
them to revoke their choice. His letter was misaddressed and failed to reach 
the committee on time, and the rest is history, up to a point. In 1966 the 
critic Max-Pol Fouchet argued that Sartre, who refused all honours, declined 
the Nobel in defence of “the solitude of the revolutionary writer”, in 
denunciation of “worldly and external self-importance”. Sartre set this out 
movingly in his funeral oration for the Italian communist leader and 
revolutionary writer Palmiro Togliatti, who died on 21 August 1964, a few 
months before the Nobel episode.
Bruce Ross-Smith
Oxford

Another side of Bob Dylan’s doctorate | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/24/another-side-of-bob-dylans-doctorate>
• Alfred Nobel made his fortune from arms and explosives. In Masters of War, 
Dylan sang about “You that build all the guns / You that build the death planes 
/ You that build all the bombs.” The song’s final verse includes the lines “And 
I hope that you die / And your death’ll come soon.” I hope Dylan stands 
alongside Sartre in refusing this tainted award (Dylan thinks twice about Nobel 
acknowledgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/21/bob-dylan-unacknowledges-nobel-prize-literature-win-removed-website>
, 21 October).
Andy Ashenhurst
Canterbury

• Before making fools of themselves by awarding the Nobel prize for literature 
toBob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan>, the Nobel committee 
should have taken into account the experience of St Andrews University, which 
in 2004 made the songster a Doctor of Music for “his outstanding contribution 
to musical and literary culture”.

Arriving with his entourage 50 minutes into a 90-minute ceremony, Dylan sat 
glassy-eyed on the stage, yawning occasionally as the speaker burbled on about 
how his music “moved everything on to a place it never expected to go and left 
the deepest imprint on human consciousness”, even comparing him to Pablo 
Picasso. After which, ignoring the university choir and its rendition of 
Blowin’ in the Wind, and without a word of thanks or farewell, the new doctor 
and his train left the building.
Harry Watson
Edinburgh 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• The second letter was amended on 25 October 2016. An earlier version said 
Einsten refused the Nobel prize; he accepted the prize, although he did not 
attend the award ceremony.
 