
The bodies of 34 migrants who were abandoned by people smugglers while trying 
to reach neighbouringAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> were 
found in the Niger desert last week, authorities have said.

“Thirty-four people, including five men, nine women and 20 children, died 
trying to cross the desert,” Niger’s interior ministry said in a statement on 
Wednesday.

“They probably died of thirst, as is often the case, and they were found near 
Assamaka,” a security source said, referring to a border post betweenNiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/niger> and Algeria.

The migrants were abandoned by people smugglers, the statement added, and only 
two of the bodies had so far been identified – a man and a 26-year-old woman, 
both from Niger.

Temperatures in the region can reach 42C (108F), with blinding sandstorms 
tearing across the desert. The conditions mean that only a fraction of those 
who die trying to cross the area are ever found.

Thousands of children travelling alone from Africa to Europe, says Unicef
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/14/thousands-of-migrant-refugee-children-travelling-alone-from-africa-to-europe-says-unicef>
Thousands of migrants have arrived in Algeria in recent years, mostly from 
neighbouringMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> and Niger.

Libya used to play host to the majority of migrants from sub-Saharan Africa, 
but since that countrydescended into chaos following the death of Muammar 
Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/10/libyan-forces-fight-street-battles-with-isis-for-control-of-sirte>
, Algeria has become the main destination.

Many pass through Algeria as they head for Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, but more than 7,000 migrants 
from Niger, mostly women and children, were returned to their home country in 
2015 as part of an agreement between the two countries.

Europe has recently turned its attention to trying to curb the number of 
illegal arrivals from Africa, after adeal with Ankara in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-deal-turkey-migrants-refugees-q-and-a>
 cut the number of people trying to cross from Turkey.

More than 2,814 people have drowned trying to reach Europe since January, 
according to the UN refugee agency, prompting urgent efforts to tackle the 
problem.

A new proposal mooted last week involves using EU funds to promote private 
investment of up to €60bn in countries where many migrants come from – 
Ethiopia, Niger, Nigeria, Mali and Senegal, as well as Jordan and Lebanon.

The European commission also wants to speed up readmission deals with African 
countries and with Pakistan and Afghanistan, to make it easier to send back 
people who are not granted refugee status.

The commission is also set to unveil a plan for a “blue card” system for 
skilled migrants to come to Europe legally.

The aim is to reduce the incentive for people to risk their lives travelling 
to the continent on fragile boats.
 