
Bonnie Greer <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bonnie-greer> tells me, with 
pride, that she doesn’t really engage much with contemporary culture. Or, more 
accurately, she doesn’t remember much once it’s been and gone, doesn’t watch 
TV, and doesn’t go out in the evenings. “I spend most of my day alone,” she 
says, “and I never go anywhere. Nope.” She doesn’t recognise the actors who 
occasionally approach her in the street and she hates dinner parties, because 
she can’t stand the chat.

“I’m a curious person,” the critic and writer says, several times. “I spent 
half my life apologising for wanting to go to the Royal Opera House not a blues 
or jazz club.” She began reading Ibsen and Chekhov a couple of years ago, after 
taking what sounds like aMyers-Briggs personality test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2013/mar/19/myers-briggs-test-unscientific>
, which told her: “I didn’t really know who I was.”

She took to the Russian writers with brio and we’re meeting today in a busy 
London restaurant to discuss her new adaptation of The Cherry Orchard, which 
she has reimagined and relocated to a bougie, black, middle-class retreat in 
Michigan calledThe Hotel Cerise 
<http://www.stratfordeast.com/whats-on/all-shows/the-hotel-cerise/>. Although a 
contemporary African American family takes the place of Russian aristocrats at 
the dawn of the 20th century, Greer insists The Hotel Cerise is “not a black 
version of Chekhov”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff79b710773711bb9d5e9724ed019247514d252fd%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bonnie%20Greer%3A%20'Black%20Lives%20Matter%20is%20a%20big%20fail%20for%20my%20generation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bonnie%20Greer%3A%20%27Black%20Lives%20Matter%20is%20a%20big%20fail%20for%20my%20generation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff79b710773711bb9d5e9724ed019247514d252fd%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
 Actors in rehearsal for The Hotel Cerise … from left. Abhin Galeya, Madeline 
Appiah and Lacharne Jolly. Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey 
When I wake up in the morning, I’m just myself. It’s only when I leave the 
door that I become a black woman to the world

Defining it that way, she explains, feels reductive: the point is to show how 
the mechanics of Chekhov’s writing can be easily bent to accommodate an 
inclusive perspective on love, loss and the rest. “When I wake up in the 
morning,” she explains, “I’m just myself. It’s only when I leave the front door 
that I become a black woman to the world.”

Greer, now aged 68, was born in Chicago, the eldest of seven siblings to a 
mother run ragged looking after them all, and a father who worked in a factory 
and was stationed in Britain during the second world war. She moved to the UK 
in 1986 to work in the arts and has defined herself as a playwright ever since, 
with works including Munda Negra (1993) and Jitterbug (2001). She writes all 
day, “often till 3am”, and is still finishing The Hotel Cerise when we meet.

She married her husband, a solicitor, in 1993 and they lived near Notting Hill 
for over a decade. “We had to move because I couldn’t stand what the area had 
become – couldn’t stand it.” She repeats this four times. “I couldn’t stand the 
bankers, thegentrification <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gentrification>
.” The couple moved to Soho, a prohibitively expensive area that has itself 
been undergoing a(much-protested) gentrification for some years now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/25/the-slow-death-of-soho-farewell-to-londons-sleazy-heartland>
. “But what I get to see is passing traffic!” says Greer. “There’s still 
different kinds of people coming through, it’s more cosmopolitan.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e7cd87ddc8484b7628aa336b39011609cec272%2F0_132_2500_1535%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bonnie%20Greer%3A%20'Black%20Lives%20Matter%20is%20a%20big%20fail%20for%20my%20generation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bonnie%20Greer%3A%20%27Black%20Lives%20Matter%20is%20a%20big%20fail%20for%20my%20generation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e7cd87ddc8484b7628aa336b39011609cec272%2F0_132_2500_1535%2F2500.jpg>
 Bonnie Greer, far left, attends rehearsals. Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey 
I tell black women all the time: 'Don't apologise for yourself and keep your 
hair nappy. Make sure you are heard'

Greer is barely five feet, but projects a grand and glamorous life: she has 
often been the go-to voice called upon to represent minority women on TV and 
radio, she has sat on the boards of theBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum>, the Royal Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/royal-opera-house>, Theatre Royal 
Stratford East <http://www.stratfordeast.com/>, was appointed an OBE in 2010 
and is now the chancellor of Kingston University. For a couple of years, she 
wrote a weekly culture column for the Mail on Sunday, dotted with dispatches 
from parties and premieres.


“That’s not really me,” she explains. “I spent most of my life sleeping on 
couches. I move in that world, but I’m not of it. When I first came here 30 
years ago, it was shocking to me that people would talk about black British 
people in front of me, they were dismissive and would trivialise things because 
I was from America.”


She became a British citizen almost 20 years ago but, I guess, probably quite 
enjoys often being the only black person in the room. “Yeah,” she says. “I tell 
you why: because it alters the space. It changes things up and I tell black 
women all the time, ‘Don’t apologise for yourself and keep your hair nappy – 
whatever that means to you. Never apologise, make sure you are heard.’”

And Greer is certainly heard: she has a beautiful voice, perfectly paced 
mellifluous honey that goes a long way to distract from the fact that she often 
speaks in tangents and non-sequiturs. Conversation zips along, taking in her 
obsession with the Obamas and the art of waitressing, to the trouble with 
Theresa May and the faith she has in the young.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0640e1fd8138a6ec7d98703446e797f4126d228f%2F0_0_5792_7790%2F5792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bonnie%20Greer%3A%20'Black%20Lives%20Matter%20is%20a%20big%20fail%20for%20my%20generation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bonnie%20Greer%3A%20%27Black%20Lives%20Matter%20is%20a%20big%20fail%20for%20my%20generation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fbonnie-greer-black-lives-matter-hotel-cerise-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0640e1fd8138a6ec7d98703446e797f4126d228f%2F0_0_5792_7790%2F5792.jpg>
 ‘Millennials will save us’ … Bonnie Greer in London. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Guardian 
“Millennials, I think, are gonna save us – if they can get jobs and keep their 
body and souls together. I see a lot of repetition of my own life experience, 
seeing things come back again.” Like what? “Black Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> is a rerun. 
It’s a replay of what we did as student activists in the 60s, theBlack Panthers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/14/fifty-years-black-panthers-formed-black-lives-matter-revolutionary>
. I understand it because I’ve been through it and seen it.”

Does the fact that #BLM even exists not represent a failure on the part of her 
generation? “Oh yes, a big fail. Big fail. People of my generation did what 
everyone does. People get tired, say, ‘I want to have some kids, a roof over my 
head and a paycheque.’ I never did that, but I don’t blame my friends who did.”

Strangely, for someone who made her name on television review shows, Greer 
claims to have never watched herself on TV – “I became a critic because I have 
a big mouth and opinions” – not even thenotorious Question Time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=afE05e6n4Zk> from 2009, when she appeared with 
Nick Griffin, then leader of the BNP. “I’ve never watched it,” she says. Yet 
she wroteYes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/23/bonnie-greer-nick-griffin-opera> 
for the Royal Opera House based on the experience? “I remembered my emotions 
sitting there, though. I remembered my feelings, the nerves up to it, the 
pressure.”

She also considers herself to have low self-esteem, but is such good, 
garrulous company, I can only assume she’s joking. “I’m extremely shy,” she 
insists. Oh, come on, Bonnie! I tell her I don’t believe her: we are running at 
more than double the allotted interview time at this point and she hasn’t had a 
chance to eat more than three bites of her lunch – mushroom burger, fries – and 
I’m not even a quarter of the way through my questions.

“Why would I lie to you?” she says. When are you shy? “I’m always shy.” In 
what situation? “In every situation.”

At this precise moment, she spots the play’s publicist and waves her over with 
a huge, emphatically warm: “Hi!” They chat briefly, as Greer’s lunch is sent 
back to the kitchen to be reheated. I tell her it’s a shame she dislikes 
socialising: she seems born to it. “Oh, never. People think it’s personal. With 
you I’m having a ball because you’re real, most people …” She pauses while 
rummaging around for a level of diplomacy. “Most people operate from personas. 
I’m fascinated by personas.”

 * The Hotel Cerise is at Theatre Royal Stratford East, London 
<http://www.stratfordeast.com/whats-on/all-shows/the-hotel-cerise/>, from 20 
October-12 November. Box office: 020-8534 0310.
 