
It started as an idea at a kitchen table between friends frustrated by the 
limitations of algorithm-driven digital recommendations and star ratings of 
books that they believed had encouraged a “deep engagement with the shallow” 
over the last 10 years.

Two years on, the cofounder of the Folio prize Andrew Kidd and Silicon Valley 
veteran Ayesha Karim hopeAlexi <https://alexibooks.com/>, an app backed by 
illustrious authors as well as influential critics, will bring to the attention 
of “passionate readers” books that on launch were eclipsed by heavily promoted 
rivals.

'Amazon without Amazon': one-hour book delivery service launched
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/14/amazon-without-amazon-one-hour-book-delivery-service-launched>
In return for £1.99 a week, Alexi members have access to the personal 
recommendations of a notable list of writers including Man Booker winners John 
Banville and Peter Carey, as well as Ali Smith, John le Carré andBret Easton 
Ellis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/breteastonellis>. Their handpicked 
selections include books that inspired them, as well as lost classics and 
undiscovered gems.

Kidd, a former publisher at Picador, told the Guardian: “There are so many 
books that are just behind the curtain. We wanted to create the digital 
equivalent of a good bookshop for readers not fortunate enough to live near 
one, a place where they can find a more surprising range of books than is on 
offer on Amazon or in the chains.”

Karim said she and Kidd were excited to join “a growing movement that is 
intent on offering people a way out of the rabbit hole of algorithms and 
reductive five-star ratings.”

The crowdfunded app aims to make a case for books as a means of engagement not 
just escape, the founders added. “We were frustrated that all the same books 
were being promoted at people, and what we wanted to create was a digital 
equivalent to a bookseller who personally recommends books to customers,” said 
Kidd, a former publisher of Picador and literary agent at Aiken Alexander.

The surprising success of backlist titles such as Stoner by John Williams and 
Austin Wright’s novel Tony & Susan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/17/tony-and-susan-austin-wright>, 
recently made into the film Nocturnal Animals, gave the developers confidence 
that an appetite exists for a digital outlet that can recommend books beyond 
the handful of titles given prominence elsewhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbook-choice-app-alexi-aims-to-free-readers-from-algorithm-rabbit-hole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe36fb91d2786347b3207000bccfbebb720db39c%2F0_0_1242_2208%2F1242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Book-choice%20app%20Alexi%20%20aims%20to%20free%20readers%20from%20'algorithm%20rabbit%20hole'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbook-choice-app-alexi-aims-to-free-readers-from-algorithm-rabbit-hole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Book-choice%20app%20Alexi%20%20aims%20to%20free%20readers%20from%20%27algorithm%20rabbit%20hole%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbook-choice-app-alexi-aims-to-free-readers-from-algorithm-rabbit-hole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe36fb91d2786347b3207000bccfbebb720db39c%2F0_0_1242_2208%2F1242.jpg>
 The app is currently optimised for iOS, with an Android version to come in 
2017. Photograph: Alexi 
The app, which was released as a beta in 2015, is currently optimised for 
iPhone and iPad, with an Android version coming in 2017. From launch, it will 
offer members access to weekly recommendations from well-known authors and 
critics.

As well as being backed by authors, the app has strong support from publishers 
including Bloomsbury, House of Zeus, Pan Macmillan and Europa. Available to 
readers everywhere outside North America, which it hopes to include in 2017, 
its “handpicked mix” includes novels, short stories, history, politics, poetry 
and reportage.

Kidd believes the shock caused by the recent Brexit vote and Trump election 
has left readers hungry for high-quality writing that takes them beyond 
familiar material. “People are fixed in their own echo chamber and hearing 
their own opinion reflected back,” he explained. The app aims to help readers 
break out of their groups and find books that challenge and inform as well as 
entertain.

“It may be unfashionable … to look to experts for opinions, but readers want 
to hear what experts have to say. And authors are some of the most expert 
people out there,” he said.
 