
John Banville
Novelist

Robert Macfarlane's The Old Ways: A Journey on Foot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780241143810/the-old-ways-a-journey-on-foot>
 (Hamish Hamilton £20) is a wonderful book – literally, a book full of wonders 
– in which he takes to the world's pathways, from chalk downs and an estuarial 
mirror-world in England, to Palestine, Spain, the Himalayas. He has a poet's 
eye, and a prose style that will make many a novelist burn with envy. In a 
barbarous time, Macfarlane reminds us of what it is to be civilised.

La Folie Baudelaire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781846142901/la-folie-baudelaire>
 (Allen Lane £35) by Roberto Calasso is an extraordinarily ingenious and 
learned study of Baudelaire and Baudelaire's Paris, "capital of the 19th 
century", and of the invention of modernism in literature and, especially, in 
painting. Only a mind as various as Calasso's would think to compare Manet's
Olympia with a photograph by Weegee. One had thought they didn't write books 
like this any more, but Calasso does.

Ali Smith
Novelist

The great Brazilian writer Clarice Lispector once wrote that she wanted her 
writing to be like a punch in the stomach to her readers, "for life is a punch 
in the stomach". This year the life in Jenni Fagan's debut novel,The Panopticon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780434021772/the-panopticon>
 (Heinemann £12.99), knocked the breath out of me, Peter Hobbs'sIn the Orchard, 
the Swallows 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780571279272/in-the-orchard-the-swallows>
(Faber £10.99) picked me up and dusted me down, and a reread of Brigid Brophy's 
1967 novelThe King of a Rainy Country 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780957410701/the-king-of-a-rainy-country>
 (Coelacanth £10) boosted me better than any Omega 3.

Wendy Cope
Poet

My discovery of the year was the American novelist Shalom Auslander, who is 
brave, outrageous and very funny. I recommend his 2009 memoirForeskin's Lament 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/religion/9780330453547/foreskins-lament>
, as well as his 2012 novel,Hope: A Tragedy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447207665&INTCMP=ILCBKSBTN3949>
 (both Picador £7.99).

Three of my favourite crime writers brought out excellent new books this year: 
A Room Full of Bones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9781849163705/a-room-full-of-bones-a-ruth-galloway-investigation>
 (Quercus £7.99) by Elly Griffiths,Kind of Cruel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9780340980712/kind-of-cruel> 
(Hodder £7.99) by Sophie Hannah andBroken Harbour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9780340977637/broken-harbour> 
(Hodder £12.99) by Tana French. And I enjoyed Glyn Maxwell'sOn Poetry 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/stage/9781849430852/on-poetry> 
(Oberon Masters £12.99) – occasionally mad but very interesting.

Julian Fellowes
Actor, novelist, screenwriter and director

I suspect the book that has haunted me the most this year was the life of that 
queen of the silent screen,Louise Brooks: A Biography 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/film/9780816637812/louise-brooks-a-biography>
 (University of Minnesota £17), by Barry Paris. I have seldom read so lyrical a 
tale of self-destruction. When she was a girl, my mother used to be mistaken 
for Louise Brooks and so I have always felt a sort of investment in her, but I 
was unprepared for this heartbreaking tale of what-might-have-been.

My novel would probably be The Butterfly Cabinet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780755370702/the-butterfly-cabinet>
 (Headline Review £7.99) by Bernie McGill, which is based, I think, on a true 
story, about the darkness inside all of us, and how politeness and education 
will not always prevent us hurting even those who need us most. McGill has the 
ability to enter into the brain and heart of her characters and so to make us 
sympathise with people who commit acts we abhor.

I also very much enjoyed Anne De Courcy's wonderfully researched book, The 
Fishing Fleet: Husband-Hunting in the Raj 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780297863823/the-fishing-fleet-husband-hunting-in-the-raj>
 (W&N £20), about English girls going out to India during the Raj to find a 
husband, and the challenges for those who were successful. Her detail is 
fascinating, a real window on a set of beliefs and values, held strongly within 
living memory, and yet as distant from us as the man in the moon.

Adam Gopnik
Writer and essayist

Much the saddest literary event of the year was the death in February of 
Wisława Szymborska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/feb/02/wislawa-szymborska>, the matchless 
Polish poet of minor circumstances and major meanings. Rereading her work 
remains a daily revelation of how much light can be found in, so to speak, the 
navel lint of life – and has any poet ever suffered less in translation, not a 
sound seems out of place? All the sadder and more instructive, therefore, to 
read Anne Applebaum'sIron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe, 1944-1956 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780713998689>
(Allen Lane £25) and be reminded of the brutal, if not always fatal, historical 
circumstances in which Szymborska came of age. Applebaum is not so much 
polemical as just pained by all that happened; her essential revelation – that 
Marxist ideology, mad though it seems, really mattered even for the 
mediocrities who enforced it – is a useful reminder for anyone still inclined 
to imagine that ideas don't make history. Szymborska makes a brief appearance 
in reference to a couple of hushed-up Stalinist odes, a reminder, too, that 
history can force terrible choices even on the best of us. We're lucky to 
escape it, and them, when we can.

Sam Jordison
Writer and journalist

Denis Johnson's slender novella Train Dreams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847086617/train-dreams> 
(Granta £12.99) took just a few hours to read – but I'm sure it will haunt me 
ever after. It's a howl against emptiness, against time and against the 
relentless march of technology – and it resonates long and loud. The fact that 
this was on the shortlist for the Pulitzer prize this year makes the jury's 
decision to withhold it all the more baffling. It should have won.

Dogma <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781612190464/dogma> 
(Melville House £9.99) by Lars Iyer is the kind of book that we are always told 
never gets published any more: uncompromisingly intellectual, passing strange 
and absurdly funny. If Lars Iyer hadn't already writtenSpurious 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781935554288/spurious>, it 
would be possible to call his second novel a unique event. As it is, it's just 
more of the same, only better. Iyer's weird talent continues to grow, and the 
misadventures of his miserable characters are starting to seem like the 
brightest things in modern British fiction.

In Hawthorn & Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847087416/hawthorn-and-child>
 (Granta £12.99), when one of Keith Ridgway's narrators leads you through an 
industrial wasteland to a "fetid dark place full of shit", it feels as if you 
have reached the heart of this singularly claustrophobic and bleak collection 
of interlocking stories. Yet there's something exhilarating about these 
missives from the criminal shadows of north London. They're written so well, 
with such intensity and such insight that they set you purring – even as they 
raise a hammer behind your head.

Jackie Kay
Poet and novelist

Artful 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780241145401/artful> 
(Hamish Hamilton £20) by Ali Smith is a revelation; a new kind of book 
altogether, a book that defies categorisation and leaps out of every box anyone 
could try and put it in; a book that marries fiction to nonfiction, literary 
criticism to essay; a book that is as serious as it is witty, as light as it is 
enlightening.Artful could have only been written by Ali Smith. It will open 
doors for writers; a kind ofA Room of One's Own 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780141018980/a-room-of-ones-own>
 for today's readers. Only Smith won't stay in one room. An intimate study of 
grief,Artful makes you glad to be alive.

Adam Mars-Jones
Writer

I read three uncompromising novels this year, books that showed no sign of 
having been cooked up in the Laboratory for Disguised Sequels that supplies a 
lot of publishing product. They deserve a readership for the excellent reason 
that they haven't been designed to home in on an existing one. Kirsty Gunn'sThe 
Big Music 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jul/27/big-music-kirsty-gunn-review> 
(Faber £20) takes the bold step of using its subject matter, classical Scottish 
bagpipe music, as a formal model.

IJ Kay's Mountains of the Moon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224093767>
 (Jonathan Cape £16.99) is a startling first novel, exhilarating though full of 
pain and damage. I suppose Sally Gardner's alternate-universe nightmareMaggot 
Moon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781471400049>
 (Hot Key £10.99) is for "young adults", but it treats them as just that, 
adults. Not every clever 16-year-old is likely to enjoy a story so bleak, but 
why should the ones that will be fobbed off with something watered down?

Elizabeth Day
Observer writer

I was riveted by Zadie Smith's NW 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241144145>
(Hamish Hamilton £18.99), a brilliant piece of writing that captures the 
essence of London, the complexities of women, the nuance of class and the 
strangeness of searching for one's identity while never losing its sense of 
humour. It should have been shortlisted for every prize going.

When it Happens to You 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do> (Simon & Schuster 
£10), by Molly Ringwald – yes,that Molly Ringwald – is poignant, funny and 
moving. I can pay no greater compliment than to say it reminded me, in parts, of
Anne Tyler <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/anne-tyler>.

And lastly, Jonathan Lee's second novel, Joy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780434020423>
 (William Heinemann £12.99), charts the final day in the life of a high-flying 
young lawyer. Lee writes with extraordinary vividness, with prose so sharply 
defined it takes your breath away.

Oliver James
Psychologist and author

Nikolas Andreyev's A Moth on the Fence: Memoirs of Russia, Estonia, 
Czechoslovakia and Western Europe 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Moth-Fence-Memoirs-Estonia-Czechoslovakia/dp/1906164029>
 (Hodgson Press £12.99) is grippng and revelatory of life in 1930s middle 
Europe, between the wars and in the run-up to the second world war.

More Tales from the Landings, edited by Sarah Stacey and Alex Allan (
Rehabilitation for Addicted Prisoners Trust <http://www.rapt.org.uk/>, 
suggested donation £5: for a copy call 020-7582 4677 or email 
info@rapt.org.uk), is a brilliant use of firsthand accounts of how Rapt, the 
drug rehab prison programme, can completely transform lives – very uplifting 
and informative of the true causes of both crime and addiction.

I found At Last 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/may/08/at-last-edward-st-aubyn-review?INTCMP=SRCH>
 (Picador £7.99) by Edward St Aubyn to be the best-written account of how to 
convert the lead of childhood adversity into the gold of volition, concluding a 
sparkling quintuplet of books.

Peter Conrad
Observer writer

My pick is a pair of bulky but wonderfully enjoyable homages to favourite 
arts, both published by Allen Lane – David Thomson'sThe Big Screen: The Story 
of the Movies and What They Did to Us 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/07/big-screen-david-thomson-review> 
(£25) is a startling analysis of what happens to us in the darkness as we dream 
with eyes open while watching movies, andA History of Opera: The Last 400 Years 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780713996333>
 (£30) by Carolyn Abbate and Roger Parker ingeniously retraverses the form's 
development while helping to explain its intense, irresistible emotional power.

Colin Thubron
Travel writer and novelist

Robert Macfarlane's powerfully evocative The Old Ways: A Journey on Foot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/10/old-ways-robert-macfarlane-review> 
follows the tracks and drove-roads which are our forgotten inheritance. InThe 
Man Within My Head: Graham Greene, My Father and Me 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408828755>
 (Bloomsbury £16.99), Pico Iyer reflects poetically on his affinity with Graham 
Greene; while Benjamin Myers'sChrist the Stranger: the Theology of Rowan 
Williams 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Christ-Stranger-Theology-Williams-Introduction/dp/056759971X>
 (T&T Clark International £14.99) beautifully illuminates the exacting theology 
of the departing Archbishop of Canterbury.

Ian Thomson
Author

In Extreme Metaphors: Interviews with JG Ballard, 1967-2008 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780007454853/extreme-metaphors>
 (Fourth Estate £25) we learn of Ballard's enduring love of the south of France 
(an intoxicating mix of "garlic, Gauloises, shit and perfume"), Graham Greene, 
disused football stadiums and games of contract bridge. Impeccably edited, the 
book serves as a valuable coda to the work of one of the strangest and most 
haunted imaginations in English literature.

JG Nichols devoted 10 years to his magnificent new translation of Dante's 
brimstone epicThe Divine Comedy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9781847492463/the-divine-comedy>
 (Alma Classics £20). All life is written in Dante's burning pages, and Nichols 
has done him proud.

Ali Shaw
Novelist

Full of beachcombers, child giants and drowned lovers called back from the 
depths, Lucy Wood'sDiving Belles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fantasy/9781408816851/diving-belles> 
(Bloomsbury £14.99) were enchanting short stories about ordinary lives brushed 
by magic. I also loved Luke Pearson's joyous Hilda and the Bird Parade 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781907704482>
 (Nobrow £11.95), a beautifully drawn (literally and figuratively) comic about 
a little girl and her single mother adapting to life in a mysterious city.

Mohsin Hamid
Novelist

In nonfiction, two books stood out for me: Pankaj Mishra's From the Ruins of 
Empire 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846144783>
 (Allen Lane £20), a superb history of Asia; and Leonard Mlodinow'sSubliminal: 
The Revolution of the New Unconscious and What it Teaches Us About Ourselves 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781846145964/subliminal-the-revolution-of-the-new-unconscious-and-what-it-teaches-us-about-ourselves>
 (Allen Lane £20), a mind-bending introduction to cognitive neuroscience. 
Fiction-wise, I read a lot of classic sci-fi – Philip K Dick, William Gibson, 
Neal Stephenson, Olaf Stapledon'sStar Maker – but none of it was published this 
year.

Salley Vickers
Novelist and critic

Richard Ford's Canada 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408836569/canada> 
(Bloomsbury £12.99) was my novel of the year. A bizarrely credible tragedy 
conveyed through a superbly realised damaged consciousness. In nonfictionThe 
Pinecone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9780571269501/the-pinecone> 
(Faber £20) by Jenny Uglow was absorbing, illuminating and brilliantly crafted. 
The surprise treat wasDoppler (Head of Zeus £7.99 – out 1 Dec) by Erlend Loe, 
wonderfully subversive, funny and original.

Benjamin Zephaniah
Poet

The Marlowe Papers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2012/may/10/the-marlowe-papers-literary-dialogue>
 (Sceptre £20) by Ros Barber really blew me away. Barber reimagines Christopher 
Marlowe as a gentle, thoughtful man, who wasn't murdered in a pub, and was not 
the drunken thug that many make him out to be. Academics can argue about 
Shakespeare authorship, but whatever you think of that question, this is a 
great (big) narrative poem. Accessible but thoughtful, intelligent but funny.

The People Speak <http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/0857864459> (Canongate £17.99) by 
Colin Firth and Anthony Arnove should be on the school curriculum. It's a 
collection of radical writings and speeches that remind us that riots are 
nothing new, and that rising up against the government used to be a great 
English tradition. Sometimes I feel lonely being a political poet, sometimes I 
wonder if I should just give it all up, do comedy, and go shopping like 
everyone else, but after reading this I was reminded of my roots.

William Dalrymple
Historian and writer

Faramerz Dabhoiwala's The Origins of Sex: A History of the First Sexual 
Revolution 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846144929>
 (Allen Lane £25) is a fascinating look at the 18th-century sexual revolution. 
It is my favourite sort of history book, where detailed primary research is 
wrapped in fine prose and an effortless sense of narrative.

I also adored Artemis Cooper's biography of my favourite travel writer, 
Patrick Leigh Fermor: An Adventure 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/oct/21/leigh-fermor-adventure-cooper-review>
 (John Murray £25). For many of us, Paddy's description of walking through 
midwinter 1930s Germany inA Time of Gifts has the status of a sacred text, and 
in her magnificent new biography Cooper has left the perfect memorial to this 
remarkable man, which is as full of joie-de-vivre as its subject. My favourite 
book this year, however, was by Leigh Fermor's true heir: Robert Macfarlane.The 
Old Ways: A Journey on Foot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/jun/10/old-ways-robert-macfarlane-review>
, a search for the ancient routes that criss-cross the landscape, shows how far 
Macfarlane is capable of out-writing almost any other prose stylist of his 
generation, and is, in my humble opinion, a work of near-genius.

Caitlin Moran
Broadcaster, critic and columnist

Like everyone in Britain, I saw out my post-Olympic comedown crying over Clare 
Balding'sMy Animals and Other Family 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670921461>
 (Viking £20) – one of the most cheerfully told descriptions of an essentially 
loveless childhood I've ever read. Similarly,Swimming Studies 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846144943>
 (Penguin £20) by Leanne Shapton was about wanting to be an Olympic swimmer in 
the 90s – vivid with chlorine-bleached swimsuits, and post‑match sorrow.

I'm 50 pages into Danny Baker's Going to Sea in a Sieve 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297863403>
 (W&N £18.99) and it's making me bark. Shirley Hughes's first novel, for kids –
Hero on a Bicycle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781406336115>
(Walker £6.99) – about the second world war in Italy, is citrus-oil stinging 
and bright. And I wouldn't eat if it weren't for Nigella Lawson (Nigellissima 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701187330>
, C&W £26) and Yotam Ottolenghi (Jerusalem 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091943745>
, Ebury £27), so thank God they both put out books this year.

Julie Myerson
Author and critic

Emily Perkins's The Forrests 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408809235/the-forrests> 
(Bloomsbury £12.99) takes you straight into the hearts and minds of a single 
family over a lot of years. With the spark, verve and emotional mischief-making 
that has almost become her trademark, she creates something that is neither 
quite comedy nor quite tragedy but – exactly like real life – an uneasy blend 
of both. It's a dazzling achievement – honest and unsparing about marriage, 
babies, sex and death.

David Vann's Dirt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780434021963/dirt> 
(Heinemann £12.99) will not be to everyone's taste – a family horror story that 
grabs you by the throat and keeps hold till the very last page. But it's the 
kind of novel you surface from with a real sense of excitement about what 
fiction can do – and it reaffirms Vann as one of the most darkly talented and 
unsettling writers working today.

Stuart Evers
Novelist and critic

Karl Ove Knausgaard's A Death in the Family 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781846554674/a-death-in-the-family>
 (Harvill Secker £17.99) didn't feel much like a masterpiece after the first 50 
or so pages; but by its end it was difficult to know how else to describe it. 
Meticulously detailed, harrowing, oddly beautiful, its depiction of a family's 
disintegration is one of the most powerful pieces of writing I've read in years.

Greg Baxter's The Apartment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781844882861/the-apartment> 
(Penguin £12.99) was one of two great Irish novels this year(Hawthorn & Child 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781847087416/hawthorn-and-child>
 by Keith Ridgway the other). In a fictional European capital, an American 
veteran looks for a new apartment, aided by a woman with whom he may or may not 
be in love. It is a dark and sinewy novel, written with sparse clarity and 
affecting subtlety.

Reminiscent of John Cheever and James Salter, Niven Govinden's Black Bread 
White Beer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780007503179/black-bread-white-beer>
 (The Friday Project 99p – Kindle edition) follows a couple in the aftermath of 
a miscarriage. It is a slender novel, but one that lingers, Govinden's 
shimmering prose picking out the unravelling of a loving relationship in the 
most heartbreaking of ways.

Craig Raine
Poet

Christopher Reid's Nonsense 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571281282>
 (Faber £12.99) was, as usual with this exceptionally gifted poet, a reliable 
source of pleasure – grave, deft, subtle, oblique, surprising, touching. No 
other poetry this year came anywhere near it. I was diverted and intrigued by 
Stephen Spender'sNew Selected Journals 1939-1995 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571237579>
 (Faber £45), edited by Lara Feigel and John Sutherland (with Natasha Spender). 
Everyone is so used to Spender's charming, self-effacing, self-ironising 
persona that his acerbic animadversions here – on Auden, on Brodsky, for 
example – are breathtakingly candid. "Did I really like Wystan?"

Philip French
Film critic, the Observer

Michael Frayn's brilliantly plotted Skios 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780571281411/skios> (Faber 
£15.99), set in and around a plausibly farcical cultural centre in Greece, is 
laugh-aloud funny, as fine as anything his mentor Wodehouse ever wrote. In his 
hypnoticZona 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/film/9780857861665/zona-a-book-about-a-film-about-a-journey-to-a-room>
 (Canongate £16.99), the year's best book on cinema, Geoff Dyer discursively 
explores a personal obsession withAndrei Tarkovsky 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/andrei-tarkovsky>'s Stalker that began when he 
saw a still from the movie in theObserver. Pico Iyer's The Man Within My Head: 
Graham Greene, My Father and Me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/travel-guides/9781408828755/the-man-within-my-head>
 is also an obsessional work, gracefully combining autobiography, travel and 
cultural criticism.

Julie Burchill
Journalist

My husband said it was typical of me that the first self-help book I've ever 
read in my life was not one which I sought to learn from but one which totally 
confirmed the way I think about life anyway –Enjoy Every Sandwich: Living Each 
Day As If It Were Your Last 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/healthmindandbody/9780593069639/enjoy-every-sandwich-living-each-day-as-if-it-were-your-last>
 (Bantam £10.99) by Lee Lipsenthal.Emerald City and Other Stories 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781780331218/emerald-city> 
(Corsair £7.99), Jennifer Egan's book of short stories, was almost as good as 
her astounding novelA Visit from the Goon Squad 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781849010337/a-visit-from-the-goon-squad>
, which is going some. And Nick Cohen'sYou Can't Read This Book 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/politics/9780007308903/you-cant-read-this-book-censorship-in-an-age-of-freedom>
 (Fourth Estate £12.99) confirmed him – as if there was any doubt – as the most 
righteous and irresistible political polemicist living.

Geoff Dyer
Novelist and critic

I have more fun reading Dean Young 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/dean-young> than just about any 
other poet I can think of. His poems are crazed, self-devouring narratives, 
full of loopy wisdom: "At any moment an announcement's expected/ but that's 
what moments are for…"Bender: New & Selected Poems 
<https://www.coppercanyonpress.org/pages/browse/book.asp?bg={BA0A0EE3-4B39-4449-83D8-D39106171520}>
 (Copper Canyon $26) is a perverse arrangement and self-selection from an 
inconsistently brilliant, surprisingly voluminous body of work. It's about time 
editors here got in on the act and published a British edition.

Marina Warner
Writer

Hans Belting, in Florence and Baghdad: Renaissance Art and Arabic Science 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/art/9780674050044/florence-and-baghdad-renaissance-art-and-arab-science>
 (Harvard £25), gives an exhilarating new perspective on unexpected 
conjunctions; the book is beautifully illustrated.Out of It 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408822036>
 (Bloomsbury £7.99), Selma Dabbagh's first novel, takes us, observantly and 
deftly, into the lives and feelings of those who live in Gaza and want ordinary 
lives. And, finally, Lewis Carroll's poetry has been collected together – 
amazingly, for the first time – by Gillian Beer inJabberwocky and Other Nonsense
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9780141195940/jabberwocky-and-other-nonsense-collected-poems>
 (Penguin £14.99). Frabjous it is, too, through and through.

Chris Mullin
Author, journalist and politician

I very much enjoyed Events, Dear Boy, Events 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/history/9781846684326/events-dear-boy-events-political-diaries-of-britain-from-the-great-war-to-the-present>
 (Profile £25), a history of the 20th century through the eyes of diarists, 
skilfully edited by Ruth Winstone, an old hand when it comes to the editing of 
diaries. Also Jack Straw'sLast Man Standing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/politics/9781447222750/last-man-standing-memoirs-of-a-political-survivor>
 (Macmillan £20) and Education, Education, Education: Reforming England's 
Schools 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781849544207>
 (Biteback £12.99) by Andrew Adonis, both welcome additions to the rich crop of 
New Labour memoirs.

Rachel Cooke
Observer writer

I read some fantastically singular novels this year. I really liked Maria 
Semple'sWhere'd You Go, Bernadette 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297867296>
 (Weidenfeld & Nicolson £12.99): the story of a brainiac teenager, Bee, and her 
search for her disappeared genius architect mother. Loony, but gripping and 
funny. And I lovedThe Lifeboat 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844087525>
(Virago £12.99) by Charlotte Rogan. It's 1914, a liner has gone down, and in a 
crowded lifeboat, a group of survivors grows increasingly aware that for some 
to live, others must die. It has a wonderful (unreliable?) narrator, Grace, and 
it chills you to the bone.

My favourite nonfiction was Kate Summerscale's Mrs Robinson's Disgrace: The 
Private Diary of a Victorian Lady 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408812419>
 (Bloomsbury £16.99), an exquisite cameo of a book, which tells you everything 
you need to know about Victorians and marriage. Katie Roiphe's essays,In Praise 
of Messy Lives <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Praise-Messy-Lives-Essays/dp/0812992822>
 (Dial $25), are seriously provocative – and I mean that in a good way.

Joe Dunthorne
Novelist, poet and journalist

Whether exploring prehistoric caves in Kentucky or Axl Rose's oxygen chamber, 
John Jeremiah Sullivan is the ideal guide to the fringes of American life. I 
have been pressing his book of essays,Pulphead 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780099572350/pulphead-notes-from-the-other-side-of-america>
 (Vintage £9.99), on to everyone. I also loved Ned Beauman's second novel, The 
Teleportation Accident 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780340998427/the-teleportation-accident>
 (Sceptre £16.99). It brims with weirdness, time travel and perfect one-liners.

Tim Adams
Observer writer

The three books that have stayed with me in 2012 have all been uncommon acts 
of faith. Katherine Boo'sBehind the Beautiful Forevers: Life, Death and Hope in 
a Mumbai Slum 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846274497>
 (Portobello £14.99) is a masterpiece of documentary storytelling, based on 
four years the author spent living in the slums of Mumbai. It looks hard into 
places of extreme despair, and comes back brimming with irrepressible life.

Philip Gould's When I Die: Lessons from the Death Zone 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408703984>
 (Little, Brown £14.99) was a wholly different feat of courage and love. The 
New Labour peer's memoir of his last months of life has you consider, with 
urgent and moving immediacy, the possibilities of the antique concept of "dying 
well".

Julian Barnes's Through the Window: Seventeen Essays (And One Short Story) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099578581>
(Vintage £10.99) sounds like a ragbag of writing about writing, but the 
novelist's unfailing insight and wit make it that rare thing – a work of 
criticism that is a compulsive page‑turner.

Louise Doughty
Novelist, playwright and critic

This year's erotica explosion passed me by – I'm not aroused by the overuse of 
the adverb – but when sex fails you, there's always gossip. Two excellent 
memoirs from leading writers have provided it in shedloads, along with some 
moral seriousness to boot:Country Girl 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780571269433/country-girl>
 by Edna O'Brien (Faber £20), and Salman Rushdie's Joseph Anton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780224093972/joseph-anton>
 (Jonathan Cape £25), a memoir of the fatwa years that showed the human reality 
behind the headlines.

Craig Taylor
Writer

Katherine Boo's masterclass in reportage (Behind the Beautiful Forevers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9781846274497/behind-the-beautiful-forevers-life-death-and-hope-in-a-mumbai-slum>
) was remarkable, but the best book on India this year had to be Aman Sethi's A 
Free Man: A True Story of Life and Death in Delhi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/society/9780224096904/a-free-man-a-true-story-of-life-and-death-in-delhi>
 (Jonathan Cape £14.99). My fiction pick is Gwendoline Riley'sOpposed Positions 
(Jonathan Cape £14.99), which should be mandatory reading for anyone who 
frothed over Lena Dunham and her TV show.

The hardcover of Adam Phillips's excellent Missing Out: In Praise of the 
Unlived Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780241143872/missing-out-in-praise-of-the-unlived-life>
 (Hamish Hamilton £20) easily fits in a coat pocket, so you don't have to miss 
out on anything, but the best reason to buy "physical" books in 2012 had to be
The Letters of Samuel Beckett Volume II: 1941-1956 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780521867948/the-letters-of-samuel-beckett-volume-volume>
 (Cambridge £30), so massively un-Kindle-able I had to lug my copy to a desk, 
feel its weight, crack its spine. The reward inside is Beckett's wise advice on 
how to write, how to live, and also, thankfully, how to garden.

Kate Kellaway
Observer writer

When Swan Lake Comes to Sarajevo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781853118654/when-swan-lake-comes-to-sarajevo>
 (Canterbury £12.99) by Ruth Waterman is a moving diary about conducting a 
multi-ethnic sinfonietta in Bosnia and the bridges music builds.Alys, Always 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780297865018/alys-always> 
(W&N £12.99) by ex-Observer writer Harriet Lane is a brilliant debut novel 
about a disturbed hack.England on Horseback 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908337146>
 (Clearview £25) by Zara Colchester and Charlotte Sainsbury-Plaice involves 
hacking of another sort. A glorious book with romantic photos – a rider's 
reverie.

Julian Baggini
Author

Tony Wright's Doing Politics 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781849540421>
 (Biteback £12.99) restores hope that serious thought can go on in Westminster. 
Wright retired as an MP at the last election universally respected by 
constituents and peers, and this collection of his writings shows how an astute 
reading of the intellectual traditions of the left provides all that is needed 
for a relevant, contemporary Labour party. Roger Scruton continued to do the 
same job for the Conservatives, more or less single-handed, inGreen Philosophy: 
How to Think Seriously About the Planet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/philosophy/9781848870765/green-philosophy-how-to-think-seriously-about-the-planet>
 (Atlantic £22).

Mary Beard
Classicist, author and broadcaster

Some of my favourite books of the year always turn out to be exhibition 
catalogues. In 2012 my first prize went to the Royal Academy'sJohan Zoffany RA, 
Society Observed 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/ra-publications-86/johan-zoffany-ra-society-observed-exhibition-catalogue-1350/product.html?LproductId=1350>
 (Royal Academy £24.95), edited by Martin Postle. It was a wonderful souvenir 
of a great show, but also taught me a lot about an artist I fancied I knew 
quite well – some of it surprisingly raunchy (like the discussion of Zoffany's 
wonderful hanging condoms). In second place was the British Museum's beautiful
Shakespeare: Staging the World 
<http://www.britishmuseumshoponline.org/history-geography+culture/shakespeare-staging-the-world/invt/cmcf28245/?stylecat=>
 (British Museum £25), by Jonathan Bate and Dora Thornton. You never knew that 
Henry V's saddle could be so interesting! Honest.

Alexander McCall Smith
Novelist

Christopher Simon Sykes's Hockney: The Biography 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/nov/24/hockney-biography-christopher-simon-sykes-review>
(Century £25), which takes us up to 1975, is a marvellous, vivid story. Then 
there is Ben Macintyre, whoseDouble Cross: The True Story of The D-Day Spies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/mar/29/double-cross-ben-macintyre-review> 
(Bloomsbury £7.99) is, as one might expect from the author ofAgent Zigzag 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408811498>
, a triumph.

Owen Jones
Author and political commentator

As well as inflicting misery on millions, Tory governments tend to provoke a 
new generation of left-wing writers. With what is both a compelling and 
definitive guide to the rise of the BNP in the 00s,Bloody Nasty People: The 
Rise of Britain's Far Right 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844679591>
 (Verso £14.99), Daniel Trilling emerges at the forefront of a new wave of 
young progressive thinkers.

Sara Wheeler
Travel writer and biographer

A first book by a young Englishwoman impressed me. Suzanne Joinson's A Lady 
Cyclist's Guide to Kashgar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781408825143/a-lady-cyclists-guide-to-kashgar>
 (Bloomsbury £12.99) consists of two parallel stories, each told from the point 
of view of a childless female protagonist, one at a shimmering, multi-ethnic 
Silk Road trading post, the other in contemporary London. From a debutante to a 
grande dame: Alice Munro'sDear Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9780701187842/dear-life> 
(Chatto & Windus £18.99), another dazzling collection of short stories, 
provincial and universal in equal measure.

Andrew Rawnsley
Chief political commentator, the Observer

I hugely enjoyed Dan Jones on The Plantagenets 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007213924>
 (HarperPress £25), stonking narrrative history told with pace, wit and 
scholarship about the bloody dynasty that produced some of England's most 
brilliant, brutal kings. I thought even my large appetite for accounts of the 
great conflict of the 20th century might have been sated after so many 
excellent recent books on the subject, but Antony Beevor proved me wrong with 
his terrificThe Second World War 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297844976>
 (W&N £25). As we have come to expect from this master, he excels at using 
eyewitness testimony to illustrate how mankind can be capable of both terrible 
cruelty and astonishing courage.

Maria Popova
Editor of brainpickings.org

As Consciousness is Harnessed to Flesh: Diaries 1964-1980 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241145173>
 (Hamish Hamilton £18.99), the second volume of Susan Sontag's published 
diaries, presents a remarkable glimpse of the inner life – conflicted, 
restless, brimming with conviction – of one of modern history's greatest 
intellectuals.

In Ignorance: How it Drives Science 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780199828074>
(Oxford £14.99), Columbia biologist Stuart Firestein challenges our 
relationship with facts and knowledge, making a bold case for new models of 
science education and research funding rewarding curiosity rather than 
certitude.

Drawing from the City 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9789380340173>
 (Tara £22.99) features the stunning illustrations of self-taught Indian folk 
artist Teju Behan in a tender and aspirational story about woman's empowerment 
in patriarchal society.

Robert McCrum
Associate editor, the Observer

My big discovery this year was Alison Moore's The Lighthouse 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781907773174/the-lighthouse>
 (Salt £8.99), a beautifully constructed first novel of haunting subtlety and 
dark mystery. Shortlisted for the Booker prize, it was probably too slight to 
be a contender, but Alison Moore must be a name to watch. Salley Vickers is a 
novelist whose imaginative journey always promises magic and mystery.The 
Cleaner of Chartres 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780670922123>
 (Viking £16.99) shows her on top form in a rich weave of loss and redemption 
spiked with Ms Vickers' irrepressible wit.
 