
Alan Hollinghurst's highly-praised novel The Stranger's Child has missed out 
on a place on the ManBooker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize> shortlist, with the former 
Booker winner trumped by two debut novelists.

One of the favourites to take this year's award, Hollinghurst's story of a 
bisexual poet killed during the first world war, was passed over by the judges. 
The panel, headed by former MI5 director Dame Stella Rimington, preferred
Guardian First Book Award-longlisted Stephen Kelman's Pigeon English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/31/guardian-first-book-award-longlist>
, inspired by the murder of Damilola Taylor and written in the voice of a 
Ghanaian 11-year-old, and former journalist-turned-debut novelist AD Miller's 
crime story set in Moscow, Snowdrops.

They also gave Julian Barnes, who has been shortlisted three times for the 
Booker but never won it, a fourth chance, this time for his 150-page novella 
The Sense of an Ending, about a middle-aged man looking back at his student 
days. Although he has described the Booker as"posh bingo" 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v09/n20/julian-barnes/diary> in the past, Barnes has been 
William Hill's 3/1 favourite to win the prize, ahead of Hollinghurst at 5/1 and 
Carol Birch's Jamrach's Menagerie and Miller's Snowdrops, both at 7/1. Birch's 
11th novel, a 19th century-set story of a doomed expedition to the South 
Pacific to capture a "dragon", also made the shortlist.

"Inevitably it was hard to whittle down the longlist to six titles," said 
Rimington. "We were sorry to lose some great books. But, when push came to 
shove, we quickly agreed that these six very different titles were the best."

Two Canadian authors, Patrick deWitt and Esi Edugyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/esi-edugyan>, complete the line-up for the 
£50,000 literary award. Edugyan's second novel, Half Blood Blues, traces the 
apparent disappearance of black German jazz trumpeter Hieronymous "Hiero" Falk 
during the second world war, and deWitt's The Sisters Brothers – also a second 
novel – is the story of two hired killers in gold rush America.

"As a young writing student I remember eagerly awaiting the Man Booker 
shortlist each year and reading as many of titles as possible," said Edugyan. 
"There was a real sense of ritual to it, it was a very meaningful act to me. I 
am amazed and deeply honoured to be shortlisted for this award."

Four of the books are from independent publishers – Jamrach's Menagerie 
(Canongate), The Sisters Brothers (Granta), Half Blood Blues (Serpent's Tail) 
and Snowdrops (Atlantic). "Recognition for so many smaller publishers this year 
has certainly provided evidence of strength-in-depth beyond the standard 
front-of-house promotions and there are a couple of relatively unsung authors 
we're particularly excited to see on the list, including the novels by Esi 
Edugyan andCarol Birch <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-birch> which 
best manage to combine elegant writing, absorbing plots, nuanced characters and 
a real evocation of time and place," said Jonathan Ruppin at independent book 
chain Foyles. "Edugyan's Half Blood Blues, particularly, would make a very 
deserving winner."

Barnes, for one, is likely to view his shortlisting with some dread. The 
author, who made the final cut in 2005 for Arthur and George, in 1998 for 
England, England and in 1984 for Flaubert's Parrot, has said that the period of 
expectation before finding out the final result"usually produces some 
psychosomatic malady – a throbbing boil, a burning wire of neuralgia, the prod 
of gout" <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v09/n20/julian-barnes/diary>. With over a month 
to go before this year's winner is announced on 18 October, his fellow 
shortlisted authors will be hoping his words are not prophetic.

The shortlist

The Sense of an Ending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780224094153/the-sense-of-an-ending>
 by Julian Barnes
Jamrach's Menagerie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847676566/jamrachs-menagerie>
 by Carol Birch
The Sisters Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847083180/the-sisters-brothers>
 by Patrick deWitt
Half Blood Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781846687754/half-blood-blues>
 by Esi Edugyan
Pigeon English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781408810637/pigeon-english>
 by Stephen Kelman
Snowdrops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781848874527/snowdrops> 
by AD Miller
 