
Some reviewers seemed to struggle for the words to adequately express the 
brilliance of Anne Enright’s latest novel,The Green Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/14/the-green-road-anne-enright-review-kate-clanchy>
. “Enright’s prose glitters and gleams like sunlit water,” rhapsodisedCharlotte 
Heathcote in the Sunday Express. “She is that rare thing: a very, very good 
writer,” wasEmma Townshend’s more straightforward verdict in the Independent on 
Sunday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/the-green-road-by-anne-enright-book-review-you-cant-escape-family-however-far-you-try-to-go-10236205.html>
. “Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Tumblr faded to shadow. I was not distracted 
from reading a single word.” High praise indeed.For the Observer’s Alex Preston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/03/the-green-road-anne-enright-review-exquisite-collage>
, however, the book would have worked better as a series of short stories. “The 
reunion at the end of the novel, and the dramatic disappearance that shuttles 
us through the final pages, feel like unnecessary MacGuffins, put there 
to appease the conventions of plot.”Cristina Patterson, writing in the Sunday 
Times, was captivated. “The surgical precision of her writing can also make you 
feel that she can, in Wordsworth’s words, ‘see into the life of things’. 
There’s a singing simplicity to it that can tug at your heart.” But she, too, 
grappled to find quite the right word for Enright. “You can’t really call a 
woman a master. A mistress seems to be something else. But I think Anne Enright 
is a master. She has certainly produced a masterly work.”

Garlands were predicted for Gavin Francis’s “cultural map of the body” 
Adventures in Human Being. “So enthralling and so well written that it should 
win its own clutch of prizes,” wroteNick Rennison in the Sunday Times, who 
hailed the “frequent brilliance of Francis’s prose, which can move seamlessly 
from clinical exactitude to poetry”. In the Times,Melanie Reid described the 
book as “clever, strangely beautiful and definitely not for the squeamish”, 
remarking that, just as neurosurgeon Henry Marsh’sDo No Harm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/19/do-no-harm-brain-surgery-henry-marsh-review>
 was shortlisted for many prizes, “Gavin Francis’s book deserves the same.”
Robin McKie wrote in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/18/adventures-in-human-being-gavin-francis-review-john-epley-wirvell>
 that: “In other hands,Adventures in Human Being might well have become 
cluttered with cliche, detail or sentimentality but Francis has a lightness of 
touch that helps him avoid these pitfalls.”

High-minded readers may be alarmed to note that the influence of the first 
couple of pop culture,Kanye West <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> 
andKim Kardashian <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>, 
has been beating an inexorable path from the pages of Heat magazine into the 
literary sections. Earlier this year saw the publication ofSam Riviere’s poetry 
collection inspired by the pair,Kim Kardashian’s Marriage 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/kim-kardashians-marriage-by-sam-riviere-book-review-now-its-kim-the-poet-10026159.html>
, and it seems that was just the beginning.Selfish, Kardashian’s 350-page epic 
book of selfies, which is riding high on the bestseller charts on both sides of 
the Atlantic, was treated to a lengthy and enthusiastic review in the Telegraph 
by Riviere, who compared the Kardashians to the Brontës: “a family of creative 
women, in the business of conducting narratives in which men come and go, but 
female relationships remain constant and meaningful”. Meanwhile, the New York 
Times ran a substantial review ofMr West, the first collection by the poet 
Sarah Blake, inspired by Kanye’s relationship with his mother, Dr Donda West. 
It’s hard to avoid the conclusion that the lure of online clicks might have had 
something to do with it, particularly as the reviewer,Andrew DuBois, was not 
convinced of the collection’s literary merit. “Mr West is a book that is in 
utterly good faith. That doesn’t quite make it a good book, however.”
 