
Linda Grant has "an effortless style – no metaphor ever feels forced – and her 
many ideas linger with you long after you have finished reading. The novel is 
pleasingly unpredictable too – I never once foresaw a plot development. My only 
complaint? I fear I may not read a better book all year."Rosamund Urwin in the 
Evening Standard <http:// 
www.thisislondon.co.uk/lifestyle/book/article-23913956-rise-and-fall-of-the-baby-boomers- 
in-we-had-it-so-good.do> was delighted with Grant's novel about the babyboomer 
generationWe Had It So Good. Melissa Katsoulis in the Times was similarly 
extravagant in her praise: "This is a gripping family saga stylishly told. 
Postwar California, Oxford and London are re-created superbly and brightly. Yet 
big ideas surface continually and make this much more than a readable trip down 
one man's life path . . . Grant approaches these questions with her usual 
insight and subtlety and comes close to creating the perfect novel."Jane 
Shilling in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/8257810/We-Had-It-So- 
Good-by-Linda-Grant-review.html> was less convinced, wondering how interested 
younger readers would be, and remarking: "Her delineation of character is 
judicious rather than passionate – so that even characters in extremis live out 
their dramas at a safe distance from the reader's heart."

Patrick French's India: A Portrait was well received, Neel Mukherjee in the 
Times noting its "immediacy, freshness and immense readability": "French, 
acutely conscious of the cliches and stereotypes that have marred writing about 
India, seeks to steer clear of them programmatically . . . It is a funny, witty 
book; also dense, gripping, thrilling. What blazes through each page is 
French's absolute and uncondescending engagement with India".Basharat Peer in 
the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8257096/India- 
a-Portrait-by-Patrick-French-review.html> offered a quieter commendation, 
calling the book "impressive" and singling out the discussion of the 
billionaire businessman Sunil Bharti Mittal. In the Independent, Salil Tripathi 
 <http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/india- 
a-portrait-by-patrick-french-2183841.html>highlighted French's statistical 
analysis of India's parliament, "a fascinating analysis, revealing a deeper 
truth . . . French's portrait is confusing for the reader in a hurry who wants 
a primer on India for his first flight to Delhi. But accept India's confusing 
complexities, and it is stirringly accurate."

Many of the reviewers of Adam Mars-Jones's novel Cedilla, the follow-up to 
Pilcrow, which recounts the next stage in the life of his gay, disabled 
protagonist John Cromer, remarked on its size. Yet it didn't put them off.Mark 
Sanderson in the Sunday Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/8257774/Cedilla-by-Adam-Mars-Jones- 
review.html> described "a cavalcade of incident – both internal and external – 
that rivals Proust in its intensity of detail . . . Has the punning prima donna 
got his comeuppance? It is a tribute to Mars-Jones's style, wit and humour that 
the exhausted yet exhilarated reader can't wait to find out." For an admiring
Leo Robson in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8257144/Cedilla- 
by-Adam-Mars-Jones-review.html>, "There isn't a passage here that doesn't 
sparkle with some well-phrased perception, neatly overturned cliché or freshly 
minted pun. And while it can be draining to read a book of this size in which 
most sentences prompt you to smile, laugh or revise an opinion, you couldn't 
exactly call this a weakness." "I wasn't wild aboutPilcrow," wrote Keith Miller 
in the Literary Review <http://www.literaryreview.co.uk/miller_12_10.html>, 
"though I was hugely impressed by it.Cedilla is, in one sense, simply more of 
the same: same character, same voice (sensuous but unsentimental and morbidly 
quip-heavy) . . . same triangulations between author, grown-up narrator and 
youthful protagonist. If I enjoyedCedilla more it is perhaps because that triad 
is sturdier this time round."
 