
Books about crime and prison are often among the favourite reading choices for 
people in jail. Howard Marks,who died of cancer this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/11/howard-marks-obituary>, wrote a 
classic of the genre with his autobiographyMr Nice 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/mr-nice.html>. First published in 1996, it 
chronicles Marks’s international drug smuggling activities and his seven years 
in a US prison. Since then, Mr Nice has been one of the most borrowed books in 
prison libraries. As a former prisoner, I have read many books on the subject – 
not to mention written a couple. Among the best are the following five:

Books kept me alive in prison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/aug/31/books-kept-me-alive-in-prison>
In the Belly of the Beast: Letters from Prison by Jack Henry Abbott

Abbott’s book came about when he wrote to the author Norman Mailer when Mailer 
wasresearching the serial killer Gary Gilmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jun/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview37>
. Abbott’s letters to Mailer became this book. His prose is mesmerising in its 
strength. The life Abbott describes, from his childhood in reformatories to his 
time in prison for murder in 1965 at the age of 21, is turned into a poetic 
tragedy. It is compounded when he killed again six weeks after he was released 
in 1981. Abbott’s description of the dynamics of the prisoner hierarchy shows 
how universal the effects of incarceration can be.

Prisoners of Honour by David Levering Lewis

Prisoners of Honour is a forensic examination of the trial, imprisonment and 
eventual exoneration ofAlfred Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/jul/13/france.comment>. Lewis’s 
blistering narrative, interspersed with the evidence of the antisemitic 
conspiracy that put Dreyfus away, brings life and insight to the case like no 
other account. The French army captain was convicted of treason in 1894 and 
sentenced to life on Devil’s Island, a place barely bigger than a palm tree’s 
shadow 10 miles off the coast of French Guiana. Dreyfus, an innocent man 
wrongly condemned to a hellish existence in a tiny prison built especially for 
him, offers an inspirational lesson in integrity and courage. Before prison, I 
lived without both these traits. I read Prisoners of Honour in prison and it 
changed the way I thought about life. Dreyfus made me want to be a better 
person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fbooks-behind-bars-five-best-stories-prison-life-alan-sillitoe-erwin-james%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7971eff701066c5f2ca6cb1716e28eac02b2ac%2F1022_86_3346_2008%2F3346.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20behind%20bars%3A%20five%20of%20the%20best%20stories%20about%20prison%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fbooks-behind-bars-five-best-stories-prison-life-alan-sillitoe-erwin-james%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20behind%20bars%3A%20five%20of%20the%20best%20stories%20about%20prison%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fbooks-behind-bars-five-best-stories-prison-life-alan-sillitoe-erwin-james%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff7971eff701066c5f2ca6cb1716e28eac02b2ac%2F1022_86_3346_2008%2F3346.jpg>
 Alfred Dreyfus’s prison cell on Ile du Diable, Devil’s Island, French Guiana. 
Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
No Beast So Fierce by Edward Bunker

Bunker was a former career-criminal and prison escapee who became a writer and 
actor (he played Mr Blue in Quentin Tarantino’sReservoir Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/reservoir-dogs>). No Beast So Fierce was the 
key to his final escape to a crime-free life. It is an angry novel about 
criminality, violence and the challenges faced by prisoners trying to 
reintegrate into society, along with the obstacles that abound on the path to 
“going straight”. It is written in a fast-paced, authentic style that draws on 
Bunker’s experience of the low life of Los Angeles. James Ellroy was so 
impressed with it that he described it as “perhaps the best novel of the Los 
Angeles underworld ever written”.

The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/loneliness-of-the-long-distance-runner.html> 
by Alan Sillitoe

This titular tale in this short story collection follows a boy called Smith 
who is sent to borstal for robbing a bakery. There he becomes a cross-country 
runner – such a good one that he becomes the governor’s hope for a PR coup when 
Smith is pitched to race in a competition against students at a local public 
school. In the race he streaks ahead of the field, only to stop yards from the 
finishing line in a supreme act of defiance that demonstrates the freedom of 
his mind and his spirit against the bleak and repressive borstal regime. 
Sillitoe understood that you can imprison the body, but the mind will always be 
free.

In the Place of Justice by Wilbert Rideau

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Rideau served almost 44 years in prison before he was released in 2005. Rideau 
was originally convicted of murder and sentenced to death in 1961 when he was 
19. Hissentence was commuted to life imprisonment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/may/31/wilbert-rideau-rehabilitate-prisoners>
 when the death sentence was temporarily abolished in Louisiana in 1972. Rideau 
spent the majority of his sentence in Angola State Penitentiary (also known as 
the Farm), where he started writing a column about prison life called The 
Jungle. Rideau went on to become editor of the Angolite, the prison’s 
award-winning magazine. In 1998 he helped to produce an Oscar-nominated 
documentary about Angola State, titled The Farm. The story of his life in this 
deftly written book is an example of what can be achieved in the direst 
circumstances with just a positive attitude and a pen.

Erwin James’s book Redeemable: a Memoir of Darkness and Hope 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/redeemable-9781408813973/> is published by 
Bloomsbury.

 * What are the best books written about prison time? Leave your 
recommendations in the comments below.
 