
Matthew Syed in the Times judged Chase Your Shadow: The Trials of Oscar 
Pistorius <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/chase-your-shadow.html> by John 
Carlin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johncarlin> “superb”, its strength 
being that “it weaves many disparate strands into a humane and sensitive 
overview of a case that shocked the world. Alternating in consecutive chapters 
between the drama of the court proceedings and the backstory of Pistorius’s 
life, the book examines the social context, the role of the media and the many 
ironies of our celebrity culture … The detail is fascinating.” Carlin is “not 
unsympathetic to the findings of the judge”.Justice Malala pointed out in the 
Sunday Times that the author “is a highly respected former foreign 
correspondent in South Africa, who has already written the book that became the 
2009 filmInvictus <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/04/invictus-review>
”. His book is “unavoidably dull” when it recounts the trial day by day, but 
“Where the court reporting does come alive is when Pistorius takes the stand 
and is subjected to cross-examination. Here, it reads like a taut courtroom 
drama.”Harriet Alexander, who reported on the trial for the Daily Telegraph, 
concluded in her review that it was “an accomplished retelling of the Pistorius 
tale – albeit without any huge revelations”.

Some Luck <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/some-luck.html> by Jane Smiley is 
“the first novel in a projected trilogy about Iowa farm people and their 
descendants”, wrotePaul Elie in a review for the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/09/books/review/jane-smiley-some-luck-review.html>
 that was very polite but less than fulsome: “Smiley is so commanding as a 
novelist and critic that you feel she must have very definite reasons for 
telling these stories the way she does. She knows these people, no question … 
But, strangely, her ease with the material makes it feel less than original or 
necessary.” “If you like thrills and surprises or literary innovation in 
the mould of anAli Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith> novel or 
evenMartin Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> at his best, 
then this formally straightforward linear narrative may not be for you,” decided
Louise Jury in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/some-luck-by-jane-smile-book-review-engrossing-first-offering-of-us-farm-trilogy-from-pulitzer-prizewinning-writer-9846934.html>
, who couldn’t ever get “really excited” by the novel. “But fans of big-cast 
family sagas with love and death and the world at large impinging only lightly 
– but tellingly – on events will loveSome Luck.” Lucy Hughes-Hallett’s notice 
in the Times had a more positive spin: “Smiley’s prose is as unpretentious as 
her characters’ thoughts, but like them, capable of subtlety and wisdom. Her 
narrative structure – the year-by-year chronicle, the evenhanded distribution 
of attention – is a strong, infinitely pliable, framework. This a quietly 
written book, nothing flash about it, but it takes on the big subjects – from 
love to mortality – and meets them with steady strength.”

Not My Father’s Son: A Family Memoir 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/not-my-father-s-son.html> by actor Alan 
Cumming deals with the violence meted out to him as a child by Alex Cumming, 
his father.Helen Davies in the Sunday Times described it as “powerful … 
heart-breaking and brave … a thoroughly gripping read, one that keeps its 
biggest revelation until the very end”.Jeffery Taylor in the Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/entertainment/books/536946/Alan-Cumming-s-autobiography-Not-My-Father-s-Son-book-review>
 felt it to be “a brave book, airing fundamental agonies of the human condition 
with as light a touch as is perhaps possible”. ButAndrew Billen in the Times 
wasn’t so sure about “a book whose prose never quite springs free of the 
psychobabbly conventions of celebrity memoir … Cumming, as they say in 
television documentaries, is on a ‘journey’, and its destination is neither his 
father nor grandfather, but the ever-fascinating Alan himself”.
 