
"The realist novel has managed to brush off every indignity hurled at it 
during the past century. Rachel Kushner'sThe Flamethrowers is a marker of its 
resilience – a novel about 20th-century radical politics and art written in the 
conventional spirit of a 19th-century Bildungsroman." ButLudovic Hunter-Tilney 
in the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/43399248-cc2f-11e2-bb22-00144feab7de.html#axzz2W4yWTaZF>
 wasn't sure about a novel that "arrives with rapturous reviews and 
endorsements from Jonathan Franzen … for all its ambition and nicely turned 
phrases, it doesn't quite ring true." For a start, "you find yourself longing 
for a heroine with a bit more vim who will tell these people to shut up". 
What's more, "Reno is a thoroughly conventional narrator, one who could have 
turned up with minor embellishments in an Edith Wharton novel. But Kushner 
surrounds her with the appurtenances of a DeLillo text …The Flamethrowers is 
caught between two competing literary ideologies." For James Wood in the New 
Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2013/04/08/130408crbo_books_wood?currentPage=all>
, on the other hand, it "is scintillatingly alive, and also alive to artifice. 
It ripples with stories, anecdotes, set-piece monologues, crafty egotistical 
tall tales, and hapless adventures … It is nominally a historical novel … But 
it manifests itself as a pure explosion of now."

Strictly Ann, by Ann Widdecombe, is "briskly and competently written", thought 
Lynn Barber in the Sunday Times, "and she comes across as sensible, cheerful, 
pragmatic – excellent qualities as an MP, though not necessarily as an 
autobiographer. She never agonises; she is sure of her rightness at all times; 
and her arrogance ... is sometimes breathtaking." ForMelanie McDonagh in the 
Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/arts/book/beware--theres-an-awful-lot-of-politics-to-get-through-before-anton-du-beke-8646855.html>
, "it's twice as long as it should be. It's not just that she digresses from 
discussing her childhood with some caustic reflections on the current situation 
but that she can't bypass a chance to remember some constituency stalwart, some 
teacher, some old Oxford Union dispute, by name." However, "She's good-humoured 
about the controversies but she gets her own back."Lloyd Evans in the Spectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/8925421/strictly-ann-by-ann-widdecombe-review/>
 provided further evidence that the rightwing press has been gentle on the 
memoir: "publishers know that the sales of political memoirs depend entirely on 
the author's popularity. This explains why Alan Johnson's autobiography has 
risen skywards while poor old David Blunkett's performed a bellyflop. 
Widdecombe's ripping tale will follow the flightpath of the former."

"What he has written is a critical essay fizzing with ideas; a large-scale 
historical argument is at work, but there is no simple telling of a 
chronological story, and the final purpose is a polemical one, relating to the 
present and the future."Noel Malcolm in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/historybookreviews/10095937/Money-by-Felix-Martin-review.html>
 objected to the subtitle of Felix Martin'sMoney: The Unauthorised Biography, 
but in a four-out-of-five review argued that "as Martin approaches the present, 
his arguments become sharper and more genuinely thought-provoking … he is 
a very clever man."Howard Davies in the Times pointed out: "In real life Martin 
trades credit instruments at Liontrust Asset Management, and is associated with 
George Soros's Institute of New Economic Thinking." He didn't like the book's 
method – "while the eventual aim is quite clearly to peddle his own patent 
remedy for the financial system's ills, he begins a long way back" – and 
objected, too, to Martin's solution of "narrow banking".The Economist said 
<http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21578009-good-guide-stuff-our-pockets-gold-rush>
 that Martin had written a "surprisingly entertaining book on the nature of 
money", and summed up his proposed reforms: "If you lose your dough, tough. You 
knew the risks."
 