
Accusations of "dumbing down" were levelled at this year's Man Booker 
shortlist when the judges aimed for "readability" above all, but it turns out 
readability was exactly what the public were looking for after the six novels 
competing for this year's prize became the most popular Booker line-up since 
records began.

Headed by AD Miller's Moscow-set thriller Snowdrops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781848874541/snowdrops>, 
this year's Booker shortlist has sold more than double the number of copies of 
the shortlist last year, when Howard Jacobson's The Finkler Question beat 
novels including Emma Donoghue's Room and titles by Peter Carey and Andrea Levy 
to win the prize. Industry magazine the Bookseller reveals that since this 
year's shortlist was announced on 6 September,the six books have sold 37,500 
copies, up 127% on last year and 105% on the previous record in 2009 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/2011-man-booker-shortlist-most-popular-ever.html>
, when Hilary Mantel's historical novel Wolf Hall went on to win.

Snowdrops is the most popular novel on the shortlist, with 11,800 copies sold, 
followed by the 19th century-setJamrach's Menagerie by Carol Birch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847676566/jamrachs-menagerie>
 (9,000), Julian Barnes's novellaThe Sense of an Ending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780224094153/the-sense-of-an-ending>
 (6,400), Stephen Kelman's debutPigeon English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781408810637/pigeon-english>
 (3,900), Patrick deWitt's westernThe Sisters Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847083180/the-sisters-brothers>
 (3,500) and Esi Edugyan'sHalf Blood Blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781846687754/half-blood-blues>
 (2,800), about the disappearance of a black trumpeter during the second world 
war.

The Bookseller attributes the popularity of the shortlist partly to the fact 
that two of the novels are already available in a cheap, mass-market format, 
with even the most expensive of the titles selling for £12.99. "All six novels 
can currently be purchased at UK booksellers for a total of £65.94 – down 36% 
(or £37) on 2010's selections," said charts editor Philip Stone.

It is also undoubtedly down to the judges' attempts to pick, as chair Stella 
Rimington put it, "readable" books. "We want people to buy these books and read 
them, not buy them and admire them,"she said on announcing the shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/06/man-booker-prize-shortlist>, 
whilefellow judge Chris Mullin said the titles "had to zip along" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/sep/11/catherine-bennett-dumbed-down-booker-prize>
 to make it into the final line-up. As critics lined up to slam judges' 
unexpected selection, which included two debut novelists ahead of titles by 
former winner Alan Hollinghurst and Costa winner Sebastian Barry, judge Susan 
Hill tweeted"Hurrah! Man Booker judges accused of 'dumbing down.' They mean our 
shortlist is readable and enjoyable." 
<http://twitter.com/#!/susanhillwriter/status/111442359392280576>

At Waterstone's, Jon Howells said today that "the naysayers who criticised 
this shortlist for a perceived lack of household names have been shamed by the 
book-buying public, who have been as ready to try someone new from the list as 
they have to read Julian Barnes's The Sense of an Ending".

But at top end bookselling chain Foyles, Jonathan Ruppin said he had seen a 
"less marked" lift in sales than in previous years. "Literary prizes at their 
best are a way of getting something more challenging and original into the 
hands of readers, books with timeless qualities that aren't always easily 
promotable," he said. "While this year's selection is undoubtedly an 
eye-catching one, it's also more overtly commercial than in other years and 
we'd hate to see the Man Booker prioritise entertainment over literary merit."
 