
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> enjoyed the distraction 
of European competition last night as, despite dropping points for the first 
time in the group, they qualified for the knockout stages of the Uefa Cup. 
Nacho Novo maintained his record of scoring in every game of the group stage to 
cancel out Ireneusz Jelen's opener, and Kris Boyd equalised again after Daniel 
Niculae had restored Auxerre's lead.

Rangers' manager, Paul Le Guen, has been under pressure over his side's 
domestic form, which has left them 15 points behind Celtic in the league, and 
he was encouraged by last night's display. "Auxerre are a good team with great 
players but we responded well and never gave up," he said. "I feel there is a 
real spirit in the team. I feel we are improving and it's a great feeling; we 
can get through this difficult period. It's great they are able to fight on the 
pitch for Rangers."

Allan McGregor was called into action after five minutes when Jelen unleashed 
a thunderous effort; the Rangers goalkeeper tipped it over the bar. Novo then 
had a chance to take the lead when he collected a superb long ball from Barry 
Ferguson but Fabien Cool raced off his line to block his point-blank shot. 
Rangers were soon forced to make a change when Steven Smith slipped on the wet 
surface and limped off to be replaced by Julien Rodriguez after 20 minutes.

Once the action started again, only the exploits of McGregor kept the scores 
level when he first denied Jelen, then scrambled off the ground to block the 
rebound from Beno√Æt Pedretti. After 31 minutes, however, he was powerless as 
Jelen pounced on a long ball from Younes Kaboul and raced into the box to score.

The woodwork then denied Auxerre a second goal when Oumar Kalabane's header 
struck the crossbar. Instead it was Rangers who scored next, after 62 minutes. 
A Dado Prso ball into the box came off Charlie Adam and fell kindly to the feet 
of Novo, who stabbed home from eight yards.Auxerre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/auxerre> responded by replacing Pedretti 
with Niculae and it proved an inspired substitution when he scored within 
seconds of coming on. He threw himself in front of Jelen's cross to send a 
diving header past McGregor and restore Auxerre's lead.

Novo narrowly missed a chance to haul Rangers level again, before being 
replaced by Filip Sebo for the last 10 minutes. But Rangers secured the point 
they needed to see them through to the last 32 when the ball broke for Boyd to 
score with six minutes remaining.
 