
Kris Boyd's expected move to Birmingham has hit a delay after a row over 
personal terms left the deal in limbo. TheRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> striker travelled to Birmingham 
tonight to discuss a contract and undergo a medical, but unforeseen stumbling 
blocks have arisen during the talks, in which it had been assumed Boyd would 
sign a five-year-contract, worth £20,000, with the St Andrews club.

Following 24 hours of negotiations between the clubs it is understood 
Birmingham had agreed to pay an initial £3.8m for the former Scotland striker – 
20% of which will go to Kilmarnock, his former club – plus about £1m in add-ons 
relating to appearances and City gaining promotion to thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, but their bartering could 
potentially have all been for nothing.

The disagreement is a blow for Alex McLeish, the Birmingham manager who 
brought Boyd to Rangers and also worked with him while in charge of the 
Scotland national team, and had hoped to parade the striker as his player as 
early as tomorrow.

The possible departure of Boyd, who has scored 20 goals in 21 outings this 
season, will cause ructions among the Rangers support as the team seeks to 
prevent Celtic from securing four championships in succession. The 25-year-old 
forward may not be the only player to make an exit at Ibrox, however, as the 
defender Madjid Bougherra remains linked with possible moves to Marseille, 
Auxerre andNewcastle United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> while two other 
top-flight English clubs are believed to have joined Joe Kinnear, the manager 
on Tyneside, in the pursuit of the Rangers captain, Barry Ferguson.

While Ferguson has no strong inclination to return to the England – he 
previously endured an ill-fated time at Blackburn Rovers – Rangers would find 
it hard to refuse a bid in excess of £2m for the 30-year-old. The Rangers 
manager, Walter Smith, meanwhile, will turn his attention to the English 
Premier League's loan market in an attempt to increase his attacking options 
given Boyd's imminent move.
 