
Ahead of the Activate Johannesburg Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-johannesburg>, Emma Kaye, 
CEO ofBozza <http://bozza.mobi/>, spoke to us about creating a digital platform 
to connect artists with fans who want locally-relevant content and to unlock 
creativity across the continent.

What's your background, and what led you to Bozza?
Being born in Zimbabwe and immersed in the creative industries from a child, I 
have always valued artists and what they contribute to society. Throughout my 
career as a serial entrepreneur, I have always put the creative industries at 
the centre of all that I have done. My first business was as the co-founder and 
CEO ofTriggerfish Animation <http://www.triggerfishstudios.com/en/>, one of 
Africa's leading animation companies. Triggerfish allowed me to understand the
value of content <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/digital-content>; 
it can educate, entertain and engage audiences. However, after 10 years in this 
role, it was clear that while Africa is a continent of storytelling and music 
and there is value in this content, traditional media only allowed for a few to 
have the privilege of this expression. To have a voice in the creative 
industry, an artist needs access to funds, broadcasters, radio, labels and 
more. Testament to this,Africa's share of the global creative economy is less 
than 1% <http://issuu.com/icpubs/docs/ab0214_lr>, which proves that while 
talent is universal, opportunities are not; enter Bozza.

What are Bozza's goals?
Bozza is a technology platform that enables young African musicians, 
filmmakers and poets to connect with fans who want locally-relevant content via 
their mobile device, desktop and free-to-air satellite television. Trusted and 
transparent, Bozza is a marketplace for the next generation of African talent, 
unlocking the creative currency on the continent and catalysing positive social 
change at scale – turning access into economic participation for artists and 
pride for everyday African consumers.

You focus on providing content local to the user, which most other online 
platforms don't provide. How successful has the strategy been so far?
In terms of our success, after two years of development, Bozza has a robust 
platform that allows any artist anywhere in Africa to upload any digital 
material whether it is film, music, text or pictures. We then ensure that this 
content is optimised and served to fans on whatever device they are using. As a 
mobile first company, we ensure that artists' material can be consumed on more 
than 3,000 types of mobile devices, including feature phones. Audiences also 
have the option to use the desktop to discover new African artists.

Since August 2013, we have more than 1,100 artists from across Africa: Kenya, 
Zimbabwe, Zambia, Angola, Tanzania, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal so 
far uploading their work and sharing with their fans. In launching a recent 
music service for South African users, we had 200,000 subscribers wanting 
locally relevant content. In short, our strategy has been a great success so 
far.

Is media consumption and online culture in Africa the same as in the rest of 
the world – or are there distinct differences?
The media consumption in Africa is primarily done through mobile devices, 
rather than a desktop or tablet. This is the main distinction which in turn 
impacts file size and time spent online due to the data costs.

What's Bozza's future, and do you have any other projects in the pipeline?
While Bozza continues to build the artist base from across Africa, we are also 
increasing the number of distribution channels to give the biggest possible 
reach for the artists. This includes not just mobile and desktop but alsoIPTV 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IPTV>, internet radio, satellite TV and events.

Finally, what is your message for the delegates attending the 
Guardian's Activate Johannesburg Summit?
Mobility has huge socio-economic, educational, commercial, societal and 
individual significance. Emerging economies have been hugely resourceful in 
using mobility in socio-economically important ways, to empower micro 
enterprises. By embracing mobility as a content delivery platform, emerging 
countries or continents can leapfrog developed economies, establishing a unique 
societal brand in a vibrant new industry.

Emma Kaye is a speaker at this year's Activate Johannesburg Summit, 26 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-johannesburg>. Apply for 
your free placehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/apr/15/activate-johannesburg-apply-now>
.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> content 
is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. 
Find out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 