
Every month food service supplier, Brakes, donates meals to a national food 
charity feeding homeless and vulnerable people around the UK and, in the 
process, is saving itself thousands of pounds.

Like other food service companies, Brakes is regularly left with food that is 
still fit to eat but which can't be distributed because it exceeds a minimum 
shelf life. Historically, the food has been dumped in landfill.

In partnership with the FareShare charity <http://www.fareshare.org.uk/>, some 
of this food is redistributed to 600 charities around the UK, which in turn 
feed 30,000 people a month who are living in hostels, day centres, night 
shelters and women's refuges.

Brakes' partnership with FareShare began in March 2010. Currently 16.5% of its 
surplus food, such as pre-prepared vegetables, desserts and chilled meat, goes 
to the charity, making it one of charity's largest suppliers.

Between March and October 2010, Brakes donated the equivalent of over 800,000 
meals, valued at £350,000. But by doing so Brakes saved £23,000 in landfill 
costs and prevented 1,112 tonnes of CO2 being released into the atmosphere.

It is the perfect marriage of community and environmental goals and Brakes 
plans to go even further. In September 2010, members of Brakes executive 
committee spent a day at FareShare's Bermondsey site working with other 
volunteers. 

In 2011 the company aims to increase meal equivalents donated to FareShare to 
over one million a year. This will keep 2,000 tonnes of food fit for human 
consumption out of landfill. 

In early 2012 it intends to donate 60% of edible food waste to charity, rising 
to 70% by the end of 2013.

As a result of this mutually-beneficial programme, Brakes leads the industry 
in minimising food waste and is a leading partner in FareShare's fight against 
hunger in the UK.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 