
Conversations on the internationalisation of UK universities are growing with 
different sides calling out the benefits and the areas in need of attention. 
Arguments usually tend towards the human rights records of the governments in 
countries whereuniversities go to set up their international campuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/09/uzbekistan-british-universities-human-rights-karimov>
. This is instead of focusing on the direct benefits the students and people in 
the countries will gain from the international universities.

International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/international> campuses 
set up by UK universities have a wider level of independence from the politics 
and policies of their host countries than domestic institutions. This can 
enpower students to see the world from a new perspective, one where the people 
have a voice and know their rights. This in itself is the purpose of education. 
But Africa has seen little of this ambition and growth.

As of May 2013, there was no UK university branch campus in Africa. One was 
opened in SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, but then 
closed in 2004. In 2011/2012 there were an estimated 35,255 African students 
studying in UK higher education institutions (HEIs). Nigeria contributed 17,620 
students to that number. Over one million students who finish secondary schools 
do not get placements in local universities because institutions are already 
overcrowded and there's simply not enough.

Currently the relationship UK universities have with Africa is with the 
international marketing offices that seek to grab those students who can afford 
UK university learning. There are very minimal institution-to-institution level 
collaborations, partnerships and exchange. I believe this is because of the 
issue of presumed instabilities in governments, security challenges and general 
lack of communication. The UK universities retreat to a safe-mode which allow 
them minimal risks and higher financial gains.

To help build the higher education system that Africa needs and deserves, UK 
universities need to start setting up institutional-level partnerships that 
will benefit both the universities and the students who attend them. Based on 
my experience working with the University of Wolverhampton to create an 
institution level collaboration, this is what we found worked:

1) Student exchange programmes that allow African and UK students to spend 
some time in partner international campuses, and learn in a new environment 
with a different set of teacherswho offer different perspectives – this will 
help them to shape a global view.they can bring back to their campuses.

2) Staff exchange programmes that create visiting positions in the 
participating institutions. Experienced faculty members will spend six to 12 
months in international campuses, bringing new learning experiences to both the 
students and teachers through seminars, lectures and public speaking.

3) Research partnerships that will drive the development of local academic 
content and curriculum, scientific research and local industry participation in 
the academic process. African universities are currently lacking in the area of 
adequate research by both department members and students, with very little 
being done.

The need for quality in African institutions is highlighted by the 2013 – 2014 
World University Rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/table/2013/sep/10/qs-world-university-rankings-2013>
, where no African university came in the top 200. We first need to help 
improve the quality of students and academics who are already in African 
institutions before seeking to expand internationally into the region. One of 
the reasons the Asian market is so viable is because the system is already ripe 
for such expansion. The case is different in the African context.

Meanwhile, the continued and increasing UK visa restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/nov/27/london-met-university-global-repuation>
 will affect the push for internationalisation in the "send students over to 
the UK" model. With other countries easing their own visa rules, coupled with 
the high cost of living for students in the UK and rising fees for 
international students, the number of students arriving on UK campuses will 
gradually begin to fall.

Organised well however, student, staff and research exchanges could gradually 
wear away the presumed risks of working in the African higher education sector 
. Subsequently, we could see involvement of both UK and other international 
universities in the African market with new branch campuses being developed on 
the continent, particularly in the East and West African clusters. Fewer 
numbers of African students getting international visas should not prevent UK 
universities from bringing an education to them.

Gossy Ukanwoke is the founder of Beni American University 
<http://beniamerican.org/> – follow him on Twitter @gossyomega 
<https://twitter.com/gossyomega>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 