
The brutalist headquarters of South America's biggest company, Petrobras 
<http://www.petrobras.com/en/home.htm>, offers a harsh riposte to those who try 
to romanticise Brazil as a land of golden beaches and endless forest. This 
week, the concrete edifice in central Rio de Janeiro was the focus of a pro-oil 
rally by thousands of petrochemical workers amid a presidential election debate 
dominated by how to manage the nation's vast fossil fuel reserves.

It is a question that has opened up the biggest gap between President Dilma 
Rousseff <https://www.theguardian.com/world/dilma-rousseff>, an old industry 
champion of the Workers Party, andher main challenger Marina Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/30/brazil-marina-silva-first-green-president-election-dilma-rousseff>
, a former environment minister who has pledged to shift priorities towards 
alternatives energies like wind, solar and ethanol.

This is more than just a Brazilian rerun of George Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-bush> and Big Oil versus Al Gore 
and climate concern, because state-run Petrobras is no ordinary company and – 
with the company also mired in a massive corruption scandal – this is no 
ordinary time.

On Wednesday, a former senior executive of the company, Roberto Costa, is due 
to testify that dozens of senior politicians received kickbacks from oil 
contracts as part of a scheme to buy votes. According to local media, he has 
already told police that big contractors with Petrobras contributed a 3% cut on 
contracts to campaign funds.

If his allegations are corroborated, the scale of the wrongdoing could dwarf 
the other major scandal of recent years –known as the Mensalão scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/02/brazil-corruption-trial-politicians>
 – and further undermine the reputation of a company that has long been seen as 
a national treasure.

"The scandal is really bad. It's bigger than anything else so far, bigger than 
Mensalão and will play to Silva's advantage," said Heni Ozi Cukier, a professor 
at Fundação Getulio Vargas private university.

Petrobras <http://www.petrobras.com.br/en/about-us/> is a pillar of the 
Brazilian economy, with production of 2.5 million barrels of oil per day, a 
near monopoly on petrol sales, 87,000 employees and control over the biggest 
oil deposits discovered in the world this century. The company's undersea 
drilling made Brazil self-sufficient in oil for the first time in 2006. In the 
following years, the company grew so fast that executives boasted they were on 
course to become the biggest firm in the world.

Its value has since fallen by half, but the company is as prominent as ever in 
the nation's life. As a state-controlled corporation, it is also a major source 
of funding for cultural events, hospitals and schools. Nationalist pride and 
defensiveness often dwell on the company – as was evident last year in the 
widespread public outrage that followed allegations from the US whistleblower
Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/edward-snowden> that 
Washington was spying on Petrobras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/09/nsa-spying-brazil-oil-petrobras>.

"Petrobras is a strong symbol for the Brazilian people," says Edmar Almeida of 
the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. "It is the largest company in the 
country, a success story of our engineering prowess, and a way to ensure that 
the nation keeps control of our oil and natural resources."

But the latest scandal has added to longstanding fears that the company is 
treated as a tool for politicians to reward loyalists and generate slush funds 
to buy off potential opponents. With the government holding more than half of 
the shares, senior positions in the firm have long been allocated on party 
lines to supporters of the government; and many of their decisions are 
questionable.

Petrobras lost billions of dollars on an oil refinery in Pernambuco and spent 
$1bn on a plant in Texas – signed off by Rousseff – that was sold on two years 
later at a markdown of 80%.

Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil> prices have been determined 
by political and social concerns. Ordered by Rousseff to keep inflation down, 
Petrobras has been importing oil at about $100 per barrel and selling it at 
closer to $80. Shareholders are not happy. The stock value of the company has 
almost halved since its offering in 2010. Back then, it was the fourth most 
highly valued company in the world. Today it is 30th.

As a result, Petrobras has taken a central position in the election this year 
as all sides have tried to capitalise on the scandal. "I cannot imagine that 
people can trust a party that – for 12 years – put in place a director to raid 
the coffers of Petrobras," Silva said at a speech in Rio last week that called 
for executives to be appointed by an independent search committee.

With a manifesto championing sustainable development, Silva has promised to 
resurrect ethanol – which has been damaged by oil subsidies – and put more 
emphasis on wind and solar. Mindful of the popularity of plans to mine major 
"sub-salt" deposits buried deep under the floor of the ocean, she has promised 
to honour existing contracts and said oil will continue to play a key role in 
the economy. But advisors say fuel taxes will rise.

After a spectacular surge in the polls, Silva looks almost certain to be in a 
runoff with Rousseff for the final vote on 25 October. With the race still too 
close to call, the president's camp have honed in on Petrobras policy as a 
potential vote-loser for Silva.

Rousseff has repeatedly alleged that her rival's policies would hurt the 
nation's biggest asset. Her supporters claim the media attacks on Petrobras are 
part of an attempt to wrestle it back into private hands.

The pro-oil march this week, organised by the ruling Workers' Party, resembled 
rallies in Venezuela, where employees of the nationalised petrol company are 
bussed in to support the government.

More than 1,000 people – many of them in workers' overalls or red T-shirts – 
joined the demonstration, which was led by former Worker's Party presidentLuiz 
Inácio Lula da Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luiz-inacio-lula-da-silva>.

Some chanted "Viva Petrobras! Viva Brasil!". Others carried banners declaring 
"Defend Sub-Salt. Defend Petrobras." Many wore T-shirts bearing the image of 
Rousseff as a youthful guerrilla fighter. Anti-Marina Silva badges were 
everywhere.

"Sustainable development sounds nice, but alternative energy can supply only a 
fraction of our needs," lamented union activist and Workers Party supporter 
Francisco de Assis. "We must not delay investment in Petrobras. Petroleum is 
essential forBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> and the passport 
to the future for your youth. It is a source of wealth and funding for health 
and education".

Dirty tricks are becoming more commonplace. Some on the march claimed – 
without evidence – that Silva was being paid by the United States to undermine 
the competitiveness of Brazil's biggest company.

Others said she wanted more private investment and less of a Petrobras 
monopoly, though this will play badly in Rio – the headquarters of the nation's 
company, the stepping off point for pre-salt exploration and a key electoral 
battleground.

Ildo Sauer, who was gas and energy director at Petrobras under former 
president Lula but has since become critical of the way the company is run, 
believes the comparisons with the US election in 2000 are valid.

Rousseff, he says, is like Bush in her support for big companies, whereas 
Silva is like Gore trying to save the world. But with Brazilian coalitions even 
harder to build than those in Washington and Petrobras playing such a central 
role in the national identity, he doubts that either candidate will achieve 
much of a change.

"They both have almost a religious belief, a dogma about it. But I don't think 
they'll be able to do what they want," he said.
 