
The sun has risen over Soshanguve. It is winter in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, which – if you are living in a 
poorly insulated, unheated house on the arid, elevated plains north of Pretoria 
– means cold and sleepless nights. Morning brings warmth and, these days, 
politicians.

On Wednesday, South Africa will go to the polls. Up to 26 million registered 
voters 
<http://www.elections.org.za/content/Voters-Roll/Registration-statistics/> will 
decide who they want as mayors and local councillors – and possibly redraw the 
political map of the country when they do it.

For the first time since taking power in 1994, the African National Congress 
(ANC) may win less than 60% of the votes. The party may even lose control of 
the biggest cities. Surveys show the opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) – 
which calls for a total renewal of South African politics, but has so far had 
difficulty breaking out of its stronghold in the west of the country – ahead in 
the most important cities.

ANC officials have dismissed the polls. In Pretoria, Thoko Didiza, the ANC 
mayoral candidate, said she was confident of victory. “My campaign is going 
very well,” the 51-year-old former minister told the Guardian.

The DA candidate in the city saw things differently. “This is the moment when 
we break the mould,” said Solly Msimanga, 36.

South Africa: prosecutors head off new attempt to put Jacob Zuma on trial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/south-africa-prosecutors-head-off-new-attempt-to-put-jacob-zuma-on-trial>
The stakes are undoubtedly high. Losing control of cities such as Pretoria and 
Johannesburg would deal an enormous blow to the prestige of the ANC and deepen 
already profound unease about the leadership ofJacob Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, president of South Africa and of the 
party.

The ANC would also lose immense influence over the daily lives of around 14 
million people 
<http://www.statssa.gov.za/?page_id=1021&id=city-of-tshwane-municipality> and 
annual budgets of $10bn (£7.5bn). It would come as a profound psychological 
shock to many ANC officials. One recently told supporters that the party, which 
led the struggle against the apartheid regime through the 1970s and 1980s,had 
been “anointed by God” 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/thetimes/2016/07/18/God-chose-ANC-to-lead>. 


Pretoria, also known as Tshwane, is a city that sprawls. The contrast between 
life in the vast, high-walled mansions of wealthy neighbourhoods such as 
Waterkloof and in the townships is immense. There is chronic substance abuse 
and some of the highest levels of violent crime in the world.

But despite youth unemployment rates touching 36%, there is opportunity too, 
and the city attracts tens of thousands of migrants from rural areas and 
neighbouring countries every year. Many live in desperate squatter camps on the 
rim of Pretoria.

​South Africa's 'Teflon president' survives another day, but scandal will 
stick eventually
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/jacob-zuma-south-africa-anc-nkandla-impeachment>
Soshanguve was established by the apartheid regime on an almost empty, flat 
plateau north of the city. Over 20 years, successive ANC administrations have 
built homes, streets and parks, and provided basic utilities. It is solid ANC 
territory, as was clear when Didiza’s convoy rolled into the centre of the 
township.

Local party functionaries warmed up the crowd with protest songs that have 
been ANC standards for more than 30 years. One refers to the armoured trucks 
used by apartheid police forces to brutally control the townships. The 
references were lost on Portia Chake, who didn’t understand the old slang name 
for the vehicles, but the 34-year-old knew the words to a second chant: “You 
can arrest us, beat us and we will never lie down.”

Didiza, wearing a T-shirt celebrating the foundation of the ANC 104 years ago, 
ran through her campaign speech, listing the achievements of the party. This 
strategy was predictable, experts said. “The ANC have been in power since 1994 
and will naturally claim credit for all improvements since then. And there 
certainly has been a dramatic improvement in most people’s lives over the 
period as a whole,” said Gareth Newman, an expert in governance at theInstitute 
for Security Studies <https://www.issafrica.org/> (ISS) in Pretoria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fthis-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff39b78d8fa8f10ec823712710a0544625d46fe41%2F0_219_4560_2736%2F4560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20the%20mould%3F%20South%20Africa%20at%20a%20crossroads%20as%20country%20goes%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fthis-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20the%20mould%3F%20South%20Africa%20at%20a%20crossroads%20as%20country%20goes%20to%20polls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fthis-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff39b78d8fa8f10ec823712710a0544625d46fe41%2F0_219_4560_2736%2F4560.jpg>
 The South African president, Jacob Zuma, with Danny Jordaan, the ANC mayor of 
Port Elizabeth. Photograph: Michael Sheehan/AFP/Getty Images 
“But from 2009 the statistics don’t look so good. In fact, in some areas there 
is deterioration,” he added.Public protests have been multiplying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/22/violence-flares-in-pretoria-over-anc-mayoral-candidate>
. Four-fifths are non-violent, but there are still five or six violent 
demonstrations every day.

The ANC has many problems. One is infighting. Didiza’s nomination as candidate 
in Pretoria sparked lethal riots in Soshanguve and surrounding neighbourhoods. 
The outburst was now “all over”, said an aide. Then there are severe economic 
problems at the national level and successivecontroversies surrounding Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/jacob-zuma-south-africa-anc-nkandla-impeachment>
, whose approval ratings have slumped.

At a DA meeting in a poor area in central Pretoria, many potential voters said 
they would vote for the opposition party to protest against graft in government 
and in the ANC. “They have become thieves,” said Esme Mofokeng, a 44-year-old 
who has voted for the ANC in every previous poll. Zuma has been accused of 
alleged improper relations with a hugely wealthy business family and has been 
ordered topay back state funds spent on improvements to his own home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/27/jacob-zuma-south-africa-president-private-home>
.

Mandela’s rainbow nation has gone from hero to zero. Can it reclaim his 
legacy? | Peter Hain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/mandela-rainbow-nation-jacob-zuma-south-africa-anc>
Didiza said voters she had met on the campaign trail were either unbothered by 
the charges against the party and Zuma, or did not believe them. Her view is 
backed up by pollsters who say the ANC’s record on delivery of basic services 
is key. While often of poor quality, houses, schools and clinics have been 
built and land rights continue to be a major concern.

Most expect the ANC to hold on to power, but with a reduced majority. “We are 
not really yet at a real tipping point, but we can expect a further decline in 
support. It will probably dip into the 50s for the first time in the democratic 
era,” said Newman, of the ISS.

The DA has its own problems. It is accused by critics of primarily 
representing the interests of South Africa’s white minority, but few neutral 
observers deny that the DA’s reputation for competent administration is broadly 
deserved. However, that may not be enough – just yet – to bring it to power.

Dio Kabelo, a 29-year-old in Soshanguve, explained why the ANC would get his 
vote. “I was born in the ANC. It means my life, it means freedom,” he said.
 