
Breitbart News reporter Michelle Fields and editor-at-large Ben Shapiro have 
resigned from the rightwing news site over its handling of an alleged assault 
on Fields by Donald Trump’s campaign manager.

Corey Lewandowski allegedly grabbed Fields by the arm and pulled her away 
<http:// 
https://twitter.com/Jamie_Weinstein/status/707407739744591872?ref_src=twsrc^tfw>
 from Trump when she tried to ask him a question at a press conference in 
Florida last week.

On Friday, Breitbart, which has been sympathetic to Trump throughout his 
campaign,published a long post 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/03/11/trump-presser-ben-terris-misidentified/>
 in which it said “it is unclear that contact has been made” on Fields in video 
clips of the incident.


Donald Trump accuses reporter in assault row of 'making the story up'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-reporter-assault-michelle-fields-corey-lewandowski>
The 28-year-old, who published a post of her account on Breitbart 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-journalism/2016/03/10/3276486/>, said she was 
left with finger-shaped bruises following the incident.
Michelle Fields (@MichelleFields) 
I guess these just magically appeared on me @CLewandowski_ 
<https://twitter.com/CLewandowski_> @realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>. So weird. pic.twitter.com/oD8c4D7tw3 
<https://t.co/oD8c4D7tw3>
 <https://twitter.com/MichelleFields/status/708005032839548929> March 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MichelleFields/status/708005032839548929> 
On Sunday night, Fields informed Breitbart News, which is chaired by Steve 
Bannon, ofher decision to resign 
<https://twitter.com/MichelleFields/status/709233537518608385>.

“Today I informed the management at Breitbart News of my immediate 
resignation,” Fields said in a statement first sent to BuzzFeed News. “I do not 
believe Breitbart News has adequately stood by me during the events of the past 
week and because of that I believe it is now best for us to part ways.”


Following the incident, Trump’s campaign issued a statement casting doubt on 
Fields’s account. Trump said: “Everybody said nothing happened. Perhaps she 
made the story up. I think that’s what happened.”

The incident was seen by another journalist, the Washington Post reporter Ben 
Terris, and appeared to be caught on video, and Lewandowski tweeted that she was
an “attention seeker” 
<https://twitter.com/CLewandowski_/status/708020305013448704?ref_src=twsrc^tfw>.

The alleged assault sparked internal strife at Breitbart, founded by the late 
Andrew Breitbart, prompting senior editor-at-large Joel Pollak totell staff to 
stop tweeting, speculating and defending Fields 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/rosiegray/breitbart-editor-ordered-staffers-to-stop-defending-michelle#.wu83P0O6L>
.


That did not stop Shapiro following Fields out the door and issuing a 
statement heavily criticising management for turning the news site into 
“Trump’s personal Pravda”.


“Andrew [Breitbart’s] life mission has been betrayed,” said Shapiro. “Indeed, 
Breitbart News, under the chairmanship of Steve Bannon, has put a stake through 
the heart of Andrew’s legacy. In my opinion, Steve Bannon … has sold out 
Andrew’s mission in order to back another bully, Donald Trump; he has shaped 
the company into Trump’s personal Pravda, to the extent that he abandoned and 
undercut his own reporter, Breitbart News’ Michelle Fields, in order to protect 
Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, who allegedly assaulted Michelle.”

Shapiro accused the company of “tepidly asking for an apology” and attempting 
to “abandon” Fields by ordering staff not to talk publicly about the issue.

Kurt Bardella, Breitbart’s spokesman, was the first staffer to leave in the 
wake of the alleged rough handling of Fields.
 