
Writers for the conservative news outlet Breitbart have resigned in protest 
over the company’s treatment of Michelle Fields, a campaign reporter who says 
she was assaulted by Donald Trump’s campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski. Fields 
herself also resigned, as has the company’s media relations representative.

Donald Trump accuses reporter in assault row of 'making the story up'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-reporter-assault-michelle-fields-corey-lewandowski>
“I do not believe Breitbart News has adequately stood by me during the events 
of the past week and because of that I believe it is now best for us to part 
ways,” Fields told BuzzFeed, which reported news of her departure late on 
Sunday.

The dispute has riven Breitbart, one of the leading news sites catering to 
conservative views, which claims around 17m unique visitors per month.

Editor-at-large Ben Shapiro is among those who resigned, calling out Breitbart 
chairman Steve Bannon in particular: “In my opinion, Steve Bannon is a bully, 
and has sold out [founder] Andrew [Breitbart]’s mission in order to back 
another bully, Donald Trump; he has shaped the company into Trump’s personal 
Pravda, to the extent that he abandoned and undercut his own reporter.”

The dispute started when Fields accused Lewandowski of assaulting her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-reporter-assault-michelle-fields-corey-lewandowski>
 at a campaign event in Jupiter, Florida on 8 March.

Brietbart, a conservative news site with a largely positive 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/03/13/donald-trump-zones-in-on-core-populist-nationalist-issues-well-make-america-greater-than-ever-before/>
 perspective on Trump, forbade staffers from expressing support for Fields 
publicly and questioned the veracity of her account, going so far as tocanvass 
people who had been at the event 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/03/11/trump-presser-ben-terris-misidentified/>
 with Fields for conflicting accounts of how she arrived at her injuries.

The company’s fortunes are bound more closely with Trump’s than are those of 
competing conservative publications like the Daily Caller. With WorldNetDaily, 
Brietbart flirts more openly with the fringes of American conservatism, 
approvingly christening Trump’s campaign pitch “populist nationalism 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/02/08/donald-trump-makes-last-pitch-to-new-hampshire-before-primaries-to-packed-stadium/>
”.

Fields posted pictures of her injuries – fingerprint-shaped bruises – to 
Twitter. Washington Post reporter Ben Terriswrote on 10 March 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/inside-trumps-inner-circle-his-staffers-are-willing-to-fight-for-him-literally/2016/03/10/4b2b18e8-e660-11e5-a6f3-21ccdbc5f74e_story.html>
 that he had watched as Lewandowski “grabbed her arm and yanked her out of the 
way”.

Terris quizzed Fields about the incident at the time, and the conversation was 
caught on video. Fields responded with shock: “Yeah, I don’t understand,” she 
told him. “That looks horrible. You’re going after a Breitbart reporter, the 
people who are nicest to you?”

Fields filed a report with the Jupiter police related to the incident.

When the picture of Fields’ bruised arm went up on Twitter, Joel Pollak, 
attorney for Breitbart, told the rest of the writers via the chat application 
Slack: “Please do not retweet or respond 
<http://www.ijreview.com/2016/03/559606-leaked-messages-show-ashamed-writers-at-breitbart-revolting-against-weak-leadership/>
.”

“This is the kind of problem that requires a coordinated response, which 
management has provided,” Pollak wrote. “We have asked the campaign for an 
apology and we have put Michelle’s statement up.”

When Fields resigned, Pollak put the only mention of her departure in the last 
line of the article he had written, and, under the pseudonym William Bigelow (a 
name used by Shapiro’s father, David, another Breitbart contributor), quoted 
himself: “I’m worried. I had enjoyed listening to Ben read Breitbart California 
stories, word for word, without attribution, on his morning radio show,” Pollak 
said he said. “Now what will he do for content?”

David Shapiro resigned from Breitbart on Sunday evening, according to Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/03/breitbart-mocking-ben-shapiro-220712>
.

Pollak’s article was illustrated with an image of a baby snake hatching, a 
picture lifted from Facebook of a happy-looking Fields playing a game with 
Trump-brand playing cards, and tags that included “traitors”, “urine”, “jihad” 
and “baby snake”.


The article (but not the metadata headline, which as of this writing still 
reads Ben Shapiro Betrays Loyal Readers, Listicles) has since been replaced 
with anapology 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-journalism/2016/03/14/futures-markets-wrap-dow-continues-uncertain-climb/>
 in which Pollak admits to writing the post attributed to Bigelow/Shapiro.

Pollak did not respond to a request for comment.
 