
Richard Ford calls the short story the “high wire act of literature”, but my 
favourite description comes from Irish writerMary Lavin 
<http://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2012/06/12/an-arrow-in-flight-the-pleasures-of-mary-lavin/>
, who described it as an “arrow in flight”. The phrase captures the brevity and 
epiphany of the form and some of the best practitioners – from Chekhov to 
Lorrie Moore, Katherine Mansfield to Kevin Barry – have fired it into 
unfamiliar places, soaring over a multitude of themes and ideas. Some are led 
by characters, others play with language or tone (who can forget the bone chill 
after reading Shirley Jackson’s The Lottery?), but all manage to distill 
something terrifying or tender or utterly distinct in just a couple of thousand 
words.

In the late 1990s, while studying English at university, I took a course on 
the Irish short story. The prescribed text, The Oxford Book of Irish Short 
Stories, edited by William Trevor, contained early Gaelic folk tales and 39 
short stories. We had another mandatory course on literary theory and – hurrah! 
– an introduction to feminism. Through a burgeoning exposure to Hélène Cixous 
and Julia Kristeva, I noticed that only seven of the 39 stories were by women. 
A scan of the library shelves revealed that Trevor’s anthology wasn’t the worst 
offender when it came to gender imbalance. Almost every collection was edited 
by a man, and each book I opened – including anthologies from all around the 
world – was heavily weighted towards male writers. Irish offerings were no 
different: pick up an anthology of Irish short stories published between 1950 
and 1990, and a familiar pattern emerges. Many anthologies had no women, others 
had just two or three female writers, and invariably these were the brilliant 
troika (before that word meant something else in contemporary Ireland) of Mary 
Lavin, Edna O’Brien and Elizabeth Bowen. In The Lonely Voice, his 1962 study of 
the short story, Frank O’Connor wrote that the form’s “submerged population 
groups” were silenced and marginalised. Looking at the lack of women 
represented in anthologies over the decades, women could have been included as 
just such a fringe group.

Then in 2001, I discovered Cutting the Night in Two: Short Stories by Irish 
Women Writers 
<http://newisland.ie/product/cutting-the-night-in-two-short-stories-by-irish-women-writers/>
. Edited by Evelyn Conlon and Hans-Christian Oeser, it featured 34 writers, 
living and dead – but all female. It proved a point that those library 
anthologies missed: women writers had been there all along, writing away 
through the centuries, but simply weren’t included in the same numbers as their 
male counterparts. Why?Maria Edgeworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/03/maria-edgeworth-helen-john-mullan>
 was well known for her fiction as well as her social commentary, andCharlotte 
Riddell <http://www.charlotteriddell.co.uk/> published more than 50 books, 
including many short stories. What ofMary Beckett 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland/mary-beckett-literary-world-mourning-loss-of-top-woman-writer-29745537.html>
,Maeve Kelly 
<https://lipsticksocialist.wordpress.com/2012/04/19/maeve-kelly-irishwoman-feministwriter-activist/>
,Teresa Deevy <http://deevy.nuim.ie/> or Juanita Casey 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/juanita-casey-writer-artist-and-horse-breeder-who-lived-the-archetypal-bohemian-life-8382233.html>
?

Visibility still remains an issue, as VIDA <http://www.vidaweb.org/about-vida/>
 statistics, Joanna Walsh’s#readwomen 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/readwomen?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
 campaign andthis piece by Kamila Shamshie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/05/kamila-shamsie-2018-year-publishing-women-no-new-books-men>
 suggest, but in compiling The Long Gaze Back: An Anthology of Irish Women 
Writers, I was spoilt for choice. Writers such as Eimear McBride, Mary 
Costello, Belinda McKeon, Lucy Caldwell and Lisa McInerney (all featured in the 
book) are part of a palpable energy in the new wave of Irish writing. They all 
feel the pragmatic pull of the novel, but are still committed to the shorter 
form.

Several factors ultimately went into the selection of the final 30 stories. I 
could have chosen 100 women, but my publisher was understandably stubborn about 
the page count. In opting for deceased writers, I tried to find stories that I 
both admired, and hadn’t already been heavily anthologised (I cheated in 
choosingThe Demon Lover  
<http://www.bookrags.com/studyguide-demonlover/#gsc.tab=0>because it’s 
Elizabeth Bowen’s best story). All work by the 22 living writers is new and 
unpublished: writers were given a word count but were free to write on any 
subject, so there is emigration, pregnancy, loss, capitalism, motherhood, 
ghosts, sex, painting, the American frontier and more.

Titles are tricky, but I hope The Long Gaze Back – a quote from Maeve 
Brennan’s novella The Visitor – captures the lengthy arc of Irish women’s 
writing. For it is a long arc: there are 218 years between the oldest and 
youngest writers in the collection. In some ways this anthology is a triptych: 
deceased classic writers (Somerville & Ross, Kate O’Brien, Mary Lavin) sit 
alongside feted names from the last decade (Anne Enright) and the next 
generation of new voices. There are overlaps and patterns, as well as a 
faithfulness to the canon that came before, and a desire to map new places.

An anthology is a cultural snapshot, and a book must have an endpoint, which 
is difficult when sharp new voices –Sara Baume 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/07/sara-baume-readers-nominee-guardian-first-book-award-2015>
,Danielle McLaughlin 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/09/15/dinosaurs-planets> – keep 
announcing themselves. Irish women’s writing has never been more expansive, but 
it started centuries ago, something that The Long Gaze Back attempts to 
acknowledge, while reinforcing the breadth and brilliance of the contemporary 
Irish short story.

 * The Long Gaze Back is published by New Island 
<http://newisland.ie/product/long-gaze-back-anthology-irish-women-writers/>. 
Editor Sinéad Gleeson and writer Lucy Caldwell will discuss the book at the 
London literature festival at the Southbank Centre on 5 October at 6.30pm.
 