
Russell Maliphant is having a hip-hop moment 
<http://www.google.com/search?q=hip+hop+dance&hl=en&prmd=imvns&source=lnms&tbm=isch&ei=cPomT__VAqGn0QWgsszNCg&sa=X&oi=mode_link&ct=mode&cd=2&sqi=2&ved=0CCcQ_AUoAQ&biw=1279&bih=601>
. His arms and torso are tensely angled, his weight is hunkered down, and warps 
and jerks are passing through his body like a robotic Mexican wave. For a 
50-year-old novice – especially one as unassuming and quietly spoken as 
Maliphant – it's an unexpectedly convincing imitation of street style. But what 
makes this hip-hop moment so special, and so bizarre, is the location.

I've arranged to meet the choreographer in the sculpture garden of the Rodin 
museum <http://www.musee-rodin.fr/> in Paris. In this high-walled sanctum, 
where the silence of the statues is broken only by birdsong, the two of us are 
as far from the inner-city vibe of street dance as it's possible to be. Yet, as 
Maliphant demonstrates, it was here that he drew inspiration for his latest 
work, The Rodin Project, departing from the burnished, fluid elegance of his
trademark style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jun/04/guide-dance-russell-maliphant> 
into the language of popping and breaking.

"I've loved Rodin's work since I first came to this museum years ago," says 
Maliphant, standing among these monumental bronzes. "I felt there were so many 
qualities in his figures – the tension, the line, the flow – that I could use 
in dance. But when I began work on the piece, I realised some of his sculptures 
were so massive, so grounded, that I wasn't getting the weight of them in 
my movement."

So Maliphant went along to Breakin' Convention 
<http://www.breakinconvention.com/>, London's street dance festival, "and saw 
this dancer Dickson, who reminded me of a Rodin – the sense of gravity, the 
freezing, the waves of movement. There were other elements in hip-hop that made 
sense to me, too, like the positions held on the floor, the torsion through the 
body. I'm discovering a whole new language."

As Maliphant walks me around the sculptures, it's fascinating to see them 
through his eyes.The Burghers of Calais 
<http://www.google.com/search?q=burghers+of+calais&hl=en&prmd=imvns&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=1_smT4KNLMOl0QXf3b3OCg&sqi=2&ved=0CEkQsAQ&biw=1279&bih=601>
 is for him a lesson in grouping. He points out the way Rodin's six gaunt, 
heroic figures are facing each other. "The energy flows from one to the next 
much more than if they were all facing in one direction. And that flow is 
continued in the draping of their robes. Even though it's frozen movement, it's 
very dynamic."

Maliphant points out the extraordinary realism of certain details, the rope of 
a leg muscle, the tautness of a tendon. Yet he's equally impressed by how the 
19th-century French sculptor "amplified the expressiveness" of his figures by 
enlarging their hands and feet, and exaggerating the twist of a torso. How have 
all these elements made it into the bodies of his own six dancers? "Sometimes, 
we've allowed actual gestures and positions to be in there momentarily, but 
we've tried to avoid being literal. It's much more about groupings, or larger 
qualities like groundedness or weight."

We move on to The Gates of Hell 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Gates_of_Hell> – a gigantic vision of 
torment. Maliphant gazes in awe. "It's amazing, all these figures twisting and 
falling and pouring through this vertical surface." Tommy Franzen 
<http://www.tommyfranzen.com/Tommy_Franzen_Official/Tommy_Franzen.html>, 
another of his hip-hop dancers, is also an experienced climber, and Maliphant 
has deployed his skills in a section inspired by the gates in which dancers 
clamber across a giant steel set. "They're incredibly strong," he says of his 
cast. "They bring stuff to this piece I could never do."

The lure of such new languages has always been powerful for Canadian-born 
Maliphant. He began his career with Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet (now Birmingham 
Royal Ballet) in 1981, and even at that early stage was a natural maverick. 
"While everyone else would be warming up by doing the splits and having their 
legs up to here, I'd be wafting round the room doingtai chi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/24/luisa-dillner-tai-chi>. 
I'd always been interested in eastern philosophy. And I thought tai chi was 
beautiful: the quality of it, the softness."

His curiosity about the world outside ballet grew even stronger when SWRB 
began to focus on runs of 19th-century classics such asSwan Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/10/movetube-anthony-dowell-swan-lake>
. Frustrated by the lack of creativity, Maliphant joined the small independent 
ballet company Dance Advance. If giving up the security of a big institution 
felt like a risky move, it was nothing compared to his next project.Lloyd Newson
 <http://www.dv8.co.uk/about_dv8/lloyd_newson>, the brilliantly angry young man 
of modern dance and the director of DV8, had noticed Maliphant, and tempted him 
to perform in 1988's rivetingDead Dreams of Monochrome Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/aug/31/youtube.jazz>.

The subject matter was raw enough: the fantasy life of the serial killer 
Dennis Nilsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/26/ukcrime-london>. But what 
left Maliphant gobsmacked was Newson's style of movement. "I'd never seen dance 
like it. It was pretty brutal, a lot of violent running and jumping and 
catching and falling. But I was thinking – I could stay inside ballet, chipping 
away at the same line, trying to do an extra pirouette, but there is a world of 
dance out there I know nothing about. It felt liberating." There were, he 
recalls, no rules. "In ballet, if the leg is bent and the foot isn't pointed, 
that's nearly always wrong. But here I was suddenly being asked how I thought a 
shape should be. It was quite an eye-opener. It really got me thinking."

Laurie Booth <http://www.greenroomutd.org/people/laurie-booth> was his next 
mentor. Trained in the Brazilian martial art of capoeira, with its athletic 
balancing and eel-like twists and turns, Booth was also an expert improvisor. 
Maliphant says it was learning this "instant choreography" that gave him the 
confidence to embark on his own career as a dance-maker. His style was 
characterised by a Zen-like stillness and a boneless fluidity; in 
collaborations withMichael Hulls 
<http://www.theartsdesk.com/dance/theartsdesk-qa-lighting-designer-michael-hulls>
, a lighting designer with a genius for gilding, sculpting and shadowing 
movement, Maliphant's choreography made dancers look beautiful and interesting 
in ways no one had seen before. His works were taken into the repertory of 
other companies, including the Royal Ballet and Ballet Boyz, and he created 
several projects with the ballerinaSylvie Guillem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/oct/03/dance.art>.

As we move on to Rodin's drawings, I'm reminded of how Serge Diaghilev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/09/diaghilev-ballets-russes-victoria-albert>
 used to take fledgling choreographers around art galleries, so that they could 
learn about composition and line from the old masters. Some of Rodin's sketches 
are, frankly, erotic. Maliphant laughs. "Rodin would pin a note on his studio 
door when he was with some of his models saying, 'I'm worshipping at the 
altar.' But I like the fact that the drawings are much less familiar. That 
makes them easier for me to use." As we walk past the magisterial figure of The 
Thinker, he grins. "You see what I mean? There's no way I could use that. It's 
too well known."

Hulls' lighting will reflect Rodin's habit of going into his studio late at 
night and walking round his figures with a candle, while the music, by Russia's 
Alexander Zekke, was inspired by composers who were contemporaries of the 
sculptor; there's a piece by Massenet scored for double bass that Maliphant 
says has "real Rodin weight". The sculptor's unusual methods also find their 
way into the dance, in particular "his technique of assembling and 
reconstituting elements in different ways, putting the legs from one figure on 
to the torso of another".

The raw expressiveness of Rodin's work is certainly new territory for 
Maliphant, whose choreography has tended towards a more abstract, rarefied 
handling of emotion. "It's completely challenged the vocabulary of my 
movement," he says, his voice full of energy and conviction, as we end our tour 
at Rodin's sculpture of Balzac.

Maliphant stands transfixed before this towering figure, his eyes as ever 
seeking how to translate what he sees into dance. "Look at the angle he's 
standing at," he says. "He's like some huge, gnarly tree. It's fantastic."
 