
Construction of the HS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> high-speed rail 
line should be speeded up in order to bring benefits sooner to the north of 
England, the new chairman of the project will say next week.

Sir David Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jan/17/hs2-chief-executive-salary-rail>
, the Australian infrastructure expertwho delivered the London 2012 Olympics on 
time and budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jul/14/london-olympic-games-venues-early>, 
will issue a report making clear that one way to control costs and lock in 
cross-party backing is to press ahead more quickly with the entire project.

One idea – increasingly pushed by MPs, peers and civic leaders in the north – 
is to begin work on the southern and northern sections at the same time, so as 
not to the leave the north behind, and as a way of controlling costs.

Government sources accept that the project may stall unless it has stronger 
national and cross-party backing, with northern cities and regions benefiting 
in the foreseeable future. Under current plans, phase one between London and 
Birmingham will not open for passengers until 2026. Phase two, from Birmingham 
to Manchester and Leeds, would follow in 2033. The total cost is estimated at 
£42bn. Labour has already qualified its support, insisting there can be no 
"blank cheque". It has, in effect,put a £50bn maximum price cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/25/labour-hs2-rail-project-budget>
 on phases one and two.

The current HS2 bill, passing through parliament, covers only the London to 
Birmingham stretch, so another bill would have to be put forward soon if the 
northern lines are to start at the same time.Andrew Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis>, the former transport 
secretary who is now conducting a review on economic growth for Labour, said: 
"If we can start at both ends, that would be a big step forward. If it is 
possible to do that, it would be a good thing. The faster we do it the better."

It is understood that Higgins will not cite new target dates for completion 
but will emphasise the need for urgency.
 