
A British journalist has become embroiled in a bizarre storm that has blown up 
in the wake of the latest legal action launched by Irish media mogul, Denis 
O’Brien.

Mark Hollingsworth, an experienced freelance newspaper journalist and author, 
has found himself featuring in stories rather than writing them.

At its heart, this complex and intriguing drama centres on O’Brien, the man 
who controls Ireland’s largest newspaper publisher, Independent News & Media 
(INM), the country’s only two commercial national talk radio stations and a 
range of non-media assets.

The saga began on 9 October when O’Brien is said to have received a computer 
memory stick containing media articles and other documents about him. This 
so-called “dossier” was sent to him anonymously.

On 14 October, O’Brien started a legal action against a consulting and PR firm 
called Red Flag,claiming that the dossier amounted to a conspiracy against him 
<http://www.thejournal.ie/denis-obrien-dossier-legal-action-2388449-Oct2015/>. 
In his 21-page affidavit he alleged he had been the victim of “conspiracy, 
defamation, malicious falsehood, and unlawful conduct”.

He said in his sworn statement: “In recent times, and particularly in the last 
12 months, I have become conscious that there is a campaign to damage me 
personally and professionally and to damage my business interests.”

Red Flag’s non-executive chairman is Gavin O’Reilly, the former INM chief 
executive, whose father, Tony, lost control of INM to O’Brien after a lengthy 
and bitter battle.

According to an Irish Times report 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/o-brien-the-memory-stick-and-a-claim-of-conspiracy-to-defame-1.2406766>
, aside from Red Flag, the only other person known to have obtained access to 
the memory stick’s dossier is Hollingsworth.

This fact has not been disputed by Hollingsworth, a journalist known for his 
investigative work over a period of more than 30 years, during whichhe has 
authored or co-authored several books. <http://markhollingsworth.co.uk/> He has 
also written many articles for the Sunday Times, the Guardian and the 
Independent, among others.

Hollingsworth has said he was given access to the Red Flag dossier via an 
email link to an online Dropbox facility.


But Hollingsworth has come under fire in Ireland for allegedly approaching 
politicians and other journalists who have spoken or written critically about 
O’Brien by saying that he was researching an article for theSunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> magazine.

Subsequently, the Sunday Times – both in Dublin and in London – denied he had 
been commissioned to write an article on O’Brien. Its publisher, News UK, has 
also confirmed that in a phone call to me.

One of people who claims to have been approached by Hollingsworth on the basis 
that he was working for the Sunday Times was RTÉ News business editor, David 
Murphy. He later complained that Hollingsworthhad requested access to the 
source of his information about O’Brien 
<http://www.rte.ie/news/business/2015/1019/735941-denis-obrien-journalist/>, 
which Murphy refused to provide.

Another person who claimed she was emailed by Hollingsworth was Anne-Marie 
McNally, communications adviser to an Irish TD (MP), Catherine Murphy, who 
famouslyraised questions about O’Brien’s banking arrangements under 
parliamentary privilege in May this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/may/29/irelands-media-silenced-over-mps-speech-about-denis-obrien>
.


McNally claimed Hollingsworth had sought out some members of parliament “with 
the intention of trying to ascertain their sources”. 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1621070.ece>


But Hollingsworth said he was asking about sources in order to write about 
whistleblowers and their motivations. Andhe was quoted as saying  
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/irishnews/article4590775.ece>it was a matter of 
public record that he had contributed articles to the Sunday Times

A person close to Hollingsworth said there might have been confusion among his 
critics about how freelance journalists operate.

They often work without commissions until they are sure they have a story to 
sell. The source said he has been disappointed to find himself at the centre of 
the O’Brien story and has found the public attention stressful and distracting

When I approached Hollingsworth about the matter he declined to comment.

Sources: Journal.ie 
<http://www.thejournal.ie/denis-obrien-dossier-legal-action-2388449-Oct2015/>/
Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/media-and-marketing/o-brien-the-memory-stick-and-a-claim-of-conspiracy-to-defame-1.2406766>
/RTÉ <http://www.rte.ie/news/business/2015/1019/735941-denis-obrien-journalist/>
/Sunday Times 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1621070.ece>/The Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/irishnews/article4590775.ece>

 