
Brittany Lincicome sank a par putt in fading light on the third play-off hole 
to beat Stacy Lewis for her second ANA Inspiration title on Sunday.

American World No18 Lincicome produced an eagle at the par-5 18th hole to pull 
even with compatriot Lewis, before prevailing in the play-off to win the LPGA 
Tour’s first major of the year at Rancho Mirage, California.

“Super emotional,” Lincicome said at the 18th green after the victory. “I’m 
standing here, physically shaking like a leaf still. It’s over and I’m still 
shaking.”

Lewis had three chances to win on the 18th, but missed birdie putts from 13 
feet in regulation, 15 feet on the first extra hole and 12 feet on the second.

“The initial reaction is disappointed, obviously,” she said. “But I played 
great and I hit some really good putts there, especially at the end ... I just 
played solid all day, so I have to remind myself of that and not get too 
frustrated. It just wasn’t quite meant to be today.”

On the third extra hole, Lewis left her 103-yard approach from a sand-filled 
divot short of the green and her chip stopped 12 feet in front of the pin. Her 
par putt came up an inch short, and Lincicome two-putted for the victory, 
before taking the traditional champion’s leap into Poppy’s Pond.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbrittany-lincicome-wins-ana-inspiration-title%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bfb6ca7eb02ecdd4e57d0d66d6a1d060b6c3c14%2F134_0_3735_2242%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brittany%20Lincicome%20beats%20Stacy%20Lewis%20in%20play-off%20to%20win%20ANA%20Inspiration%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbrittany-lincicome-wins-ana-inspiration-title%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brittany%20Lincicome%20beats%20Stacy%20Lewis%20in%20play-off%20to%20win%20ANA%20Inspiration%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbrittany-lincicome-wins-ana-inspiration-title%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bfb6ca7eb02ecdd4e57d0d66d6a1d060b6c3c14%2F134_0_3735_2242%2F2000.jpg>
 Brittany Lincicome jumps into Poppy’s Pond alongside her caddy, fiancé and 
father after winning the tournament. Photograph: Robert Laberge/Getty Images 
Playing in the group ahead of Lewis, Lincicome hit a 5-iron from 190 yards to 
10 feet to set up her closing eagle that matched Lewis at 9-under 279.

“The first time it felt fairly easy because I thought I was so far out of the 
tournament that I never had a chance,” Lincicome said. “I wasn’t nervous at 
all.”

The long-hitting Lincicome, who won the tournament in 2009, finished with a 
69. Lewis, the 2011 champion, closed with a 70 in tricky windy conditions.

“Once we got back in that corner around 13, 14, the wind just kind of went 
crazy on us,” Lewis said. “It was changing directions. It changed when we were 
on 10. It changed when we were on 16. It changed when we were on 18, multiple 
times during the playoff. The wind was all over the place. I think that was the 
biggest challenge.”

Lincicome lost a play-off to Inbee Park last year in the LPGA Championship, 
one of the tour’s five majors. The 29-year-old, a six-time winner on the LPGA 
Tour, is projected to jump to sixth in the world rankings.

Morgan Pressel finished third, with Kim tying for fourth at 7 under par with 
Carlota Ciganda of Spain and Anna Nordqvist of Sweden.
 