
1 Expect the hosts to be less annoying than usual


Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> may be much 
derided, but they’re smooth broadcasters, used to working in front of live 
audiences, with the charm and ability to prick pomposity without coming across 
as rude. What a delightful change they’ll make from the last four years, when 
we’ve been subjected to the horrors of James Corden – selfies with a visibly 
horrified Prince! Unctuous sucking up to the stars! General air of believing 
he’s the hero of the show! – rather than hosts who can be, you know, likeable. 
You’re unlikely to remember their turn for years to come, but you’re also 
unlikely to be reaching for shoes to launch at the TV screen.MH

2 Will Madonna match her Grammys spectacular?

Madonna hasn’t decided to fit a Brit awards performance into her busy schedule 
for 20 years, so this feels like as good a time as any for an extravagant 
return. She went for a full-on glittery matador blowout, performing single 
Living for Loveat the Grammys <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mnqlmg2rz0U> 
earlier this month, so there’s every chance she’ll try to top that at this 
year’s Brits. What’s next, a Madge hologram dancing next to the real thing 
while her team Snapchats photos of the show to waiting fans? Wouldn’t put it 
past her.TM
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEg3Ic7v2UCk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEg3Ic7v2UCk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEg3Ic7v2UCk&media=>
3 Sam Smith will clean up

The idea that Smith won’t win at least a couple of awards at this year’s Brits 
seems inconceivable – he’s sold a million albums in both the US and the UK, 
he’s performing on the night and he was also last year’s winner of the critics’ 
choice award. Another clue that tells you Smith will end the night clutching a 
load ofBrit awards <https://www.theguardian.com/music/britawards> is the 
picture of Sam Smith clutching a load of Grammy awards from earlier this month. 
When Adele cleaned up at the Grammys in 2012, she went on to win two statuettes 
at the Brits. Smith should at least match this, although, unlike Adele, we 
can’t quite imagine him ending the night flicking the Vs at the organisers.TJ

4 Unless Ed Sheeran beats him to the prizes

Smith may have been greedy at the Grammys, but there’s a chance the Brits 
could favour their former British breakthrough act and British solo male artist 
instead. While Smith may be at his Adele-like apex of success, for every 
achievement of Smith, there is a Sheeran-shaped accomplishment to trump it: 
he’s about to perform three sold-out nights at Wembley Stadium, he was the most 
streamed musician in the world in 2014, as well as the most Googled artist, and 
he shifted the most albums in the UK – 1.7m of them.Wayne Rooney loves him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2014/nov/04/wayne-rooney-joins-ed-sheeran-manchester-pub-duet-video>
. And let’s not forget the time he unwittingly partook in a political protest by
dedicating a song about a crack-addicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/01/ed-sheeran-decidates-song-crack-addicted-prostitute-david-cameron>
 prostitute to David Cameron at a party. Unfortunately, there’s not a Brit 
award for that, but maybe there should be.HG

5 Royal Blood will win one award. Because they have to 

Kasabian have asserted that the Brits are “a conspiracy. They’re trying to 
shut rock’n’roll out.” That’s the ceremony that last yearallowed Alex Turner to 
prattle on about rock’n’roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/feb/20/alex-turners-brits-speech-what-it-all-meant>
. The fact is, rock’n’roll isn’t well represented in the nominations because 
there’s very little commercially successful rock’n’roll around. Which makes the 
likelihood of the one rock band who have made an impact this year getting an 
award all the greater. Royal Blood are nominated for British group, British 
breakthrough act and British album of the year. The latter award will not be 
theirs, and probably not the second. Bet on them to win British group, so the 
Brits can claim some rock credentials.MH
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbSdtvfBQd6c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbSdtvfBQd6c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbSdtvfBQd6c&media=>
6 There will be no controversy

Take a look at some of the nominees and performers this year. Sam Smith. 
Whispery electropop band Chvrches. Posh dance/classical group Clean Bandit. Do 
any of those people stand out particularly as hoarse-voiced shit-stirrers, 
liable to derail the evening’s plans? Our best bet will be on one of the guys 
from Royal Blood chugging a Stella too many and giving Paloma Faith a piggyback 
around a few of the tables. If Alex Turner is the best the modern Brits can do, 
with his “invoice me for the microphone if you need to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/poll/2014/feb/20/alex-turner-brits-speech-what-did-you-think>
” moment from last year’s ceremony, don’t hold your breath for Jarvis Cocker or
KLF <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/11/klf-sacrifice-sheep>-style 
antics.TM

7 Hope for St Vincent, but you’ll probably get Taylor

St Vincent is clearly this year’s critical darling (although to be fair, the 
entire international female section is a gleaming crystal of musical quality 
compared to most of the categories) but will Annie Clark and her off-kilter 
art-pop triumph on the night? Of course not. Taylor Swift is the biggest pop 
star on the planet right now, and she’s turning up to perform. Only if it was 
renamed the Taylor Swift Award For Best InternationalTaylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> could this one be any more 
nailed on.TJ
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTAdARF4rGcQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTAdARF4rGcQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTAdARF4rGcQ&media=>
8 Expect social media to be awash with Swift gifs on Thursday

In the decades before kittens and Kardashians ruled the world, the Brits would 
have provided some timeless meme-moments. Just imagine the gif-ability of 
Jarvis mooning Michael, or how quickly the KLF’s Bill Drummond would start 
#trending after firing blanks from an automatic machine-gun, back in 1992. This 
year, however, we have the potentialviral appeal  
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/events/amas-2014/6327570/taylor-swift-gifs-american-music-awards>
ofTaylor Swift dancing 
<http://24.media.tumblr.com/c51986cb21fb2d306aed4133bd8ffdc1/tumblr_n02gr2aLQP1qlvwnco1_500.gif>
 along to Madonna or swearing during herex-boyfriend’s acceptance  
<http://giphy.com/gifs/taylor-swift-stfu-vmas-2013-g4Byy3iKQfZBe>speech, 
actions which will almost certainly fill the pages of the internet the next 
day. You see, aside from her skills as a very proficient pop star, Taylor 
Swift’s other benefit to the Brit ceremony will be the many over-zealous 
opportunities her uninhibited presence will bring. Whether it beecstatically 
<http://giphy.com/gifs/dancing-taylor-swift-grammys-2015-3xz2BMmOivYSnkqgUw> 
clapping, whipping out  
<http://giphy.com/gifs/amas-5xaOcLSS90Tm4D1k9SU?utm_source=iframe&utm_medium=embed&utm_campaign=tag_click>
a flame during her show or making everyonein the near vicinity 
<http://cdn.pigeonsandplanes.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/taylor-swift-dancing-with-lorde.gif>
 look as if they are humiliated by her presence alone, Swift’s gift of the gif 
will be known.HG

9 Kanye will surprise us. But we have no idea how

We’d be willing to bet he’ll perform a new, unheard song, at the very least. 
But what else might he do? Recreate the building of the Angkor Wat temple 
complex with Lego, a team of American football players and James Franco? 
Declare his candidacy for Doncaster North in the general election on the Ukip 
ticket? Unveil a new clothing range, made entirely from rubies? Announce that 
his next project is a live action movie of Trumpton, with the Kardashians 
taking the roles ofPugh, Pugh, Barney McGrew, Cuthbert, Dibble and Grubb 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s6YE4PCRNwc>? Your guess is as good as ours. MH
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJF2YbvRLkno&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJF2YbvRLkno>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJF2YbvRLkno&media=>
10 Ed Sheeran will dress down for the stage and up for the table 

At the 2012 Brits, where he won British breakthrough act and solo male artist, 
Ed Sheeran performed a remarkable trick. He was pictured sitting at the table 
with industry executives, dressed smartly in a suit and tie. Yet when he 
stepped up to the stage to perform,he was dressed down 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YLC3jqz55w>, as if he’d just come from the 
street. And when he returned to his table,he was all smart again 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XnDNafI-eOU>. The debate over pop’s 
authenticity or otherwise has been raging as long as pop has existed, but 
Sheeran clearly suspected his fans would flee in droves if his performing 
persona saw him wearing a jacket. We wouldn’t mind so much if him changing for 
the stage involved dressing up as a unicorn and wearing white leather chaps 
with flashing lights on. But it doesn’t. It involves wearing a T-shirt. He’s 
performing again this year, so let’s see if he pulls the same underwhelming 
stunt.MH
 