
1. Will Rihanna turn up?

Rihanna is increasingly giving the impression that she really doesn’t care 
about anything very much. Her album? “Oh, I’ve got a cover and all that. I’ll 
get round to recording it at some point. And releasing it? Oh, I’ll just 
dribble it out on Tidal, then give it away for free.” Performing at the 
Grammys? “Soz. Got bronchitis. Yes, I know smoking weed isn’t very good for 
respiratory illnesses, but evs.” Her tour? “Yeah,postpone a load of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/19/rihanna-delays-world-tour-anti-postponing-eight-shows-and-cancelling-two-more>
. Hey! Who put Sunderland and Cardiff on the schedule? No way I’m going to 
either of those places. I don’t care that Sunderland’s got a beach. I’m not 
going.” At this point, then, the chances of Rihanna turning up to the O2 in 
London to perform seem, to be polite, less than optimal. But we would be 
delighted to be proved wrong.

2. There’ll be no repeat of Kanye’s bleepfest

Last year, Kanye West provided the most exciting moment of the evening, when 
he performed All Day accompanied bygallons of pyro and the cream of the UK 
grime scene <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ABk7TmjnVk>. He also swore an 
enormous amount, causing ITV’s bleep operators to go into such meltdown that 
barely any of West’s actual performance was audible. This year,the Daily Mirror 
reports 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/brit-award-bosses-warn-rihanna-7371901>
, everyone’s keen to ensure a greater level of decorum, and so it has been 
“made clear” to performers – Rihanna in particular – that they must steer clear 
of the effing and blinding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_ABk7TmjnVk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_ABk7TmjnVk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_ABk7TmjnVk&media=>
3. Who will dare to fail?

Brits Chairman Max Lousada's playlist: Adele, Kanye and Jarvis' Jackson 
invasion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/22/brits-chairman-max-lousada-playlist-adele-kanye-jarvis-stage-invasion-brit-awards-videos>
Madonna set the bar high with capegate last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/25/madonna-falls-but-it-was-the-brit-awards-that-took-a-tumble>
 – generations of young Britons will grow up with their parents, grandparents 
and great-grandparents telling them the bedtime story of how a pop singer fell 
over LIVE ON TELLY when her cape failed to open. But can we expect something 
similar this year? There seems little chance of drama involving live performers 
Little Mix, Jess Glynne and James Bay and his Trademark Hat. Adele will surely 
move heaven and earth to ensure no microphonesfall into her piano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/18/adele-cried-all-day-grammys-ellen-degeneres>
, as at the Grammys. Coldplay are the kings of competence. That leaves us with 
the Weeknd (we suspect that will be drama free), Justin Bieber (bet on new, 
mature Bieber turning up, rather than tantrum-throwing, late-arriving Bieber), 
and Rihanna. She surely offers the greatest chance of unpredictability – but, 
as per No 1, we don’t know whether she’ll actually be there.

4. Bet on Adele

The greatest commercial juggernaut in modern pop rolls on apace. Adele’s 25 is 
back at the top of the US and the UK charts; it’s broken sales records on 
either side of the Atlantic. Forbes reported on 10 January that it had already 
sold 15m copies worldwide, and that’s by making everyone pay for it – no 
streaming or giveaway deals for Adele. If there’s one thing the Brits love, 
it’s commercial success. It would look perverse of the Brits not to reward the 
one artist who seems beloved of both punters and record company executives – 
the woman saving the music industry. So expect Adele to walk away with at least 
two from British female solo artist, British single and British album of the 
year. The only one of those prizes that looks like it might go to someone else 
is British single, and that’s more to share them out than because the 
contenders are so much better thanHello 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/oct/23/adele-hello-new-song-25-video>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbrit-awards-2016-10-things-adele-justin-bieber-bowie-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb3f4d0e9b0b57a3b9f8d04b310a585338fb5e2f%2F0_112_1220_1222%2F1220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brit%20awards%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbrit-awards-2016-10-things-adele-justin-bieber-bowie-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brit%20awards%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbrit-awards-2016-10-things-adele-justin-bieber-bowie-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb3f4d0e9b0b57a3b9f8d04b310a585338fb5e2f%2F0_112_1220_1222%2F1220.jpg>
 Will he need an acceptance speech? … Jesse Hughes of the Eagles of Death 
Metal. Photograph: Joel Saget/AFP/Getty Images 
5. International group is the toughest category to call

The nominees: Alabama Shakes, Eagles of Death Metal, Major Lazer, Tame Impala 
and U2. Alabama Shakes are popular and talented, but they feel like the 
outsiders. Tame Impala have had a year of unrelenting critical acclaim, and an 
audience that seems to swell with each passing month. U2 are always a safe bet, 
but did the wholeApple fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/15/u2-bono-issues-apology-for-apple-itunes-album-download>
 mar their reputation too much? Major Lazer might be the safe bet, given that 
Lean On – their big summer 2015 hit – has become the most streamed song in 
Spotify’s history. But then there’s the wild card: Eagles of Death Metal. It’s 
hard to believe their nomination – their first for any major award in a 12-year 
recording career, outside the specialist rock awards – isn’t the result of 
sympathy forthe Bataclan terror attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/18/eagles-of-death-metal-issue-statement-following-paris-terror-attacks>
. But would the Brits really give a prize to a group because their fans were 
victims of terrorists? Who knows?

6. There will be no recognition of the UK’s grime scene, or much in the way of 
UK black music at all

No grime at the Brits? No change there
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/15/grime-brit-awards-black-british-skepta-stormzy-lady-leshurr>
We’ve already been over this once: we understand that the Brits recognise 
success, but it still seems a shame that after Kanye and his grime cohort 
provided the most unpredictable and exciting moment of last year’s ceremony 
that there’s no effort to build on it.Lily Allen took up the cudgels 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/02/01/lily-allen-launches-into-online-rant-about-lack-of-grime-artists-nominated-at-the-brit-awards-5655272/>
 after Dan Hancox wrote for us about grime’s exclusion from the Brits, calling 
it“the awards ceremony Alan Partridge would approve of” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/15/grime-brit-awards-black-british-skepta-stormzy-lady-leshurr>
. But now James Bay and his Trademark Hat has hit back. “It’s varied 
nominations. It’s about music,” he told the Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/james-bay-blasts-lily-allen-7413866>
. “I don’t know why she’s had to go down that route. I haven’t looked closely 
into all the nominations, but it’s interesting she should bring that up. I 
can’t think of her last album, when she last released something.” Repeat that 
the Brits are “about music” often enough, James, and you might even start to 
believe it. Laura Mvula – who’s actually, you know, black – has a rather 
different perspective on #Britssowhite, saying shewon’t be attending because of 
the lack of diversity <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-35573608>, 
which sends the message to black kids that they are “not acknowledged in 
society, in media and in mainstream music”.

7. Bet on Bieber

The international categories at the Brits are always a lot more edifying than 
the domestic ones. Suddenly the nominees include interesting, left-field 
artists – in the international male solo artist category, that means Father 
John Misty and Kendrick Lamar appear alongside the Weeknd, Drake and Justin 
Bieber. By rights the prize should go to Lamar, whose album To Pimp a Butterfly 
sold shedloads,topped more album of the year lists than you can shake a stick at
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/18/best-albums-of-2015-no-1-to-pimp-a-butterfly-by-kendrick-lamar>
 and soundtracked the #blacklivesmatter campaign. But, against that, Justin 
Bieber is performing at the ceremony. Expect him to have extracted his pound of 
flesh in return for his appearance.

8. Whatever form the Bowie tribute takes, people will complain

Behind the Brits' all-star insult to Bowie's legacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/26/brits-2016-bowie-supergroup-adele-albarn-gallagher-coldplay-concert>
The most talked-about event of the evening will be a David Bowie tribute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/26/brits-2016-bowie-supergroup-adele-albarn-gallagher-coldplay-concert>
, which – according to press reports last month – will feature an all-star 
lineup. The Sun’s prediction was a supergroup featuring Adele, Bono, Damon 
Albarn, Noel Gallagher and Coldplay. Leaving aside for a moment two things 
about Noel Gallagher – first, that his career has been built on the precise 
opposite of Bowie-esque constant reinvention; second,are there any musicians he 
could share a stage at whom he has not yet had a pop 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/features/noel-gallagher-sounds-off-on-tidal-zayn-malik-and-same-sex-marriage-20150505>
? – it’s impossible to imagine any roster that would satisfy the Bowie zealots, 
bar perhaps one featuring Bowie’s closest collaborators: Iggy Pop, Brian Eno, 
Robert Fripp and so on. But the Brits isn’t aimed at music’s zealots; it’s 
aimed at the people who want some entertainment from people they recognise. So, 
there will be a bitter stream of complaints about whatever the Brits do, but 
chances are that a lot of people will probably be happier about ill-fitting 
superstars than perfectly picked cult artists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbrit-awards-2016-10-things-adele-justin-bieber-bowie-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4261d50c3098d0f3871edf82d5716b327008463d%2F0_112_3280_3991%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brit%20awards%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbrit-awards-2016-10-things-adele-justin-bieber-bowie-tribute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brit%20awards%3A%2010%20things%20to%20look%20forward%20to&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fbrit-awards-2016-10-things-adele-justin-bieber-bowie-tribute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4261d50c3098d0f3871edf82d5716b327008463d%2F0_112_3280_3991%2F3280.jpg>
 Black tie (and hat) … James Bay. Photograph: Amanda Edwards/WireImage 
9. Young British guitar bands are unlikely to be recognised

Best British group features three guitar bands – but Blur and Coldplay are 
veterans, and Foals are well established – but only Wolf Alice and Catfish and 
the Bottlemen, in the breakthrough category, count as young guitar acts. And 
even then, they’re up against the commercial behemoths that are Jess Glynne, 
James Bay and Years & Years. Last year’s winner was Sam Smith, the year before 
that Bastille, so expect the most commercially sucessful act to win. Which 
would make it between Glynne and Bay, who hadthe seventh and eighth 
biggest-selling albums 
<http://www.officialcharts.com/chart-news/the-official-top-40-biggest-artist-albums-of-2015-revealed__13273/>
 respectively in the UK in 2015. The last time there was a genuinely surprising 
choice of guitar-band winner at the Brits was 2009, when Iron Maiden won the 
British live act award. They had played one UK show during the preceding year.

10. Treasure Ant and Dec while you can – the alternatives are much worse


They’re not bothering with the Brits after this year, and you should be wary 
of what you wish for in their replacements. Their unfussy, relatively low-key 
presentation style was a welcome respite in 2015, after four years of James 
Corden, one of Peter Kay, then Corden with Mat Horne and Kylie the time before 
that, the Osbournes in 2008 and Russell Brand in 2007. In the future, people 
will look back at the twoAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> ceremonies as a golden 
age of Brits broadcasting.
 