
A British-Algerian journalist has died after staging a hunger strike in 
protest against a two-year jail term for offending Algeria’s president in a 
poem posted online, according to his lawyer.

“I can confirm the death of the journalist Mohamed Tamalt in Bab el-Oued 
hospital after a hunger strike of more than three months and a three-month 
coma,” Amine Sidhoum said on Facebook.

The prison service said in a statement Tamalt had died of a lung infection for 
which he was receiving treatment since it was detected on 4 December. He had 
been in hospital since the end of August. Tamalt, a dual national, launched the 
hunger strike on the day of his arrest near his parents’ house in the capital 
Algiers on 27 June, according toHuman Rights Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/08/31/algeria-2-year-sentence-facebook-poem>.

The 42-year-old blogger and freelance journalist, who ran a website from 
London where he lived, was charged with offending PresidentAbdelaziz Bouteflika 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/28/abdelaziz-bouteflika-algerian-president-election>
 and defaming a public authority, in the poem he shared on Facebook. A court in 
Algiers sentenced him to two years in prison on 11 July and fined him 200,000 
dinars (£1,400). An appeals court upheld the ruling a month later.

Amnesty International urged Algerian authorities on Sunday to open an 
“independent and transparent investigation into the circumstances” of the 
journalist’s death.

Media watchdog Reporters Without Borders <https://rsf.org/en/> (RSF) said it 
was shocked by Tamalt’s death which had dealt a blow to freedom of information 
in Algeria. “Why was there such a conviction just for words on Facebook which 
did no harm to anyone?” said Yasmine Kacha, head of the north Africa department 
of RSF.

HRW had urged Algerian authorities to release him in August when he was 
reportedly in critical condition. “The Algerian authorities should quash the 
case against Tamalt and send the message that free speech will be respected in
Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>,” it said at the time.
 