
British ash trees seem to have better resistance against a deadly fungus which 
is devastating trees across Europe, according to research which has decoded the 
DNA of the species for the first time.

The ash dieback fungus <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback> 
has spread rapidly since it first arrived in England in 2012 and the latest 
data shows it is now found in more than half of the country 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ashdieback#Distribution>. It has already affected 
90% of trees in Denmark and threatens to all but wipe out ash trees, one of 
Europe’s most common trees.

The new genetic research is now driving efforts to breed ash trees with high 
resistance to the fungus, although this will take years due to the slow-growing 
nature of trees.

However, the research also indicates that trees that are resistant to ash 
dieback may be more susceptible to another deadly threat – theemerald ash borer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/04/ash-trees-under-threat-borer-beetle-britain>
. This beetle has caused catastrophic damage to ash trees in north America and 
is spreading from Russia towards western Europe.

“This is the first time a plant genome has been rapidly sequenced in response 
to an emerging disease threat,” said project leader Richard Buggs, at Queen 
Mary University of London.

The research shows that British ash trees may be significantly more resistant 
than Danish trees but Buggs said: “Only time will tell – it’s a very novel 
[genetic] method. We don’t want people saying ash dieback doesn’t matter or 
it’s all going to be fine – we do still need to worry about it.”

The work, conducted by a team of 30 scientists and published in the journal 
Nature <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature20786>, produced a 
detailed genome for a British ash tree from the Cotswolds and also sequenced 37 
other ash trees from around Europe to assess the diversity of the species. The 
Cotswold tree has now contracted ash dieback, which Buggs said added useful 
knowledge to the project.

The scientists used all the information to improve the genetic markers which 
enable assessment of resistance to ash dieback. They then screened about 100 
British ash trees and found that, while few were immune, many were tougher than 
those in Denmark.
Spread of ash dieback across Britain since its arrival in 2012 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/ash_dieback-zip/giv-3902wb03lna3gE3n>
The Living Ash Project <http://livingashproject.org.uk/>, funded by the 
government, is already examining ash trees to select resistant specimens. The 
new genetic revelations are a boost to the project and provide hope of avoiding 
recent predictions that a “double whammy” of ash dieback and emerald ash borer 
wouldwipe out almost all ash trees across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/ash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe>
.

The discovery that trees with resistance to ash dieback may produce fewer 
chemicals that ward off insects such as the emerald ash borer emphasises that 
the project to breed tougher trees will have to proceed carefully, said Buggs, 
who also works at the Royal Botanical Gardens at Kew.

“It emphasises how difficult it might be in the end to breed a tree that is 
resistant to both,” he said. “But on the positive side, there are trees in 
China which seem to be resistant to both, and both the problems ultimately came 
from East Asia.” Another research project looking at those Chinese trees is 
underway.

“Ash dieback disease has spread across Europe in less than 10 years, so there 
is some urgency,” said Prof Ian Bancroft, at the University of York and part of 
the research team. Another team member, Prof Allan Downie, at the John Innes 
Centre, said: “This work represents significant new progress in our 
understanding of ash dieback disease [and] has been breath-taking in its speed.”

There is no cure for ash dieback, which spreads on the wind or by the 
importing of infected saplings, and is already killing many millions of trees 
across Europe. Symptoms include cankers on the bark and damaged leaves. There 
are about 90 million ash trees in the UK, with more than 1,000 species, from 
wildflowers to butterflies, reliant on the ecosystem it provides.

But Buggs said the new genetic discoveries gave grounds for cautious optimism: 
“I feel more hopeful now than I did in 2012.”

Plants diseases and pests are spreading around the world due to global trade 
and climate change. In July, the government’s official climate change advisers 
warned that thedangers posed by new diseases and pests invading the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/uk-poorly-prepared-for-climate-change-impacts-government-advisers-warn>
 as temperatures rise require urgent research.
 