
1 Madonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna>’s legs might be made of 
titanium

It’s hard to understand how else she withstood a fall down the stairs, dragged 
backwards by a dancer while performing Living For Love. But she got up and 
finished the song, then took to Instagram to tell her fans that she was all 
right. Respect where it’s due, to be honest.TM

2 Ed Sheeran <https://www.theguardian.com/music/ed-sheeran> is a suit’s wet 
dream

Ed Sheeran’s performance showed he’s a passionate and evocative musician – 
which other multimillion-selling star uses a loop pedal on the fly at an awards 
show? But his offstage demeanour betrays a man swaddled in management, the kind 
of guy who talks earnestly about his “Q4 prospects”. His acceptance speech for 
the biggest award of the night had him couching success in ticket and album 
sales, rather than art – the ultimate example of today’s free market pop.BBT

3 Ant and Dec <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> peaked in 
the first five minutes of the show

The hosting duo never really shone comedically, and put in their best work 
when their heads were bafflingly presented on a platter after a Eurovision-like 
opening segment. Their gags felt tame, and all very amicable. I never thought 
I’d think this, but should the Brits try to tempt James Corden back from 
America in 2016?TM
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fbrit-awards-2015-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424909453556%2F8d7a7f15-8975-4bcd-9093-6749f3245637-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brit%20awards%202015%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fbrit-awards-2015-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brit%20awards%202015%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fbrit-awards-2015-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424909453556%2F8d7a7f15-8975-4bcd-9093-6749f3245637-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Paloma Faith performs at the Brits. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty Images 
4 Paloma Faith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paloma-faith>’s speech 
celebrated the underdog

2015 was a year of acceptance speech firsts: there was Ed Sheeran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ed-sheeran>, who chose to dedicate one of 
his two awards not to God, his mum or his fans, but a lady named Deirdre. Then, 
there was Paloma Faith, whose acceptance speech for best solo female not only 
celebrated the “underdogs” and the “grafters”, but also exposed the kooky pop 
singer for the evil delinquent she truly is. “I used to fly poster my posters 
in Hackney and I’ve been arrested twice for doing that,” she claimed during 
what was the most honest and endearing speech of the night. That’s not to say 
illegal fly postering is either acceptable or admirable. Stay in school, kids.HG

5 Take That <https://www.theguardian.com/music/take-that> today are Imagine 
Dragons in 20 years

The former 90s boyband have now revamped as a sort of poppy stadium-rock trio. 
To prove it they brought on that dreaded 2014 accessory, the upright tom-tom 
drum, channellingImagine Dragons’ Grammys performance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ImE8QV5Fs0> with Kendrick Lamar and 
Bastille’s 2014 Brits gig <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXyRg-BgvI4> with 
Ella Eyre. “Somebody’s been listening to Coldplay, eh?” said co-host Dec 
Donnelly after Take That left the stage. Fair.TM

6 Kanye <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> embraced grime

Drake has been bigging up Brit crime drama Top Boy and grime MC clash series 
Lord of the Mics on his Instagram, so not to be outdone,Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> brought out tens of grime dons 
from Krept and Konan to Novelist, and shouted out Skepta at the end of his 
astonishing All Day. Nothing says “black lives matter” more than putting the 
creators of Britain’s most daring music into the spotlight, and taunting 
racists with a cartoonish and chic version of their nightmares: hoods, flames, 
mobs. Even if you discount the Drake diss that people are already picking out 
of the track’s lyrics, this was Kanye announcing himself as the keeper of rap’s 
vanguard.BBT
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fbrit-awards-2015-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424909552915%2F8f311f32-a64a-4631-b476-120e5e2c886f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brit%20awards%202015%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fbrit-awards-2015-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brit%20awards%202015%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Fbrit-awards-2015-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424909552915%2F8f311f32-a64a-4631-b476-120e5e2c886f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ellie Goulding finds Lewis Hamilton hilarious. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty 
Images 
7 And the award for Worst Bantz goes to … Ellie Goulding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/16/ellie-goulding-uk-charts-no-1-fifty-shades-of-gray>
 andLewis Hamilton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lewis-hamilton>

“Sorry, I have to hold myself, I can’t stand,” announced Ellie Goulding as she 
approached the podium with – who else? - the currentFormula 1 world champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/nov/23/lewis-hamilton-fourth-briton-multiple-f1-titles>
.

“Your dress …” stuttered a confused Hamilton. “You going to a wedding or 
something?”

“Excuse me!” exclaimed Goulding. 

Several seconds of silence passed. 

“That was a good one,” said Goulding. 

“No.” said Hamilton. 

More silence. 

To produce banter this awkward on a night that involved Jimmy Carr making a 
joke aboutMadonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> being on HRT 
certainly takes some doing. But the unique chemistry between Goulding and 
Hamilton was enough to make Sam Fox and Mick Fleetwood seem like Morecambe and 
Wise.TJ

8 After all the hype, people still don’t know Royal Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/aug/28/royal-blood-loose-change-video>

In what is becoming a dependable post-awards show trend, a lesser-known act’s 
win inspired a series of “who even is this?” tweets. In this case, it was 
Brighton garage-rock duoRoyal Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/21/royal-blood-rocknroll-live-shows>
. Saying “this is a huge surprise for us, and probably for everyone here 
because you may not know who we are” probably didn’t help their cause, but 
there that is.TM
Joshua Fox (@joshua_fox) 
Apparently I'm not the only one unsure who these two chaps are. #BRITs2015 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BRITs2015?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/T5iSuUssaq 
<http://t.co/T5iSuUssaq>
 <https://twitter.com/joshua_fox/status/570680636865961985> February 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/joshua_fox/status/570680636865961985> 
9 Sam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sam-smith> painted himself into 
a corner

Sam Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sam-smith> may have got his break 
from his mum pouring her City fortune into his career, but it matters not in 
our post-authentic world – and when he emerged, it looked like we had a proper 
pop star on our hands. Unafraid to sing about his sexuality and heartbreak, he 
flitted from UK garage (La La La, Money on My Mind) to throbbing dance (Latch) 
to premium ballads (Stay With Me). But then he got big in America, where 
emoting is king – now his big public appearances see him trotting out plodding, 
desperately average songs that have all the emotional complexity of a crying 
emoji. If he continues on this path, he’ll paint himself into a corner, and 
become a weird footnote in Grammy history.BBT

10 Foo Fighters <https://www.theguardian.com/music/foofighters> must have had 
a busy press day recently

The shouty rockers accepted their international group award in a video 
message. But wait – weren’t those the same clothes they were wearing when they 
received their NME award on Wednesday 18 February and announced their 
Glastonbury 2015 headliner’s slot? Ah yes, they clearly recorded acceptance 
speeches for both at the same time. Efficient, those ones.TM
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0M3GInMbrqk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0M3GInMbrqk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0M3GInMbrqk&media=>
 Foo Fighters accepting a 2015 Brit award for best international band  