
Europe is a successful Unicorn ranch. The number of private technology 
companies valued north of $1bn – originally nicknamed after the mythical 
creature due to their supposed rareness – that are based in Europe has risen to 
47, according to tech investment bank GP Bullhound.

The count is up by 10 in the past year, and the combined value of the 
companies on the list is now $130bn (£90bn).

More than a third of the Unicorns are based in Britain, including Asos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos>, Transferwise and Zoopla, as well 
as new entrants on the list like augmented reality firm Blippar and business 
planning software makers Anaplan, founded in the UK but now based in San 
Francisco.

Spotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> has overtaken Skype 
as the most valuable unicorn in Europe, with a valuation of $8.5bn, and leads 
Sweden into second place by number of unicorns. The country has seven 
billion-dollar tech firms, and Germany, France and Israel (which is included in 
Europe for the purposes of this study) follow with six, three and three 
respectively.

While 10 unicorns have joined the list since 2015, others have dropped off. 
Powa, for instance, was once valued at nearly $3bn, butit’s now in 
administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/18/dan-wagner-powa-technologies>
, unable to pay the costs of doing business.

High-profile failures are few and far between, perhaps in part due to the 
higher barrier to entry for European startups. Unicorns in Europe tend to have 
a higher average revenue than those in the US, suggesting that investors on the 
other side of the Atlantic are happier to pump money in to companies with low 
or non-existent income in the hope of a large payoff in the future. The average 
European unicorn has a revenue of $315m, according to GP Bullhead, and is 
valued at 18 times its revenue; in America, those figures are $129m and 46 
times respectively.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fbritain-leads-europe-technology-unicorns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c961bb991b578b8cdaa1b3749722c89f013d579%2F0_245_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20leads%20Europe%20in%20tech%2C%20with%2018%20of%2047%20%241bn%20companies%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fbritain-leads-europe-technology-unicorns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20leads%20Europe%20in%20tech%2C%20with%2018%20of%2047%20%241bn%20companies%20%E2%80%93%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fbritain-leads-europe-technology-unicorns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c961bb991b578b8cdaa1b3749722c89f013d579%2F0_245_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Spotify has overtaken Skype as the most valuable unicorn in Europe, with a 
valuation of $8.5bn. But it is still unprofitable. Photograph: Christian 
Hartmann/Reuters 
But almost half of European unicorns are still unprofitable, including some of 
the biggest names on the list, such as Spotify, Funding Circle, and one of 
Finland’s two unicorns, Rovio, the developers of Angry Birds.

Finland’s other unicorn, Supercell, another mobile games developer, is faring 
better: GP Bullhound thinks it could be Europe’s first “decacorn”. That’s a 
technology firm worth $10bn, in case you aren’t keeping track. Supercell’s 
revenues have grown 173% year on year, and it’s already valued at over $5bn.

And tenuously extending the metaphor, the bank also named twelve “unicorn 
foals”: “European tech firms that GPH Bullhound believes could achieve a 
billion-dollar valuation in the coming months and years.” Restaurant delivery 
serviceDeliveroo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo>, music 
streaming site Soundcloud, and Swedish payments service iZettle are all on that 
list.

Manish Madhvani, a managing partner and co-founder of GP Bullhound, said that 
the report showed that the European tech sector was strong. “There has never 
been a better time to operate within the European market. I firmly believe that 
the right ecosystem now exists for one of the companies highlighted in this 
report to push forward and reach a $10bn valuation in the next few years. With 
time, Europe could even produce its first $100bn tech company.”

“Europe has yet to reach the dizzying heights of American giants such as 
Facebook and Google, but when you look at businesses in the $1bn to $3bn range, 
what we lack in quantity we more than make up for in terms of quality. All the 
data points towards a stable, maturing market that has avoided the excesses of 
the US in favour of sustainable growth. We are seeing a remarkable resilience 
in European technology markets.”
 