
A senior BT executive has questioned the strategic value and £700m price tag 
for Richard Desmond'sChannel 5 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive>, 
effectively ruling out the telecoms giant as a serious bidder for the 
broadcaster.

John Petter, the head of BT's consumer arm, speaking at an Ad Week Europe 
session in London on Tuesday, said he could not directly comment on speculation 
about BT's participation in the Channel 5 auction.

However he said that there was "not a lot to hang your hat on" at Channel 5, 
and that there are "not many strong programme formats".

When further questioned as to whether this view would rule BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> out as a Channel 5 suitor in the 
short term, Petter said: "It counts us out for any term."

Bidders will have to "put up or shut up" with full, binding bids by 14 April, 
with Discovery and UKTV co-owner Scripps mooted as interested parties.

Until the bids are officially submitted there is no definitive way of knowing 
if Petter's comments are not potentially part of a bid tactic to publicly put 
pressure on Desmond and his bankers, Barclays, over price.

BT's apparent lack of appetite for the broadcaster will be a blow to Desmond, 
who acquired the business for just £103.5m almost four years ago. He is 
targeting a £700m sale price for Channel 5, 10 times its estimated profit of 
£70m this year.

Desmond had hoped that the fierce rivalry between BT and BSkyB might result in 
a bidding war for Channel 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/07/bskyb-bt-richard-desmond-channel-5>
, with each looking to deny the other of a potentially strategically important 
TV asset.

BSkyB is thought to have an agreement with US factual broadcaster Discovery 
Communications, regarded as the frontrunner to snap up Channel 5, to handle its 
advertising sales in the event of a deal.

A Sky bid for Channel 5 is regarded as unlikely, with sources suggesting that 
the satellite broadcaster's biggest shareholder, Rupert Murdoch's 21st Century 
Fox, wants to keep its "regulatory powder dry" for a renewed run at taking full 
control of the company.

There have also been rumours that MTV-owner Viacom may not be progressing with 
a full bid, although this has not been confirmed, taking out another 
potentially key suitor.

Rumours have emerged that Desmond might also be looking at other options such 
as a flotation of Channel 5. Some believe the timing of rumours about other 
potential plans indicates that serious interest in the broadcaster is waning.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 