
The government should prioritise the creation of a more ambitious high-speed 
rail network linking England’s northern cities to address the “stark” shortfall 
in investment compared with London, according to a UK thinktank.

The IPPR says the chancellor, Philip Hammond, should take advantage of record 
low government borrowing costs tofund an ambitious new HS3 scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/27/hs3-cross-pennine-railway-line-hs2-david-cameron>
. This high-speed line could connect Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle 
and other major cities, boosting economic growth across the region.

Without a radical overhaul of transport, UK suburbs face poverty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jul/25/uk-suburbs-need-radical-transport-solutions-ease-poverty>
At present, the Institute for Public Policy Research 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Institute_for_Public_Policy_Research> says the 
government plans to spend just £280 per person on infrastructure projects in 
the north in the next five years. In contrast, London will get £1,870 per 
person between now and 2021.

Tom Kibasi, Director of IPPR in London, says Britain needs to urgently upgrade 
its transport networks to match other advanced economies, and make it easier to 
travel around the country. “The time it takes to travel, on hugely dated 
infrastructure, between our great regional cities is a national disgrace – this 
is just not what happens in Germany, Japan or France, with their fantastic rail 
links, or the United States, with its highly developed regional air travel,” 
Kibasi says.

Kibasi argues that Britain’s vote to leave the EU shows that regions away from 
London need more support. “Given the Brexit result, the north of England must 
urgently see growing prosperity. A proper east-west crossing would boost 
northern and UK growth, and must now take priority above all other major 
transport projects, includingCrossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> 2 and HS2,” he added.

London’s figures are skewed by Crossrail – the £7bn railway line under the 
capital, running from Reading and Heathrow in the west to stations across Essex 
in the east.

Former chancellor George Osborne announced £60m to develop a plan for a new 
rail link between Manchester and Leeds in his March budget. Those cities are 
divided by the Pennines, making the 40-mile journey longer and more hassle than 
travellers would like.


What is HS3?: proposed sub-Pennine rail line explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/27/what-is-hs3-proposed-sub-penning-rail-line-explained>
The IPPR believe HS3 should be more ambitious to help more northern cities and 
to connect assets such as ports and national parks.

The yields on UK government debt, or gilts, are at record lows, meaning the UK 
can borrow for a decade at just 0.7% per year. Hammond has suggested he could 
reset the government’s fiscal policy in the autumn statement, due later this 
year, and some City experts expect a jump in government borrowing and spending.


David Owen, economist at investment bank Jefferies, agrees that the government 
should rethink its plans. “To the extent that Brexit represents a supply shock 
this also brings fiscal policy much more to the fore – perhaps with 
infrastructure bonds for infrastructure projects that the BoE ends up buying – 
as low gilt yields give the government more room for manoeuvre,” Owen said.

People in the east Midlands are particularly starved of government cash, the 
IPPR found, with just £193 per capita coming their way between now and 2012 
through the national infrastructure pipeline. The south-west is the next 
deprived, at £219 per person.

Even if Crossrail is stripped out, Londoners are still due to receive £1,364 
over the next five years.

Lord Adonis, who was secretary of state for transport in the last Labour 
government, has argued that HS3 would help create a new generation of skilled 
workers.

Writing in the Guardian in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/27/lord-adonis-hs3-rail-revolution-north-high-speed>
, Adonis said: “High-speed rail will demand a high-skilled workforce – 50% of 
which is likely to require NVQ level 3 (A-level) qualification or above. Under 
existing demands the UK is, notoriously, failing to attract and train a 
sufficient number of engineers. That’s why the creation of two high-speed rail 
colleges in Birmingham and Doncaster is so important.”

 