
Q We are planning on building a sustainable extension to our property. We've 
done a lot of research into alternative materials, and want to use re-used 
floorboards, but don't know what to replace our existing flooring with. 
Whatever we put on will give a height difference between the two different 
floor surfaces. Any suggestions?
 Jen, Sheffield

A I see two real answers: first, just live with the height difference and 
simply put an angled wooden section between the floor levels - you'll probably 
get used to it soon enough. Secondly, minimise the height difference with a 
thinner sustainable flooring surface - cork tiles, recycled rubber, or both. 
Look atwww.expanko.com <http://www.expanko.com> for a good selection of 
contemporary cork and recycled-rubber floors - my favourite is cork 'mosaic', 
cut into thin strips to show off its variety of grain and colour. It looks 
great and supports the Portuguese cork industry, which is having a tough time 
due to those soulless plastic-bottle corks - don't they know no one likes them?

Q I live in a Thirties terrace house. The main rooms all have fireplaces, but 
the surrounds are long gone. I'd like to install authentic Thirties fire 
surrounds, but I only have vague ideas of yucky light-brown tiles. Where can I 
get some ideas, and where might I be able to buy originals or copies of such 
surrounds?
 Chris, Coventry

A Unless you want to turn your home and life into a heritage masterpiece, you 
have a wonderful opportunity to install a contemporary fireplace. If you get it 
right, the contrast and practicality will make the hearth the centre of your 
home. Seewww.londonfiredesigns.co.uk <http://www.londonfiredesigns.co.uk> for a 
selection of sleek 'hole in the wall' metal surrounds, and put your mark on 
your home. If you wish to reinstate period fireplaces, look for one with a 
touch of British domestic Deco chic - recurring ziggurat stepped-tile designs 
in what you could call sludgy colours.

Alternatively, go for something with simple, understated, glazed coloured 
tiles. Twentieth Century Fires (www.c20fires.co.uk <http://www.c20fires.co.uk>) 
has a great selection of original and reproduction designs which should help 
keep the 21st century firmly out of your home.

Â· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 