
May I offer the following observations on your report (Brown hit by fresh 
bullying allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-fresh-bullying-allegations>
, 22 February)?

1. To publish anonymous allegations against a named person is an injustice.

2. To make unprovable claims about the source of these allegations against a 
named person or persons is an injustice. This injustice is in no way mitigated 
by claims of a duty to those who have made the allegations, while denying it to 
those against whom such allegations are made.

3. To decide whether anyone has been bullied requires an agreed definition of 
bullying. It its absence, or the absence of evidence from both parties before a 
competent arbitrator, a public accusation of bullying against a named person is 
an injustice.

4. Breaching these principles raises the risk of implying that an allegation 
is tantamount to a conviction. This is an injustice. It is alarming that this 
vital distinction is widely disregarded in much public discourse and in many 
cases. Disliking someone doesn't prove them guilty.

5. Politicians are as much entitled to justice under the law as other citizens.

These considerations are independent of motives, whether shabby or 
high-minded, or whether the victim of injustice is Jack-the-lad or prime 
minister. It is inconceivable that the mother and father of all helplines, the 
Samaritans, would have acted in the way that the CEO of the NationalBullying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/bullying> Helpline has done.

Geoffrey Lang

London

• While Andrew Rawnsley's revelations paint a disturbing picture of an 
individual who struggles to control his reactions and manage others, it is not 
an unfamiliar scenario. Organisations often promote individuals into management 
or leadership positions based on successful performance against targets or 
specific expertise rather than any demonstrated competence or potential to 
manage people. However, organisations tend to deal with this by ensuring that 
suitable training or individual coaching is provided to help managers develop 
the skills and behaviours required to lead and motivate their teams 
effectively. I wonder if any such intervention has been put in place forGordon 
Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> following the 
feedback he received from Gus O'Donnell as it could offer a more constructive 
alternative to the endless critical analysis of his personal shortcomings.

Elaine Denniss

(Business psychologist), London

• The most depressing aspect of the Brown "bully-gate" affair was the BBC 
devoting a huge chunk of its news bulletins to fanning the flames of the 
flimsiest of stories in the finest traditions of the Tory toadying tabloids. 
The point was hammered home with ruthless irony by a distinguished BBC reporter 
reminding us that he was outside a world economic summit called by the prime 
minister to help avoid the catastrophe that lurks around every corner. Along 
with most of the media, theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> was 
resolute to realise its self-­determining prediction that coverage of such 
important issues would be cast aside in favour of gossip.

Nigel de Gruchy

Orpington, Kent

• What matters more: a prime minister who was "bold and clear-sighted" in 
preventing the collapse of several major banks (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/feb/22/andrew-rawnsley-gordon-brown-temper>
, 22 February), or one who gets ratty from time to time?

Ruth Goodall

Weston Longville, Norfolk

• If Gordon Brown's staff are so wimpish that they phone helplines when they 
have irritated their boss to exasperation, they deserve sacking, not sympathy.

Diana Brazier

Leeds

• No bullying or harassment in Whitehall? Are The Thick of It 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbcfour/thickofit/archive.shtml> and In the Loop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128197/in-the-loop> without basis in 
fact then? Not what we had been led to believe.

MH Delap

Bath

• I attended a lunch given for Lady Thatcher when she was prime minister. One 
of the speakers expressed a view at odds with her industrial policy. She tore 
him off a frightful strip – then left. Was she a bully? Of course she was.

David Butler

London
 