
A new, unknown work from the vast Anthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> archive in Manchester is to 
see the light of day for the first time today.

The late writer's epic drama charting the ascent of Napoleon Bonaparte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/napoleon-bonaparte> through the ranks during 
the early years of the French Revolution will have its premiere on BBC Radio 3. 
Humorous and historically detailed, Burgess' story is set against the 
background of the general's tumultuous relationship with Josephine.

Manchester-born Burgess, who died in 1993, wrote at least 33 novels, including 
the notoriously subversiveA Clockwork Orange. Researches in his archive, left 
to theBurgess Foundation <http://www.anthonyburgess.org/> by his widow Liana, 
have now revealed that he wrote a total of 25 works of non-fiction, two volumes 
of autobiography, three symphonies, and more than 250 other musical works, 
including a piano concerto, a ballet and stage musicals.

Burgess, who also contributed regularly to the Observer, had a long-term 
fascination with Napoleon and wrote a novel,Napoleon Symphony, based on the 
structure of Beethoven's Eroica symphony. Burgess approached director Stanley 
Kubrick about making it into a film, but Kubrick, who had directed the film 
adaptation ofA Clockwork Orange, declined. Burgess then wrote his play, 
although it never reached the stage.

Now at last the drama, which stars Toby Jones as Napoleon in the adaptation 
for radio by Anjum Malik, is to be heard for the first time as part of a wider 
Bonaparte season onRadio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3>, marking 
200 years since the historic retreat from Moscow.

Earlier this year the Observer launched an essay competition to celebrate the 
newspaper's association with the late writer.

The judges are writers Kamila Shamsie, William Boyd and Scarlett Thomas, as 
well as Andrew Biswell, who is the director of the International Anthony 
Burgess Foundation, and Robert McCrum, associate editor of theObserver. The 
result will be announced in the next few weeks.
 