
King Alfred’s cakes stick out of the ash branch, charred and lumpy and looking 
more like coal than cake. These excrescences are the fruiting bodies of a 
fungus named after the folk tale about King Alfred who, having trouble with the 
Danes, was harboured by a woman whose baking he was supposed to watch and 
instead cremated.

There’s a lesson in there somewhere about attending to the small things 
important to others, but this fungus is arguably more important to the destiny 
of ash trees than Alfred was to his country. Having read Oliver Rackham’s
wonderful little book <http://littletoller.co.uk/bookshop/monographs/ash/> The 
Ash Tree, I feel a kindred passion for the ash, which defines the woodland of 
Wenlock Edge, and I share his anxiety about novel diseases killing trees 
because of globalisation and ignorance.

Like Alfred, we have not been watching what is important and it may be too 
late. Rackham’s book has a seething anger over our inability to look after 
things that matter. It was a shock to learn thathe died a couple of weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/20/oliver-rackham>; he leaves 
an invaluable legacy of ecological wisdom.

The scientific name for King Alfred’s cakes is Daldinia concentrica 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daldinia_concentrica>. Although it sounds like 
the corporate name of a privatised industry this wood-rotting fungus is 
important. It feeds on the dead wood of the ash and rots it into the soil. A 
number of beetles feed only on that fungus in Britain.

So too, the leaves of the ash get pulled underground by worms, and these 
processes create a rich woodland floor. Up in the treetops the smooth pale bark 
of the boughs appears silvered in the morning sunlight.

There’s a biting wind today, which rattles the saplings like yacht masts in a 
marina. A buzzard settles in a huge old ash and stares like Odin across the 
fields. Jackdaws mend nests in some holes; other holes have bat roosts or tawny 
owls, all made possible by the sculpting of the fungus.

King Alfred’s cakes tell an important story: despite ash trees being common we 
should not take them for granted; the peril lies in looking the other way.

Paul Evans @DrPaulEvans1 <https://twitter.com/DrPaulEvans1>
 