
The number of people doing apprenticeships is on the rise, and they help the 
economy as much as they benefit individuals. Over the next 10 years, 3.8 
million people will complete an apprenticeship, contributing an estimated 
£3.4bn to the UK economy per year in productivity gains by 2022, according to 
the Centre for Economics and Business Research.

But some young people aren't aware of this option as an alternative to 
university after they leave school. Hattie Wrixon, co-founder ofUni's Not For Me
 <http://www.unisnotforme.com/>, says: "They are a great opportunity for those 
that aren't thinking about applying to university, and the only way we can 
really encourage people to apply for an apprenticeship is to ensure they are 
regarded as highly as a degree by employers and society."

"I am sure many people decide not to undertake an apprenticeship because there 
is not enough information out there when considering their post-school 
options," she says.

Apprenticeship schemes are often given a bad name, especially when companies 
hit the headlines fornot legally paying apprentices enough 
<http://www.tuc.org.uk/workplace-issues/learning-and-training/apprenticeships/three-ten-apprentices-paid-less-legal-minimum>
. But in October last year the government started tightening the rules. Through 
the Skills Funding Agency (SFA), the government outlined guidance on what an 
apprenticeship is and the requirements from the employer.

So we've put together the most common myths about apprenticeship schemes, 
alongside the facts, so you can work out whether it's for you.

"I won't have a real job"

Most apprenticeships are full-time like a regular job. The SFA states that the 
number of hours worked must be at least 30 per week, just seven-and-a-half 
hours less than the 37.5 worked on regular contracts. This can be reduced but 
only in exceptional circumstances.Apprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/apprenticeships> must also last for a 
minimum of 12 months, and normally last between one and four years.

"It's not a secure option"

You'll need to check your individual contract but you should have the same 
rights as other employees, with a contract of employment and real opportunities 
for future progression.

"I can't afford it"

Unlike most ways of gaining formal training and practical experience, 
apprenticeships are paid for by the government and your employer, so they're 
great if university isn't an option financially.

"I'll be badly paid" 

The national minimum wage for apprentices starts at £2.68, which applies to 
apprentices aged 16 to 18. Apprentices aged 19 or over who have completed their 
first year get paid the national minimum way for 18-20 year olds. If you're 
unsure whether you are being paid the right amount,you can check national 
minimum wages here <https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates>.

But apprenticeship schemes often pay more than this so it's worth looking 
around – research has suggested that apprentices take home £200 net pay per 
week on average. It is also expected that an apprentice's pay will increase in 
line with their productivity and experience.

"It won't help my job prospects" 

Once you've completed your apprenticeship, your job prospects are good. Recent 
figures from the Office of National Statistics (ONS) show that more than a
quarter of graduates were paid less than the £11.10 average for those on 
work-based training schemes last year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/10578118/Graduates-earning-less-than-those-on-apprenticeships.html>
. The figures show that85% of people who complete an apprenticeship will stay 
in employment 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCwQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.bis.gov.uk%2Fassets%2Fbiscore%2Ffurther-education-skills%2Fdocs%2Fe%2F12-812-evaluation-of-apprenticeships-learners.pdf&ei=z8HnUtu7LoqA7QaMmYDYCg&usg=AFQjCNG0tjiXxOQr3jnEW-oZ3quCtIw2ZA&sig2=9rOdRPvfmR80xCLw9FS-cw&bvm=bv.59930103,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
, and 64% of these stay with the same employer with which they did the course.

"I won't get a qualification"

This is a common misconception, but in fact all apprenticeships must include 
an element of training. They should be designed to give you on- and off-the-job 
training, which will lead to some form of qualification.

In England, there are three levels of apprenticeships 
<https://www.gov.uk/apprenticeships-guide>, which each lead to different levels 
of qualification:

• Intermediate – equivalent to 5 GCSE passes

• Advanced – equivalent to 2 A-level passes

• Higher – lead to NVQ level 4 and above or a foundation degree.

So depending on your scheme, you could end up with: a National Vocational 
Qualification (NVQ); a Functional Skills qualification; a technical 
certificate, such as a BTEC Higher National Certificate (HNC); a Higher 
National Diploma (HND) or a foundation degree.

"I can't because I'm a graduate"

While you can't start an apprenticeship scheme if you're in full-time 
education, you can do one once you've graduated. But you won't be eligible for 
government funding, meaning your employer has to pay your training costs. It's 
worth checking with individual employers whether they consider graduates before 
applying, to make sure you're not wasting your time.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 