
While science is still busy trying to come up with an established truth about 
what goes on inside our heads, artists (not to mention philosophers, writers 
and neuroscientists) are free to explore the actual experience of being 
conscious. In the early 20th century Madrid Santiago Ramon y Cajal, often 
called the founder of modern neuroscience,mapped neurons in spidery ink drawings
 <http://public.media.smithsonianmag.com/legacy_blog/neurons.jpg>. Wassily 
Kandinsky 
<http://images.mentalfloss.com/sites/default/files/styles/article_640x430/public/Kandinsky_6.jpg>
 meanwhile set out to paint from the unconscious mind. Liberating colour from 
its shackles, he used paint to try and create a language of visual abstraction 
akin to music.


Artists continue to use colour to explore our sensory experience of the world. 
Ann Veronica Janssens uses colour and light to make us question all our 
perceptions. For hernew installation 
<http://wellcomecollection.org/exhibitions/states-mind-ann-veronica-janssens> at
Wellcome Collection, <http://wellcomecollection.org/> she fills the gallery 
with coloured mist. In this extraordinary environment, all ordinary details 
about how we see – colour, surface and depth – are altered or obscured, and we 
become intensely focused on the act of perception itself. Encounters like these 
remind us of the richness of our interaction with the world; a personal 
universe constructed within the confines of our skulls.

So this month’s challenge, as part of The A to Z of Reader’s Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/01/a-to-z-of-readers-art-new-project-share-your-art>
, is to create a work of art that expresses your conscious experience. It could 
be inspired by philosophy, or neuroscience – or you might prefer simply to 
celebrate the diversity of your daily reality without seeking answers.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.
 