
It is a truism of sitcoms that, whenever there’s a conversation about violence 
towards testicles, men always cross their legs. As a woman, reading Anatomical 
Venus, you will want to fold yourself protectively over everything, wrap your 
arms around your kidneys and liver, run some barbed wire round your 
reproductive area.

Between 1780 and 1782, Clemente Susini 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clemente_Susini> created the Anatomical Venus. 
She was conceived as a way to teach anatomy, cadavers being in short supply for 
reasons of medical ethics, rather than any shortage of death. Lifesize and made 
of wax, her prettiness is self-evident, and in case you missed it, adorned with 
a string of pearls. Her eyes are dead, unmistakably and her hair is real human 
hair. She is fashioned of seven anatomically correct layers, which the keen 
student can pull apart, ending in a teeny foetus curled in her womb.

House of wax: macabre figures on show in New York museum – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/apr/01/wax-models-morbid-anatomy-museum-new-york-gallery>
It is genuinely difficult to pinpoint how unsettling it is, what an act of 
violence has been perpetrated by the accuracy of the rendering. There seems to 
be something blasphemous, inhumane, in creating a corpse and trying to beautify 
it – or rather, in considering beauty to be a necessary trait in an 
anatomically accurate dead body. In taking beauty to be such a critical 
component of womanhood, it misses, and seals in wax its own misapprehension of, 
what beauty is. Attractiveness and life are indivisible: there is nothing in 
natural life that is prettier dead than alive.

Necrophilia is a taboo for a reason. It is not what it says about, or does to, 
the corpse that makes it aberrant to desire it. It is what it says about your 
desire for women en masse, that you could see the appeal of a dead one: it is 
the logical end point of objectification, perceiving the physical traits to be 
so important that they continue to entice even after the life to which they 
were attached has been extinguished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fanatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc374188f3d75eb5df9e7d26c21cdcfe76dcb8e4%2F285_237_1965_1179%2F1965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cadavers%20in%20pearls%3A%20meet%20the%20Anatomical%20Venus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fanatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cadavers%20in%20pearls%3A%20meet%20the%20Anatomical%20Venus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fanatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc374188f3d75eb5df9e7d26c21cdcfe76dcb8e4%2F285_237_1965_1179%2F1965.jpg>
 An Anatomical Venus produced by the workshop at La Specola between 1784 and 
1788. Photograph: Collections and History of Medicine, MedUni, Vienna 
Joanna Ebenstein’s sumptuous and therefore even more disgusting book is 
fascinated by this era, in which “the study of nature was also the study of 
philosophy”; in which a body created for medical purposes could also be read as 
a work of art. Perhaps it is so horribly magnetic for purely anachronistic 
reasons: we are so used to the separation of body and mind, science and 
philosophy, that when we see that separation elided we cannot help but read in 
some insult to the spirit to see it reconnected with its own internal organs.

Death becomes it: how the Morbid Anatomy Museum slayed Brooklyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/20/morbid-anatomy-museum-gowanus-brooklyn>
The aesthetics of anatomical drawings and models had been prized for some 
centuries before Demountable Venus, on the basis that, in order to be 
interested in the inner workings of the human body, men must be seduced by it. 
“Anatomy,” wrote Andreas Vesalius in 1543, “is an important part of natural 
philosophy; since it embraces the study of man and must properly be regarded as 
the prime foundation of the whole art of medicine and the source of everything 
that constitutes it.”

It is interesting to consider that the body – its nuts and bolts, the raw 
mechanics of it – had by this point long been considered a proper subject for 
artists.Leonardo da Vinci <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/davinci> 
had dissected more than 100 bodies himself earlier that century, and a younger 
artist,Michelangelo Buonarroti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/michelangelo>, accepted a commission 
from a church for which he was paid in corpses.

Naturally, though, there is a piquancy to the female cadaver, not simply 
because of these hideously orgasmic expressions juxtaposed against intestines. 
It is a given that a woman’s body will be dismembered by life, and only by good 
fortune, put back together again. (The simplest for-instance: after a friend 
had a caesarian, her husband said, “I’ve seen a part of my wife no other man 
will ever see. Her kidneys.”)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fanatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac1d777c6ceb9419487a2eabed6cac209dfebdf%2F0_2360_8573_2169%2F8573.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cadavers%20in%20pearls%3A%20meet%20the%20Anatomical%20Venus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fanatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cadavers%20in%20pearls%3A%20meet%20the%20Anatomical%20Venus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fanatomical-venus-anatomy-human-biology-joanna-ebenstein-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac1d777c6ceb9419487a2eabed6cac209dfebdf%2F0_2360_8573_2169%2F8573.jpg>
 Venerina (Little Venus) created by the workshop of Clemente Susini. 
Photograph: Museo di Palazzo Poggi, Universita' di Bologna 
In so many of these figures, almost all of them pregnant, the woman’s face is 
so idealised and the foetus so carefully rendered that she looks like the doll, 
and the baby like the human. The idea that beauty doesn’t simply cling on past 
the end of life, but is actually intensified by death, is explored by 
increments, so thatEdgar Allan Poe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edgarallanpoe>’s contention that “the death 
of a beautiful woman is, unquestionably, the most poetical topic in the world” 
slips, tracelessly, into historian Philippe Aries’s, that “the dead body 
becomes in its turn an object of desire”.

The Anatomical Venus is literally uncanny, by Freud’s definition (borrowed 
from Schelling), “everything that was meant to remain secret and hidden has 
come into the open”.

• Anatomical Venus by Joanna Ebenstein is published by Thames and Hudson at 
£19.95. To buy it for £15.96, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/400829/>, or call 
0330 333 6846.
 