
This year, food and drink-based Cinco de Mayo celebrations will be affected by 
the skyrocketing prices of limes. The hit to margaritas and guacamole are 
nothing compared to next year, though, when the California drought and 
resultant crop shortages are expected to ripple across the Cinco de Mayo meal 
table with higher prices expected for tomatoes, lettuce and avocados.

Cinco de Mayo is a holiday inspired by a battle won by the Mexican army in 
Puebla, Mexico in 1862. That city is theonly place in Mexico 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2014/05/02/308624630/cinco-de-mayo-whose-holiday-is-it-anyway>
 where the holiday is widely acknowledged, but in the US, it has become an 
opportunity to commemorate the influence of Mexican American culture by eating 
guacamole and drinking margaritas.

This year, margarita production is threatened by the lime shortage, caused by 
a widespread citrus disease and cartel battles in Mexico’s lime-growing region. 
Last year, lime case prices were about $15-20. This year, cases can cost around 
$100.

Impending Cinco de Mayo celebrations, and general year-round enjoyment of 
guacamole and margaritas could be further threatened because ofCalifornia’s 
devastating drought 
<http://droughtmonitor.unl.edu/Home/StateDroughtMonitor.aspx?CA>, which has 
harmed food production in the state that produces nearly half of US-grown 
produce and nuts. Here’s a look at some of the top crops that are being 
threatened by the state’s water shortage.

Avocados

California produces nearly 90% of America’s avocado crop, making it the 
primary domestic provider of the fruit. Experts expect the spring avocado crop 
to be the state’s smallest since 1990. Timothy Richards, anArizona State 
University agribusiness professor, estimates 
<http://wpcarey.asu.edu/news-releases/2014-04-16/expect-pay-more-certain-groceries>
 that there will be a 28% increase in avocado prices because of the drought.

Some growers will focus their sales on the west coast to save on shipping 
costs and ensure a fresher product,according to food service trade publication 
QSR <http://www2.qsrmagazine.com/articles/exclusives/0109/avacado-1.phtml>. The 
other parts of the country will face an increased reliance on imported avocados 
from Mexico and Chile, which had a smaller than usual avocado crop as well.

Lettuce

Richards estimates prices for lettuce, one of California top 20 exports, will 
jump by 34% because of the drought. Since there aren’t any good substitutes for 
lettuce, it is a crop that economists expect people will be willing to pay a 
higher price for. California produces 74% of US-grown lettuce, according to the 
USDA.

Packaged salad prices are also expected to increase by 17 to 24 cents to a 
possible $3.03 per bag, Richards estimated.

Peppers

California is America’s primary provider of peppers. Richards estimates pepper 
prices are likely to increase by 17% because of the drought.

While 2013 was California’s driest year on record, it followed two very dry 
years. This long-running drought mean food prices are expected to rise past 
2014. With these food shortages, grocers are going to rely more heavily on 
imported fruits and vegetables.

Tomatoes

About 90% of US-grown tomatoes come from California, according to the USDA. 
Richards estimates that the drought will cause tomato prices to increase 22 to 
45 cents to a possible $2.84 per pound. Each of these price increases is likely 
to have an effect on products reliant on these crops, like pre-made salsa.
 