
Australian government agencies have made almost uniform calls to wind back 
federal whistleblower laws, arguing they are an administrative burden that 
creates confusion and unnecessary costs.

Federal police admit seeking access to reporter's metadata without warrant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/federal-police-admit-seeking-access-to-reporters-metadata-without-warrant>
In strikingly similar submissions, a swathe of government agencies have all 
called for changes to the way the public interest disclosure scheme should 
operate in submissions to astatutory review 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/pmc/about-pmc/taskforces-and-consultations/statutory-review-public-interest-disclosure-act-2013>
 led by the former integrity commissioner Philip Moss.

The laws were introduced by the Labor government in order to provide an avenue 
to protect whistleblowers making public interest disclosures. The scheme 
largely favours internal disclosures by whistleblowers but, in some very narrow 
circumstances, also permits disclosures to the public or media. There are broad 
exemptions for intelligence agencies to the operation of the scheme.

The Australian Taxation Office, Australian federal police, Attorney General’s 
Department, Department of Defence, Department of Immigration and Border 
Protection and Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade have all called for 
changes to narrow the definition of “disclosable conduct” under the scheme.

Many of their concerns relate to what is described invariably as “duplication” 
with existing workplace and anti-corruption processes.

The immigration submission 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pid-submissions/submission-dibp.pdf>
 said its experience was that the scheme was operating as a “complaint 
mechanism” rather than a whistleblowing tool.

“Under the PID Act, any personal grievance by a current or former public 
official, including dissatisfaction with a response to a complaint made under a 
different process, is deemed to be a disclosure,” it said.

Whistleblower investigation impeded by 'serious gaps' in intelligence records
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/02/whistleblower-investigation-impeded-by-serious-gaps-in-intelligence-records>
“The ‘low bar’ of disclosable conduct means that the PID Act, in its actual 
operation, replaces and complicates (rather than complements) the existing and 
established framework for management, performance management and discipline in 
the APS.”

It claimed that the scheme “disempowers supervisors from listening and 
responding to staff concerns.”

The federal police wrote in its submission 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pid-submissions/submission-afp.pdf>
: “It is of serious concern to the AFP that the overlay of PID Act processes 
and requirements with other oversight and integrity arrangements may actually 
undermine the objectives of the PID Act and frustrate the resolution of 
matters”.

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade wrote 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pid-submissions/submission-dfat.pdf>
 the conduct that could be disclosed would “capture conduct that would 
ordinarily be dealt with at a lower or managerial level through other routine 
assessment or investigative processes.”

Many of the agencies who said the act needed to be restricted had received 
only a handful of disclosures under the scheme.

A small number of agencies, likely to be Australian intelligence agencies, 
have redacted their submissions entirely.

But other legal groups have argued the laws do not go far enough to protect 
whistleblowers. The Human Rights Law Centre’ssubmission 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pid-submissions/submission-hrlc.pdf>
 said that disclosure conduct should encompass potential human rights abuses 
and expressed concern for the exemptions relating to intelligence agencies 
under the act.

Whistleblowers could have citizenship revoked under proposed laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/25/whistleblowers-could-have-citizenship-revoked-under-proposed-laws>
The submissions published also include several from whistleblowers who have 
experienced first-hand the impacts of the disclosure laws. In stark contract 
with the government agencies, many of them say the laws do not go far enough to 
protect them.

The federal MP Andrew Wilkie wrote a submission  
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pid-submissions/submission-andrew-wilkie.pdf>
outlining a series of ways that the current scheme “fails to offer adequate 
protection for several important classes of whistleblowers”. He said that it 
was likely many legitimate investigations had been undertaken.

One submission was from John Brown 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/pid-submissions/submission-john-brown.pdf>
, who worked for an undisclosed government agency. He said he disclosed a 
breach of a secret law enforcement operation, known as a controlled operation.

“The result of this action was immediate reprisal through exposure of my 
identity, not only to fellow staff members ... but also to those who the 
disclosure of conduct was made,” he wrote.

“I believe that doing the right thing, and not turning a blind eye to 
disclosable conduct that may lead to wrongdoing, is the duty and responsibility 
of every public official.”


The report is scheduled to be provided to the minister assisting the prime 
minister for the public service,Michaelia Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/michaelia-cash>, by July.
 