
Cameron Crowe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cameron-crowe> has apologised 
for casting the white actor Emma Stone as a “part-Asian” Hawaiian in 
controversial “whitewashed” romance Aloha.

Crowe addressed the issue on his blog 
<http://www.theuncool.com/2015/06/02/a-comment-on-allison-ng/> after diversity 
campaigners took him to task for allegedly failing to recognise that 
Asian-Pacific Islanders make up the majority of the state’s population. The 
casting of Stone as the quarter Asian and quarter Hawaiian character Allison Ng
drew particular criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/26/cameron-crowes-new-film-aloha-accused-of-whitewashing-hawaii>
.

Emma Stone: the whitest Asian person Hollywood could find
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2015/jun/02/emma-stone-whitest-asian-cameron-crowe-aloha-hawaii>
“Thank you so much for all the impassioned comments regarding the casting of 
the wonderfulEmma Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> in the 
part of Allison Ng,” Crowe wrote. “I have heard your words and your 
disappointment, and I offer you a heartfelt apology to all who felt this was an 
odd or misguided casting choice.”

The film-maker said he had based Ng on a real-life redheaded Hawaiian who 
always struggled to explain her unlikely ethnicity. He took the blame for the 
casting decision entirely upon himself and praised Stone for her “tireless 
research”.

“Whether that story point felt hurtful or humorous has been, of course, the 
topic of much discussion,” he said. “However I am so proud that in the same 
movie, we employed many Asian-American, Native-Hawaiian and Pacific-Islanders, 
both before and behind the camera … including Dennis “Bumpy” Kanahele, and his 
village, and many other locals who worked closely in our crew and with our 
script to help ensure authenticity.
“I am grateful for the dialogue,” the director continued. “And from the many 
voices, loud and small, I have learned something very inspiring. So many of us 
are hungry for stories with more racial diversity, more truth in 
representation, and I am anxious to help tell those stories in the future.”


Aloha review – inspiration overdose at the pixie-dust buffet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/29/aloha-review-inspiration-overdose-pixie-dust-buffet>
Aloha <https://www.theguardian.com/film/aloha> stars Bradley Cooper as a 
defence contractor who falls for Stone’s US Air Force pilot after being 
assigned to oversee the launch of a military satellite from Hawaii. The cast 
also features Rachel McAdams, Bill Murray and Alec Baldwin.


The film’s studio, Sony, had initially tried to defend itself against 
whitewashing claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/27/sony-responds-whitewashing-claims-cameron-crowe-film-aloha>
 by the Media Action Network for Asian Americans (MANAA). “While some have been 
quick to judge a movie they haven’t seen and a script they haven’t read, the 
film Aloha respectfully showcases the spirit and culture of the Hawaiian 
people,” it said last week.


Aloha opened at No 6 in the US box office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/01/san-andreas-rocks-us-but-cameron-crowe-does-not-have-audiences-at-aloha>
 chart with $10m at the weekend, on par with Cameron’s previous film, We Bought 
a Zoo, which went on to make $120m. However, the movie has suffered the worst 
reviews of the Almost Famous film-maker’s career, currently rating just 18 per 
cent “rotten” on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes.

 