
Quotes of the day

The major parties are insisting the result of election is still close but the 
debate has moved on to the outcome in the Senate. At issue is Tony Abbott's 
threat that if he does not control the Senate and it blocks the abolition of 
the carbon tax, he will call a double dissolution election.

The opposition leader, Tony Abbott:

If we win the election which is a referendum on the carbon tax, the last thing 
that the Labor party will do is set itself up to lose a second election by 
continuing to support a tax which has become electoral poison.

The climate change minister, Mark Butler:

This mandate argument that says if you lose an election hypothetically, you 
junk all of your long-standing policy positions and simply cave in to the 
government of the day is an utter fallacy â€¦ It's never been that way and 
frankly it never should.

The Greens leader, Christine Milne:

Tony Abbott has now become so arrogant that he is assuming that he has already 
got the Lodge. What he is now coming after this week is control of the Senate 
as well.

Tweet of the day

Twitter was alight after comments by the Liberal candidate for Lindsay, Fiona 
Scott, blaming asylum seekers for long hospital waiting times and crowded roads 
in western Sydney. #FionaScottLogic took off, blaming asylum seekers for 
everything from Ben Affleck becoming the next Batman to lost phone chargers.
John Birmingham (@JohnBirmingham) 
Damn asylum seekers. Always taking up the exercise machinery at teh gym. 
That's why I don't look like Wolverine.#FionaScottLogic 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23FionaScottLogic&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/JohnBirmingham/statuses/374736466061967360> September 3, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/JohnBirmingham/statuses/374736466061967360> 
Prop of the day: the Vegemite files

Exercise regimens would have to be the prop de rigueur of the 2013 election 
campaign. Abbott's addiction to public exercise for physical and mental health 
is legendary and Kevin Rudd has taken up walking with a John Howard-like zeal. 
The former Liberal leader John Hewson was a keen runner and spent the 
"unloseable" but lost 1993 election turning up sweaty to rallies while his 
opponent, Paul Keating, barely raised a sweat on a trampoline in his Zegna suit.

Rudd took his entourage of bright young campaign volunteers along the Brisbane 
river, where he was cheered and heckled to "do some real exercise, you bum". 
But in this final week, the Ruddster's mood has climbed and he would not be put 
off, even joking with the struggling Channel Ten cameraman that he would carry 
his very heavy camera. Team PM stopped for a group picture next to a homeless 
man sleeping on a bench.

Stats of the day

Updated figures from the Australian Electoral Commission: 953,941 people have 
voted.

Election betting: Labor $17.00, Coalition $1.01.

Candidate of the day

The Palmer United party candidate Brad Ferguson may get a few votes for sheer 
chutzpah. Ferguson lives in Townsville but he is standing for the Victorian 
seat of Wannon. So not only does he live thousands of kilometres from his seat, 
he admitted to ABC radio that he has never actually been there. But relax, 
Wannonarians, he will move there if he wins the seat.
 