
How about this for an alternate reality? A normal election campaign would be 
starting today. As it is, welcome to week four – we’re nearly, almost, 
oh-so-close to the halfway mark, and the question of a hung parliament is back 
on the table.

The finance minister, Mathias Cormann, the foreign minister, Julie Bishop, the 
treasurer,Scott Morrison, and the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, have 
weighed in on the hypothetical aspoll analysis shows 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/newspoll-enough-to-lose-keystates-swing-against-coalition/news-story/8c67d20b18465daad6b817be6fdbc7e8>
 the government could lose up to 16 seats in just three states.

Cormann refused to rule out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/mathias-cormann-refuses-to-rule-out-coalition-governing-with-independents>
 the Coalition forming a minority government with independents. At a doorstop 
in western Sydney on Monday, Turnbull said it was a “theoretical possibility” 
but that if any government was to formed on that basis, it would be between 
Labor and the Greens: the bogeyman that the Coalition has been evoking since 
the start of the campaign.


“That is the chaos we all remember,” said Morrison later. “And the best way to 
avoid that chaos is to support the government.”

There are three independent crossbench MPs seeking re-election: Cathy McGowan, 
Bob Katter and Andrew Wilkie. Other hopefuls include Tony Windsor, who is 
taking onBarnaby Joyce in New England, and James Mathison, the former 
Australian Idol presenter, whohas announced he will run 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/05/27/tv-presenter-james-mathison-is-running-against-tony-abbott-at-th/>
 againstTony Abbott in Warringah. (Look, you never know.)

The Libs won’t say that they won’t work with the independents but are keen to 
push Labor and the Greens together, the Greens don’t want to sit with the Libs –
it’s like trying to accommodate particularly trying guests at a dinner party 
that may never happen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/election-2016-deal-and-no-deal-decoding-turnbull-and-shortens-double-talk-on-minority-rule>
.

At least one potential arrangement has been ruled out: Turnbull said “of 
course” there is “no way” a coalition would be the formed with the Greens. The 
feeling’s mutual, saysRichard Di Natale: “My own view is that it would be 
inconceivable to support this government.”

Coming soon: a ‘straightforward’ plebiscite

Turnbull has confirmed that the marriage equality plebiscite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/malcolm-turnbull-expects-marriage-equality-plebiscite-by-years-end>
 would be held this calendar year, as soon as possible after the election. He 
said the question asked would be very straightforward: “we will be asking the 
Australian people whether they support the definition of marriage being 
extended to include couples of the same sex”.

The announcement follows aspersions cast at Turnbull’s integrity during Sunday 
night’s leaders’ debate when the prime minister dodged a question from AFR 
journalistLaura Tingle about who he was and what he stood for. (Van Badham’s 
interpretation <https://twitter.com/vanbadham/status/736909964342501377> of 
Mike Bowers’ shot of Tingle says it all.)
Van Badham (@vanbadham) 
#leadersdebate <https://twitter.com/hashtag/leadersdebate?src=hash> #ausvotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash> #auspol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/gMlXvrhJYI 
<https://t.co/gMlXvrhJYI>
 <https://twitter.com/vanbadham/status/736909964342501377> May 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/vanbadham/status/736909964342501377> 
Earlier this month George Brandis, the attorney general, said planning for the 
plebiscite was well advanced.


But Shirleene Robinson  of Australian Marriage Equality said that, regardless 
of which party wins the election, the quickest way to achieve marriage equality 
was through a parliamentary free vote: “that should be held as soon as 
possible”.

Labor has committed to holding a free vote on same-sex marriage within 100 
days if elected. The Greens are also in favour.

Politicians in glass-bottom boats …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb18d7248ec8278480536f822f92fe4630c792e3%2F0_0_5422_3615%2F5422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20what%20if%20no%20one%20wins%20the%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20what%20if%20no%20one%20wins%20the%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb18d7248ec8278480536f822f92fe4630c792e3%2F0_0_5422_3615%2F5422.jpg>
 Bill Shorten, with Labor’s environment spokesman Mark Butler, during a glass 
bottom boat ride at Green Island. Photograph: Jason Edwards/AAP 
Bill Shorten announced that Labor will spend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/30/labor-pledges-500m-over-five-years-to-support-great-barrier-reef>
 $500m over the next five years on protecting the Great Barrier Reef.

“If we do not act, it is in serious danger of being irreparably damaged,” he 
said in Cairns this afternoon. “If we do not act, our children will rightly ask 
us why didn’t we. This is not a problem that I’m inclined to pass on to future 
generations.”

Labor says it wants to work with the Queensland government to implement the 
plan, and provide a multimillion dollar boost to the CSIRO.

This comes after Friday’s revelation that the government intervened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/27/australia-scrubbed-from-un-climate-change-report-after-government-intervention>
 to remove every reference to the Reef from a UN report on the impact of 
climate change on tourism and World Heritage sites.

In the wake of that story, the Juice Media have put together 
<https://youtu.be/V41-uYPXw6I> an honest tourism advertisement. (And First Dog 
on the Moonhas asked the question that should be on on everyone’s lips: “oh my 
god what is going on?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/brenda-the-civil-disobedience-penguin-loses-her-mind-over-the-great-barrier-reef-oh-my-god>
)

Best of Bowers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ebc5d3838641800f095e6a19c73734f7ce3f7f7%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20what%20if%20no%20one%20wins%20the%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20what%20if%20no%20one%20wins%20the%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ebc5d3838641800f095e6a19c73734f7ce3f7f7%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Is it an election campaign or a holiday?Mike Bowers accompanied Bill Shorten 
to Cairns on Monday morning, where Shorten spoke to the media in the shade of 
some handy palm trees before his trip to Green Island on a glass-bottom boat. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Further reading

• A snapshot of political donations in Australia 
<https://theconversation.com/infographic-a-snapshot-of-political-donations-in-australia-60112>
 (The Conversation) An at-a-glance view of federal and state disclosure 
requirements, as well as of each parties’ major donors.

• Why I’m Voting For James Mathison (despite not being in his electorate) 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/comedy/article/2016/05/30/why-im-voting-james-mathison-despite-not-being-his-electorate>
 (SBS) Mathison looks at Tony Abbott in Waringah, and asks “What about me?”Dee 
Fidge, whose first taste of democracy came with Australian Idol, argues his 
case.

• How not to reduce government spending 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/comment-and-analysis/how-not-to-reduce-government-spending-20160528-gp639z.html>
 (Fairfax) “If screwing the politically defenceless is the best you can do to 
control government spending you’re never going to make it. They don’t have 
enough to cut.”Ross Gittins, the Sydney Morning Herald’s economics editor.


And also ...

Bill Shorten had a sharp response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/30/back-to-the-cave-bill-shorten-calls-out-senator-leyonhjelm-on-gender-equality>
 forDavid Leyonhjelm after the Liberal Democrat senator criticised Shorten’s 
pledge to fund more women’s sport on television: “Back to the cave, stone age 
man.”

Leyonhjelm had suggested women’s sport was not interesting enough to warrant 
additional funding at the taxpayers’ expense after Shorten announced in 
Canberra on Sunday that Labor would deliver an extra 500 hours of women’s sport 
via the ABC if elected on 2 July.

In other Leyonhjelm news, Crikey reports that he is 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2016/05/30/helen-dale-leaves-leyonhjelms-office/> 
currently in the throes of a staffing crisis after policy adviserHelen Dale – 
née Darville, AKA Demidenko – quit in the middle of the campaign after a 
dispute over “being subjected to oversight on Facebook stuff”.
Josh Taylor (@joshgnosis) 
Leyonhjelm advisor Helen Dale quits, leaked email suggests paying her 
replacement in cashhttps://t.co/8XxnwQ9i2P <https://t.co/8XxnwQ9i2P> 
pic.twitter.com/h86gsVetP7 <https://t.co/h86gsVetP7>
 <https://twitter.com/joshgnosis/status/737116272270282753> May 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/joshgnosis/status/737116272270282753> 
An internal email reported to be from the 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/david-leyonhjelm-disappointed-by-resignation-of-policy-adviser-helen-dale>
 senator suggests that he has told staff that he will “ignore tax” and pay 
$5,000 in cash to Liberal Democrat Party founderJohn Humphreys to replace her. 
Seems legit.

On Twitter Dale suggested that she’d quit because of constraints on her 
Facebook freedoms, referencing a staple of meme culture when she tweeted 
“Shitposting for liberty FTW”. Shealso confirmed that 
<https://twitter.com/_HelenDale/status/737127550044897281> she was no stranger 
to “the awkward ‘teach old people about dank memes’ conversation”: “It’s... 
difficult.”
Helen Dale (@_HelenDale) 
Shitposting for liberty FTW.
 <https://twitter.com/_HelenDale/status/737124760635637764> May 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_HelenDale/status/737124760635637764> Helen Dale 
(@_HelenDale) 
Also confirming I am an excellent shitposter and do not need to be told how to 
do it :)@joshgnosis <https://twitter.com/joshgnosis> @JoshButler 
<https://twitter.com/JoshButler>
 <https://twitter.com/_HelenDale/status/737127287124938758> May 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_HelenDale/status/737127287124938758> 
A spokesman for Leyonhjelm said: “We can confirm Helen Dale has left her 
position in the office of Senator Leyonhjelm and we thank her for her 
contribution.

“It’s not appropriate to discuss private arrangements in the media, except to 
say we are complying with all tax requirements.”

Meanwhile, in the rest of the world ...

Over two historic terms, official White House photographer Pete Souza has 
chronicled the most intimate, candid and comical moments ofBarack Obama’s 
presidency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d69d6a08a352338156639fc1d925949568416c7%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20what%20if%20no%20one%20wins%20the%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20what%20if%20no%20one%20wins%20the%20election%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Faustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d69d6a08a352338156639fc1d925949568416c7%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 President Barack Obama runs down the East Colonnade with family dog Bo. 
Photograph: Pete Souza/The White House 
“This is just one in a stream of vividly human and often 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/29/pete-souza-photographing-the-real-barack-obama>
 funny photographs – released not just through White House press office, but on 
Flickr and Instagram – in which Souza has documented moments of the Obama 
administration that will never be forgotten.”

And if today was a pop song ...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FiV5dQuY6ZUu&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FiV5dQuY6ZUu>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FiV5dQuY6ZUu&media=>
 PM: “How old is your rat?” 
Turnbull was reported to be “startled” by the discovery of a rat tucked in its 
owner’s high-vis hoodie during a walkthrough of a western Sydney shopping 
centre this afternoon. The two-and-a-half-year-old rodent was named Splinter; 
his owner, Shane, dared the prime minister to “give him a pat”.


“He’s the reason I don’t get pests in my home – he eats them all,” Shane told 
Turnbull, according to BuzzFeed Australia. “Cockroaches, silverfish, ants, 
spiders, fleas, flea eggs.

“Only bad thing he does is he tries to clean my teeth when I’m asleep.”

The prime minister reportedly replied, “All right, thank you.” We’ll let The 
Walkmen play outthis “cinematic” moment 
<https://twitter.com/MarkDiStef/status/737147055383027712>.
 “You’ve got a nerve to be asking my number, Mr Prime Minister” 
Never miss another catchup: If you’re reading this in the Guardian app, tap on 
“Australian election briefing” at the top or bottom of this page, then tap on 
“Follow series” to get an app notification as soon as the Campaign catchup 
publishes every afternoon.
 