
Your report about the campaign to pardon gay men convicted, like Alan Turing, 
of consenting same-sex behaviour includes some common misunderstandings (
Whitehall drags feet over pardons for gay men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/homosexual-pardon-delayed-whitehall-fears-paedophiles-simon-hughes-alan-turing>
, 27 February).

The pardon campaign is not limited to the 49,000 men convicted of the one 
homophobic offence of so-called “gross indecency”. It seeks redress for all the 
estimated 50,000 to 100,000 men convicted of consensual adult homosexuality 
under four different anti-gay laws. These laws were not repealed until 2003.

The campaign is not seeking a pardon solely for men convicted prior to 1967. 
The law reform of that year was a very limited decriminalisation. Many 
victimless homosexual acts remained illegal. A pardon is therefore also being 
sought for the estimated 20,000 men convicted after 1967.

Equally important, I am pressing for a government apology to all men convicted 
of consenting same-sex behaviour, where such actions are now no longer a 
criminal offence.
Peter Tatchell
London

• Almost 50,000 men were criminalised because of their sexual orientation. If 
evidence is found that any one of them abused children, it is right they should 
be brought to justice. Within any population of several thousand people, 
regardless of sexual orientation, one or two could be paedophiles. However, are 
those in Whitehall who are dragging their feet (raising concerns that 
paedophiles could benefit from the proposed pardon) betraying an attitude that 
associates paedophilia with one sexual orientation above another? Such an 
attitude is grossly misleading, and deeply unjust to these men who have already 
been criminalised enough.
Jo Whateley and Madge Woollard
Sheffield
 