
When Angela Merkel stepped on to the podium at her party headquarters on 
Sunday night to announce she wouldrun for a fourth term in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
, the message the German chancellor projected to the outside world was that, in 
a world of political upheavals, she would remain a constant.

Yet the internal party debates that culminated in her announcement have made 
one thing clear: if Merkel wants to match the records set by her predecessors 
Konrad Adenauer and Helmut Kohl and be elected to a fourth term in office, much 
will need to change.

According to a poll published on Sunday by the Bild newspaper, 55% of Germans 
want to see Merkel remain in office, up from 42% in August. Eleven years into 
her leadership, her approval ratings are higher than those even of populist 
regimes.

Rightwing populists
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5539e6aca351db6f0c15b351c854206d98696a1e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20anything%20stop%20Merkel%20winning%20a%20fourth%20term%20as%20chancellor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20anything%20stop%20Merkel%20winning%20a%20fourth%20term%20as%20chancellor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5539e6aca351db6f0c15b351c854206d98696a1e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Supporters of Pegida, the anti-immigration rightwing movement, march through 
Dresden last year. Photograph: Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters 
But the social climate in Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> 
has changed considerably in the three years since Merkel’s Christian Democrats 
won the election with an overwhelming 40.5% of the vote. A new rightwing 
populist party is on the rise. Many blame her move to the centre ground for 
having destroyed the country’s political landscape.

The chancellor implied as much when she said her party would have to “fight 
off attacks from all sides” – a new experience for a party that used to make a 
principle of not allowing rivals to gain a profile to their right.

A draft strategy paper leaked to the German press over the weekend suggested 
the chancellor would try her utmost to avoid the numbers of refugees arriving 
in Germany to reach the crisis levels of 2015, while at the same time not 
committing herself to an upper limit.

It also said she would try harder to address “the losers of modernisations” 
while resisting populist rhetoric – a delicate balancing act.

Coalition partner woes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0524c270a84646c2d67dbf9aa1c76e1caf04976%2F72_36_4424_3148%2F4424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20anything%20stop%20Merkel%20winning%20a%20fourth%20term%20as%20chancellor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20anything%20stop%20Merkel%20winning%20a%20fourth%20term%20as%20chancellor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0524c270a84646c2d67dbf9aa1c76e1caf04976%2F72_36_4424_3148%2F4424.jpg>
 From left: foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, chancellor Angela Merkel, 
Social Democrats chair Sigmar Gabriel and his Bavarian Christian Democrats 
counterpart, Horst Seehofer, arrive at the Bundestag in Berlin. Photograph: 
Sean Gallup/Getty Images 
Senior party members who were present at Sunday’s meeting said there was at 
the very least an agreement in the room that Merkel would not be able to win 
another election with the kind of apolitical feel-good campaign the CDU ran in 
2013, and that the party would need to distance itself from her current 
coalition partners, the Social Democrats, on themes such as economic stability 
and personal wealth – at least for the duration of the campaign.

Behind closed doors, politicians on the centre-right and the centre-left 
concede that another “grand coalition” between their parties is mathematically 
the most likely outcome and the most responsible decision in a globally 
unstable environment, even if it risks fuelling anger at the political 
establishment.

A coalition government between Merkel’s CDU and the Green party, much 
talked-about only a year ago, looks increasingly fanciful, and not just after 
Donald Trump’s victory in the US. Observers say a conservative coalition 
government with a Green junior partner would descend into infighting amid calls 
for Germany to take a more active military role.

A 2017 victory for rightwing upstarts Alternative für Deutschland, as much as 
it would fit a pattern set by Brexit and Trump’s win, is not worth serious 
consideration. Apart from a few minor MPs in the Christian Democrat’s Saxony 
branch, Merkel’s party has been as unequivocal in ruling out a coalition with 
the AfD as more leftwing parties.

Absolute majorities are extremely rare in German politics – Adenauer achieved 
the last one in 1957. In 2013 the Christian Democrats missed out on an absolute 
majority by only five seats, partly because a high number of votes went to 
parties that did not make it above the 5% threshold required for entering 
parliament, meaning 43% of the vote would have been enough for the CDU to rule 
on their own.

In 2017, that proportion is expected to be higher, since current polls see up 
to six parties entering parliament. With the AfD currently on between10-14% in 
the polls <http://www.wahlrecht.de/umfragen/> after an unprecedented influx of 
asylum-seekers and the first Islamic State-inspired attack on German soil, a 
Trump-esque upset would still require them to triple, if not quadruple their 
support.

The red-red-green threat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7b6bc52e1008108b606d9574ada34c4bae381b4%2F0_0_4500_2993%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20anything%20stop%20Merkel%20winning%20a%20fourth%20term%20as%20chancellor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20anything%20stop%20Merkel%20winning%20a%20fourth%20term%20as%20chancellor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fcan-anything-stop-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-winning-fourth-term-election-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7b6bc52e1008108b606d9574ada34c4bae381b4%2F0_0_4500_2993%2F4500.jpg>
 A migrant from Syria holds a picture of Angela Merkel as he and approximately 
800 others arrive from Hungary at Munich railway station. Photograph: Sean 
Gallup/Getty Images 
If a political obstacle emerges on Merkel’s path to a fourth term, it is more 
likely to come from Berlin – not her chancellory or the parliament next door, 
but the Berlin senate, where the Social Democrats, the Left party and Green 
party have just agreed on a coalition government to run the capital’s affairs 
for the next five years. If their collaboration proves a success, some 
commentators say, it could provide inspiration for the three parties to 
campaign on a joint ticket in 2017.

In 2013, the three left-leaning parties earned enough votes for a theoretical 
majority but were unable to put aside their historic differences, particularly 
on foreign policy issues. Three years later, with a “red-red-green” or “R2G” 
government functioning without major incidents at state level in Thüringia, and 
a working group having first at the Bundestag in October, the mood is more 
positive.

Christian Lange, a Social Democrat state secretary in the justice ministry, 
recentlycalled on his party 
<http://www.b-republik.de/archiv/portugals-stabile-minderheitsregierung-%E2%80%93-ein-vorbild>
 to learn from Portugal, where prime minister António Costa managed to create 
leftwing minority coalition government with the Communist and Marxist parties 
by bracketing out foreign policy hot potatoes such as the euro, Nato and 
military interventions.

Doing so with a self-confident German Left party might, however, be more 
tricky. As recently as June, Die Linke tabled amotion 
<http://dip21.bundestag.de/dip21/btd/18/086/1808656.pdf> for Germany to leave 
Nato and replace it with “a collective system for peace and security in Europe 
that includes Russia”.

Whether Germany’s Social Democrats are prepared to risk breaking with a 
chancellor who has many admirers in its ranks in order to pursue such a 
precarious path depends largely on their candidate – with deputy chancellor 
Sigmar Gabriel and the president of the European Parliament, Martin Schulz, the 
most likely contenders.

If the nomination of foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is anything to 
go by, yearning for stability is likely to overcome any taste for adventure. 
And Merkel will have little to prevent her from re-entering the chancellery, 
once again, in 10 months’ time.
 