
Are avocados now toast, at least for the thoughtful eater? There was only ever 
one way foravocado adulation 
<https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/avocado/?hl=en> to go, and that was 
down. Just have a look at Instagram:avocado “roses” 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/05/03/upgrade-your-instagram-game-with-some-avocado-roses-5855979/>
,avocado brownies <https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/avocadobrownies/>, 
guacamole 100 ways <https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/guacamole/>, and 
avocado smoothie <https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/avocadosmoothie/> 
(again?) Even though the hipster diet deifies the avo as a staple, boredom with 
their ubiquity would surely have ushered in peak avocado in the fullness of 
time.

But what seemed a crisis in the long term now presents as a clean-eating 
emergency here and now with urgent warnings that in Mexico, the unprecedented 
international appetite for this unique fruit isindirectly fuelling illegal 
deforestation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/avocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests>
 and environmental degradation. Those oblivious to such things in far-flung 
places will no doubt carry on regardless. But what are those who view the 
avocado as a basic food group supposed to do?

Rising avocado prices fuelling illegal deforestation in Mexico
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/avocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests>
The problem is created by the fact that it’s now theoretically more profitable 
for Mexican farmers to grow avocados than most other crops. So much so that in 
Michoacán, the state that produces most of the country’s avocados and arguably 
the world’s avocado capital, growers are ignoring the law and thinning out 
mature pine forest to plant young avocado trees instead.

But what’s so bad about swapping one type of tree for another? Permanent 
forest doesn’t need to be sprayed with fertilisers and pesticides. It takes 
care of itself and acts as a vast carbon sink. Avocado plantations, on the 
other hand, need repeated cycles of chemical inputs. They drink up irrigation 
water too, lots of it, putting pressure on local water reserves. Byone estimate 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/avocados-are-the-pits> it takes 272 litres just 
to grow about half a kilogram (two or three medium-sized) avocados.

The thirsty avocado isn’t just testing water levels in Mexico either. In 
California, avocados now vie with almonds as thetop water-guzzling crop 
<http://www.motherjones.com/tom-philpott/2014/10/avocado-drought-chile-california>
.

It’s a moot point whether the Mexicans who actually grow these on-trend fruits 
eventually harvest their fair share of the economic benefits. This lucrative 
trade is increasingly controlled by adrug cartel 
<http://www.vocativ.com/underworld/crime/avocado/> known as the Caballeros 
Templarios (Knights Templar). So when you buy a Mexican avocado, a greedy share 
of revenue may well accrue to criminals.

I've seen fields of low-paid, often migrant workers who toil and live amid 
polluted water courses and pesticides

You might think, OK, I’ll buy avocados from some other less problematic source 
then. But would an avocado from Chile, Peru or the Dominican Republic 
automatically be more sustainable or equitably produced? The fact of the matter 
is that we know pitifully little about the environmental and working conditions 
of faceless people in faraway places who grow fruit for our tables, but I have 
seen enough of foreign fruit “farms” to suspect the worst. Fields of abysmally 
low-paid, often migrant workers who toil and live day-in-day-out in a trashed 
environment amid polluted water courses and pesticides; the latter decaying 
workers’ fingernails from dipping saplings into chemicals.

In most of the fruit-growing countries of Latin America, if you talk back to 
the management, you can expect a knock at the door of your shanty. As Banana 
Link, the group that raises awareness of conditions in the global food industry,
has documented <http://www.bananalink.org.uk/sitrabi-guatemala>, Guatemala is 
the most dangerous. Any activist for fruit workers there courts summary 
dismissal or worse: kidnapping, torture, and murder. Perhaps the Caballeros 
Templarios in neighbouring Mexico are more tender-hearted and environmentally 
aware?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fhispters-handle-unpalatable-truth-avocado-toast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed3f3d32b5e2df444e79167ae514388c1079f9b%2F0_57_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20hipsters%20stomach%20the%20unpalatable%20truth%20about%20avocado%20toast%3F%20%7C%20Joanna%20Blythman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fhispters-handle-unpalatable-truth-avocado-toast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20hipsters%20stomach%20the%20unpalatable%20truth%20about%20avocado%20toast%3F%20%7C%20Joanna%20Blythman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fhispters-handle-unpalatable-truth-avocado-toast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed3f3d32b5e2df444e79167ae514388c1079f9b%2F0_57_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 ‘Thanks to demand, it’s now more profitable to grow avocados than most other 
crops.’ Photograph: Nick Wagner/AP 
The fact of the matter is that the further away from home our food comes, the 
less chance we have of interrogating its origins and its impact on its native 
environment and workforce. This isn’t an argument for boycotting imports of 
food that cannot be grown nearer us, but it is a powerful reason for refusing 
to fixate on them or fetishise them as the latest novelty “superfood”.

Whether it’s Mexican avocados, or tinny-tasting, air-freighted Peruvian 
asparagus that has drastically depleted its local water table, these foods 
shouldn’t be a staple of our diets – unless we still have the stomach for them 
when their often unedifying back story is made plain to us.

For avocados, as for crops like pineapple and bananas, we can seek out a 
Fairtrade label, which guarantees producers’ working conditions and 
remuneration better than most in their industry. Fairtrade pioneers Equal 
Exchange have established apartnership 
<http://equalexchange.coop/our-partners/farmer-partners/pragor> with Pragor, a 
progressive group of small-scale avocado farmers in Michoacán who each own 
an average of 10 acres of land, all 100% organic. When you buy a non-Fairtrade 
organic avocado, you can assume that neither workers nor the environment had to 
bear the omnipresent health and environmental burden of repeated pesticide 
spraying. Isolated from Fairtrade, organic standards in themselves do not 
guarantee a living wage, let alone freedom from company harassment for anyone 
who raises that topic.

I’ve converted to veganism to reduce my impact on the living world | George 
Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/09/vegan-corrupt-food-system-meat-dairy>
Nutritionally speaking, what’s an avocado got that you can’t get elsewhere 
anyway? If you’re buying it for vitamin E, sunflower seeds are a richer source. 
If you’re hunting down vitamin K, you’ll find heaps in broccoli and cabbage. 
For monounsaturated oil, turn your attention to extra virgin olive oil, olives 
or lamb. To pack in the folate, go for lentils and cauliflower. If we can’t be 
sure of making an ethical choice, there’s always an alternative.

The popularity of kale, for instance, makes all-round sense. It’s 
democratically cheap, its nutritional benefits and locavore credentials are 
impeccable, and it’s cultivated easily in the UK.

But when we pick up a fashionable import like avocado, we need to be sure that 
it not only benefits our personal health and wellbeing, but also that of the 
communities that grow it.
 