
The term 'squeezed middle' has become very topical, currently in relation to 
the coalition government's economic policy and the budget. In his first speech 
after becoming Labour leader,Ed Miliband coined the phrase 'squeezed middle' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/nov/26/ed-miliband-britain-squeezed-middle?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and this was picked up to such an extent that the Oxford English Dictionary 
nominated it as 'word of the year 
<http://blog.oxforddictionaries.com/2011/11/squeezed-middle/>' in 2011.

In the world of marketing and communications, the issue of the 'squeezed 
middle' has been with us for many years. There are examples in numerous sectors 
where those products or services occupying the middle ground have struggled.

In retailing, for instance, the middle ground is particularly unforgiving. The 
retailers that survive and thrive are those that stay closest to their 
customers and are able to develop and articulate a clear offering and 
proposition to customers; the John Lewis Partnership, including Waitrose, is a 
prime example.

Within HE, a similar situation may be emerging. On the one hand, deregulation 
is expected to result in increased competition for the brightest students, with
quotas for individual institutions related to the 'AAB+' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2011/jul/08/higher-education-white-paper-binary-divide?INTCMP=SRCH>
 bar being removed. On the other hand, many institutions have also lost quota 
places because of earlier reform which re-distributed 20,000 places to low-cost 
universities and FE colleges.

The 'squeezed middle' of universities is, and will increasingly be, under 
pressure if their student numbers decline. This may be compounded by the rise 
in tuition fees, if this results in greater polarisation between the premium 
and low cost segments, or groups of universities.

So, what can marketing departments do to support their institutions?

First, all organisations, whether in the public, private or voluntary sector, 
benefit from regularly reviewing their customer or value proposition, to ensure 
its clarity and saliency. We summarise a customer proposition as 'what can you 
(university x) do for me (target customer)? A value proposition is typically 
described as a promise of value to be delivered and a belief from the customer 
of value that will be experienced.

This requires market and customer research, so that, importantly, insights are 
gathered from the 'outside in', from the customer's perspective, rather than 
from 'inside out', the institution's perspective.

Second, the insights can then be used as part of a debate about the 
university's strategy and positioning, where positioning can be summarised as 
'what is different about you (university x)'?. From a marketing perspective, 
this is about ensuring a meaningful differentiated positioning and one that 
genuinely reflects the university's strengths against its competition.

Northampton and London Metropolitan University are two such examples. 
Northampton has a focus on subject specialisms and has set out its stall to be 
the 'top university in the UK for social enterprise by 2015'. London Met has 
used the opportunity of increased tuition fees to introduce differential 
pricing for its courses, in support of its 'affordable quality education' 
proposition.

Finally, it's about developing or modifying communications in line with the 
customer proposition and positioning, and promoting a consistent message to the 
various stakeholders and target audiences through the appropriate media and 
channels.

A university may decide it wants to avoid, or alternatively thrive in, the 
'squeezed middle'. Either way, its marketing team should be able to provide 
valuable insights and support.

William Annandale is managing partner at Quadrant Consultants 
<http://www.qcl.co.uk/>, a strategy and marketing consultancy

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 