
By stealth, the avocado is slowly eroding the joys of eating. First we had 
avocado ice cream 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/food/article-3677214/Iceland-unveils-new-vegan-dairy-free-nice-cream-range-avocado-banana.html>
, thenavocado mousse 
<http://www.trentonian.com/article/TT/20160719/NEWS/160719725>, then the 
(unholy)smoothie 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/08/01/breakfast-smoothie-recipes/>. The latest 
– courtesy of Instagram – is the avocado “bun”, in which an avocado stands in 
for a burger bun. It was started byColette Dike 
<https://www.instagram.com/fooddeco/?hl=en>, a food stylist based in the 
Netherlands, who posted a picture of an avocado halved, in which was sandwiched 
a chickpea burger and some grilled baby sweetcorn.

More recently, she has assembled a classic cheeseburger in an avocado bun, and 
at the weekend she posted one with whipped feta, bacon and a fried egg. A look 
through her admittedly beautiful feed reveals an obsession with the fruit – in 
one picture, she has stuffed it with chocolate paste and rolled the outside in 
granola. We’ll leave that for another day. Today, we take on the avocado bun. 
Could it possibly catch on?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Favocado-bun-colette-dike-instagram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e3965c6bc98eb087ea1fec7c0d0ecd23e92fb3%2F0_284_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20really%20use%20an%20avocado%20as%20a%20bun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Favocado-bun-colette-dike-instagram%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20really%20use%20an%20avocado%20as%20a%20bun%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Favocado-bun-colette-dike-instagram%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46e3965c6bc98eb087ea1fec7c0d0ecd23e92fb3%2F0_284_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Emine Saner’s recreation of Colette Dike’s avocado and fishfinger bun. 
Photograph: Emine Saner 
Avocado shortage fuels crime wave in New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/avocado-thieves-shortage-crime-fruit-black-market-new-zealand>
The first problem is that cutting an avocado in half crossways just feels 
wrong. It’s also surprisingly hard to get the stone out. And then what do you 
do with the hollows? I filled mine with mayonnaise, which in nauseated 
hindsight was a bad idea. Definitely don’t go for her fish-finger sandwich: you 
can only fit an unsatisfactory two fingers in to an avocado bun, though a slice 
of tomato and an onion ring fit pleasingly. Cram some lettuce in, and sprinkle 
with sesame seeds and irony.

Eating it like a burger is obviously impossible. You have to cup your hands 
around it as if you’re holding a baby bird, and gently suck at it until you can 
get enough purchase to take a bite. Then it disintegrates into a fatty, creamy 
mess.

The website Mashable called the avocado bun the summer’s “most polarising 
fad”; Dike told the site that people might prefer to use a knife and fork and 
think of it as a stacked salad. Which is, I think, the opposite of a burger. 
One for the cameras only, then.
 