
The Apple Watch looks set to get a reboot on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/05/apple-headphone-jack-iphone-7-lightning-usb-c-port>
, but is it already too late? Even before its announcement in 2014, the Apple 
Watch was seen as the device that would ignite a boom for wearable technology 
the way the iPhone had for smartphones and the iPad for tablets. It would, in 
effect, create a new consumer tech category by itself.

Two years later, the anticipated craze for wearable devices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/16/pebble-boss-eric-migicovsky-smartwatches-app>
 – from smartwatches to fitness bands to smart eyewear and clothing – has yet 
to materialize. Not only has demand not lived up to the hype, but consumer 
excitement around wearables appears to be waning.


A Forrester Research report released last month showed the share of people 
using wearable devices declined from 21% in 2015 to 14% this year, based on 
online surveys of adults in the US and Canada. Even among tech-savvy young 
adults aged 28-36, the proportion using wearables has dropped from 35% to 28%.


Apple could never recreate the success of the iPhone. But it doesn’t need to
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/30/apple-iphone-cant-recreate-success-doesnt-need-to>
Sales of the Apple Watch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch> 
itself have hardly quieted skepticism. Worldwide shipments of the device fell 
55% in the second quarter, pulling down the entire smartwatch market by nearly 
a third, according to the market researcher IDC.


The firm attributed the decline mainly to customers holding off buying the 
Apple Watch in anticipation of an updated model, rumored to be unveiled along 
with theiPhone 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/04/iphone-7-apple-needs-to-impress-chinese-coming-samsunfg-steadfast>
 at Apple’s media event on Wednesday in San Francisco. During the company’s 
earnings conference call in July, CEO Tim Cook promised “an enhanced user 
interface, significantly improved performance, and all-new fitness and health 
capabilities”.


Speculation about the second-generation Watch suggests changes to the device 
will be mostly internal, with updates such as a faster processor and GPS 
functionality.


Slow performance has been among users’ chief complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/apple-watch-smartwatch>. 
“There’s a bunch of apps I’d like to have on here, or apps I do have, where if 
they loaded faster, I’d find it to be a lot more valuable,” said Apple Watch 
owner Mark, a 31-year-old consultant in New York City. He plans to get the new 
model when it’s released, expecting improvements.


Apple hasn’t disclosed sales of the Watch since it went on sale in April 2015. 
But analysts have estimated it sold 12m units in its first 12 months – more 
than the iPhone in its first year on sale but fewer than the iPad. In March,
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> cut the price of the basic 
Sport model by $50 to $299 to boost sluggish sales.


The tech giant still dominates the category, but its lead has shrunk from 72% 
to 47% as competitors such as Samsung, Lenovo and LG Electronics have made 
inroads. IDC analyst Jitesh Ubrani said he expects the entire smartwatch market 
will be flat or up by only single digits in 2016.


An IDC report released on Tuesday shows a clear split in the market between 
what it calls “basic” wearables, like fitness trackers, and “smart” wearables, 
like smartwatches, that support third-party apps. Shipments of basic devices 
were up 49% in the second quarter while those for smart wearables fell 27%. The 
category overall grew 26% from a year ago to 22.5m units.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fapple-watch-tech-wearables-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a77cbf585814bf29d6171d2c6fe4ff45b4b049%2F0_279_3298_1979%2F3298.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20new%20Apple%20Watch%20save%20a%20weakening%20wearables%20market%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fapple-watch-tech-wearables-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20the%20new%20Apple%20Watch%20save%20a%20weakening%20wearables%20market%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fapple-watch-tech-wearables-market%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8a77cbf585814bf29d6171d2c6fe4ff45b4b049%2F0_279_3298_1979%2F3298.jpg>
 Fitbit’s Flex 2 family. Fitbit is the market leader in wearable devices. 
Photograph: AP 
Basic wearables have benefited from lower price points, a clear value 
proposition and a wide selection of products. “Smart wearables, meanwhile, are 
still struggling to find their place in the market,” noted IDC analyst Ramon 
Llamas.


The rap on fitness and activity trackers especially, though, is that the 
novelty wears off quickly. People get them to track workouts, count steps or 
check vital signs but end up ditching them after a short time.


Wearables are going to be for our age what pet rocks were to the 70s. Everyone 
is going to have one in their drawer
Scott Galloway 
Consulting firm Endeavor Partners acknowledged in a report earlier this year 
that many users abandon wearables at higher rates than other mainstream 
consumer products.


“Wearables are going to be for our age what pet rocks were to the 70s. 
Everyone is going to have one in their drawer,” said Scott Galloway, founder of 
the digital research firm L2 Inc in New York and a clinical professor of 
marketing at NYU’s Stern School of Business.


In soliciting consumer feedback, Forrester found people walked away from 
wearables for various reasons: they received them as unwanted gifts, grew 
frustrated with the device’s limited capabilities, or didn’t see the need for a 
device beyond their smartphones.


No company has more at stake in seeing consumers don’t lose interest in 
tracking their exercise routines than Fitbit. It led the overall wearables 
market in the second quarter with a 25% share of global shipments, built on 
sales of its marquee devices, such as the Blaze and Alta.


Investor optimism saw the company’s stock price surge almost 50% to about $30 
following its initial public offering in June 2015. But the stock has since 
tumbled to about $15 a share, reflecting Wall Street concerns about its 
business.


While growth remains healthy, Fitbit expenses have ballooned, putting pressure 
on margins. In an analysis of its second-quarter results, Jan Dawson of Jackdaw 
Research pointed out that increasing marketing, R&D, and other costs have 
pushed operating margins to almost zero.


Why I have finally taken off the Apple Watch for the last time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/apple-watch-smartwatch> 
And while sales climbed nearly 50% in the period, that rate is down from 
triple-digit quarterly growth last year. “That’s likely a sign of a maturing 
market and an increasingly saturated one for Fitbit,” wrote Dawson.


Forrester expects wearable users over time will migrate away from Fitbit-style 
activity trackers to more versatile options such as smartwatches. “Wearables 
will have to evolve to become multi-function devices,” said Forrester analyst 
Gina Fleming.


Despite wearable usage falling in the last year, Forrester projects the 
category will reach critical mass by 2021, with 29% adoption and annual US 
sales of $9.8bn.


But L2’s Galloway is doubtful wearables will amount to more than a niche 
market. “There’s only one company that has a shot at making this work, and 
that’s Apple,” he said.

 