
Q I have recently applied for credit and was turned down, even though I have 
never paid a bill late and don't have any debts. I was really angry about this 
and so applied to get a copy of my credit file in order to find out why I was 
refused.

I now think that the problem stems from the fact that my brother, who lived 
with me for 12 months at my house, ran up considerable credit card and loan 
debts while he was at my house. Could it be that his financial problems have 
affected me?

GK

A It is possible that when a lender looked at your file the information about 
your brother counted against you. However, there is good news on the horizon. 
Later this year, new data protection legislation will help people in your 
situation. The new rules will mean that credit reference agencies will have to 
change the way they supply information about your credit history.

Currently, lenders sometimes take into account the financial affairs of other 
members of your family when they assess whether you are a good credit risk. 
When the rules change they will no longer be able to access such information 
from credit reference agencies.

Anyone who is concerned about their credit file should write and ask for a 
copy of it from the credit reference agencies,Experian 
<http://www.uk.experian.com/> and Equifax 
<https://www.econsumer.equifax.com/webapp/ConsumerProducts/index.jsp>. If you 
discover that the information held on you is wrong, you can write to the agency 
putting the record straight and explaining your circumstances. This is known as 
a "notice of correction" and any lender who views your file in the future will 
be able to see it.
 