
As the line between civilization and wilderness becomes increasingly thin, do 
true adventurers still exist?

Technology allows climbers to tweet from the top of Mount Everest. Antarctic 
skiers can instantly upload selfies from the South Pole. Anyone can obtain an 
inexpensive device with a panic button that allows them to request a rescue 
from any place on earth, for any reason – adventure’s version of a “get out of 
jail free” card.


In 2007, Spot <http://findmespot.com/en/>, a subsidiary of the company 
Globalstar Inc <http://www.globalstar.com/en/>, introduced a new satellite 
messenger unit with the catchphrase “Live to tell about it”. The device could 
communicate three messages – “I’m OK”, “SOS” and “911” – independent of 
cellular coverage. The first two buttons privately alerted a user’s chosen 
contacts, and 911 signals were transmitted directly to emergency services.

Personal locater beacons and satellite phones existed before this, but Spot 
made remote communication more affordable and accessible. Now with 250,000 
units in service, Spot has facilitated 3,810 rescues worldwide – an average of 
about one per day.

Debates about the device’s use have raged as long as it’s been available. 
Advocates argue that satellite messengers take the “search” out of search and 
rescue missions because they help pinpoint exact locations. The devices also 
alert authorities during the early stages of emergencies, mobilizing rescues 
soon enough to make a difference. Money and lives are saved when volunteers 
don’t have to comb the woods looking for a person who went missing days earlier.

Critics, on the other hand, argue that money is wasted and volunteers are 
unnecessarily exposed to danger when people call for help they don’t need. 
These devices also garner an inflated sense of security, and prompt people to 
take more risks than they otherwise might.

In October 2009, two men and their teenage sons activated <http://ctober 2009, 
two men and their teenage sons activated their emergency beacon three separate 
times during a single hike in the Grand Canyon.> their emergency beacon three 
separate times during a single hike in the Grand Canyon. The first time, the 
inexperienced hikers panicked when they ran out of water, but declined help 
from rescues who arrived after they located a water source. The second time, a 
helicopter was dispatched in the middle of the night, only to find the same 
hikers who signaled for help because their water tasted “salty”. Another 
dubious alert arrived the following morning, and rescuers angrily removed the 
group from the canyon. Thousands of dollars were spent on these erroneous 
rescue efforts – costs ultimately absorbed by taxpayers. The hikers stated that 
without the beacon, they would not have attempted the hike.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fadventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439932832480%2F3450dd41-2f99-4dd3-96c0-8e9ed8edace1-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20still%20call%20yourself%20an%20adventurer%20if%20you%20use%20a%20GPS%20safety%20beacon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fadventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20still%20call%20yourself%20an%20adventurer%20if%20you%20use%20a%20GPS%20safety%20beacon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fadventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439932832480%2F3450dd41-2f99-4dd3-96c0-8e9ed8edace1-1020x612.jpeg>
 Thousands of dollars can be spent on erroneous rescue efforts. Photograph: 
Jill Homer 
In February, a woman embarked on solo hike in the Presidential Range of New 
Hampshire. Several hours after Kate Matrosova’s husband dropped her off at a 
trailhead, she activated her emergency beacon in the midst of a major winter 
storm. Searchers couldn’t immediately locate her on an exposed mountain ridge 
before the storm intensified, plunging temperatures to 30 below zero. Wind 
gusts exceeded 100 miles per hour. By morning, she was dead.

Matrosova, 32, had an impressive resume of mountain climbs and cold-weather 
experience. Before she embarked on her hike, the Mount Washington Observatory 
had issued a dire forecast: whiteout conditions, wind gusts to 125 miles per 
hour, and a wind chill factor of 75 below zero. The reason rescuers couldn’t 
locate Matrosova right away was because hurricane-force winds apparently lifted 
her from the trail and dropped her several hundred feet down the ridge.

Mountaineers often seek out severe weather in the Presidential Range to 
prepare for bigger mountains, but even the most experienced and well-equipped 
climbers wouldn’t stand much of a chance in weather that severe.

Many questioned why Matrosova didn’t choose to turn around before retreat 
became impossible. “Maybe she relied a little too much on the technology,” 
search and rescue volunteer Mike Pelchat told the Boston Globe after the 
incident. “Maybe she thought she could turn back. But the temperatures, and the 
wind, got the best of her.”

Dangers become less intimidating when safety nets are available. Research has 
shown that reckless driving increased following the implementation of seatbelt 
laws. Humans inevitably adjust their behavior to match the perceived level of 
risk. The result, some argue, is not only a safety hazard. It’s also a moral 
hazard.

According to David Roberts, a long-time mountaineer and author, “(GPS) devices 
have engendered a radical shift in the concept of adventure. Hikers, skiers and 
boaters not only expect to be whisked to safety at the push of a button, they 
regard this luxury as an inalienable right.”

Mountaineers aren’t the only ones contemplating the direction of adventure’s 
moral compass in light of GPS technology. In recent years, adventure races have 
used locator beacons to track athletes’ progress, and signal for help if needed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fadventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439932674941%2F33f3f4d4-fb39-4b65-86ee-a62e101fde6b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20you%20still%20call%20yourself%20an%20adventurer%20if%20you%20use%20a%20GPS%20safety%20beacon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fadventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20you%20still%20call%20yourself%20an%20adventurer%20if%20you%20use%20a%20GPS%20safety%20beacon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fadventure-spot-gps-safety-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439932674941%2F33f3f4d4-fb39-4b65-86ee-a62e101fde6b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mushers during the Iditarod in 2015. Photograph: Jill Homer 
Trackleaders.com <http://trackleaders.com> is an independent business that 
facilitates race tracking by renting out Spot units and providing the software 
to broadcast tracks in real time. Online spectators watch their favorite “blue 
dots” move along maps on courses that can cover thousands of miles, through 
remote areas of the world. For some races, the SOS button is an important 
feature, allowing organizers to facilitate fast extractions.

“We happily support SOS through Spot when that’s what an event wants,” said 
Trackleaders co-founder Matthew Lee. “Some of our clients hold races for quite 
inexperienced participants, and they literally encourage the use of SOS, so we 
have it fully programmed and tested before the starting gun.”

But are these safety nets what adventure racers want? After all, Trackleaders 
features events that promote themselves as the toughest and most challenging 
races in the world – events such as the Tour Divide, a 2,750-mile mountain bike 
race from Canada to Mexico, and the Iditarod dog sled race, a thousand-mile 
race across frozen Alaska.

When the Iditarod first introduced Spot units, some participants expressed 
aversion. Among those was Alaska musher Danny Seavey, who was lining up for his 
third Iditarod in 2014.

“At the last minute a race judge came running over and attached a GPS Spot 
tracker to my sled, and told me it had an emergency SOS button I could push if 
I needed to be rescued,” Seavey said. “I (and many other mushers) told him I’d 
rather not know that. It’s harder to be tough if there’s an easy way out.”

In 2014, a half-dozen Iditarod mushers pushed their SOS button, which rules 
stipulated was an automatic forfeit from the race. California musher Cindy 
Abbott activated hers while while driving her dog team through the Dalzell 
Gorge, a steep and notoriously difficult section of the trail. A dearth of snow 
created especially hazardous conditions over rocks and glare ice – a “death 
run” as she described it. She had some close calls, and was frightened, but she 
and her dogs weren’t injured. Abbott had invested a lot of time, money and 
energy into her second Iditarod run, and she still isn’t sure why she pushed 
the button.

“I knew I was scratching,” she said. “It was OK. I understand. But I wished 
they hadn’t had the button on there.”

While Abbott wished she could take back her help signal, musher Hugh Neff 
believed help didn’t come quickly enough after his dog team quit running in 
65-mile-per-hour winds.

Neff criticized Iditarod management for failing to respond for more than 10 
hours, by which time, his girlfriend Nicole Faille wrote, “my guy was on his 
way out of this world.” Veteran mushers and grizzled Alaskans were critical of 
Neff’s criticism, questioning why an experienced musher – or anyone venturing 
into the Alaska backcountry for that matter – wasn’t more prepared to hunker 
down for 10 hours in a storm.

“Even a 911 mission can take hours,” said Robert Pollhammer, race director for 
the Yukon Arctic Ultra, a bike, ski, and foot race on the Yukon Quest Trail in 
Canada. “If the weather does not permit, there is no air rescue at all. That is 
why it is so important to have basic survival skills, enough food, warm clothes 
and the right sleeping system.”
 Two cyclists making their way on the Iditarod trail. Photograph: Jill Homer 
For years, the Iditarod Trail Invitational – the human-powered version of the 
thousand-mile dog sled race – took a more hardline stance. Cyclists, skiers and 
runners were explicitly forbidden to carry GPS trackers. “Technology has no 
place on the Iditarod Trail I love and enjoy,” co-director Bill Merchant wrote 
before banning the devices, citing miscommunications as the main reason. “I 
miss the days when we went into the wilderness dependent on our skills and a 
bit of luck to come home alive.”

In 2015, however, the race partnered with Trackleaders to offer optional GPS 
tracking of participants, under the stipulation that racers used Spot Trace 
devices, which only track location and do not include an SOS or 911 button. At 
the pre-race meeting, co-director Kathi Merchant explained that this concession 
was “for entertainment purposes only”.

Spectators who clicked on the tracking page were alerted to the possibility of 
erroneous data, and warned not to contact race management for any reason. 
During the 2015 race, three foot-racers and one cyclist encountered a massive 
snow dump along an especially remote and untravelled section of the Iditarod 
trail, slowing their progress to as little as 10 miles per day. Meanwhile, 
temperatures plunged to 45 below, communication was limited to brief satellite 
phone calls from one racer, and it was all spectators could do to not fret over 
the glacial progress of blue dots on a screen. Why were they moving so slowly? 
Were they in trouble? Would they press an SOS button, if they had one to press? 
Even with limited data, a remote and ungraspable situation became more real.

“Through tech tools, pics, audio and blogging, we arguably have more fodder 
for keeping ourselves enchanted,” Trackleaders’ Lee said. “We can wonder about 
so many more details. What are the snow conditions like, where are they 
camping, what are they eating, how often are they stopping? As the windows on 
adventure have opened, we don’t have to hang it all on the great ‘when’. Yes, 
the tracking data possess vital statistics, but the mystery lies in the images, 
the words – the stories.”

Where does the mystery lie for adventurers? The athletes battling inhumane 
conditions on the Iditarod trail had no sense of the worried spectators 
watching from the warm comfort of their homes. They were just doing what 
adventurers have always had to do – relying on their own skills, and a little 
bit of luck, to push through adversity and come home alive.

Would they have pushed an SOS button? After the frostbitten and exhausted 
racers emerged in a village on the Yukon River more than a week later, every 
one of them said no.

Roberts wrote of a “blissful disconnectedness” that has been all but lost in 
the GPS era. He believes adventurers are spiritually and intellectually poorer 
without places where they can truly leave everything behind. The mysteries of 
the wilderness are fading, only to be replaced by the mundanity of modern life. 
Yes, it’s always better to live to tell about it, but what stories are we 
telling? Real-time Facebook updates about freeze-dried meals, Strava segments 
from glaciers in Greenland, blurry phone videos of a summit bid?

Others, such as Lee – who himself has finished and won a number of 
ultra-endurance mountain bike races – believe the rise of satellite 
communication will continue to bring the spirit of adventure to more people, 
and that’s a good thing.

“No adventurer worth their salt wants to be that guy who scratches all the 
time,” Lee said. “Like any mental crutches that come along over the maturity of 
adventure sports, so too will the effect of tracking mature. Folks are already 
becoming more experienced and sophisticated in its use.”
 