
In among the ligging and rigging of last year's Cannes film festival, visitors 
may have spottedJames Toback <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0864812/?ref_=sr_1> 
and Alec Baldwin trudging wearily back and forth along the Croisette. The 
director and star, it now transpires, were in town to shoot a very meta 
documentary – a film about their efforts to actually make a film. For a 10-day 
spell they interviewed everyone from Ryan Gosling to Martin Scorsese, Nicole 
Kidman to Roman Polanski. Along the way they took the temperature of a festival 
perched at the intersection between art and commerce. The documentary's title,
Seduced and Abandoned 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155231/seduced-and-abandoned>, alludes to 
Baldwin's description of the film industry as "the world's worst girlfriend". 
But it might just as easily refer to Cannes' teasing, tricky relationship with 
the major US studios. In this case, however, it's hard to tell just who is 
seducing who.

On the eve of the 66th Cannes film festival, the romance is clearly in full 
bloom, with Warner Bros' star-spangledThe Great Gatsby  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/150967/great-gatsby>installed as the 
opening gala, Steven Spielberg booked as jury president, and the schedule awash 
with studio produce. But is this union as harmonious at it looks? A cynic could 
argue that all ostensibly happy marriages are really power struggles in 
disguise. If so, the alliance between Cannes and Hollywood is surely no 
exception.

"Cannes has always been a useful idiot for Hollywood," explains Toback, 
rasping down the line from his apartment in New York. "And the studios, in 
turn, are a useful tool for Cannes. It's a symbiotic relationship. But I think 
it's more Cannes that courts the studios than the other way around."

This courtship has not been without its hiccups. As is the way with most 
romances, the early years proved the most golden. There were eight American 
films in the inaugural festival of 1946, including Billy Wilder's The Lost 
Weekend, Alfred Hitchcock'sNotorious 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76968/notorious> and a Disney cartoon 
called Make Mine Music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XtyUycHvYls>. Delbert 
Mann's blue-collarMarty <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oGPWgCWaN3M> lifted the 
Palme d'Or in 1955, while fragrant Olivia de Havilland was the first American 
jury president in 1965. Throughout the 1970s, Cannes became a kind of Mecca for 
the best of US cinema, withMASH <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/84547>, 
The Conversation <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77114/conversation>, 
Taxi Driver <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36313/taxi.driver> and 
Apocalypse Now <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36320/apocalypse.now> 
ascending to the winner's rostrum. In those halcyon days, it was possible to 
believe that Cannes and Hollywood were largely singing from the same hymn sheet.

So what went wrong? Evidence suggests that studios cooled on Cannes during the 
blockbuster 1980s. All at once the festival did not fit with their business 
model. Executives baulked at the reputed $5m price tag of bringing a film to 
the Côte d'Azur. And by century's end, the marriage had all but run aground. 
"Mainstream Hollywood is virtually absent from Cannes," festival president
Gilles Jacob lamented to the New York Times in 1997 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1997/05/05/movies/cannes-festival-is-turning-a-very-lively-50.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm>
. "Because the gap has widened between art and business, between popcorn 
pictures and arty films." The studios, he added, would consent to send a film 
to the festival only after its run at US cinemas was safely over. "They don't 
want to risk bad reviews in Europe."

Nick James, editor of Sight and Sound, remembers the Hollywood famine of the 
late 1990s. "Lots of heavy European arthouse," he sighs. "Lots of 
black-and-white pictures. Lots of four-hour movies." James credits Thierry 
Frémaux, the current artistic director, with dragging Cannes back to a more 
even keel. On taking the reins in 2001, Frémaux has said that his first order 
of business was to re-establish ties with the Hollywood suits, adapting his 
festival to a new world order. "Under his tenure you've seen the studios come 
in, animation come in, 3D come in. And I think it's worked; it's shaken things 
up," he says. "It makes the programme more varied and exciting."

There's no doubt that this year's competition boasts an imposing Hollywood 
pedigree. Alexander Payne'sNebraska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155224/nebraska> may be shot in black and 
white, but it comes backed by Paramount. The Coen brothers'Inside Llewyn Davis 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154516/inside-llewyn-davis> is a CBS 
film, while Steven Soderbergh'sBehind the Candelabra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154523/behind-the-candelabra> was 
commissioned by HBO.The Immigrant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146662/immigrant> and Only God Forgives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154519/only-god-forgives> are both 
Weinstein productions, with a third (Fruitvale Station 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155235/fruitvale-station>) in the 
neighbouring Un Certain Regard sidebar. Added to this is Cannes' newfound habit 
of scheduling popcorn blockbusters in high-profile "out of competition" slots. 
In recent years, the Croisette has played host to The Matrix sequels and the 
Star Wars franchise, Indiana Jones and Pirates of the Caribbean. On such 
occasions, one has the distinct sense of a festival simultaneously basking in 
the limelight while wearing a clothes peg on its nose.

Has the balance now swung too far? After all, doesn't Cannes pride itself on 
offering the finest, most challenging pictures from the world's four corners? 
Casting an eye over this year's lineup, the LA Times identified the pitfall, 
suggesting that "US studio films run the risk of tipping the festival away from 
its independent roots". Then there is the fact that the lavish opening premiere 
isn't really a premiere at all. Gatsby opened (to mixed reviews) in the US last 
week.

Steven Gaydos, executive editor at Variety, concedes that this is a problem. 
"It's certainly not great for Cannes that Gatsby does not premiere there," he 
says. "But, for whatever reason, those are the terms the festival agreed to." 
Yet, by and large, the marriage still works. "I would describe the relationship 
as cautiously beneficial," Gaydos explains. "Friends with dangerous benefits, 
and the danger lies in both directions. If you cater too much to the big 
studios, the big movie stars, then you risk losing your credibility and leave 
the other directors feeling overshadowed. But the hard fact is that festivals 
need stars. Nobody takes pictures of a festival without stars. That's the 
nature of the business."

For its part, Hollywood is still spooked by the consequences of launching in 
Cannes. "The studios are nervous of having their films in competition, of 
having a negative judgment passed down upon them. They don't want to spend all 
this money coming to Europe, only to have their butts kicked by a bunch of 
snooty critics." This, he adds, is what happened withThe Da Vinci Code 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112366/da.vinci.code>, which opened the 
party back in 2006. "Worst reviews I ever read 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/may/18/france.cannes2006>," Gaydos 
chuckles. "They all but accused the film of starting world war two and 
kidnapping the Lindbergh baby. But so what? It still went on to make 
three-quarters of a billion dollars."
 Clear-eyed sense of the industry … James Toback's Seduced and Abandoned. 
Back in New York, James Toback has a Cannes award for his Mike Tyson 
documentary <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/124648/tyson>, plus a vaulted 
list of credits that extend fromhis 1978 debut Fingers 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BlcsyfGvZF8> through to three collaborations 
with Robert Downey Jr. Even so, he has never strayed remotely close to a 
billion-dollar gross, and his latest feature is still stuck in development. 
Shooting his Cannes documentary, he says, has given him a clear-eyed sense of 
the industry today.

"If I can draw a conclusion other than we're all gonna die, I'd say that film 
is in a state of chaotic flux," Toback tells me. "For an independent film-maker 
the only way to survive is to navigate your way through treacherous waters – 
or, to put it more cynically, to scheme and rob to stay afloat. Meanwhile, the 
studio system has gone to decision by committee. We have this endlessly 
watered-down, conglomerate world that breeds homicidal rage like no other." He 
sighs. "If I don't murder someone with an axe, I may make another film."

Seduced and Abandoned ushered Toback through the various levels of the Cannes 
Palais, "from the engine room to the sky lounge". What he found there may not 
have been pretty. And yet, despite all the heartache, he feels that the 
festival remains more saint than sinner. "I'm not sure I agree with the people 
who criticise Cannes for selling out and say the place has become a circus," he 
says. "That strikes me as pretty naive. Without all the studio money, the 
festival would not exist. The big films support the little films, and that's 
the way it works. Cannes is great because it's half and half, just as film 
itself is half and half, the art and the commerce. You can't make the movies 
without playing both sides."

Stealth Palmes d'Or, goths, and other Cannes predictions


The Palme d'Or

And the winner of the award for best film at this year's Cannes goes to 
… whatever it was you didn't see. Three years ago, wailing could be heard in 
newsrooms the world over as Apichatpong Weerasethakul's Uncle Boonmee Who Can 
Recall His Past Lives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135882/uncle-bonmee-who-can-recall-his-past-lives>
 took top honours. After a couple of years of winners (The Tree of Life 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/139929/tree-of-life>, Amour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147440/amour>) from directors with both 
name recognition and modest commercial prospects, we're due another winner that 
comes with three different types of subtitles, screened that morning of the 
tight deadline and the accidental hangover. The smart money at this stage is on
La Vie d'Adèle Chapitre 1 & 2 by Abdellatif Kechiche 
<http://www.festival-cannes.fr/pt/archives/ficheFilm/id/11409897/year/2013.html>
.

The best actor award

Michael Douglas has this in the bag already. Not only is his performance in 
the Liberace biopicBehind the Candelabra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/154523/behind-the-candelabra> reportedly 
incredible, the film has other assets that make it catnip for the jury. First 
off, there's the Euro-friendly explicitness: this really is no-holds-barred 
stuff, such as a scene that has the pianist watching porn with his puppy. But 
the real deal-sealer is that by rewarding Steven Soderbergh's film, Cannes 
would get one over on Hollywood, whose studios turned the script down for fear 
it was"too gay" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/07/steven-soderbergh-liberace-film>. 
HBO stepped in, meaning the film will premiere on TV in the US, and so be 
ineligible for the Oscars.

The best actress award

Last year Marion Cotillard's turn in Jacques Audiard's Rust & Bone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146658/rust-and-bone>, as a waterpark 
trainer who loses her legs, was beaten to the best actress award by two 
troubled nuns in Romanian drama Beyond the Hills. This year, Cotillard takes a 
belt-and-braces approach: she's an Ellis Island burlesque dancer in James 
Gray's 1920s-setThe Immigrant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146662/immigrant>, as well as a moll in 
70s Brooklyn inBlood Ties 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/129512/blood-ties> (scripted by Gray, 
shot by her husband, Guillaume Canet). Only the first plays in competition, but 
impetus will be strong to reward a woman many still feel was robbed.

The This Must Be the Place award for potentially dubious goth-rocker act

In 2011, Sean Penn's Robert Smith-alike in the Paulo Sorrentino drama 
got tongues wagging and heads shaking. This year, all eyes are on 
Tom Hiddleston , who plays an undead underground muso in Jim Jarmusch's 
crypto-vampire romanceOnly Lovers Left Alive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/26/cannes-2013-jim-jarmusch>. Advance 
photos show leather jackets and long black locks.

The Artist award for Oscar-friendly retro experimentalism

Michel Hazanavicius's homage to the silents premiered at Cannes two years ago, 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/may/16/cannes-2011-the-artist-michael-footnote-review>
 then swept the board at the Oscars 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/feb/27/artist-oscar-best-picture> the 
following February. This year we've one idiosyncratically monochrome movie – 
Alexander Payne's father/son road trip,Nebraska 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155224/nebraska> – and one entirely 
speech-free offering: All Is Lost 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/155232/all-is-lost>, JC Chandor's 
followup toMargin Call <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/140465/margin-call>
, this time with sole cast member Robert Redford up some sort of creek without 
a paddle.Catherine Shoard
 