
Geoffrey Chaucer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geoffreychaucer> gave us, 
in the 14th century, The Wife of Bath’s Tale, The Merchant’s Tale and The 
Knight’s Tale. More than 600 years later, authors including Ali Smith, Chris 
Cleave and Marina Lewycka have come together to write a modern version of The 
Canterbury Tales, working with refugees in Britain to tell their stories in a 
forthcoming anthology.

Out on 23 June from Manchester independent publisher Comma Press, Refugee 
Tales features stories including Cleave’s The Lorry Driver’s Tale, Smith’s The 
Detainee’s Tale, Lewycka’s The Dependant’s Tale and Patience Agbabi’s The 
Refugee’s Tale. It stems from refugee charity theGatwick Detainees Welfare Group
 <http://www.gdwg.org.uk/>, which sends volunteers into the two detention 
centres at Gatwick airport to speak to the hundreds of people who are held 
there.

How badly we need English / To be made sweet again
David Herd 
“The visiting is incredibly successful, but what people in detainment 
repeatedly said to us was that they wanted their stories to be told – that they 
felt the general population was unaware of what detention is like, including 
the fact that it’s indefinite,” said the charity’s Anna Pincus. “They don’t 
feel safe enough to share their stories themselves … but they have a tremendous 
frustration at being voiceless. So we came up with the idea of using The 
Canterbury Tales as a model of journeying and showing their stories.”

“This prologue is not a poem / It is an act of welcome / It announces / That 
people present / Reject the terms / Of a debate that criminalises / Human 
movement,” the collection opens, in a poem from David Herd. “To make his 
English sweete. / That’s why Chaucer told his tales. / How badly we need 
English / To be made sweet again.”

The charity paired writers with refugees, and organised a walk last summer 
from Dover to Crawley – “essentially from the detainment camp at Dover to the 
detainment camp at Gatwick”, said Pincus. The writers read their tales at 
public events every evening, to “packed” halls, with the tales now collected by 
Comma Press, which said it offers “rare, intimate glimpses into otherwise 
untold suffering”.

The detainee’s tale by Ali Smith: 'I thought you would help me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/27/ali-smith-so-far-the-detainees-tale-extract>
In The Detainee’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/27/ali-smith-so-far-the-detainees-tale-extract>
, Smith writes of a man who escaped a life of slavery in Ghana, to then become 
a victim of human trafficking to the UK. He spends five years working for the 
traffickers in the UK – “They tell you it’s cost them a great deal of money to 
bring you here. They say you’ll be working till you’ve paid it all back ... 
Room, van, warehouse. Warehouse, van, room. Five years. Most weeks all week, 18 
hours a day. You sit in silence, now, with me. You hold your head in your 
hands.”

When he contacts the Home Office, he is put in prison for six months, and then 
in detention. “On that train home, and all these weeks and months later, I’ll 
still be thinking of the only flash of anger in the whole of your telling me a 
little of what’s happened to you in this life so far ... Except for this one 
moment you’re calm, accepting, even forgiving – but for these six syllables, 
six words, that carry the weight of a planet, weight of the earth,” Smith 
writes. “But when I came to this place, when I came to your country, you say. I 
sit forward. I’m listening. You shake your head. I thought you would help me, 
you say.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
The walk will be repeated next month, from Canterbury to London, with authors 
including Jackie Kay and Kamila Shamsie contributing to a fresh round of tales. 
The pilgrimage will culminate with a series of events in London, including
Jeremy Irons’ reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/15/william-shakespeare-handwritten-plea-for-refugees-online-sir-thomas-more-script-play-british-library-exhibition>
of Shakespeare’s “Thomas More’s appeal for mercy in the treatment of refugees” 
on the Southbank, and a performance featuring Billy Bragg, Ben Okri, Smith and 
others at the ICA.

“We hear so many of the wrong words about refugees – ugly, limiting, 
unimaginative words – that it feels like a gift to find here so many of the 
right words which allow us to better understand the lives around us, and our 
own lives too,” said Shamsie of the upcoming Refugee Tales. Shami Chakrabarti, 
former director of the campaign group Liberty, called it “a wonderful way of 
rehumanising some of the most vulnerable and demonised people on the planet”.
 