
Yesterday was the 35th anniversary of the night when, for English football, 
the world stopped turning. Asked to beat Poland at Wembley to qualify for the 
1974 World CupEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> could only 
draw 1-1. The repercussions of that fateful evening continue to reverberate 
even now.

The Football League had refused to help Sir Alf Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alf-ramsey> by postponing the previous 
Saturday's programme. Challenged on this in a radio interview, Alan Hardaker, 
the League's redoubtable secretary, protested that "it is a football match not 
a war. Everybody is getting hysterical. If we do lose, the game is not going to 
die. It will be a terrible thing for six weeks and then everybody will forget 
about it."

Fat chance. Much of England's present support was not even born when Ramsey's 
side were eliminated in 1973 yet the result has left a permanent mark on 
people's perceptions of the national side's status and aspirations in global 
affairs. The assumption that in 1970 England would retain the World Cup won in 
1966 had been roundly and rudely contradicted by West Germany in Le√≥n yet the 
possibility that one day the team would not actually qualify for the tournament 
proper had not been seriously considered. England might not win a World Cup 
played beyond Wembley but at least they would always be there to try.

Ever since the final whistle was blown on England's increasingly desperate 
attempts to beat Jan Tomaszewski, Poland's inspired goalkeeper, a second time 
the efforts of successive managers to qualify for the major tournaments have 
been accompanied by a degree of angst among supporters and media alike. In the 
case of Graham Taylor and Steve McClaren the reservations were eventually 
justified and Don Revie and Kevin Keegan did not hang around in the World Cup 
long enough to find out. Ron Greenwood, Bobby Robson, Glenn Hoddle and 
Sven-Goran Eriksson each managed to get England to the World Cup proper and 
already Fabio Capello looks like joining them.

England's present coach is echoing Ramsey in his better years although the 
Italian's English is marginally superior to to Alf's strangled vowels and 
misplaced aspirates. Like Ramsey Capello is quick to identify a problem and 
deal with it successfully, as shown in his readiness to change the roles of 
Wayne Rooney and Steven Gerrard to the team's advantage during the qualifiers 
against Kazakhstan and Belarus. Moreover he appears to command the respect of 
the players as Ramsey did while keeping a similar distance from them - a master 
not a mate.

Capello also shares Ramsey's belief in the importance of a solid defensive 
base although he will be lucky to unearth another Gordon Banks before 2010. 
Ramsey, too, would have been horrified at the space and possession England's 
midfield allowed Belarus before half-time in Minsk and both coaches' team talks 
would have amounted to the same thing, the oldest managerial edict in the game: 
"Get stuck in!"

There are certain contrasts in approach, not least Capello's dealings with 
reporters. England's present coach expects to be quizzed about team and tactics 
and, like so many of the modern ilk, is a master at answering questions 
comprehensively while at the same time giving little of importance away. 
Ramsey, who belonged to an older, more introverted school, regarded queries 
about team matters as an intrusion into his private life.

With four straight wins Capello has made a better start to a World Cup 
campaign than any of his predecessors and in a way was fortunate to take over 
the England squad in the wake of McClaren's flawed, flummoxed attempt to 
qualify for this summer's European Championship. Maybe the Football Association 
believed McClaren, one of the game's NCOs, had a marshal's baton in his 
knapsack. If so it turned out to be a wand patented by Tommy Cooper.

Two tests now await Capello. The first concerns the alacrity with which he 
picks up the thread of qualifying for South Africa in 2010 when England resume 
their quest next April Fools' Day against Ukraine. The second, assuming England 
get there, is how he handles the squad in the tournament proper, a task which 
exposed Eriksson's inability to act decisively during a game when things began 
to go wrong.

Ramsey was found out in the long run because he did not understand 
substitutes. That will be the least of Capello's problems but World Cups can 
make pygmies out of giants and reduce the most hardened and experienced of 
coaches to helpless bystanders. At least England's latest incumbent has given 
himself a flying start towards being judged at the highest level.
 