
Fronting up to the media after a Test defeat is something Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has now done more than any 
other England captain and after the final-day collapse in Chennai he turned to 
the room of assembled journalists that had just grilled him in the bowels of 
the stadium to wish them a merry Christmas and a safe flight home.

If reporting this farewell sounds unctuous then consider the circumstances: 
the self-destructive tendency of his batsmen, on a pitch that just 24 hours had 
seen his bowlers ship a torturous 759 for seven, made them the first team in 
successive Tests to score 400-plus first up only to lose by an innings, in what 
was a record-equalling eighth England defeat in the year.

We have been planning for Alastair Cook to go to Ashes, says Paul Farbrace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/alastair-cook-paul-farbrace-england-australia-2017>
And yet, having watched this unfold and fielded rounds of questions on his 
future as captain for the umpteenth time at the fag end of a gruelling winter 
tour, he moved to offer these words despite knowing a number of the recipients 
were probably pondering how best to baste him before popping him in the oven.

Cook, for all the barbs thrown around during the Kevin Pietersen affair (and 
which his employers at the time offered little to quell the flames but petrol), 
is a decent man and soaking up pressure has been the hallmark of his 
record-breaking feats with the bat, running through his 58 Tests and four years 
as England captain like the words in a stick of rock.

But as he spends the festive period back home with his young family staring at 
the fork in the road at which a talented but stagnating team currently finds 
itself, before meeting Andrew Strauss, his director of cricket, in January to 
review the tour, this ability to ride out a storm must not come into the 
equation.

Instead, he must draw on strength of a different kind and consider that the 
best path forward – the one that frees him up to continue as England’s best 
blunter of the new ball and empowers the 20-somethings to breathe new life into 
the dressing room – may be to let go of the position he has so cherished.

However damaging the thrashings in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/ashwin-takes-six-wickets-as-india-clinch-series-against-england>
 andChennai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/england-india-cricket-test-series-defeat>
, reasons for the 4-0 defeat in India do not fall solely at his door and it is 
not, in itself, reason to step aside. Virat Kohli’s world No1s are streets 
ahead of any other at home, possessing an ocean-deep batting lineup, an 
unrivalled phalanx of spin bowlers and seamers that can squeeze life out 
pitches that offer lateral movement sparingly.

Cook has led a team in the toughest conditions without world-class spin of its 
own, while rich subcontinental experience with the bat – bar his own nine 
centuries in Asia – is lacking. Reverse swing meanwhile, the one power his 
quicks can in theory marshall out here, has not been forthcoming from the SG 
ball and the catching continues to frustrate.

But having gone further than any England captain before him in terms of 
matches overseen – and now surpassed Mike Atherton’s 21 defeats in the job – 
there is a growing sense that extending his own life as a batsman, and not 
allowing it to be swallowed up by the relentless additional duties of 
leadership that prompted predecessors Strauss and Michael Vaughan to pack it 
all in at once, may be the best gift the 31-year-old can pass on before his 
eventual retirement.

There is no rush for a decision on Cook’s part, given England’s next Test 
match is not until July, although some early clarity may allow hisexpected 
successor, Joe Root 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/alastair-cook-england-captaincy-joe-root-india-series-defeat>
, the time he needs get his head around the job. And fears over the effects on 
his batting feel distinctly English in themselves and one glance at the top of 
the batting rankings should allay them.

Not leading England into the Ashes tour next winter would naturally be a 
disappointment to Cook giventhe 5-0 last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/05/ashes-2013-14-australia-england--whitewash>
. But with a resurgent South Africa first up before that (before a less 
threatening West Indies), ploughing on would see him one series defeat away 
from plunging the Test team back in the same territory that saw plans for the 
2015 World Cup ripped up on the eve of the tournament.

England report card: five areas to focus on before the Ashes series next 
winter | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/20/england-india-test-series-alastair-cook>
And it should not be his choice alone either. Strauss, who shored up Cook’s 
position in May last year upon starting his own position, before being rewarded 
with victories in the Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/england-win-ashes-beat-australia-fourth-test>
 andSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/stuart-broad-six-wickets-england-south-africa-series-win>
, must also consider whether he has the captain to match his head coach in Test 
cricket and that Root, for all his inexperience, may well be a better fit given 
his rise up the age groups with the next generation.

Trevor Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss>, who has 
overseen huge white ball progress, is beginning to come under increased 
scrutiny himself and within the squad there are already grumbles that his stock 
response to defeats of “you will still wake up tomorrow breathing” is turning a 
relaxed environment into a soft one. His repeated message of positivity should 
not be conflated with the ill-judged shots during the final day in Chennai, 
however, for it counts in defence also.

Bayliss too, despite all his public distance on the subject, may well be 
craving some fresh senior voices in the group that are consistent with his 
approach. Unlike the one-day set-up, he will feel no urgency to move on James 
Anderson and Stuart Broad but if they and Cook focus on what they do best for a 
few more years, while the likes of Root and Ben Stokes run the dressing room, 
it may yet jolt things out of their year-long torpor.
 