
Are you sure about your decision?

Ravi Soni is a careers adviser for the National Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>: "One of the key 
factors in making a decision about going to university is whether you know what 
type of work would suit you. It's a good idea to explore this as it helps you 
understand whether it's necessary to have a degree to get to where you want to 
be.

"People tend to be concerned about funding when it comes to higher education, 
but many don't fully research their options. There are resources, such as the
student finance calculator <https://www.gov.uk/browse/education/student-finance>
 and theNational Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/advice/courses/funding/Pages/default.aspx>
 website, to help you understand funding. Universities and colleges also offer 
options such as foundation degrees, higher national certificates and higher 
national diplomas, which are not as expensive as a full degree."

You don't need a degree to be successful

Hattie Wrixon co-founded Uni's Not For Me <http://www.unisnotforme.com/> when 
she was 17 years old: "I chose not to go to university after the tuition fees 
went up and I could not find a suitable course worth paying for. Instead, I 
decided to set up the site, which aims to help and guide students who aren't 
sure what they want to do. There are a number of different qualifications that 
you can do, and many companies will pay for these if you are able to get a 
place at their firm."

Research your options 

Montanna Stafford is product manager at the Association of Accounting 
Technicians <http://www.aat.org.uk/>: "Show initiative and research the company 
or organisation thoroughly so that you can demonstrate this in your 
application. Think about why the area of work appeals to you. In terms of 
securing an apprenticeship, a good starting point is to register with the
National Apprenticeship Service <http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/>, where you 
can search for vacancies in your local area."

Mark Morris is careers guidance practitioner for the Chartered Institute of 
Legal Executives (CILEx) <http://www.cilex.org.uk/>: "There are plenty of 
careers that you can enter without going to university. The apprenticeship 
route is growing in popularity. For some people, there are considerable 
benefits to working and earning while you are learning and building a 
professional career. Social media offers a range of ways of finding 
opportunities. It can also be a great way to research employers and find out 
what they are tweeting about.

"One common misconception is that you cannot become a qualified lawyer without 
going to university. The CILEx has a well-established route that you can take 
after leaving school or college â€“ there are now also apprenticeships in legal 
services."

Apprenticeships 

Clare Whitmell <http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/> is a Guardian contributor 
and a qualified business communication trainer: "If you apply for an 
apprenticeship, expect a fairly rigorous selection procedure. You'll need to 
send your CV, so make sure this is as good as you can get it, with evidence of 
your skills. You might also need to do an aptitude test to check if you have 
the ability to do the apprenticeship.

"You need to show you're enthusiastic and committed. Apprenticeships 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/apprenticeships> last for at least a year, 
so the employer will want to be sure that you'll stay the course. Be clear on 
why the sector and role appeals, and include this in your cover letter.

"Showing your commitment through volunteering will also work in your favour. 
For instance, one of the best ways into charity work (regardless of whether you 
have a degree) is through volunteering for that charity. You'll get to know 
people and find out first-hand about opportunities."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.
 