
The Present review – Cate Blanchett and Richard Roxburgh ageing disgracefully
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/the-present-review-cate-blanchett-and-richard-roxburgh-ageing-disgracefully>
The Sydney Theatre Company has announced that Andrew Upton’s critically 
acclaimed 2015 production The Present – an adaptation of Anton Chekhov’s 
unfinished and untitled first play – will be taken to Broadway later this year, 
starringCate Blanchett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> and 
Richard Roxburgh in their Broadway debuts.

Although Blanchett has toured to New York with STC previously – she appeared 
in its productions of Hedda Gabler,A Streetcar Named Desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/dec/03/cate-blanchett-a-streetcar-named-desire>
 andThe Maids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/10/cate-blanchett-isabelle-huppert-the-maids-review>
, and starred alongside Roxburgh in Upton’s adaptation of Chekhov’s Uncle Vanya 
– this will mark the first time Sydney Theatre Company has opened a show on 
Broadway.

The play, usually called Platonov, was not discovered until 1920, 16 years 
after Chekhov’s death. Upton’s adaptation, which received afive-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/10/the-present-review-cate-blanchett-and-richard-roxburgh-ageing-disgracefully>
 in the Guardian last year, sets the stage in the mid-1990s of post-perestroika 
Russia, where a group of friends – led by an acerbic, womanising school 
teacher, Mikhail Platonov (Roxburgh), and his wife, Sasha – gather in the 
country to celebrate the 40th birthday of the one that got away from him: Anna 
Petrovna (Blanchett).

Cate Blanchett and Richard Roxburgh: two decades on stage for the Sydney 
Theatre Company – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/aug/07/cate-blanchett-and-richard-roxburgh-two-decades-on-stage-for-the-sydney-theatre-company-in-pictures>
Upton was at the creative helm of STC until last year, serving with Blanchett 
as co-artistic director for the first five years of his six-year run. In 2015 
he announced he would step down from the role because the couple had decided to 
move to New York.

“The deciding factor was that our children are still of an age where they can 
be mobile without disrupting their education too much,” he said. “It won’t be a 
permanent move. Sydney will always be our home. But it will be an adventure.”

Most recently, Upton was executive producer of the critically acclaimed feature
Carol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/26/carol-film-review-cate-blanchett-todd-haynes-rooney-mara>
, starring Blanchett alongside Rooney Mara intwo Oscar-nominated roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscars-2016-full-list-of-nominations-awards-movies>
.


The Present will be directed by John Crowley, who also directed the original 
production, and will be produced by Stuart Thompson and STC. Complete casting 
and an opening date will be announced soon.

 