
Several CDs marked with the name of the deceased radical cleric Anwar al-Awlaki
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>were seized from the home 
of a Detroit man arrested after buying five grenades from an undercover federal 
agent, according to a sealed search warrant obtained by the Detroit News.

Federal authorities would not disclose what the CDs contained, but listed them 
with seven rifles, two assault rifles, a shotgun, handguns, thousands of rounds 
of ammunition, computer equipment and cellphones that were found at Sebastian 
Gregerson’s west side home, the newspaperreported <http://detne.ws/2aWBdu8> on 
Saturday.

Gregerson, 29, is charged with possessing an unregistered destructive device. 
He was arrested last Sunday in Monroe, south-west ofDetroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit>.

Court records allege Gregerson spoke about carrying out an unspecified attack. 
His defense attorney, David Tholen, has said the government is exaggerating his 
threat.

Tholen said earlier this week that Gregerson was just a survivalist. However, 
Cathleen Corken, a prosecutore, told the federal magistrate Mona Majzoub on 
Thursday that Gregerson appeared to be preparing for violent acts, and called 
him a dangerous man.

Anwar al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, a radical 
American-Yemeni cleric, was influential among militants living in the west. His 
English language internet sermons called for jihad, or holy war, against the 
US. Al-Awlaki was killed in 2011 in Yemen by an unmanned drone.

The FBI has said a US soldier sentenced to death in the 2009 shooting deaths 
of 13 people at the Fort Hood military base in Texas sent numerous emails to 
al-Awlaki. The convicted terrorist Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, serving a life 
sentence for trying to blow up a Detroit-bound airliner in 2009, trained under 
al-Awlaki.

“When you look through most of the cases of individuals who get arrested for 
terrorism charges, the vast majority had al-Awlaki on their laptops,” Seamus 
Hughes, with the George Washington University program on extremism, told the 
newspaper.
 