
Shaun Ryder: Musician
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F599c28bb587ad6855b7d6f4641aa356a33ae3c8e%2F2431_283_1540_2309%2F1540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F599c28bb587ad6855b7d6f4641aa356a33ae3c8e%2F2431_283_1540_2309%2F1540.jpg>
 Shaun Ryder. 
I don’t make things at Christmas. The wife does the cooking. I’m a northern 
man of 53. We don’t do stuff like that. I don’t do owt. I once tried to fix up 
someChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> lights, and 
ended up blowing myself to the other side of the living room.

The only thing I do is dress up as Father Christmas. The Sun newspaper once 
got me to dress up for its Christmas party – I took the costume home and now I 
dress up for the kids. We’ve got two girls: a six-year-old and a 
seven-year-old. I managed to blag them once. I dressed up in the costume and 
the wife took a Polaroid photo of me from behind with a big sack, next to their 
presents.

We left the photo by the empty plate where the mince pies and milk were the 
night before. I told the kids that it was the real Father Christmas and they 
fell for that one. They thought it was great. We’ve got about another two years 
of that before they catch on that it’s really Dad.

Martha Wainwright: Musician
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6346a8142583a3fd244c422bc1c364feb8391e78%2F821_12_754_1130%2F754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6346a8142583a3fd244c422bc1c364feb8391e78%2F821_12_754_1130%2F754.jpg>
 Martha Wainwright 
I host Christmas for the whole family at my house, which is also the home that 
my mother and her two sisters grew up in and their father built in 1940. The 
living room is stunning: it’s got a very low ceiling with beams and a big 
fireplace.

The tree, especially when [my brother] Rufus is around, is ridiculous – he 
goes tinsel crazy.

It’s a complete winter wonderland in Quebec. It’s insanely snowy and cold. 
Last year we built an ice rink on the lawn. This eastern part of the country is 
the coldest, and getting through the winter is a big thing. Winter sports are 
the only way to not go crazy. There’s a sound you hear all winter in Quebec – 
the din of hockey pucks hitting the wooden edges of a rink.

We laid down a big tarp on our lawn, then built up the sides with stones, 
flooded it with a hose, until we had a few inches of water, and let it freeze. 
All of the family brought cross country skis and we put on the sweaters my 
mother knitted. I’m not a bad skater. Being a tough girl when I was a kid, I 
always had hockey skates.

The ice rink was great at keeping the kids outside. That’s the thing with kids 
at Christmas: you want to get them out of the house otherwise they are going to 
tear it down and destroy it while you make Christmas dinner.

The Wainwright Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/11/the-wainwright-sisters-review-martha-lucy-roche-st-stephens-church-london>
’ debut album Songs in the Dark is out now

Mary Beard: Historian
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45cd0f8d8c6a14acf94da401b5133a8b4d887691%2F1324_382_1586_2379%2F1586.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45cd0f8d8c6a14acf94da401b5133a8b4d887691%2F1324_382_1586_2379%2F1586.jpg>
 Mary Beard 
Christmas is the only time of year that I actually bake a cake. All the 
equipment – the tin, the special paper, and the wire rack to put the cake on as 
it comes out of the oven – is kept for just one Sunday in November. I’d like to 
say that I have a secret of success, but for two decades everything has worked 
just fine with the aid of a battered copy of Delia and her recipe Classic 
Christmas Cake (deliaonline.com <http://www.deliaonline.com/>), along with a 
good deal of brandy and luck (hope that is not pride coming before the first 
fall).

My real weakness is the decoration of the damn thing. The combination of a 
plastic robin, out of scale Santa and a lot of little silver balls never quite 
does justice to the deliciously tipsy cake underneath.

Ainsley Harriott: Chef
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff05b160f95b9162ef426b4a294b606ad7c5aaa0d%2F528_130_729_1093%2F729.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff05b160f95b9162ef426b4a294b606ad7c5aaa0d%2F528_130_729_1093%2F729.jpg>
 Ainsley Harriott 
Christmas for me means starting the day with ackee and saltfish, and cornbread 
muffins. It began as a tradition with my parents when they were still together, 
and Mum continued it until she passed away about 20 years ago. Even though my 
kids have grown up, I know that they are going to continue the tradition too.

There’s something special about it. It makes me think particularly of Mum. We 
were lucky as kids – whenever we came home from school, Mum was there. My dad 
was a great eater but Mum was the cook.

Mum and Dad used to do a lot of entertaining. We had quite a nice house, so 
everybody descended on us at Christmas – aunts and uncles, who weren’t even 
aunts and uncles. Lunch didn’t happen until about four in the afternoon, so 
ackee and saltfish for brunch was a big thing. Mum also made great homemade 
eggnog, with brandy in it. That was my first taste of alcohol, and I’ll never 
forget the smell of nutmeg in the house.

I’ve been to the Caribbean for Christmas a couple of times. The thing is, at 
Christmas, I want to be at home. I’m British, I was born here. I like going for 
that Christmas morning walk with the dog and the kids.

I love how everybody slows down to celebrate it. It brings families together – 
however frustrating that might be. We cook together, chat together, and give 
each other awful presents. And of course it’s memories: thinking of my mum and 
dad who are no longer here, and capturing a bit of the time that we had 
together.

Isy Suttie: Comedian
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72ee39244b3df06a70c15472dd3eff2d587a2b69%2F933_160_898_1348%2F898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72ee39244b3df06a70c15472dd3eff2d587a2b69%2F933_160_898_1348%2F898.jpg>
 Isy Suttie 
About 10 years ago, I decided to make my boyfriend a papier-mache penguin for 
Christmas. We’d been to London zoo and fallen in love with a penguin called 
Roy. Our relationship was on its last legs, and I thought that if I made a 
grand gesture I could save it.

I bought loads of chicken wire and curved it into the right shape, but I had 
no equipment to cut it, so the penguin ended up being 5ft tall. I left his 
tummy hollow, and made shelves inside it with wire. I thought my boyfriend 
could store DVDs in there.

The wings were rotational, and covered in black furry felt. They could bend to 
any angle and go up and down. The head was fully detachable. I painted him in 
black-and-white gloss, with an orange beak.

Taking Roy on the bus for the big presentation was interesting. The bus driver 
joked that he should charge me for an extra ticket as the penguin was the size 
of small man. When my boyfriend came down and saw it on the doorstep, I 
realised it had got out of hand. I had created a monster. My boyfriend didn’t 
have a big bedroom, so Roy dominated the space. He never even used the shelves 
for his DVDs.

We broke up not long after that. I think that, in a way, Roy became like the 
child we didn’t have. He forced us to face up to the fact that we were better 
off as friends, and it was much easier than having an actual child.

Isy Suttie’s book The Actual One is out in January. Her show The Actual Book 
Tour starts on 17 January

Carly Rae Jepsen: Musician
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa73192a3bc819a4f3cedda70be305f8d2c48b4bd%2F862_73_1443_2163%2F1443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa73192a3bc819a4f3cedda70be305f8d2c48b4bd%2F862_73_1443_2163%2F1443.jpg>
 Carly Rae Jepsen 
When we were very little, my siblings and I made decorations for the Christmas 
tree. Dad helped us to make painted egg shells – we’d blow the egg, then 
carefully paint the shell. We also made clay ornaments, which we’d cover with 
too much paint so they’d all end up brown. There’s brown clay trees, brown 
snowmen, and they look like the saddest things in the world – but to us they 
are precious. It doesn’t feel like Christmas until they are hung on the tree.

My brother, little sister and I decorate the tree together, and every year we 
fight over who gets to hang our handmade childhood decorations. My brother is 
three years older than me, so we’re talking 32 years old here, and my sister is 
seven years younger. We’re all adults, and it’s such a silly thing to do.

There is a part of us that feels like our parents are making us do it, but 
then we get into it and it’s like, this is cool. We have rum and eggnog, we put 
on music, we bring out the onesies, and we just kind of embrace the cheesiness 
of it.

Carly Rae Jepsen’s album E.Mo.Tion is out now

Alexander Armstrong: Comedian, actor, presenter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99af5c351ed17dacf6c5d5f5e309fd0836195fce%2F1488_89_892_1336%2F892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20share%20their%20favourite%20Christmas%20rituals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcelebrities-favourite-christmas-family-rituals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99af5c351ed17dacf6c5d5f5e309fd0836195fce%2F1488_89_892_1336%2F892.jpg>
 Alexander Armstrong 
For the last four years, I’ve made my own sloe gin each winter. Mmm. Sloe gin. 
My dad used to make it, and I think it’s really exciting to see the sloes, gin 
and sugar sitting in a great big jar.

We’ve only lived out in the country for a couple of years, but already I get 
such a kick out of making things. I made elderflower fizz, which was terrifying 
because several bottles exploded.

The sloes this year were delicious. People say you need to prick each sloe 
with a silver pin, but that’s not true. Just put the sloes in the freezer, and 
that will split the skins for you. Thaw them out, chuck them in a jar with 
twice as much sugar as sloes, then top it up with gin. It starts out cloudy 
with the sloes at the bottom, then as time goes on it gets darker and darker 
and turns into pure sloe gin.

It’s terribly easy to make, but so delicious. Useful too. We’ll suddenly 
think, oh God, we haven’t got a Christmas present for someone. Then we look in 
the larder for a bottle of sloe gin. We end up giving it all away – which, I 
think, is probably how it should be.

The A-Z of Pointless by Alexander Armstrong and Richard Osman is out now
 