
Milan booked their place in the last 16 of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> after posting a scrappy 
2-0 victory overAuxerre in Burgundy. Zlatan Ibrahimovic's wonderful 64th-minute 
opener came out of the blue and he was later replaced by Ronaldinho, who scored 
the second late on.

That took Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> to eight points 
in Group G andAjax's 4-0 thumping at home to Real Madrid ensured the Rossoneri 
would qualify as runners-up to the Spanish champions.

Cristiano Ronaldo struck twice as Madrid guaranteed themselves a first-place 
finish in the group after convincingly seeing off the hosts at the Amsterdam 
ArenA. First-half goals from Karim Benzema and Alvaro Arbeloa put Madrid in 
control before Ronaldo scored his double after the break, the second from the 
penalty spot.

Madrid finished the match with only nine men after Xabi Alonso and Sergio 
Ramos were sent off in the closing stages after picking up second yellow cards 
for time-wasting.

Marseille cruised into the last 16 with a 3-0 away victory over Spartak Moscow 
at the Luzhniki Stadium. Mathieu Valbuena gave Didier Deschamps' men the lead 
in the 18th minute and further strikes by Loïc Rémy and Brandão after the break 
ensured the margin of victory they required to progress behind Chelsea, who won 
Group F by coming from behind to beat MSK Zilina 2-1 at Stamford Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/23/chelsea-msk-zilina-champions-league>
.

The Roma captain, Francesco Totti, capped a magnificent comeback with a late 
penalty as the Italians stunnedBayern Munich 3-2 at the Stadio Olimpico in 
Group E.

Trailing 2-0 at half-time after Mario Gomez's two goals, Marco Borriello 
scored four minutes after the restart before Daniele De Rossi equalised. Totti 
then scored the winner from the penalty spot six minutes from the end after 
Borriello had been brought down by Bayern's goalkeeper, Thomas Kraft.

The result puts Roma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> within 
touching distance of the next round as they sit three points clear of 
third-placedBasel. Bayern have already qualified as group winners.

Federico Almerares scored the only goal to keep Basel's hopes of qualification 
from Group E alive. Almerares's goal came in the 14th minute against the bottom 
side,Cluj, who rarely threatened the home goal at St Jakob Park.

In Group H, while Arsenal suffered a shock 2-0 defeat by Braga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/23/sporting-braga-arsenal-champions-league>
 at Estadio Municipal,Shakhtar Donetsk scored three second-half goals to brush 
asidePartizan Belgrade and virtually assure progression. Goals from Taras 
Stepanenko, Jadson and Eduardo put Shakhtar in charge of the group as news came 
through of Arsenal's setback.
 