
Chance the Rapper looks set to become the first artist to get an album in the 
Billboard 200 charts this week based on streams alone for Coloring Book, his 
third mixtape in four years (or fourth if you count last year’s Surf withDonnie 
Trumpet & The Social Experiment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/29/donnie-trumpet-and-the-social-experiment-surf-first-listen-review-chance-the-rapper-goes-psych>
).

Streams have counted towards the US chart since the end of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/06/us-music-industry-streaming-doubles-adele-physical-sales>
. They also, from the start of this year, go towards the RIAA’s gold and 
platinum sales certificates, using a byzantine tabulation method whereby 1,500 
cumulative streams (on an audio service like Spotify or Apple Music as well as 
YouTube) are treated as the equivalent of 10 track sales and, therefore, one 
album sale.

Kanye West scores first US No 1 album via streams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/12/kanye-west-first-number-one-album-via-stream>
It is a mathematical system that is as controversial as it is confusing, but 
has contributed to the chart success this year of Rihanna’sAnti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/28/rihanna-anti-album-review-brave-bold-and-confused>
, Kanye West’sThe Life Of Pablo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/14/kanye-west-the-life-of-pablo-review-you-can-see-why-his-immodesty-rubs-people-up-the-wrong-way>
 and Beyoncé’sLemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>
 – all initially streamed exclusively on Tidal, the subscription service they 
have shares in; but these albums also had a download side which, arguably, did 
most of the heavy lifting in getting them high in the charts.

What is different and most remarkable about Coloring Book is that it is not 
available to download anywhere and is being done without the backing of a 
record company. Chance is rap music’sbrightest polymath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/18/chance-the-rapper-hmv-forum-london-review>
, autodidact and cottage industry all rolled into one. He is no fan of the 
“old” industry system and his achievements to date represent a crystallisation 
of all the grand theorising about disintermediation and the “death of the 
label” that have been kicking around since 1999 and Napster. There are hundreds 
of thousands of DIY acts out there and lots of platforms, like Bandcamp, 
TuneCore and SoundCloud, to help them get their music out, but success at scale 
has proved elusive to them without the help of a label.

Chance is rap music’s brightest polymath, autodidact and cottage industry all 
rolled into one

“There’s no reason to [sign with a label],” Chance told Rolling Stone in 2013, 
makinghis mission of total independence clear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/13/chance-the-rapper-chicago-music-coloring-book-hip-hop>
. “It’s a dead industry […] What’s an album these days, anyways? ‘Cause I 
didn’t sell it, does that mean it’s not an official release?”

It’s not that labels haven’t sought to sign him. He claimed he had meetings 
with “nearly every major label” three years ago and memorably turned down an 
offer from Kendrick Lamar’s TDE label. He could have followed the path taken by 
Drake, who used mixtapes to build his profile and then signed to Universal. He 
also developed a tight promotional relationship with Apple, being the spotlight 
star at the launch of Apple Music last June as well as having the technology 
company bankroll his Hotline Bling video. He reciprocated this largesse by 
giving the company a two-week exclusive on his Views album at the end of April. 
Yet Chance, in sharp contrast, is ploughing an independent furrow, making most 
of his money on the hoof from branding deals and touring.

This century has been defined by an unspooling calamity for the record 
industry – a car crash it is only now crawling out of. Critics of the business 
have laughed up their sleeves at its floundering, saying it is unfit for 
purpose and woefully anachronistic. At various points they have held up what 
they perceived as clear evidence that record labels were a spent force and 
utterly unnecessary for artists.

Yet labels did not die in that time; they merely consolidated to ensure their 
survival. At the turn of the millennium, there were five major labels 
(Universal, Sony, Warner, BMG, EMI) and today there are just three (Universal, 
Sony, Warner). Record sales may be a fraction of what they were back then – the 
IFPI reports that the global recorded music market was worth $33.6bn in 2001 
and just $15bn last year – but record companies have remained critical in what
Joni Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonimitchell>, when singing 
about her label headDavid Geffen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/nov/05/pressandpublishing.popandrock> 
in Free Man In Paris, described as “stoking the star maker machinery behind the 
popular song”.

Chance the Rapper: 'I once wanted Kanye West to be my dad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/28/chance-the-rapper-surf-hip-hop-kanye-west>
There have been many times in this period of upheaval where the label has been 
declared DOA. In 2008,Groove Armada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/groovearmada> left Sony BMG and signed a 
one-year deal with Bacardi and this was hailed as the moment when brands, with 
their shiny imagery and deep pockets, put the fusty old record labels to the 
sword. Except the partnership spluttered out amid mild apathy and options to 
extend the partnership after 12 months were not taken up.

A few years earlier, acts like Lily Allen and Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> were apparently breaking on 
the then exciting new social media platform MySpace. Except they didn’t and had 
label backing to push them into the charts (Regal/EMI for Allen, Domino for 
Arctic Monkeys). There was also the brief but preposterous moment when Sandi 
Thom, claiming she was video broadcasting to hundreds of thousands of people 
from her south London basement, was taken seriously until it was discovered her 
viewer numbers had been gamed. After a transitory chart career, she found 
herself shunted back to the margins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fchance-the-rapper-album-coloring-book-mixtape-billboard-charts-stream-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73db126365a1fc085c1ed2f5ff72ccb2b1a1ef4e%2F0_161_3248_1948%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chance%20The%20Rapper%20is%20the%20world's%20first%20truly%20independent%20artist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fchance-the-rapper-album-coloring-book-mixtape-billboard-charts-stream-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chance%20The%20Rapper%20is%20the%20world%27s%20first%20truly%20independent%20artist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fchance-the-rapper-album-coloring-book-mixtape-billboard-charts-stream-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73db126365a1fc085c1ed2f5ff72ccb2b1a1ef4e%2F0_161_3248_1948%2F3248.jpg>
 Kings of the dial-up era: the Arctic Monkeys Photograph: Fabio De Paola/REX 
Shutterstock 
For an equally fleeting moment, Starbucks was seen as a new type of record 
label and retailer in one, doing deals with acts including Carly Simon and, 
incredibly,Paul McCartney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paulmccartney>. 
Simon, however, sued the coffee chain and its Hear Music arm in 2009 over what 
she alleged were meagre sales – sitting as a stinging parable for how the new 
is not always better or smarter than the old.

There have been moments here and there where acts were seen to be breaking up 
the old model and marking what business analysts insist on calling a “paradigm 
shift”. Cazzette became the first act in 2008 to release an album exclusively 
via Spotify but failed to set the world on fire. Even a mega-act likeRadiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead>, the sombre pioneers of DIY 
releases, still had the hand rail of a record label (XL Recordings) from In 
Rainbows in 2007 onwards.

All of these were mere blips, but the momentum that Chance the Rapper has 
built, pretty much single-handedly, suggest all those grand claims for total 
artist autonomy made over the past 16 years could finally be coming good. None 
of this, however, is happening in a vacuum. It has taken the perfect storm of 
the right act arriving at the right time, social media becoming truly 
mainstream, significant changes to the chart rules to incorporate streams and 
the declining importance of both CDs and downloads to deliver something that 
could change those “paradigms”.

Because of this, record companies are not going to be dumped in a shallow 
grave just yet. Neither are the charts going to be awash with acts doing 
exactly what Chance has done. As with all true pioneers, he exists in his own 
orbit. Anyone looking at what he has done and trying to replicate it is doomed 
to spectacular failure for one very clear and important reason: they are not, 
and never will be, Chance the Rapper.
 