
A who’s who of technology and media heavyweights, including Ashton Kutcher, 
Bill Gates, Twitter co-founder Ev William and entrepreneur Richard Branson, 
have joined a $25m (£16m) funding round in the social activism platform
Change.org <https://www.change.org>.

The funding round also includes LinkedIn’s co-founder Reid Hoffman and chief 
executive Jeff Weiner, Yahoo co-founder Jerry Yang, Huffington Post’sArianna 
Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington> and A-Grade 
Investments, the venture capital firm founded by actor Kutcher, Guy Oseary and 
Ron Burkle.

Omidyar Network, the philanthropic investment firm created by eBay founder 
Pierre Omidyar ,which led a $15m funding round in Change.org a year ago, has 
also “significantly increased” its investment in the latest fundraising.

“We wanted two groups of people on board as we expand globally,” said Ben 
Rattray, founder and chief executive of Change.org. “The first is founders and 
chief executives of the world’s largest internet companies who know how to 
build at scale. The second was leaders in business and media because ultimately 
those are the avenues that some of the biggest change happens.”

 Ben Rattray, founder and CEO of Change.org. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter/theguardian.com 
Rattray said the founding team were still in control of the company, and that 
the latest investors to be approached have been selected because they are 
“mission-aligned” with Change.org’s strategy.

“To think long-term and make the best decisions in the interest of the company 
it is important for investors to have input but not control,” he said. “It is 
important for us to retain independence. There are much easier ways to raise 
$25m but we wanted mission-aligned people who understand about the long term.”

The company has seen explosive growth since its last funding round in 
mid-2013, with monthly global unique user numbers rising from 35 million to 80 
million.

Rattray said the rate of successful petitions put on Change.org (“the primary 
metric of success we use is victories”) has surged from one win every five 
hours a year ago to almost one win per hour.

He added that the funds would be used to invest in areas including mobile - 
half of all users of Change.org do so via a mobile device - and improving the 
ability for users to build support for very localised campaigns.

“I’m most excited about the local opportunity, we don’t do geo-local, which 
will enable people to take action in their immediate area on things such as 
food or school campaigns,” said Rattray.

“To date engagement and participation has been far away, remote physically, 
with big successful campaigns. The most effective way of engaging a broad swath 
of a local populations is not a small number of massive campaigns but a massive 
number of small campaigns.”

Another focus will be to build a tool to allow elected government officials or 
business leaders to directly engage with users of Change.org.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fchange-org-funding-round-ashton-kutcher-bill-gates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F9%2F1418110138128%2Fa9070e38-a85d-452d-906c-7791740b0dad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Change.org%20raises%20%2425m%20from%20media%20heavyweights%20in%20fresh%20funding%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fchange-org-funding-round-ashton-kutcher-bill-gates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Change.org%20raises%20%2425m%20from%20media%20heavyweights%20in%20fresh%20funding%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fdec%2F09%2Fchange-org-funding-round-ashton-kutcher-bill-gates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F9%2F1418110138128%2Fa9070e38-a85d-452d-906c-7791740b0dad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Writer and feminist Caroline Criado-Perez had a successful petition on 
Change.org. Photograph: Sarah Lee/Guardian 
At the moment it is possible for this to happen “manually”, with Change.org 
contacting figures to facilitate a response to an issue.

This is what happened with deputy prime minister Nick Clegg who responded to 
200,000-plus people involved in a petition on Change.org about parents who were 
arrested after removing their son with cancer from a hospital ward.

“We want to build a tool set to enable officials at all levels of government 
and in business to allow then to directly engage with citizens or consumers 
through the platform,” Rattray said. “At the moment we do it manually, we reach 
out, I’m excited about doing it at scale. We don’t just want consumers to be 
able to petition, we want businesses and officials to be able to respond.”

Rattray admitted that Change.org, which has 18 offices worldwide and about 200 
staff, is not profitable but covers most of its costs from ad revenue.

“We are not focussed specifically on profitability but on continuing the trend 
of revenue growth and outside funding from investors. We have a higher level of 
revenues covering costs than most early and even mid-stage start-ups.”

In total the latest round of funding includes 25 investors.

Notable UK victories for Change.org petitions include Caroline Criado Perez’s 
campaign to keep a historic female figure on British banknotes 
<http://carolinecriadoperez.com/keep-a-woman-on-english-banknotes/>.

Fahma Mohamed’s 250,000 strong petition calling on Michael Gove to write to 
headteachers in the UKabout female genital mutilation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/end-fgm>.
 