
Adam Sampson, the former chief executive of the homeless charity Shelter, 
argues that with growth and professionalisation Britain's charity sector "could 
lose its sense of mission", and that "there is a danger that what makes it 
distinctive, valuable or essential may get eroded" (High-minded ambition, 3 June
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/jun/03/adam-sampson-charity>).

I identified with much of his description of the life of the CEOs today. Many 
charity heads will feel the same - rebels of the 1970s, consciously outside a 
system they wanted to change, now "suited and booted", "earning close to 
six-figure salaries and enjoying all the trappings of an executive lifestyle", 
networking with politicians and worrying about how to manage growing 
organisations. How far we now seem from our romantic past.

But this is not a sign that we have lost sight of what is important. Quite the 
opposite. As Sampson says, "charities are not set up to benefit staff" or for 
their CEOs to feel good about themselves. They exist for one reason - to help 
those most in need. I agree that, as he says, problems like homelessness are 
too important for the "amateur, chaotic and physically squalid night shelters 
of the 1970s" that he remembers. This is why the mission of my organisation, 
the Association of Chief Executives of Voluntary Organisations (Acevo), is a 
modern and enterprising third sector.

While it cannot be denied that engaging with government makes compromise 
inevitable, is it not better to be at the table influencing policy rather than 
outside the door shouting? Do we not need the "seat at the establishment table" 
that he mentions in order for our beneficiaries to be heard?

I agree, as Sampson argues, that there "has been a price to pay", and it 
throws up challenges we must address. He says that "as the contract culture 
grows [bidding and delivering on government contracts], there is a temptation 
to measure success with reference to delivery of contract performance rather 
than value to client". This is true, and we must continue to push for the 
reform of how we fulfil contracts. As the sector grows, our greater clout will 
help us to do that.

Sampson does admit that "the contract culture has driven efficiency". He is 
right, it has helped us sharpen our act. It ensures that taxpayers get good 
value and that beneficiaries get the best service. It has moved charities away 
from juvenile assumptions that just because we are doing good and providing 
quality services we do not need to be tested.

We must hold our nerve. The reform of public service provision will require 
charities to be more business-minded than ever. While it will pose great 
challenges to the sector, it will also provide an opportunity for those who 
embrace the changes to flourish. This is why Acevo is working with government 
departments, thinktanks and charity leaders to make sure they seize this 
opportunity.

Sampson says that "the professional, organised and well-maintained hostels 
[for the homeless] of today overrides any temptation towards nostalgia", but he 
worries that the unique identity of charities is changing. He shouldn't worry. 
Identity is not what matters. It is our mission and our beneficiaries that 
count.

â€¢ Stephen Bubb is chief executive of Acevo
stephen.bubb@acevo.org.uk <mailto:stephen.bubb@acevo.org.uk>
 