
Aim

"To make provision for the establishment of a Children's Commissioner; to make 
provision aboutservices provided to and for children and young people 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2004/ukpga_20040031_en_1#Legislation-Preamble> 
by local authorities and other persons; to make provision in relation to Wales 
about advisory and support services relating to family proceedings; to make 
provision about private fostering, child minding and day care, adoption review 
panels, the defence of reasonable punishment, the making of grants as respects 
children and families, child safety orders, the Children's Commissioner for 
Wales, the publication of material relating to children involved in certain 
legal proceedings and the disclosure by the Inland Revenue of information 
relating to children."

Main provisions

• Creates the post of a Children's Commissioner <http://www.11million.org.uk> 
for England.
• Enables the government to create an electronic record of every child in 
England, Scotland and Wales to make it easier to trace children across local 
authorities and government services.
• Places a "duty to cooperate 
<http://www.everychildmatters.gov.uk/strategy/guidance>" on all services who 
work to protect children, designed to eliminate the risk of children "falling 
through the gaps". Services include local authorities, the police, the 
probation board, the youth offending team, the Strategic Health Authority and 
Primary Care Trusts, Connexions partnerships, and the Learning and Skills 
Council.
• Makes new statutory bodies called Local Safeguarding Children Boards 
<http://www.everychildmatters.gov.uk/lscb> responsible for child protection.
• Requires local authorities in England to appoint a director of children's 
services.

Background

In September 2003, the government published the Every Child Matters 
<http://www.everychildmatters.gov.uk/_files/B889EFF62F56A9E4C69778A869B3DA44.pdf>
 green paper alongside its formal response to Lord Laming'sinquiry into the 
death of Victoria Climbié 
<http://www.victoria-climbie-inquiry.org.uk/finreport/finreport.htm>. 

Lord Laming's report highlighted gaps in the child protection system, in 
particular a lack of joined-up reporting, which left individual professionals 
unable to gain a full picture of what is going on in a child's life. The green 
paper recommended policy changes backed by legislation; the Children's Act was 
designed to respond to Lord Laming's finding that health, police and social 
services missed 12 opportunities to save Climbié in part because of a lack of 
information sharing. The act enables the government to create anelectronic 
profile <http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2004/may/19/childrensservices3> of 
every child in England, to include details such as the child's name, address, 
date of birth, school, GP practice and the name of the person responsible for 
their day-to-day care.

The act also establishes a Children's Commissioner for England and makes that 
commissioner responsible for non-devolved matters relating to children in 
Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland.

The act says that the commissioner "must have regard to the UN Convention of 
the Rights of the Child <http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/k2crc.htm> (UNCRC)", 
signed by Margaret Thatcher in 1989.

Initial drafts of the bill merely proposed that the commissioner "may have 
regard to the UN Convention of the Rights of the Child (UNCRC)" but the Lords
passed an amendment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2004/may/19/childrensservices5> to 
strengthen the bill amid children's rights campaigners' complaints that the 
bill failed to promote children's rights.

Criticism

Although the act grants existing UK children's commissioners wide general 
powers to enable them to initiate inquiries on general issues, the act ensures 
that commissioners can only carry out formal investigations on the direction of 
the relevant secretary of state and it also allows the secretary of state the 
power to withhold subsequent reports.

Critics claimed the role lacked autonomy. Peter Clarke, the Welsh commissioner 
and incoming president of the European Network of Ombudspersons forChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, described it as a "very weak 
model".

Carolyne Willow, coordinator of the Children's Rights Alliance, said: "Without 
powers to access information, to enter establishments, to subpoena witnesses 
and to meet children in private, the commissioner will be indistinguishable 
from children's charities."

Liberty questioned the government's decision to allow both the creation of 
such an extensive database holding information on children and young people, 
and the choice to make shared information accessible to such a wide range of 
public bodies.

Concerns about the safety and confidentiality 
<http://www.ofsted.gov.uk/Ofsted-home/News/News-Archive/2007/November/Children-and-young-people-voice-their-concerns-over-the-new-ContactPoint-database-for-children-in-England>
 of the database have been raised.ContactPoint 
<http://www.everychildmatters.gov.uk/deliveringservices/contactpoint/about>, as 
the government's "information sharing index" is now known, has been beset by
delays <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2008/sep/02/schools.children1> as 
teachers' associations and privacy campaigners have repeatedly raisedsecurity 
concerns <http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2007/dec/06/children.mainsection> 
about the database.
 