
While the original Planet of the Apes movie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VjcpRHuPjOI> is a bona fide sci-fi classic, 
this is one (rare) saga that has benefited from being rebooted in the CGI era. 
The sight of actors dressed up as gorillas and chimpanzees always had a veneer 
of pantomime about it in those films from the 60s and 70s. EvenTim Burton's 
2001 version <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/81519/planet.of.the.apes>, 
featuring sexy, moustachioed chimp Helena Bonham Carter, had an unmistakable 
ring of camp about it.

The arrival of Andy Serkis's Caesar, on the other hand, was the moment this 
whole intelligent-monkey farrago stopped being a bit of a joke. Whether given 
life by Serkis himself or a few strokes of the post-production animator's 
virtual paintbrush (the argument remains unresolved), here was a creature whose 
sentience came across as instantly creepy – even demonic – the moment you 
looked into its eyes.Rise of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142809/rise-of-the-planet-of-the-apes> 
is as much horror movie as it is sci-fi, and that genre shift alone makes its 
return to cinemas a surprisingly valid one.

The debut teaser trailer for sequel Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film> hit the 
web this week, and it looks like we're flung into a full-blown conflict between 
the two sentient species of the primate order. Rupert Wyatt's 2011 debut showed 
how kindly chimp Caesar was transformed into a man-hating monster due to 
multiple episodes of mistreatment on the part of his captors. Now, with human 
civilisation sent tumbling into post-apocalyptic purgatory by the advance of a 
mysterious virus which began to proliferate towards the end of the last film, 
we see the beginning of the monkeys' reign. Here's the official synopsis:

A growing nation of genetically evolved apes led by Caesar is threatened by a 
band of human survivors of the devastating virus unleashed a decade earlier. 
They reach a fragile peace, but it proves short-lived, as both sides are 
brought to the brink of a war that will determine who will emerge as Earth's 
dominant species.

Set a reported 10 years after the last movie, the trailer gives us a voiceover 
that sounds like Gary Oldman's human leader Dreyfus to me, though he's not on 
screen. This is a promo that's full of brooding menace and the terror of things 
to come. As reboots go, the decision to set this particular version on the 
Planet of the Apes in the period prior to the dominion of monkeys suddenly 
seems like genius, pushing the whole saga into thrillingly vicious John Wyndham 
territory.

Like all the best horror movies, Rise functioned by holding back the full 
terror of ape evolution. Caesar uttered only a single word during the running 
time of that movie: a fearsome "No!" Much of the potential for success of Matt 
Reeves's sequel will depend on how it handles the simian discovery of full 
speech, and the teaser wisely avoids getting into this territory.

If Caesar does develop a genuine vocabulary – and I personally would avoid 
that particular event like Apes' plague – will that affect Serkis's chances of 
awards season recognition in 2015? The British star was clear on his desire to 
become thefirst actor to be Oscar-nominated for a mo-cap turn on Rise two years 
ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/01/andy-serkis-mo-cap-oscar>
. Voters appeared to be put off by the lack of speech, and studio 20th Century 
Fox has not positioned the sequel for an awards season run. But if the second 
movie in the rebooted saga is a hit, and Serkis is great in it, there will 
surely be clamour once again for the Academy to reward this new form of acting.

Dawn of the Planet of the Apes is due to be released in the UK on 17 July 
2014, and in the US six days earlier. Does the sequel have you scratching your 
armpits and hooh-hoohing with pleasure? Or is this belated attempt to 
resuscitate a much-loved sci-fi saga distinctly lacking in monkey magic?

• Read the rest of the Week in geek series 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/series/week-in-geek>
 