
China’s investment in the world’s largest radio telescope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/16/china-relocates-9000-people-fast-telescope-search-for-aliens>
 delivers a nice metaphor for China’s investment in science: it represents the 
big picture, and the potential payoff for a far-seeing strategy.

In 1985, China was held in suspicion by most of the rest of the world. Its 
economy had been twice ruined, first byMao’s Great Leap Forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/01/china-great-famine-book-tombstone>
, between 1958 and 1960, a step that precipitated a devastating famine and 
deaths by the million; and then by the calamitousCultural Revolution of 1966-76 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/05/mao-cultural-revolution-china-red-guard>
, which committed scholars and experts wholesale to the humiliation of manual 
labour, an act that squandered decades of intellectual capital.

China uproots 9,000 people for huge telescope in search for aliens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/16/china-relocates-9000-people-fast-telescope-search-for-aliens>
But in 1985, China announced another approach: it would become an intellectual 
power by investing in research and creativity. With centralized, unopposed 
authority, and unquestioned control,China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> could do what it liked, and this time 
the people liked what they got: hope, science and vision.

The start was slow, but within three decades, China has overtaken Japan to 
become the world’s second largest economy – behind only the US. And during that 
time its investment in research and development has grown: China is now a power 
in space research and manned flight; with a billion potential patients on its 
books, it has become a ambitious player in medical, biological and chemical 
research. Indeed, in 2015 pharmacologistTu Youyou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/05/youyou-tu-how-maos-challenge-to-malaria-pioneer-led-to-nobel-prize>
 became the first Chinese winner of a Nobel prize for medicine, awarded for her 
discovery of a treatment for malaria.

The graduate workforce expanded, Chinese-born scientists who had moved abroad 
were tempted back, more than 4,000 distinguished non-Chinese scientists were 
attracted to Chinese academies and universities and by 2014, more than 110,000 
PhDs who had left to work aboard had returned to China, largely because, for 
the first time, there was a better chance of research support at home than 
there is now in Europe, or the US, where investment in research has been 
faltering.

Science is an international endeavor, and although the Chinese government has 
encouraged indigenous talent an increasing proportion of scientific papers now 
carry the names of Chinese-based scientists in partnership with western (and 
western-based Chinese) researchers. In 2006,a 15-year-plan 
<http://www.researchtrends.com/issue22-march-2011/tipping-the-balance-the-rise-of-china-as-a-science-superpower/>
 announced that China would become a “science powerhouse” by 2020. It is a 
powerhouse already.

It has also invested hugely in energy research: by 2020, 15% of its energy 
will be from renewable sources. Between 2012 and 2014,according to the journal 
Nature 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v528/n7582_supp_ni/full/528S170a.html>, 
China’s output in the life sciences grew by 30%. The nation’s science 
directorate has ambitions in the fields of gene therapy, stem cell and cloning 
research; there has also been big spending on the science of agriculture, water 
and the environment. And – thanks to remarkable discoveries preserved in unique 
geological strata – China long ago became a powerful player in the world of
palaeontology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/16/zhenyuanlong-suni-biggest-ever-winged-dinosaur-discovered-china>
.

The people who have been told to move to make room for the world’s biggest 
reflector may not see it this way, but the new 500-metre telescope is not just 
a tool for tuning in to the distant universe: it is a felicitous examplar of 
the grand vision.
 