
Shares in Fortescue Metals Group surged by more than 10% on Tuesday after 
reports that two major Chinese companies were considering making an investment 
in Andrew Forrest’s struggling iron ore producer.

China’s largest steel producer, Baosteel, and the country’s largest 
conglomerate, CITIC, have held talks with Fortescue about investing in the iron 
ore miner to shore up its balance sheet, the Australian Financial Review 
reported on Tuesday 
<http://www.afr.com/business/mining/china-cash-lining-up-for-fortescue-metals-group-20150525-gh9cny>
.

It also reported that Chinese companies have applied to Australia’s Foreign 
Investment Review Board about a possible investment, but it was not known 
whether Baosteel or CITIC were behind the applications.

Perth-based Fortescue was the biggest riser on the ASX200 benchmark index on 
Tuesday morning, climbing 13.36% to $2.46 in early trading. The stock closed 23 
cents, or 10.6%, higher at $2.40.

The group has been hit hard by the falling price of iron ore, which reached its
lowest point in more than a decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/02/ron-ore-falls-below-us50>
 at the beginning of April.


In addition, Fortescue has debts of $7.4bn and also has higher costs than its 
largest rivals such as Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton.

Although the iron ore price has recovered in recent weeks to around US$60 a 
tonne,Fortescue has been forced to cut costs and shed jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/13/fortescue-to-cut-hundreds-of-jobs-despite-partial-rebound-in-iron-ore-price>
 as it seeks to maintain profitability.

Forrest, the company’s chairman and founder, drew criticism after suggesting 
that miners should cap production in order to stabilise the price. But although 
Tony Abbott said the government was considering an inquiry into the issue,the 
prime minister later backed away from the idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/19/tony-abbott-backs-away-from-iron-ore-inquiry-after-lobbying-by-bhp-and-rio>
.

Fortescue Metals released a statement on Tuesday, saying it does not comment 
on speculation. “Fortescue is not aware of FIRB applications by third parties 
and is in compliance with its continuous disclosure obligations,” the company 
said.

Chief executive Neville Power has said that a strategic investor would suit 
the company best.

Morningstar resources analyst Mathew Hodge said China would be eager to avoid 
Fortescue going into administration and spark a potential takeover by iron ore 
giants Rio Tinto or BHP Billiton.

Hodge said Fortescue had too much debt and was probably considering selling a 
stake in some mines, infrastructure or equity.


“This is a single commodity producer without a cost advantage that’s got a lot 
of debt, he said. “Ultimately that’s unsustainable and something will have to 
change.”
 