
Get used to the wild stock market rides. Tuesday’s action lacked the high 
drama of Monday last week - there was no slump in Chinese share prices or 
opening 1,000-point decline in the Dow Jones - but 3% off the FTSE 100 is quite 
alarming enough. At least three things suggest the stormy weather is here to 
stay.

First, Beijing appears to have learned nothing during the last month. Their 
search for scapegoats has led to the ridiculous spectacle of aChinese journalist
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/31/chinese-financial-journalist-wang-xiaolu-makes-alleged-on-air-confesssion-after-market-chaos>
 at a respected publication “confessing” on television to causing panic and 
disorder in the markets. There was no mention in Chinese state media, of 
course, of the real story - that over the course of a year, China’s authorities 
manufactured an extraordinary bull market that was bound to collapse because 
valuations reached absurd levels.

The Guardian view on China’s meltdown: the end of a flawed globalisation | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/01/guardian-view-on-china-meltdown-the-end-of-a-flawed-globalisation>
Second, the slowdown in Chinese factories seems to be intensifying. Few firm 
conclusions can be drawn from two sets of data, especially given that its 
Chinese data, but official and private measures of the manufacturing sector 
agree on the main point. Activity has hit a three-year low.

As a result, it becomes increasingly hard to believe that Chinese consumption 
can provide enough compensating growth to deliver the official target for 
overall growth this year of “about 7%”. Once it has overcome its unhealthy 
obsession with short-term share prices, how will Beijing respond? The strong 
suspicion is that it will cut interest rates again and allow the yuan to 
devalue further, in the hope of stimulating growth of any variety. In the west, 
that would imply fresh deflationary breezes and a tougher life for exporters. 
Expect markets to react wildly to any fresh sign of Chinese weakness.

The third ingredient is concern that the US recovery is already past its peak. 
Tuesday’s data for US manufacturing activity was so-so. There was a slowdown in 
August, possibly caused by local exporters feeling the effects of a stronger 
dollar. Critically, however, the fall was probably too small to change the mind 
of any Federal Reserve official inclined towards an early hike in interest 
rates. The worry is still alive that a US rate rise could be a monumental 
mistake.

Add it all up and more volatility is the way to bet. Bears stand accused of 
over-hyping the Chinese slowdown and mistaking a weak patch for a crisis in the 
offing. In truth,China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has created 
the deep worry. A hunt for imaginary market culprits suggests the authorities’ 
instinct is to play games of political diversion for domestic consumption.

HSBC should choose London

At least the erratic behaviour in Beijing makes one decision easier for the 
top brass atHSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/british-companies-exposed-china-market-turmoil>
. If the directors were ever seriously minded to move the bank to Hong Kong, 
the wheeze can be abandoned now. Any proposal toleave London and head to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/27/hsbc-relocation-how-the-bank-will-decide-whether-or-not-to-leave-uk>
, even back to the former British outpost, would surely be quashed by 
shareholders.

Naturally, HSBC’s Structured Review of Location of Holding Company – an 
exercise in scoring potential locations against 11 criteria – will be allowed 
to run its course, with the outcome due to be announced by the end of the year. 
In practice, though, the debate should be closed. China’s commitment to 
economic liberalisation is in doubt and it is hard to understand why an 
international bank, even one with deep roots in Hong Kong, would wish to tie 
itself more closely to an undemocratic regime.

British companies exposed to fallout from China's market turmoil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/01/british-companies-exposed-china-market-turmoil>
In any case, HSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> has 
already secured long-term relief from the UK bank levy. It will feel the 
financial benefit of George Osborne’s budget reforms from 2020. HSBC’s 
chairman, Douglas Flint, should chalk that up as a victory and commit to London 
at the earliest opportunity.

Asos sales goal still a way off

Asos “has always been about the longer journey”, its co-founder and chief 
executive, Nick Robertson, told his shareholders last autumn. It’s a trip he 
will now undertake from the back seat. Robertson will stay on the board but the 
company’s chief operating officer, Nick Beighton, will be handed the day-to-day 
job of makingAsos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> “the world’s 
leading fashion destination for 20-somethings”.

Beighton has been warmed up for eventual promotion – he was finance director 
not so long ago – but the timing requires a full explanation. Robertson has 
been saying for ages he wants Asos to hit the staging post of £2.5bn in annual 
sales, but the company is only halfway there. Founders are not all alike, but 
most don’t step back until they’ve achieved their publicly stated goals.
 