
The world’s largest radio telescope has begun operating in south-western China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, a project Beijing says will help 
humanity search for alien life.

The five-hundred-metre aperture spherical radio telescope (acronym: Fast), 
nestled between hills in the mountainous region of Guizhou, began working about 
noon on Sunday, the official news agency, Xinhua, reported.

Built at a cost of 1.2bn yuan (£138m), the telescope dwarfs the Arecibo 
observatory in Puerto Rico to become the world’s largest single-dish radio 
telescope, with twice the sensitivity and a reflector as large as 30 football 
pitches.

Fast will use its vast dish, made up of 4,450 panels, to search for signs of 
intelligent life and to observe distant pulsars – tiny, rapidly spinning 
neutron stars believed to be the products of supernova explosions.

European Space Agency accused of 'having a problem with promoting women'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/25/european-space-agency-accused-of-having-a-problem-with-promoting-women>
China sees its ambitious, military-run, multi-billion-dollar space programme 
as symbolising the country’s progress. It plans a permanent orbiting space 
station by 2020 and eventually a manned mission to the moon. President Xi 
Jinping celebrated the launch, with reports on Sunday that he had sent a 
congratulatory letter to the scientists and engineers who contributed to its 
creation.

The telescope represents a leap forward for China’s astronomical capabilities 
and will be one of several “world-class” telescope projects launched in the 
next decade, said Yan Jun, head of China’s National Astronomical Observation 
(NAO), according to Xinhua.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fchina-unveils-world-largest-single-dish-radio-telescope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4af4eac7f6ee25cc08170cc000de4d4d72201a6b%2F0_194_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20starts%20up%20world%E2%80%99s%20largest%20single-dish%20radio%20telescope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fchina-unveils-world-largest-single-dish-radio-telescope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20starts%20up%20world%E2%80%99s%20largest%20single-dish%20radio%20telescope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fchina-unveils-world-largest-single-dish-radio-telescope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4af4eac7f6ee25cc08170cc000de4d4d72201a6b%2F0_194_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The telescope’s visitor centre, which includes a planetarium. Photograph: 
Xinhua/Barcroft 
In a test run before the launch, Fast had detected electromagnetic waves 
emitted by a pulsar more than 1,300 light years away.

Earlier, Xinhua cited Wu Xiangping, director-general of the Chinese 
Astronomical Society, as saying that the telescope’s high degree of sensitivity 
“will help us to search for intelligent life outside of the galaxy”.

Experts have been hunting for alien intelligence for six decades, pointing 
radio telescopes at stars in the hope of discovering signals from other 
civilisations, but have not yet found any evidence. Last month, a “strong 
signal” detected by a Russian telescope searching for extraterrestrial signals 
stirred interest among scientists, but experts said it was too early to make 
conclusions about its origin.

Alien life, or noise? Russian telescope detects 'strong signal' from sun-like 
star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/29/russian-radio-telescope-strong-signal-hd164595-seti>
The new Fast telescope could “lead to discoveries beyond our wildest 
imagination,” Douglas Vakoch, president of METI, a group seeking to send 
messages to space in search of alien life, told Xinhua.

Construction of Fast began in 2011, and local officials relocated nearly 
10,000 people living within three miles (5km) to create a quieter environment 
for monitoring. Mobile phones in the area must be powered off to maintain radio 
silence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fchina-unveils-world-largest-single-dish-radio-telescope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82effb25fe8da69befb120865d73116009db48fb%2F0_219_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20starts%20up%20world%E2%80%99s%20largest%20single-dish%20radio%20telescope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fchina-unveils-world-largest-single-dish-radio-telescope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20starts%20up%20world%E2%80%99s%20largest%20single-dish%20radio%20telescope&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fchina-unveils-world-largest-single-dish-radio-telescope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82effb25fe8da69befb120865d73116009db48fb%2F0_219_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The last panel of the Fast telescope is installed in July. Photograph: China 
Daily/Reuters 
In the past, China has relocated hundreds of thousands of people to make way 
for large infrastructure projects such as dams and canals.

The area surrounding the telescope is remote and relatively poor. State media 
said it was chosen because there are no major towns nearby.

The villagers will be compensated with cash or housing. The budget for 
relocation is 1.8bn yuan (£208m), it was reported; more than the cost of 
constructing the telescope. At the beginning of this month, reports said 600 
apartments had been built so far with the funds.

China has poured money into big science and technology projects as it seeks to 
become a hi-tech leader, but despite some gains the country’s scientific output 
still lags behind.
 