
The presumption of innocence is understood as a cornerstone of both United 
States and United Kingdom law. But now, according toNoam Chomsky 
<http://www.chomsky.info/>, it is 'long disappeared'. Such an accusation is 
perhaps unsurprising coming from the most persistent critic of US foreign 
policy. Chomsky was speaking at the launch of a new academic journal,State Crime
 <http://statecrime.org/journal>, and was referring to the increasingly 
controversial US tactic of assassination of al-Qaida leaders and associated 
individuals. For Chomsky, this practice goes far beyond what he called the Bush 
administration's 'kidnapping' to Guantanamo Bay. The current strategy is, he 
claimed, developing into a 'massive global assassination campaign'.

Chomsky's pedigree on such topics is well established. In 1988, long before 
Osama bin Laden conspired to destroy the World Trade Centre, Chomsky wrote The 
Culture of Terrorism as a searing critique of US secret operations overseas. 
Since then he has held both Bush administrations as well as their Democratic 
counterparts to account in a range of polemical publications on power, 
terrorism and international relations. This most recent critique is the latest 
chapter in a long history of highlighting the fact that terrorism is just as 
easily committed by states as against them.

But there are those who see targeted killing as part of a constitutional 
response to terrorism. Harold Koh, a former Dean of Yale Law School and strong 
critic of the Bush administration, now serves as legal adviser to the State 
Department. He supports the use of targeted killing and in aMarch 2011 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zeIYtJDWsxI> speech to the European University 
Institute's Global Governance Programme offered a robust defence of the tactic. 
This has caused dismay in US legal circles, where Barack Obama's willingness to 
deploy this strategy is considered a continuation of the Bush administration's 
extra-legal tactics. The recent killing of Anwar al-Awlaki prompted David Cole, 
a Professor at the Georgetown Law Center, to write a critique simply entitled
Killing Citizens in Secret 
<http://www.nybooks.com/blogs/nyrblog/2011/oct/09/killing-citizens-secret/>. 
Al-Awlaki's possession of a US passport escalates the controversy, as it raises 
serious questions about what a state may do to its citizens if it believes them 
to pose a threat.

The revulsion amongst the US legal left stands in contrast to comparative 
silence on this side of the Atlantic. The use of secret legal memos, 
extra-territorial action, and a war without geographic boundaries is all too 
familiar. But on this topic our legal commentators arenigh on silent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/search?q=%22targeted+killing%22&section=law>. With 
a few notableexceptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/sep/30/anwar-awlaki-extrajudicial-murder>
, the tactic has gone largely without discussion in popular or academic legal 
commentary. Al-Awlaki's killing was much-reported but little-debated. There are 
at least two possible explanations for this. First, Obama is a far more popular 
figure in Europe than his predecessor ever was. Those who regard him as the 
best American president we could hope for may be slow to criticise. Second, 
European states might be viewed as less complicit in the use of targeted 
killing than they were in, say, extraordinary rendition to Guantanamo Bay. It 
is, we might hope, someone else's problem.

These are not convincing excuses to turn a blind eye. Obama may be more 
respectful of international law, but he should not be afforded carte blanche in 
pursuing al-Qaida. And European observers cannot be complacent about possible 
European complicity. Europe's role in illegal detention, extraordinary 
rendition and torture was not immediately clear, but the evidence that emerged 
over time was damning. Targeted killing raises questions about international 
law and the laws of war and, after al-Awlaki, about the fundamentals of 
constitutional government. The practice does not stop at the Atlantic shore. 
Neither should the debate on its lawfulness.
 