
EasyJet enjoyed a big rise in passenger numbers in December as Britons put 
asideconcerns about the falling pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
 to seek out winter sun in the Canaries or Spain. European city breaks were 
also popular in the run-up to Christmas.

The budget airline flew nearly 5.6 million passengers last month, 731,720 more 
than a year earlier – a 15.1% rise. This took the number of passengers 
transported in 2016 to 74.5 million, up 6.6% on the previous year.

Lower fares have helped, with easyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> cutting prices by about 6% in 
each of the past two years, passing on lower fuel costs in the wake of the oil 
price slump. Fuel makes up a third of the airline’s overall costs. It has also 
increased capacity by adding 17 planes since 2015, taking the total to 260 in 
December.

Traffic to Mediterranean beach destinations rose by nearly a quarter, as Brits 
headed to Tenerife, Lanzarote and Malaga, as well as taking a new route to La 
Palma.

EasyJet profits fall due to weak pound and discount fares
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/easyjet-profits-fall-due-to-weak-pound-and-discount-flights>
Figures from Gatwick, also released on Friday, painted a similar picture. 
Britain’s second largest airport said 43 million people travelled through it 
last year – a new record. The airport recorded 3.1 million passengers in 
December, 15% more than a year earlier.

The airport operator said there was a clear split in December, with travellers 
opting for either very cold or very hot climes. Popular wintry destinations 
included Finland and Iceland, while winter sun was sought in La Palma, the 
Canary Islands, St Lucia and Providenciales in the Turks and Caicos Islands.

EasyJet said passengers also flocked to cities across Europe in the run-up to 
Christmas, with a year-on-year increase of 15% in December. Among the most 
popular destinations were London, Amsterdam, Paris, Geneva and Milan. Many 
Brits also flew home for Christmas, with travel within the UK increasing by 16% 
year on year.

EasyJet vows to recruit more female pilots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/easyjet-female-pilots-amy-johnson-initiative>
This comes as welcome news for the airline, which had a rough ride over the 
year as a whole.EasyJet recorded a sharp fall in annual profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/easyjet-profits-fall-due-to-weak-pound-and-discount-flights>
 – its first decline in six years – after being hit by the slide in sterling, 
multiple terrorist attacks and airport strikes. It expects a further drop this 
year.

Its rival Ryanair also recorded strong growth in passenger numbers in 
December: earlier this week it reported a 20% rise to 9 million customers. The 
Irish carrier transported 117 million people last year, up 15% on 2015.

Analysts at Liberum said the December figures were boosted by a weak period in 
2015: “Strong figures at first glance, but against a depressed comparative that 
was impacted by the closure of Sharm el-Sheikh and the aftermath of the Paris 
attacks.”

Long-haul travel is booming, according to Gatwick, growing nearly 27% last 
month. Toronto airport saw the biggest increase in passenger numbers in 2016, 
at 97%, as holidaymakersfollowed in Prince Harry’s footsteps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/prince-harry-britain-race-royals>
. Belfast International was also popular, with an 83% jump in passenger numbers 
last year. Gatwick credited the “Game of Thrones effect” as tourists travelled 
to Northern Irelandto visit locations for the TV series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/game-of-thrones-international-success-story-crafted-in-belfast-shipyards>
.

 