
When Hollywood powerhouse Disney cast Bill Murray, Christopher Walken, Idris 
Elba and Ben Kingsley in its forthcoming remake of The Jungle Book, not to 
mention Oscar-winner Lupita Nyong'o and Avengers star Scarlett Johansson, the 
studio most likely expected the makers of a proposed rival version to blink and 
down tools. Now it appears the studio may have not quite realised who they were 
dealing with, after Britain's Andy Serkis named a cavalcade of A-list stars, 
including Christian Bale, Cate Blanchett, Naomie Harris andBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>, on his team for the 
upcoming The Jungle Book: Origins, which is being backed by rival firm Warner 
Bros.

Serkis, who is making his directing debut on the The Jungle Book: Origins 
after cutting his teeth as second unit director on Peter Jackson'sHobbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/12/hobbit-desolation-of-smaug-review>
 trilogy, will voice Baloo the bear in the Rudyard Kipling adaptation,according 
to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/christian-bale-cate-blanchett-join-726475>
, with fellow Britons Peter Mullan and Eddie Marsan having also joined the 
cast. Disney's version is set for release in October 2015, while Serkis's will 
debut a year later on 21 October 2016.

Bale, who has not taken on a voice role since working on the English-language 
version of Studio Ghibli'sHowl's Moving Castle 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0347149/> in 2004, will portray Bagheera the 
panther for Warner Bros.Cumberbatch was previously announced as the villainous 
tiger Shere Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/20/benedict-cumberbatch-shere-khan-to-battle-idris-elbas-rival-moggy>
, and Blanchett will voice the nefarious python Kaa. Harris, Marsan and Mullan 
are members of the wolf pack that adopts "mancub" Mowgli, with the boy himself 
played by the US child actor Rohan Chand.

Both new films appear to be based largely on the chapter Mowgli's Brothers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mowgli%27s_Brothers> in Kipling's 1894 
collection, which has traditionally been used as the source material for a 
number of Hollywood adaptations over the years. Disney's version, from theIron 
Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man> director, Jon Favreau, stars 
Murray as Baloo, Elba as Shere Khan, Walken as King Louie the ape, Kingsley as 
Bagheera, Johansson as Kaa, Nyong'o as the mother wolf Raksha and Breaking 
Bad's Giancarlo Esposito as wolf-pack leader Akela.

Serkis's version is expected to be a darker take, and will feature 
motion-capture CGI as well as live action. Favreau's film will also combine CGI 
and live action, with 10-year-old New Yorker Neel Sethi the only actor set to 
appear on screen as Mowgli.
 