
An assured performance, in testing conditions, by Danny Cipriani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-cipriani>, the 20-year-old fly-half 
who surely has a stellar international career in front of him, helped Wasps to 
advance to the semi-finals of the EDF Energy Cup with a minimum of fuss at 
Adams Park. And all that against Jonny Wilkinson, the current England No 10 and 
all-round general hero, who was making his first appearance since the World Cup 
final following the ankle injury he suffered earlier in that tournament.

The Newcastle stand-off emerged unscathed against the reigning European 
champions and tackled with characteristic courage. That said, he had precious 
little chance to put his stamp on an increasingly staccato contest thatWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>, who played with the wind 
behind them in the first period, had all but wrapped up by the interval.

Cipriani, who was successful with five of his six shots at goal, also kicked 
proficiently out of hand and showed some decent touches with the ball in hand, 
too, though it never developed into the sort of open game in which he could 
showcase his undoubted running and passing talents. All in all, though, it was 
a job well done by Cipriani and by Wasps.

'Danny Cipriani did well and he did what needed to be done,' said Wilkinson. 
'I spent time with him in the World Cup warm-up period and he demonstrated then 
that he is keen to learn and that he has a great deal of talent. He has speed 
and agility, as well as the ability to control a game, and he has years ahead 
of him to develop.

'As for me, it is great to be back. I felt good out there, although we perhaps 
need to learn to play more effectively in such conditions.'

As well as the return of Wilkinson and Toby Flood, there was also a Newcastle 
debut for New Zealander Carl Hayman, the finest tighthead prop in the world. 
The 28-year-old All Black, who came on as a half-time replacement, has signed a 
two-and-a-half-year contract that is reputedly worth Â£1m, which may just turn 
out to be a steal for Newcastle.

A man who enjoys deerstalking and fishing, Hayman has been spending time 
docking lambs' tails at the Otago farm of Andrew Hore, the New Zealand hooker, 
since the World Cup. To suggest Newcastle were lambs to the slaughter here 
would not be true. But Wasps were never in the remotest danger of finishing 
second best after two penalty goals by Cipriani and a brace of tries gave the 
home side an 18-0 lead with barely half an hour elapsed. And a deserved lead it 
was, too.

With Wasps, for whom James Haskell was an omnipotent force, dominant up front 
and with Cipriani keeping Newcastle firmly on the back foot with some searching 
kicks out of hand - and with both feet, too - it seemed only a question of time 
before the Falcons' line was breached.

And so it proved when Eoin Reddan, who was a livewire throughout, picked up a 
loose ball 40 metres out and touched down in the left-hand corner after 
effecting a delightful chip over Tom May.

The scoreline became 18-0 when Wasps were awarded a penalty try - and quite 
rightly - after Newcastle, who had just had prop Jon Golding sent to the 
cooler, were penalised for collapsing a five-metre scrum, the fourth successive 
time they had done so, as they were being shoved back towards their line at a 
rate of knots.

Tim Payne, the Wasps loosehead, was penalised for driving in on the angle at 
the first scrum after the break. Wilkinson slotted that penalty and another one 
shortly afterwards to reduce Wasps' lead to 18-6, but the deficit was simply 
too much to make up, though the Falcons - who enjoyed more of the possession in 
the second period - might have opted to kick for the posts on a couple of 
occasions rather than kicking to the corner.

Cipriani added two more penalties - both cleanly struck into the wind - to 
extinguish any lingering hopes of victory Newcastle may have entertained.

Adams Park 7,490

WASPS Van Gisbergen; Sackey (Lewsey 71), Waters, Flutey, Voyce; Cipriani, 
Reddan (Amor 75); Payne, Ward (Webber 75), Vickery, Shaw (Birkett 71), 
Skivington, Hart (Leo 80), Haskell, Dallaglio (capt)

Tries Reddan, penalty Con Cipriani Pens Cipriani 4

NEWCASTLE M Tait; May, Noon, Flood, Rudd (Visser 64); Wilkinson, Grindal 
(Dickson 60); Golding (McDonnell 55), Thompson (Long 47), D Wilson (Hayman 
h-t), Perry (B Wilson 65), Sorenson, Parling, Woods, Dowson (capt)

Pens Wilkinson 2

Referee M Changleng (Sco)
 