
Utrecht 

by Dixe Wills 

'It's 465 steps and 112m up, so those of you with a heart condition had better 
say so now." Rosa, our guide up the Dom, is only half joking. However, it's the 
view from the top of the country's tallest church tower that's the real 
heart-stopper: thousands of tiny black roofs rippling out to the surrounding 
plains of a distant horizon.

The roofs belong to Utrecht, a city largely undiscovered by tourists, 
doubtless because it has no airport. It turns out it's not in Germany either, 
as I used to think, but slap bang in the centre of Holland. Ingmar Heytze 
laughs resignedly when I make my geographical confession. We're at café Sector 
3, devouring a delicious triple-decked pyramid of sweetmeats and pastries while 
he embarks on an oral tour of his native city. It's like listening to Betjeman 
on Cornwall only Ingmar, like Utrecht, is cool - he's young, he's in black, and 
he's the only poet in Holland with a weekly verse in a national newspaper. He 
also loves the place: "I haven't been out of Utrecht for longer than six weeks 
the whole of my life."

My girlfriend and I are soon off exploring, grasping a list I'd made of 
Ingmar's favourite places. We begin in the old town, a vast area inside a 
medieval canal which once also served as the city's moat. We've come to seek 
out Ingmar's first choice: the cellars. Built as extended basements to join 
grand houses to the canalside, the cellars form their own 
not-quite-subterranean domain on the towpath 20ft below street level and are 
unique to Utrecht. We leapt on board a sightseeing boat and for the next hour 
drifted past cellar restaurants, cellar bars, arty cellar shops, a cellar gym 
and even a cellar theatre.

This recycling of buildings is evidently a popular local pastime. Holland's 
first department store, the gloriously monikered Winkel van Sinkel, is now a 
sumptuous cafe-bar; the water tower a museum; the Courts of Justice a swish 
hotel. The police station has been reborn as an arthouse cinema, the Louis 
Hartlooper, and boasts a funky cafe we both rather took to, which is "outside 
but inside".

We were very much inside the leftbank-esque Café Orloff before we realised it 
was another Ingmar must see. It's here that Dick Bruna, the 81-year-old creator 
of Miffy, takes his coffee each morning before cycling to his studio. Too late 
to bag the moustached genius himself, we consoled ourselves with two hot 
chocolates topped with whipped cream and a visit to the nearby museum dedicated 
to his work. A wonderful evocation of the world of Miffy and her friends, 
almost everything at the Dick Bruna Huis is at child's eye-level, just as it 
should be.

"But while you're here you must visit the university," Ingmar had told us. 
Utrecht is Holland's number one college town. The 28,000 students, every one of 
them on a sit-up-and-beg bicycle, give the city a restless vitality and their 
modern campus, a 10-minute bus ride away, is quite extraordinary. Suffice to 
say it's the first time I have ever gasped at halls of residence (an 
astonishing Rubik's Cube affair) or been lost in wonder inside a library.

Our hotel, by contrast, gave us a cosy taste of what it's like to live in one 
of the city's elegant 19th-century houses. Marc and Ruard took over De Admiraal 
earlier in the year and are fast putting their eco-artistic stamp on the place. 
Very civilly, they also invite their guests to have drinks with them on the 
house each evening at six. Afterwards, we sat on our balcony admiring their 
lovely art-strewn garden running down to a tastefully overgrown sliver of canal.

We found ourselves captivated by more of Ingmar's choices in this distinctly 
magical realist city: the garden behind the University Museum where 
preternaturally huge Amazonian waterlilies loll about in ponds; the 
Moroccan/Turkish quarter where the streets flow with exotic fruit; the Rietveld 
Schröder house - a Mondrian painting in 3D, complete with sliding walls; the 
post office built to resemble a cathedral; and the frankly unbelievable 
stainless steel house - we just stood and gawped. And gawped.

However, it was the evening strolls back to our hotel that topped everything. 
Discarding the map, we let ourselves be taken wherever sparkling waterways, 
cobbled streets or tree-filled parks led us, following the advice in Ingmar's 
own guide, Utrecht for Beginners: "Pick a gentle night/Walk along the canals 
and watch/How the light dissolves into the houses."

·  Stena Line's Dutchflyer (08705 707070, stenaline.co.uk 
<http://www.stenaline.co.uk/ferry/rail-and-sail>) £29 single from any National 
Express station in East Anglia or London Liverpool Street to any station in 
Holland (via Harwich/Hoek van Holland ferry). Hotel De Admiraal (0031 30 275 
8500,hoteldeadmiraal.nl <http://www.hoteldeadmiraal.nl>) doubles from €105 room 
only. Boat Tour (+30 272 0111,schuttevaer.com <http://www.schuttevaer.com>) 
adult €7.60, child €5.90. Dick Bruna Huis (+30 236 2392,dickbrunahuis.com 
<http://www.dickbrunahuis.com>) adult €8, child (13-17) €6, (1-12) €2. For 
walking tours ask for Ingeborg Behari (+30 236 0000,utrechtyourway.nl 
<http://www.utrechtyourway.nl>).

Santiago 

Nicolàs del Río, architect

Since the end of the dictatorship there has been a real cultural awakening; 
restaurants and bars have multiplied and the historic Bellavista neighbourhood 
is busy every night of the week. Try Etniko for a taste of the new, or for a 
Santiago institution go to Venezia, Pablo Neruda's old haunt.

• Etniko, Constitución 172 (0056 2 732 0119); Venezia, Pío Nono 200 (+2 737 
0900).

Stay at Vilafranca Petit Hotel Pérez Valenzuela 1650, Providencia (+2 235 14 
13,vilafranca.cl <http://www.vilafranca.cl>) doubles €80.

Hiroshima 

Tomoko Nishizaki, film producer

Because of its tragic history, Hiroshima's people are more interested in the 
rest of the world and are often committed to international causes in a way that 
is unlike the rest of Japan. This doesn't just mean the Peace Park and the 
A-Bomb Dome, but also in people's friendliness to visitors. It is a city of 
water, crossed by six rivers and blessed by the Seto Inland Sea. Visitors 
should try okonomiyaki, a vegetable, meat, egg and noodle pancake served from 
tiny restaurants all over the city.

• Okonomiyaki Village (28 restaurants in one building), 5-13 Shintenchi, 
Naka-ku.

Stay at Regalo, 9-2 Hashimoto-cho, (0081 82 224 6300, regalo-h.com 
<http://www.regalo-h.com>) doubles from ¥9,500. 

Sofia 

Magdalena Rahn, features editor of English-language paper the Sofia Echo

Drinking wine under the peeling cupolas of the old Byuyuk mosque, now a museum 
with a bar; or the three hours spent over an afternoon coffee at Opera, one of 
the numerous cafes that dot the tree-lined streets; or the hours around the 
table drinking the local brandy, rakiya, and eating mezze in traditional 
restaurants like Vagabond; or posing in fashionable new spots like Motto - what 
the city is all about is spending time with people, your own friends, or those 
you meet along the way.

• Motto, 18 Aksakov St (00359 2 987 2723, motto-bg.com 
<http://www.motto-bg.com>) Vagabond, 5 Svetoslav Terter St (+2 944 1465). 
Opera, 113 Rakovski St (+2 988 2141).

Stay at Scotty's Boutique Hotel, 11 Ekzarh Yosef (+2 938 6777) doubles from 
€55.

Bucharest 

Cristina Racaru, furniture designer

Night falls over Bucharest to the accompaniment of belting rhythms and a 
social scene that has exploded in the last few years. Bars and clubs crowd the 
old quarter, Lipscani, while the Calea Victoriei Boulevard is the heart of a 
jazz scene and there are great, unpretentious bars near the University like 
Cafeneaua Actorilor. Come also for romantic architecture. After decades of 
neglect, the neoclassical and art nouveau buildings are being renovated. And 
there are plenty of grandiose edifices from the Communist era to marvel at.

• Cafeneaua Actorilor, Blvd Nicolae Bãlcescu 2, (0040 21 900 842, 
cafeneauaactorilor.ro <http://www.cafeneauaactorilor.ro>).

Stay at Hotel Opera, 37 Brezoianu St (+21 312 48 55, hotelopera.ro 
<http://www.hotelopera.ro>) doubles €120.

Helsinki 

Johan Eriksson, documentary film-maker

Until 15 years ago Helsinki was a tough, industrial city with smoky beer 
halls, usually with heavy-handed bouncers on the doors. Affluence has since 
brought every imaginable international cuisine and level of entertainment, from 
heavy-metal karaoke bars in boho Kallio to the beautiful people-filled lounges 
of Erottajankatu Street and several Michelin-starred restaurants. The live 
music and club scene is thriving, and you can sample both at the Kuudes Linja, 
a relative newcomer that's really taken off. Traditional enjoyments include 
saunas, the coastline and islands in the summer, Christmas markets and 
seriously heavy meat pastries taken with coffee on winter mornings.

• Kuudes Linja, Hämeentie 13 (kuudeslinja.com <http://www.kuudeslinja.com>).

Stay at Hotel Helka, Pohjoinen Rautatiekatu 23 (00358 9 613 580, helka.fi 
<http://www.helka.fi>) doubles from €120.

Belgrade

Viktor Markovic, runs the website Belgraded.com <http://www.Belgraded.com>

Take the cheapest tourist trip in the world - tram number two circles around 
the city centre, and the ticket costs around 30p. Also - find one of the 
"hidden" cafes: the Globetrotter's Association or Idiot, would be good options. 
Pay a visit to Kuca Cveca (the House of Flowers), the monument and the last 
resting place of Josip Broz Tito. Restauran Dacho could be classified as the 
only tourist trap in Belgrade, but a lot of locals go there as well, because of 
the food. In the evening, head for a raft - Povetarac is currently the coolest 
- on one of the rivers.

• Restauran Dacho, Patrisa Lumumbe 49 (00381 11 2782 422). The Globetrotter's 
Association, 7 Despota Stefana Blvd. Idiot, 13 Dalmatinska St.

Stay at Hotel Admiral Club, Venizelosova 31 (+11 30 38 260, hacb.co.yu 
<http://www.hacb.co.yu>) doubles from €154.

Almaty 

Kris Gray, English teacher and blogger 

Blame Borat, but tourists are starting to come to Kazakhstan. There's been a 
real boom in new clubs and bars and British DJs have played at glamorous 
lounges like Di Wang and Crystal, while the more down to earth go to Da Freak. 
It's a young city, filled with students and friendly cafes, like Coffedelia on 
the corner of Tulebaeva and Kabanbai Batir. All around are incredible 
mountains. In the summer everyone hikes and picnics, while in winter we go 
skiing and there are lots of parties in the mountains. Despite the oil-boom and 
advancing modernity, Kazakh culture still puts great importance on hospitality, 
so the people are incredibly friendly.

• Di Wang, 75 Zhambul St, corner of Tchaikovsky St (007 727 272 3810. Da 
Freak, 40 Gogol (+327 273 1337).

Stay at Hotel Kazakhstan, 52 Dostyk Ave, (+327 291 9101; hotel-kazakhstan.kz 
<http://www.hotel-kazakhstan.kz>) doubles from €97.

Antwerp

Hettie Judah, design writer

Most of the cutting edge fashion stores are strung along Nationalestraat. Look 
out for the smoked-glass front of recently opened Sien - it stocks directional 
works by buzz designers like Proenza Schouler or Bruno Pieters. For serious 
customers they'll stage a private catwalk show. If all the style gets too much, 
slink off to bohemian locals' favourite Caffenation.

• Sien, 91-95 Nationalestraat, (0032 3 232 6226), Caffenation, 64 Hopland. 

Stay at Hotel Julien (+3 229 0600, hotel-julien.com 
<http://www.hotel-julien.com>) doubles from €165. 

Hamburg

Jeroen van Marle, editor of Hamburg In Your Pocket

The Beatles did their first recordings in Hamburg's notorious Reeperbahn area, 
and it's still a fun place to wander around, visiting cocktail bars like La 
Paloma or concerts at Grosse Freiheit 36. Head straight from the clubs to the 
fish market for an early morning snack of smoked eel, then learn more about 
Hamburg harbour at the brand new Maritime Museum, set in a massive 1880s 
warehouse complex.

• La Paloma, Friedrichstr 11, (0049 4031 4512). Grosse Freiheit 36, Grosse 
Freiheit 36 (+4031 777 811,grossefreiheit36.de <http://www.grossefreiheit36.de>
). Fish market, Grosse Elbstrasse 137. Maritime Museum, Koreastrasse 1, (+4030 
092 300,internationales-maritimes-museum.de 
<http://www.internationales-maritimes-museum.de>). 

Stay at Galerie Hotel Sarah Petersen (+49 4024 9826, 
galerie-hotel-sarah-petersen.de <http://www.galerie-hotel-sarah-petersen.de>), 
doubles from €98.
 