
Aim

"To make provision 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2004/ukpga_20040036_en_1#Legislation-Preamble> 
about civil contingencies."

Main provisions

• Requires local and regional authorities to design detailed plans 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/Corporation/LGNL_Services/Advice_and_benefits/Emergencies/Civil+emergencies+-+emergency+plan.htm>
 for dealing with an emergency.
• Imposes a duty to cooperate and share information on all organisations 
classified asCategory 1 responders 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/Corporation/LGNL_Services/Advice_and_benefits/Emergencies/Civil+emergencies+-+the+Civil+Contingencies+Act.htm>
 (emergency services, local authorities and NHS bodies) and obliges other local 
bodies described as Category 2 responders (the Health and Safety Executive, 
transport and utility companies) to cooperate with regards to emergency 
preparedness and response.
• Grants ministers wide-ranging powers 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2004/ukpga_20040036_en_3#pt2-l1g22> during an 
emergency, including the right to amend any act of parliamentexcept  
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2004/ukpga_20040036_en_3#pt2-l1g23> the Human 
Rights Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/14/human-rights-act>
. These amendments only last for 21 days.
• Includes a "triple lock guarantee" to ensure the powers are only evoked in a 
genuine emergency. Ministers must be sure the situation presents a serious 
threat to the United Kingdom's human welfare, environment or security, they 
must show emergency regulations are necessary and their response must be 
proportionate.
• Limits the use of emergency powers to 30 days.

Background

Even prior to the events of 11 September 2001, the government had signalled 
that it intended to overhaul Britain's outdated national emergency planning 
system. The new act was designed to create a modern civil defence framework and 
respond to MPs' criticism that Britain's emergency serviceslacked the 
capabilities 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/uk-could-not-cope-with-terrorist-attack--mps-649311.html>
 and resources to cope with a major terrorist attack. The Cabinet Office 
website describes the act "as delivering a single framework 
<http://www.ukresilience.gov.uk/preparedness/ccact.aspx> for civil protection 
in the United Kingdom capable of meeting the challenges of the twenty-first 
century".

The act is separated into two key parts: local arrangements for civil 
protection (part 1) and emergency powers (part 2). In the event of a natural 
disaster or terrorist attack, part 2 allows the government to deploy the armed 
services, ban public assembly, impose travel restrictions, force evacuations 
and prevent public access to sensitive areas.

The government's draft bill received heavy criticism 
<http://nds.coi.gov.uk/content/detail.asp?ReleaseID=58422&NewsAreaID=2&NavigatedFromSearch=True>
 for its broad definition of what would constitute an emergency, it included 
any event that "presents a serious threat to human welfare, the environment, 
political, administrative, or economic stability, and the security of the UK or 
part of it". MPs pointed out this could include many eventsroutinely dealt with 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt200203/jtselect/jtdcc/184/18411.htm>
 by emergency services and the definition was later tightened to strengthen the 
"triple-lock guarantee 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200304/cmhansrd/vo041117/debtext/41117-07.htm>
".

The government rejected calls from opposition MPs for part 2 of the Bill to 
include a sunset clause (a clause that repeals legislation at a specified date 
unless action is taken to renew it) on the basis that "emergency regulations 
contain 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200304/cmhansrd/vo041117/debtext/41117-08.htm>
 their own sunset clause: they lapse in 30 days".

Criticism

Opposition MPs claimed the act had insufficient safeguards. In particular, 
they noted the lack of sanctions if the declaration of an emergency is 
misjudged or wrong. The Commons rejected an attempt by the Lords to pass an 
amendment protecting seven additional pieces of "constitutionally important 
legislation <http://www.theyworkforyou.com/lords/?id=2004-11-16a.1319.5>" 
(including habeas corpus) from emergency powers.

Civil liberties groups expressed concerns that the act could be used in the 
future by a government with malign intent. Tony Bunyan, editor ofStatewatch 
<http://www.statewatch.org>, described the powers as truly draconian. He said: "
Cities could be sealed off 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2004/jan/07/politics.terrorism>, travel bans 
introduced, all phones cut off, and websites shut down. Demonstrations could be 
banned and the news media made subject to censorship. New offences against the 
state could be 'created' by government decree.

"This is Britain's Patriot Act. At a stroke democracy could be replaced by 
totalitarianism."
 