
Clams Casino <https://soundcloud.com/clammyclams> doesn’t immediately strike 
you as one of hip-hop’s most in-demand producers.

Quiet, unassuming and equipped with a New Jersey accent that gives his words a 
no-nonsense brevity, Michael Volpe, sounds almost surprised when he recounts 
the tracks he’s created and the sound that they’ve inspired. As recently as 
2008 he was spamming rappers in a bid to get them to guest on one of his 
productions.

Clams Casino: 32 Levels review – sleepy, punch-drunk symphonies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/17/clams-casino-32-levels-review> 
“At that point I would send out 20 beats to every email address I had,” he 
says. “Whoever’s email I could get off MySpace or something I would finish a 
beat and send it to them.”

One artist who did use his productions was Lil B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/28/rapper-lil-b-apologises-making-transphobic-twitter-joke>
, the Bay Area rapper who is also goes by the moniker Based God and who is 
known for his esoteric – or nonsense, depending on who you talk to – lyrics. At 
the start of this decade Volpe was making beats in his mom’s house in Nutley, 
New Jersey. He’d construct an instrumental hip-hop track, often laced with tape 
hiss and incongruous samples –Imogen Heap is his most famous muse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wWehZhzT8UM> – and then send his tracks out to 
artists such as Soulja Boy <https://www.theguardian.com/music/soulja-boy>, Mobb 
Deep’s Havoc and Lil B, not hearing from them again until the track – usually 
uncredited – would end up on the internet.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwWehZhzT8UM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwWehZhzT8UM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwWehZhzT8UM&media=>
Despite Lil B and Volpe working together on their best-known projects (I’m 
God, is the pair’s biggest hit) they only met in person while working on 
Volpe’s new album,32 Levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/17/clams-casino-32-levels-review>.

“That was the first time we met and hung out in person,” says Volpe. “We 
started working online in 2008, it’s almost 10 years. I’d done three shows with 
him before that but we’d never meet properly at the shows. He’d come in and 
we’d meet in the hallway or something and just say hi. He was just in and out.”

Despite the lack of IRL connections, the pair’s lo-fi spaced-out productions 
earned the sound the moniker “cloud rap 
<http://www.highsnobiety.com/2015/06/25/cloud-rap-yung-lean-lil-b/>” and they 
were bundled together with the likes of early 10s rap tearawaysWolf Gang 
<http://wolf-gang.co.uk/> and Main Attrakionz 
<https://soundcloud.com/808sanddarkgrapes3>, and presented as a core part of 
the scene that mostly existed on Tumblr pages and MySpace accounts.

Some of his contemporaries made the transition into bankable mainstream acts – 
Tyler, the Creator and Earl Sweatshirt, for example – while others have failed 
to download from the cloud. Clams Casino has managed to sit somewhere in the 
middle. Forward-thinking imprint Tri Angle put out an EP of instrumentals that 
repositioned Volpe as a kind of psych-hop outlier. That was backed by free MP3 
releases of his popular instrumentals on download site Mediafire, which made 
him known as an artist in his own right rather than just another unknown 
bedroom producer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4x2aJhsDLKo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4x2aJhsDLKo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4x2aJhsDLKo&media=>
He almost didn’t become a producer at all. Volpe’s profile as a producer began 
to rise at the same time he was studying for a physical therapy degree in New 
Jersey because his early music career wasn’t exactly what you’d call lucrative.

“I hadn’t made money until 2011 from music at all,” he says. “It was four 
years before I made any money. I remember getting paid $500 to do a remix and 
thinking ‘Oh shit!’, because I’d been doing stuff for years for nothing.”


Things changed after his self-released mixtape came out in March 2011, when 
combined with the success of the work he’d done with the then little known A$AP 
Rocky, he started getting serious offers.

Fast-forward five years and on his new album, Volpe has assembled a cast of 
familiar friends (A$AP Rocky, Lil B) and combined them with newer acquaintances 
(Vince Staples, Kelela). Perhaps the most intriguing is the album’s penultimate 
track featuring Future Islands frontmanSamuel T Herring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/nov/17/us-band-future-islands-conquer-258-headed-beast-of-a-world-tour>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQqna-NUal9Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQqna-NUal9Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQqna-NUal9Y&media=>
Volpe was connected to Herring via his manager, who signed Future Islands to 
4AD. They corresponded over email, then face to face.

“I could never have planned the song to come out like that,” he says. “The 
first thing I sent him was completely different, it was New Wave-y sounding, 
faster, synthy and really 80s sounding. I sent him three options and he came 
back with Ghost in a Kiss.”

“When I first heard it I was shocked and wasn’t ready for it,” he says. “I 
lived with it for a couple of weeks and then it hit me, but it took me a while. 
I didn’t get it at first. What usually happens to me happened in reverse that 
time.”
 