
It was probably the greatest scoop of modern times – a report that the Germans 
were massing tanks on the border withPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>, signalling the start of the second 
world war on 1 September 1939.

The report, pinpointing when and where the Germans were about to attack, was 
written by Clare Hollingworth in her first week as a journalist. Seventy-six 
years later, the formerdefence correspondent of the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/oct/10/clare-hollingworth-war-reporter-100>
 and the Daily Telegraph, a veteran of conflicts in Vietnam, Algeria, 
Palestine, China and across Europe, plans tocelebrate her 104th birthday 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PBZxpGDqpsQ(http://bit.ly/CelebrateClare104> 
on Saturday at what has become her second home, the Foreign Correspondents’ 
Club in Hong Kong. There is also aFacebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/celebrateclare> dedicated to her. 

Many of Hollingworth’s scoops involved spies and double agents. So accurate 
was her reporting that MI5 once suspected her of being a spy. One of her 
editors asked her if she was working for MI5 and the Poles accused her of being 
an agent forMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>.

One of her scoops, concerning the flight to Russia of Kim Philby, the “third 
man” in the Cambridge spy ring, was held by the then Guardian editor for three 
months.

From the archive, 4 July 1962: Algiers in frenzy of joy following independence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jul/04/archive-1962-algiers-algeria-independence>
But most of her scoops were the result of her determination to see for herself 
on the frontlines. Geoffrey Taylor’s Changing Faces: The History of the 
Guardian describes her covering the war in Algeria, “literally marching toward 
the sound of gunfire and regularly walking alone through the casbah”. She 
secured the release of the kidnappedDaily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> journalist John Wallis by 
leading the press corps to the hostage-takers. The OAS, an underground French 
group opposed to independence, realised they had bitten off more than they 
could chew, and released the reporter.

In a report from Saigon, dated 6 May 1965, that helped to influence the 
attitude of Harold Wilson’s Labour government as well as the Guardian editor’s, 
Hollingworth wrote: “Today, in spite of American bombing of targets in North
Vietnam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam> and the danger of the local 
struggle becoming a major war, there is a military stalemate … this stalemate 
could continue indefinitely.”


Colleagues from all corners of journalism rank her as one of the very best war 
correspondents. “It was one of my first assignments and I’d been sent to East 
Pakistan [now Bangladesh] … I’d never met her before. She was certainly scary. 
She didn’t suffer fools gladly. She didn’t show any sympathy to my 20-year-old 
naivety,” recalls the BBC’sJohn Humphrys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/john-humphrys>, adding that she had contacts 
everywhere, from generals to prime ministers.

Chris Patten, the former governor of Hong Kong, said: “Clare Hollingworth is 
certainly one of the most unforgettable journalists I have ever met and one of 
the greatest journalists of the 20th century ... She was honest, brave and 
hugely well informed. Her life is a paradigm of what great journalists should 
be all about.”

Charles Moore, the former editor of the Daily Telegraph, describes her as “one 
of the greatest reporters of the 20th century, a legend in journalism and a 
trailblazer for women reporters.”

John Simpson said: “Clare made an extraordinary impact in journalism.” The 
veteranBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> correspondent noted that she 
did the first interview with the Shah of Iran, and the last, after he fell.

In her world scoop from Poland just before the outbreak of war, Hollingworth 
described how as she was driving alongside a valley she saw a hessian screen 
that blocked the view.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fclare-hollingworth-doyenne-of-foreign-correspondents-turns-104%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e674f1349799d1b06687d60689a9f0bb724f10d%2F146_91_1152_1727%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clare%20Hollingworth%2C%20doyenne%20of%20foreign%20correspondents%2C%20turns%20104&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fclare-hollingworth-doyenne-of-foreign-correspondents-turns-104%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clare%20Hollingworth%2C%20doyenne%20of%20foreign%20correspondents%2C%20turns%20104&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Foct%2F08%2Fclare-hollingworth-doyenne-of-foreign-correspondents-turns-104%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e674f1349799d1b06687d60689a9f0bb724f10d%2F146_91_1152_1727%2F1152.jpg>
 The spy Kim Philby in 1961. Hollingworth broke the story of his defection to 
the USSR, though the Guardian didn’t run it for three months. Photograph: Jane 
Bown for the Observer 
“Suddenly there was a great gust of wind which blew the hessian sacking from 
its moorings,” she reported. She looked down into the valley and saw for the 
first time “scores, if not hundreds of tanks”.

Hollingworth called her friend Robin Hankey, second secretary at the British 
embassy in Warsaw. “Robin”, she began. “The war’s begun!” Hankey told her she 
was talking rubbish as the two governments were still negotiating. She is said 
to have held the phone out of the window so Hankey could hear the sound of 
battle for himself.

“1,000 tanks massed on Polish border, Ten divisions reported ready for swift 
stroke”, screamed the Telegraph headline above her story on 29 August 1939.


In a role that earned her the sobriquet “the Scarlet Pimpernel”, she had 
already helped to rescue 3,000 people from the Polish city of Katowice, where 
the British consul-general was an old friend.

She had a knack of knowing the right people. Her neighbours when she lived in 
Cairo with her husband, Geoffrey Hoare, were the Cambridge spy Donald Maclean 
and his wife, Melinda – an acquaintance that proved invaluable when he defected 
to Moscow.

One of her greatest scoops concerned Philby. She and Philby were working 
together in Beirut – she for the Guardian, he for the Observer – when he 
disappeared in January 1963. After exhaustive detective work, she was quite 
certain Philby had boarded a Soviet ship in the harbour. She immediately filed 
the story for the Guardian. The editor, Alastair Hetherington, held the story 
on the grounds, he said, that if it was untrue, the newspaper could face 
“colossal” libel damages.

It was not until late April, when she was in the London office and 
Hetherington was away, that she finally persuaded a deputy editor to run the 
piece. It was buried on page seven, under the headline: “Riddle of Philby’s 
disappearance – Journalist missing 3 months”.

The story caused a sensation, notably in Fleet Street. “For the first time in 
history,” the veteran journalist William “Trilby” Ewer told her, “the Daily 
Express is leading with what the Guardian said yesterday.” Soon afterwards the 
government admitted that it believed Philby had indeed fled to Russia.



 