
The stresses of clearing are well documented. Of the 300,000 students who 
received their exam results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/aug/15/elite-universities-compete-student-fees-clearing>
 last week, those who got lower or higher grades than predicted were suddenly 
having to make some of the most important decisions of their life – and quickly.

It can be a hugely trying period for students and parents. A poll by the 
consumer watchdog Which? showed that20% of students going through clearing feel 
unsupported and alone <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-23680618>. And recent
research by the Girls' Schools Association 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-23680618> highlighted that parents are not 
always in the best position to advise and guide students through the clearing 
process.

It falls to admissions staff at higher education institutions to face the full 
force of the stresses involved. And with increasing numbers of students and 
institutions taking part, 2013 has been a more unpredictable year than most. 
The University of Birminghamreported 4,500 calls in two hours of clearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/aug/15/elite-universities-compete-student-fees-clearing>
 on Thursday morning. The University of Exeter received3,000 calls in the first 
hour alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/aug/15/elite-universities-compete-student-fees-clearing>
.

Given this demand, many admissions staff newly recruited to the process had to 
provide guidance and support to young people making high stakes decisions at a 
vulnerable point in their lives. The introduction of 'adjustment' heaped on 
further pressure – more than 115,000 students who achieved ABB grades had the 
option of trading up to a more prestigious university or more competitive 
course.

Universities are desperate to attract the best talent and the pressure to do 
so is piled on to admissions staff. This year at Recourse, a charity providing
practical and emotional support <http://www.recourse.org.uk/about-us> for 
further and higher education staff, we saw the highest number of calls ever 
related to exam results and clearing. Some callers said they felt anxious and 
stressed; others were suffering from depression. The overall picture that 
emerged was of admission teams unable to do their job properly.

For students, clearing can feel like the last chance to access the education 
and future they had always hoped for themselves. This can create irrational 
behaviour, with equally stressed parents who want the best for their children 
making demands and even threatening violence. Too many, admissions tutors are 
unprepared and unsupported in dealing with this barrage of emotion.

One admissions administrator called Recourse for support after an aggressive 
call. "Some parents upset with the grades their children receive can become 
very confrontational," she reported. "You can see a blame scenario emerging." 
Handling distraught students and disgruntled parents requires specialist 
training – unsurprising, then, that without it so many admissions staff are 
reporting stress.

Institutions would be able to alleviate this stress if they provided adequate 
safeguards for staff. This might include supervision by colleagues during tough 
calls or improving the availability of counselling and respite services. The 
opportunity to have a short call with a trained clinician can help staff to 
rationalise and normalise a tough call, find their own solutions and carry on 
with their work.

Workloads have increased and many admissions staff are working significantly 
longer hours than before. Another tutor called Recourse complaining that her 
workload had increased so rapidly and in such a changing situation that she 
felt unable to cope. The senior staff who could support their colleagues 
through these challenging circumstances are under pressure themselves.

The solution is simple: it lies in greater support for admissions staff. But 
this is not the sort of thing that can be done on the hoof during a few weeks 
in August. Institutions need to put a framework in place much earlier in the 
year to ensure that staff are properly looked after and given the training they 
need. That framework need not be rocket science: for example, limits on hours 
worked; ensuring proper breaks; and setting aside time to discuss problems with 
a line manager.

Clearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> is an essential part 
of university admissions. It is also a significant part of a student's academic 
journey. Currently, staff are having to paper over the cracks in the road. It 
is essential that we recognise the stresses faced by admissions staff at 
universities and colleges in Britain, and equip them with the right skills and 
support they need for next year. It's not just their future that depends on it.

Angela Roger is chair of trustees at the Teacher Support Network 
<http://www.teachersupport.info/> and Recourse <http://www.recourse.org.uk/> – 
follow it on Twitter@RecourseCharity <https://twitter.com/RecourseCharity>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 