
At the grand age of 85, Clint Eastwood finds himself the hottest director in 
Hollywood, following the barnstorming box-office success of Iraq war drama
American Sniper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>. Now the 
Oscar-winning film-maker has revealedhis next movie 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/clint-eastwoods-next-movie-revealed-799151>
 will tell the story of another all-American hero: veteran pilotCaptain Chesley 
“Sully” Sullenberger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/17/hudson-plane-crash-pilot-sullenberger>
.

Sullenberger piloted US Airways Flight 1549 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hudson-river-plane-crash> into the Hudson 
river on 15 January 2009, saving the lives of all 155 passengers and crew on 
board. The Airbus A320 had hit a flock of Canada geese during its climb out of 
nearby LaGuardia airport in Queens, New York.

Titled Miracle on the Hudson, Eastwood’s film will be based on Sullenberger’s 
New York Times bestselling memoir Highest Duty: My Search for What Really 
Matters, which was optioned by producers Frank Marshall and Allyn Stewart of 
Flashlight Films in 2010.Perfect Stranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/13/thriller> writer Todd Komarnicki 
is adapting the screenplay.

Pilot tells of crash-landing as plane pulled from Hudson river
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/18/new-york-plane-crash-salvage> 
“I am very glad my story is in the hands of gifted storyteller and film-maker 
Clint Eastwood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/clinteastwood>, and veteran 
producers Allyn Stewart and Frank Marshall,” Sullenberger, 64, told the 
Hollywood Reporter in a statement. “The project could not have found a better 
home than Warner Bros Pictures. This is truly a dream team.”

Sullenberger was dubbed “Captain Cool” by the then New York City mayor Michael 
Bloomberg, following the famous water landing, which Sullenberger performed 
after he realised there was no chance of reaching LaGuardia or another airport. 
He retired from flight duty the following year, but was later hired by CBS as 
an aviation and safety news expert, and moved into public speaking on the 
international stage. Sullenberger was ranked second on Time‍’s Top 100 most 
influential heroes and icons of 2009 list.

Eastwood is the toast of Hollywood after American Sniper took more than $543m 
worldwide and became thetop-grossing film of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/american-sniper-biggest-film-of-2014-us-box-office>
 at the US box office, beating big-budget action epics such as The Hunger 
Games: Mockingjay, Part 1, Guardians of the Galaxy and Captain America: The 
Winter Soldier. Starring Bradley Cooper as US Navy Seal Chris Kyle, the film 
also received six Oscar nominations and glowing reviews, despitevilification  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/06/real-american-sniper-hate-filled-killer-why-patriots-calling-hero-chris-kyle>
from some commentators for its depiction of the sniper’s deadly work in Iraq.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Famerican-sniper-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421410513658%2Fcrop_KP-69693_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Sniper%3A%20'Clean%20Harry.%20Like%20Dirty%20Harry%2C%20but%20boring'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Famerican-sniper-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Sniper%3A%20%27Clean%20Harry.%20Like%20Dirty%20Harry%2C%20but%20boring%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Famerican-sniper-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421410513658%2Fcrop_KP-69693_640.jpeg>
 American Sniper: ‘Clean Harry. Like Dirty Harry, but boring’ – video review 
Signing on to Miracle on the Hudson means Eastwood is now unlikely to take up 
his option to direct Jonah Hill in the story of heroic security guard Richard 
Jewell,as announced in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/02/clint-eastwood-leonardo-dicaprio-jonah-hill-olympic-bomb-plot>
. Jewell foiled a bomb attempt at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, but later came 
under police suspicion and suffered an invasive trial by media that left his 
life in ruins.

The Hollywood Reporter suggests that difficulties tying Eastwood’s regular 
studio Warner Bros to the 20th Century Fox project ultimately proved impossible 
to resolve. The film-maker also turned down the opportunity to direct aremake 
of the musical A Star is Born 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/25/bradley-cooper-may-direct-a-star-is-born-film-remake>
 in 2012.
 