
Clint Eastwood could follow up the spectacular box office success of his 
controversial Iraq war drama American Sniper by directing Jonah Hill and 
Leonardo DiCaprio in the story of a failed Olympic bomb plot, reportsDeadline 
<http://deadline.com/2015/03/clint-eastwood-richard-jewell-1996-summer-olympics-jonah-hill-leonardo-dicaprio-1201402476/>
.

Hill, Oscar-nominated for supporting roles in Moneyball and The Wolf of Wall 
Street, has been tipped since February to play the lead role of heroic security 
guard Richard Jewell, who foiled the attempt at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics but 
later came under police suspicion and suffered an invasive trial by media that 
left his life in ruins. In a reverse of the acting duo’s Wolf of Wall Street 
dynamic, DiCaprio is in line to play a southern lawyer who helped Jewell escape 
his nightmare, though the actor’s involvement is not yet confirmed. The film is 
based on the Vanity Fair articleThe Ballad of Richard Jewell 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/magazine/archive/1997/02/brenner199702>, which tells 
the story of the security guard’s rise to fame and subsequent vilification.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fclint-eastwood-leonardo-dicaprio-jonah-hill-olympic-bomb-plot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427960518924%2F8cdebe33-6845-47d1-82bc-1e34bf27dfea-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clint%20Eastwood%20to%20direct%20Jonah%20Hill%20and%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20in%20Olympic%20bomb%20plot%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fclint-eastwood-leonardo-dicaprio-jonah-hill-olympic-bomb-plot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clint%20Eastwood%20to%20direct%20Jonah%20Hill%20and%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20in%20Olympic%20bomb%20plot%20drama&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fclint-eastwood-leonardo-dicaprio-jonah-hill-olympic-bomb-plot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427960518924%2F8cdebe33-6845-47d1-82bc-1e34bf27dfea-1020x612.jpeg>
 The real Richard Jewell, to be played by Jonah Hill. Photograph: Atlanta 
Constutution/W Berry-Atlanta Journal/Corbis Sygma 
Jewell, who died in 2007, saved countless lives when he sounded the alarm 
after discovering a backpack containing pipe bombs at the Centennial Olympic 
Park in Atlanta. The explosive did go off, however, with one person killed and 
dozens more injured in the resulting blast. The former police officer was 
eventually completely exonerated, with anti-abortion, anti-gay terroristEric 
Robert Rudolph <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/jun/01/usa.theobserver> 
later found to have built the bomb, and the security guard went on to sue the 
NBC and CNN networks for their part in attacking him.

Clint Eastwood cut American Sniper's final scene after request from widow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/17/clint-eastwood-edited-american-snipers-final-scene-following-request-from-widow>
Eastwood, 84, finds himself the toast of Hollywood after American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper> took more than $535m 
worldwide and became the US box office’s top-grossing film of 2014. Starring 
Bradley Cooper as US Navy Seal Chris Kyle, the film also picked up six Oscar 
nominations and excellent reviews, despite vilification in some quarters for 
its depiction of the real-life sniper’s deadly work in Iraq.

The veteran director usually works at Warner Bros, but Jewell’s story is set 
up at rival studio Twentieth Century Fox, so negotiations will be necessary 
before Eastwood can sign on. Deadline reports that the companies may take a 
co-production credit to allow the film to move ahead. Paul Greengrass and David 
O Russell are among the other directors who have previously considered taking 
on the high-profile project, which has a screenplay by Captain Phillips’s 
Oscar-nominated Billy Ray.
 