
Following American Sniper and Sully, Clint Eastwood is set to tackle another 
real-life story by adapting Jessica Buchanan’s memoir Impossible Odds, 
according tothe Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/clint-eastwood-tackle-true-life-936277>. 

Written by Buchanan and her husband Erik Landelmalm, Impossible Odds recounts 
her experience of being kidnapped by Somali militants and later rescued by a 
navy Seal team in 2012 while working as a humanitarian aid worker in east 
Africa.

Buchanan was abducted, along with her co-worker, in 2011 by land pirates. 
Landemalm tried to work with various agencies to have his wife saved, with 
President Obama eventually authorizing a Seal team to extract the pair.


Sully review: Clint Eastwood and Tom Hanks turn a mile-high miracle into 
middling drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/sully-review-clint-eastwood-and-tom-hanks-turn-a-mile-high-miracle-into-middling-drama>
Brian Helgeland, who worked with Eastwood on Mystic River and Blood River, is 
reportedly writing the script.


Eastwood recently made headlines for saying young Americans were a “pussy 
generation” in an Augustinterview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/03/clint-eastwood-donald-trump-racism-esquire-interview>
 with Esquire. He also defended Donald Trump’s string of controversial remarks, 
while promoting his latest film Sully, which has gone to became a major hit for 
the film-maker, grossing over $100m in the US since opening in September. The 
film, starring Tom Hanks as pilot Chelsey Sullenberger, who became a hero after 
landing his plane on the Hudson river, is also pegged as a potential Oscar 
winner.

Sully follows Eastwood’s 2014 success American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, which starred Bradley 
Cooper as US navy hero Chris Kyle. That film earned $350m domestically, making 
it the biggest hit of his career as a director, on top of netting an Oscar 
nomination for best picture (it won for sound editing).
 