
In these scenes, the rides come fast and furious, beastly and beautiful, but 
that’s not what scenes inside cars are about. Some of the best scenes in cinema 
come from the confines of a car: the symbol of mobility and journey, 
progression and the American way. Just be sure not to take the wrong turn …


Army of Shadows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/mar/17/worldcinema.drama>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnsF8Tb6-qSw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnsF8Tb6-qSw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnsF8Tb6-qSw&media=>
Here, conspirators operate more like gangsters than liberators, as they don 
the fedora and trenchcoat rather than the French flag and beret, before 
silencing one of their own instead of their Nazi occupiers. In this scene, 
director Jean-Pierre Melville encapsulates the progression (or lack thereof) of 
the partisans hidden in the shadows of war-torn Paris, as they look from the 
interior of their car, out toward the symbol of their violent/heroic cause: the 
Arc de Triomphe.


Drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/drive-ryan-gosling-film-review>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuX0H9moUGsI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuX0H9moUGsI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuX0H9moUGsI&media=>
Ryan Gosling – doing his best Lucky Luke 
<http://fc03.deviantart.net/fs70/f/2013/303/e/1/lucky_luke_by_blackstarlgart-d6seofq.jpg>
 tooth-picking impression – shows how calm and collected he can be. As the 
narrative of the film grows increasingly out of Gosling’s capable hands, the 
camera begins to move further and further away from the interior of the car. 
But for now, the camera barely leaves the front seat while Gosling shows us 
what he can do in a five-minute window.


American Graffiti
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz2OoxzYqgNY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz2OoxzYqgNY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz2OoxzYqgNY&media=>
No. Yes. No. Yes! No. Yes, that’s Harrison Ford in all his pre-pubescent 
(before he was Han-Solo-famous) glory. At the end of summer, and on the 
precipice of adolescence, just before the plummet into adulthood, this scene 
projects the aimlessness of the ever-present “now”, as young Carol reminds us: 
“The night is young and I’m not hittin’ the rack till I get a little action.”


Psycho <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/01/psycho-review>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSlo44VO-lE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSlo44VO-lE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSlo44VO-lE&media=>
Before the iconic shower came the car ride. Here, combining facial expressions 
with voiceover is all it takes for Hitchcock to aptly express a guilty 
conscience. He relentlessly holds the camera on Marion Crane’s (Janet Leigh) 
face as she drives through the night, passing blurry headlights in the wind and 
rain. Then, the mother of all wrong turns …

Reservoir Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/jun/11/dvdreviews.shopping>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKVqlVoYOeH0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKVqlVoYOeH0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKVqlVoYOeH0&media=>
If it wasn’t discussing Like a Virgin over coffee served by generously tipped 
waitresses, it was Tim Roth crying in the bloodied back seats of a car as 
Harvey Keitel shouted: “You’re going to be OK,” over and over. Scenes such as 
this move the film quickly from bathos to cathartic pathos.

Which tense scenes from cars on the move would you add? 

• Do you have an idea for Clip joint that you’d like to write? Email 
tshepo.mokoena@theguardian.com <mailto:tshepo.mokoena@theguardian.com> with 
your pitch.
 