
Full disclosure: I was, briefly, a child actor, and now I am the mother of 
one. These clips from recent films neatly put to rest the first part of that 
industry saying to never work with children or animals.

A Separation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/30/a-separation-review>

There’s a chequered history of films by directors who miscast their children 
in films, but A Separation by Asghar Farhadi isn’t one of them. Sarina Farhadi 
is extraordinary. In this mostly spoiler-free final scene, she has practically 
the last line, and its delivery is heartbreaking. Who knows if the performance 
she turns in as 11-year-old Termeh is enhanced by the fact her father is 
directing her, butA Separation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-separation> 
is all the better thanks to her inclusion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv76UscjblLI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv76UscjblLI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv76UscjblLI&media=>
We Are the Best!  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/17/we-are-the-best-review>

It seems unfair to single out just one young performer in Lukas Moodysson’s 
wonderfully watchable tale of an all-girl punk band in 1980s Stockholm. At a 
push, however, I would plump for Mira Barkhammar as the bespectacled Bobo. I 
challenge you to watch the entire film and not spend the rest of the day 
chanting “hate the sport”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmlxSH5EG5B8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmlxSH5EG5B8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmlxSH5EG5B8&media=>
Let the Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/apr/10/let-the-right-one-in-vampires-film-review>

Kåre Hedebrant as Oskar is never less than remarkable in this Swedish horror 
movie. I’ve chosen this clip because there is something excruciating about his 
goofy, in-on-the-joke smile at the beginning of the pool scene and the way his 
expression changes as he realises things are about to take a less jocular turn. 
You won’t want to find yourself alone in a municipal swimming pool for the 
foreseeable future.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdYu0cb6ONbs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdYu0cb6ONbs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdYu0cb6ONbs&media=>
The Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/nov/29/the-hunt-review>

Much has been made of Mads Mikkelsen’s incredible performance in this Danish 
drama about a teacher accused of child abuse, but I think Annika Wedderkopp as 
Klara merits similar praise. This is the pivotal scene where Klara’s vengeful 
but vague allusion to abuse is moulded into a concrete indictment by the 
leading questions of the adults questioning her. Each nugget of half-truth and 
every incriminating nod is punctuated with an endearing nose wrinkle – a 
reminder that Wedderkopp was only seven when she filmed the role.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzgRanfDqvzA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzgRanfDqvzA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzgRanfDqvzA&media=>
What Maisie Knew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/22/what-maisie-knew-review>

Onata Aprile as the titular Maisie appears in most, if not every, scene of 
this film and is a watchful, unaffected presence. Maisie’s interaction with 
Lincoln, played by Alexander Skarsgård, is deeply touching. This clip is just 
one example.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTuwFW0hkuL8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTuwFW0hkuL8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTuwFW0hkuL8&media=>
Which outstanding performances by child actors do you love? Let us know in the 
comments below.

Jemima Laing writes about being a child actor’s mother on her site 
<http://jemimalaing.pressfolios.com/>, and is on Twitter: @jemimalaing 
<http://twitter.com/jemimalaing>.

• Do you have an idea for Clip joint that you’d like to write? Email 
tshepo.mokoena@theguardian.com <mailto:tshepo.mokoena@theguardian.com> with 
your pitch.
 