
Plunging commodity prices have knocked Clive Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/clive-palmer> off Australia’s top 
50 rich list.


Palmer’s estimated wealth has fallen below US$550m – the cut-off for the 
latest Forbes Australia list – as the value of his coal and iron ore assets 
fell.


He is not the only mining magnate whose fortune has been hit by tumbling 
commodity prices.


Gina Rinehart’s wealth dropped by US$6bn, but she remains the country’s 
richest person with a net worth of US$11.7bn.


The founder of Fortescue Metals, Andrew Forrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-forrest>, dropped from fifth 
to tenth on the list; his net worth shrank by US$2.1bn to US$5bn.


Forbes said Australia’s mining royals had taken a hit from a worldwide decline 
in the demand for steel, particularly in China.


“The drop in iron ore prices and the Australian dollar’s 6.5% depreciation 
against the US dollar were among the factors that impacted many of the 
richest,” it said.


The collective worth of Australia’s 50 richest people was US$89.3bn in 2014, 
down from US$101.15bn a year earlier.


A real estate boom, partly driven by soaring interest in Australian real 
estate from Asian buyers, boosted the wealth of property tycoons.


The Sydney developer Harry Triguboff rose to second on the list as his fortune 
more than quadrupled to US$5.6bn.


Triguboff has developed more than 60,000 apartments throughout his career, and 
founded Australia’s biggest apartment builder, Meriton.


The Westfield shopping centre tycoon, Frank Lowy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/frank-lowy>, is the third richest 
Australian, adding US$400m and taking his net worth to US$5bn.


The casino mogul James Packer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/james-packer> is fourth despite falling 
revenue from Crown’s Macau casino interests wiping US$2bn from his net worth.


Ivan Glasenberg, who holds the biggest private stake in the mining giant 
Glencore, was also hit by the commodity price downturn, but is ranked fifth 
with a net worth of US$4.4bn.


Australia’s richest people

 * Gina Rinehart, mining, US$11.7bn

 * Harry Triguboff, property, US$5.6bn

 * Frank Lowy, retail, US$5bn

 * James Packer, casinos, US$4.7bn

 * Ivan Glasenberg, mining, US$4.4bn

 * John Gandel, retail, US$3.6bn

 * Anthony Pratt, manufacturing, US$3.5bn

 * Kerr Neilson, investment, US$3bn

 * Lindsay Fox, transport, US$2.9bn

 * Andrew Forrest, mining, US$2.1bn
 