
 The notorious film A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> is to receive its British 
TV premiere on Sky Box Office on July 4. Stanley Kubrick's 1971 futuristic 
thriller, based on the book by Anthony Burgess, stars Malcolm McDowell as Alex, 
a thug with an interest in "rape and ultraviolence." Kubrick withdrew the film 
from circulation in Britain in 1972 after it was blamed for sparking a series 
of attacks and it remained largely unseen until his death last year.

 Controversial rap star Eminem will make his big screen debut in a "Saturday 
Night Fever for today's generation" and not, as was originally thought, in a 
biopic of the 29-year-old's life. "He plays a guy who raps," says producer 
Brian Grazer of the film, to be directed by LA Confidential's Curtis Hanson, 
which is slated to begin production in late summer. Grazer also revealed that 
much of the action will take place in Detroit, where the rapper was raised, but 
that he will not be taking acting lessons. "He can already act. Watch his 
videos and you'll notice. There's a different dimension to them."

 After a four-day break, talks have resumed between the Screen Actors Guild 
(SAG) and the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (AFTRA). A 
deal between the two parties is expected to be reached before the looming 
deadline on June 30. Negotiations have been more secretive than earlier talks 
between the Writers Guild and AFTRA, according to Variety, due to tight studio 
news blackouts.

 Miramax have paid a six-figure-fee to distribute this years Palme d'Or 
winner The Son's Room in English speaking countries, reports Variety. The 
moving drama, directed by Nanni Moretti, about the pain and grief of a family 
coming to terms with the loss of a son, is the first Italian feature to win the 
coveted prize since 1978. It is due for release in Britain later this year.
 