 1. "Why did they ban Chocolate Orange?" Ali G 
<http://www.melonfarmers.co.uk/bpflange.htm> asked James Ferman, the former 
British film censor <http://www.bbfc.co.uk/>, in an interview last year. 
 2. The film (correct title: A Clockwork Orange 
<http://www-scf.usc.edu/~mccarrey/clockwork/>) is one of the most controversial 
films of all time and, luckily for the violence-loving movie buff, goes on 
general release tomorrow.

 3. But it had nothing to do with the censor: the late Stanley Kubrick 
<http://www.indelibleinc.com/kubrick/> chose to withdraw the film himself. 

 4. From the Korova Milkbar 
<http://westwood.fortunecity.com/chloe/194/index.htm> in a future Britain of 
tunnels and tower blocks a teenage gang speakingNasdat 
<http://www-scf.usc.edu/~mccarrey/clockwork/nadsat.html> - a Russian-influenced 
English slang - carry out an orgy of violence.

 5. In Anthony Burgess's novel 
<http://www.booksunlimited.co.uk/bol/0,6206,501784201,00.html>, Alex - the 
15-year-old leader of the gang - is arrested for murder and subjected to 
aversion therapy that leaves him incapable of distinguishing between good and 
evil.

 6. The film translates this into several notorious scenes, including one 
where the gangbeat a tramp 
<http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Forum/3111/aco_picaco6.jpg> for fun. Kubrick 
argued that this scene was concerned with the question offree will 
<http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Forum/3111/aco.htm#Film:> - "Do we lose our 
humanity if we are deprived of the choice between good and evil? Do we become, 
as the title suggests, A Clockwork Orange?" he said in 1971.

 7. But at the culmination of several decades of juvenile-delinquent movies 
that started with Marlon Brando'sThe Wild One 
<http://www.filmsite.org/wild.html> (banned in Britain until 1968), the 
director recognised thatWest Side Story <http://www.filmsite.org/wests.html> 
was the acceptable face of teenage gang warfare.

 8. So Kubrick stylised and choreographed the violence, setting it to music 
that ranges fromRossini <http://w3.rz-berlin.mpg.de/cmp/rossini.html> overtures 
toSingin' in the Rain <http://www.filmsite.org/sing.html>. You can watch the 
film trailer 
<ftp://t-rex.wesleyan.edu/pub/movies/trailers/a-f/clockworkorange.mov> - though 
beware ... it takes a while to download.

 9. No one knows why Kubrick withdrew the film: some suggest the police asked 
him after severalcopycat crimes 
<http://www.villagevoice.com/features/9918/atkinson.shtml>; in one instance a 
17-year-old Dutch girl was raped in Lancashire by a gang chanting Singin' in 
the Rain, and in another a child was beaten by a 16-year-old boy wearing Alex's 
uniform of white overalls, black bowler hat and combat boots.

 10. Kubrick died in March 1999. His other films include Dr. Strangelove 
<http://wso.williams.edu/~mhacker/strangelove.html>, 2001: A Space Odyssey 
<http://greatsci-fimovies.hypermart.net/2001/>, The Shining 
<http://home.earthlink.net/~dare2b/kubrick.htm> and Full Metal Jacket 
<http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Screen/9170/index.htm>.
 