
The Government Procurement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/procurement> Service 
has opened its long awaited channel for the public sector to obtain cloud 
computing services on a 'pay as you go' basis.

It has been named CloudStore <http://www.govstore.net/> rather than the 
Government Application Store, the name under which it was developed, and makes 
more than 1,700 services from 258 suppliers available through a catalogue for 
the first tranche of the G-Cloud service.

It comprises four service genres – infrastructure as a service, platform as a 
service, software as a service and specialist cloud services – and individual 
services including email, word processing, system hosting, enterprise resource 
planning, electronic records management, customer relationship management and 
office productivity applications.

The Cabinet Office said it provides the public sector with a cheaper, quicker 
and more transparent way to procure services, and that its main advantage will 
be that it gives organisations the option to pay for many services as they use 
them rather than developing their own systems.

Francis Maude, minister for the Cabinet Office, said: "The launch of 
CloudStore is an important milestone in theGovernment's ICT strategy 
<http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/content/government-ict-strategy> to deliver 
savings and an IT system fit for the 21st century. Simply stated, purchasing 
services from CloudStore will be quicker, easier, cheaper and more transparent 
for the public sector and suppliers alike."

The catalogue includes service details and pricing information 
<http://gcloud.civilservice.gov.uk/2012/02/19/cloudstore-open-for-business/>. 
Among the suppliers included are big names such as Capita Business, CSC 
Computer and Atos IT services, but about 50% are SMEs.On its G-Cloud blog 
<http://gcloud.civilservice.gov.uk/2012/02/19/cloudstore-open-for-business/>, 
the Cabinet Office has highlighted that the service has been developed by a UK 
SME, Solidsoft, while it is hosted on Microsoft's Windows Azure cloud platform.

Maude added: "By creating a competitive marketplace, the G-Cloud framework 
will constantly encourage service providers to improve the quality and value of 
the solutions they offer, reducing the cost to taxpayers and suppliers. And it 
gives SME suppliers of niche products the same opportunities as bigger 
organisations supplying services.

"Using cloud solutions that have already been secured and accredited will 
almost always be less expensive, and we will only pay for what we use. We will 
also know from the outset the cost of the product and, importantly, the cost of 
exit from contracts that will be no longer than 12 months."

The framework will be open to applications from potential new suppliers in the 
spring. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/feb/07/gcloud-cloudstore-second-chance-framework?INTCMP=SRCH>

The G-Cloud framework has been under development for more than two years, with 
the aim of providing a route for the easy procurement of IT services on a 'pay 
as you go' basis.Central government has a target of cloud services accounting 
for 50% of IT spending by 2015. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2011/oct/21/government-ict-strategy-implementation-plan>

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>


 