
Under attack for being badly managed and charging too much, a venerable 
British institutionhit back last week  
<http://blog.metoffice.gov.uk/2015/08/26/a-look-back-at-this-weeks-news/>by 
claiming its service and presenters offered great value for money: “For us, 
though, it’s never been about the money. It’s about serving the nation and 
ensuring the public benefits.” The plight of the Met Office,which made this 
statement on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/28/bbc-met-office>, will be 
understood by the BBC, which also faces competition from cheaper, faster or 
bigger international rivals and a major change in its fortunes.

In contrast to the meteorological service, whose 93-year contract with the BBC 
is to be put out to tender, the clouds over the corporation itself appeared to 
lift a little last week. Not the actual clouds of course, as everyone knows 
that when TV executives gather each year for the annual Guardian Edinburgh 
International TV festival they bring their own microclimate to keep them inside 
drinking and talking for days. But the storm clouds that gathered before the 
summer holidays in the form of a shock funding deal anda green paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/16/bbc-review-government-green-paper-john-whittingdale>
 that used figures culled from the pages of the BBC-baiting Daily Mail.

Armando Iannucci’s funny, crowd-pleasing paean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/26/ministers-want-bbc-to-consider-assisted-suicide-says-armando-ianucci>
 to the BBC in his MacTaggart lecture set the tone – “I feel I owe it my 
professional life”, he told a hall full of people who felt the same way – but 
his warm-up act, culture secretary John Whittingdale, was not among them. Yet 
after being called a hypocrite and weak for his part in the July deal, he did 
not come to bury Auntie but to praise her. “I would be very unhappy if the BBC 
didn’t exist,” he told the festival. Those “rushing to defend the BBC are 
tilting at windmills” and “trying to have an argument that’s not been started, 
certainly not by me”.

Has the fun-loving minister been chilled by the wind being blown by the 
Treasury money machine? There was still much to worry theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> in his warmer words, of course. Asked 
whether he thought it was biased, he said its impartiality may be better 
regulated by Ofcom, and rather than denying his doubts about Saturday night 
entertainment shows such as Strictly, he said he simply wouldn’t have voiced 
them if he’d known he was going to be made culture secretary.

But by taking the pressure off the government’s plans for the BBC – at least 
until the white paper due to be published early next year – Whittingdale 
managed to focus more attention on the part of the Veep creator’s lecture that 
attacked BBC management itself. And while many of his audience in Edinburgh 
thrilled to Iannucci’s call for champions and cheerleaders for British 
television, few were prepared to laud its representatives.

These are tough times for BBC managers, and definitely not the moment for 
another award-winning writer to echo Dennis Potter’s memorable “croak-voiced 
Daleks” attack on their predecessors, butIannucci’s call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/mactaggart-lecture-tv-diktat-defend-bbc-ministers-talk-us-down>
 to arms was firmly directed at those on the “cast and crew list”. 
Broadcasters, he sniffed, should simply “argue back; don’t adopt a position of 
automatic compromise”.

With Peter Salmon pulling out of a planned turn on Question Time and most 
other BBC executives showing an inability to speak their minds worthy of a New 
Labour apparatchik, it was left to director of strategy James Purnell to 
represent the corporation in the BBC Under Siege session, when Jimmy Mulville, 
co-founder of Hat Trick, said: “We need protection not [just] from government 
and newspapers but the strategies of its management.”

A writer’s plea to simply be left alone to make great work is older than the 
BBC itself, but these arguments are not just about cost-cutting but confidence 
and attitudes. You could argue that W1A is a brilliant riposte from a confident 
BBC but instead its ludicrous titles and endless meetings are seen as a slice 
of reality, not least by Whittingdale. Any attempt to cut a further service 
after BBC3 will be met with howls of protest from the creative industry who 
believe that 10 layers of management in any area is just too many.

Iannucci compared the BBC of today unfavourably with HBO and its tiny number 
of senior executives who apparently say, “Armando, it’s your show. You decide 
what’s best.” How ironic that the BBC, whose £3.5bn of annual revenues are 
dwarfed by the likes of Amazon and Google, is seen as bloated and unwieldy. Yet 
the real power of Iannucci’s words wasn’t just his outrage against politicians 
but the managers who deal with productivity targets, government negotiations 
and regulations at the expense of creative risk and ambition.

With an entire strand called US Gamechangers, profiling executives from 
Amazon, Discovery and HBO, Edinburgh this year was meant to be unusually 
international, whereas really the only game in town was the BBC.Google’s Matt 
Brittin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/28/google-boss-warns-against-television-repeating-mistakes-of-press>
seemed surprised that the “UK TV industry looks inwards and now, if ever, is 
the time to look outwards”.

Both men, with their experience of US corporations, are right. The British TV 
industry has heard the argument about the need for cuts for so long that it 
can’t look up and see the big picture. Tony Hall must use a planned series of 
announcements over the coming months to make the BBC bigger – not necessarily 
in budgets or the number of people charged with endless bureaucracy, but in the 
size of its ambition and its sense of pride. There will be storms ahead, 
whatever the weather.
 