
The New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> clubs lobby has 
dropped its defamation lawsuit against independent MP Andrew Wilkie.

Wilkie, an advocate for greater regulation of the poker machine industry, said 
the clubs’ backdown “sent a powerful signal that people … like me will not be 
silenced”.

He was sued over what Clubs NSW called “false claims and insinuations” in an 
ABC report on allegations made, then retracted, by former Labor MPPeter Garrett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-garrett>.


In an interview recorded for the documentary Ka-Ching! Pokie Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/17/ka-ching-pokies-documentary-reveals-what-makes-the-machines-so-addictive>
, Garrett said he was approached by a representative of Clubs NSW before the 
2004 election and handed an envelope containing “hundreds, if not thousands of 
dollars … but I gave it back”.


Ka-Ching: pokies documentary reveals what makes the machines so addictive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/17/ka-ching-pokies-documentary-reveals-what-makes-the-machines-so-addictive>
But before the film was screened in October, Garrett withdrew the claim 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-10-06/peter-garrett-retracts-details-of-alleged-clubs-nsw-money-offer/6831408>
, saying the envelope had actually contained a cheque.


In an ABC 7.30 story <http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2015/s4326336.htm> 
revealing the about-face, Wilkie described the payment as a bribe.


“I mean it has gone from bags of cash being offered to him after he was 
elected, to a cheque, before he was elected,” he told the program. “It just 
beggars belief and I suppose I’d have to ask him straight: do you really think 
we’re mugs?”

In the NSW supreme court on Friday, the clubs agreed to drop their action 
against Wilkie, who was represented by another pokies critic, the independent 
senatorNick Xenophon <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fclubs-nsw-drops-defamation-lawsuit-against-independent-mp-andrew-wilkie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe19ccdf6eafbe5c5038c573685f4f08d28dd4b17%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clubs%20NSW%20drops%20defamation%20lawsuit%20against%20independent%20MP%20Andrew%20Wilkie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fclubs-nsw-drops-defamation-lawsuit-against-independent-mp-andrew-wilkie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clubs%20NSW%20drops%20defamation%20lawsuit%20against%20independent%20MP%20Andrew%20Wilkie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F27%2Fclubs-nsw-drops-defamation-lawsuit-against-independent-mp-andrew-wilkie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe19ccdf6eafbe5c5038c573685f4f08d28dd4b17%2F0_0_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Andrew Wilkie says he will continue to point out the “harm that the poker 
machine industry is doing” in Australia. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the 
Guardian 
No reason was given but it has been suggested Clubs NSW was concerned the 
legal discovery process could have given Wilkie access to sensitive information 
about the group, which represents about 1,000 registered clubs running more 
than 70,000 poker machines.


Wilkie said on Friday he had referred Garrett’s claims about the alleged 
payment to the NSW police, the state’s electoral commission and the Independent 
Commission Against Corruption. All three were “still considering my request”, 
he said.


Clubs NSW says it will sue the ABC over Peter Garrett's cash in envelope claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/15/clubs-nsw-says-it-will-sue-the-abc-over-peter-garretts-cash-in-envelope-claim>
Wilkie said he would “continue to point out the harm that the poker machine 
industry is doing in this country, and in particular in this state, which has 
half the poker machines in Australia”.


According to a 2010 report by the Productivity Commission, about 41% of poker 
machine revenue was derived from addicted or at-risk gamblers.


Law firm Maurice Blackburn is preparing a class action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/22/pokies-operators-could-face-legal-action-under-australian-consumer-laws>
 against poker machine operators for breaching consumer laws relating to 
misleading conduct. They will argue that in their programming, displays and 
audio, the machines are “designed to be deceptive and that consumers are 
unaware of this deception”.


The ABC is still named in the defamation suit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/15/clubs-nsw-says-it-will-sue-the-abc-over-peter-garretts-cash-in-envelope-claim>
 for airing Garrett’s claims after he had retracted them, and for not issuing a 
retraction and apology.

Clubs NSW has been contacted for comment.
 