
The Coalition has agreed to allow parliament’s powerful privileges committee 
to determine whether material obtained by theAustralian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> in 
controversial raids during and after the election campaign will be protected by 
privilege.


The government had looked to be positioning to avoid that outcome but in one 
of the first gestures of the new Senate, the leader of the government,George 
Brandis <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, said he 
would support the reference to privileges because it was the “appropriate 
course of action.”

The action in the Senate has been triggered by raids following an embarrassing 
leak of confidential information from NBN Co. Labor saysthe leak revealed cost 
blow outs and delays in the NBN rollout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/20/nbn-the-trouble-with-coalitions-plan-for-quicker-and-cheaper-broadband>
 under Malcolm Turnbull, the former communications minister.

NBN: the trouble with Coalition's plan for quicker and cheaper broadband
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/20/nbn-the-trouble-with-coalitions-plan-for-quicker-and-cheaper-broadband>
Police raided the office of Labor’s deputy Senate leader, Stephen Conroy, and 
the home of a Labor staffer, Andy Byrne,during the first week of the election 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
, in search of the confidential material, which surfaced during parliamentary 
committees of inquiry, and was published by some news outlets.

Police then came to Parliament House last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/police-to-raid-parliament-house-department-over-nbn-leak-says-stephen-conroy>
 for a second raid. During the second raid, which involved AFP officers 
accessing the parliamentary server, the AFPinvoked national security grounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/cory-bernardi-signals-he-may-back-labor-over-controversial-nbn-raids>
 to prevent opposition staff from recording the investigation that stretched 
into the night last Wednesday.

The activity perturbed parliamentarians across party lines, given the 
precedents being set. Ahead of Tuesday night’s deliberations in the Senate, the 
Liberal senator Cory Bernardi signalled he could side with Labor in sending the 
matter off to the privileges committee.

Conroy invoked privilege during the first police raid, which means all the 
material taken by the AFP in relation to the NBN Co leaks has been locked in 
the safe of the clerk of the Senate until the chamber makes a determination 
about how to proceed.

The Coalition’s decision to back Labor’s motion referring the case to 
privileges followed an offer by the Senate president, Stephen Parry, to broker 
talks between Brandis and the Labor Senate leader, Penny Wong, to determine a 
way forward.

Parry later withdrew the offer after it became clear the Coalition would back 
the motion.

Speaking to the motion, Conroy told the Senate all parliamentarians needed to 
stand up to defend their work with whistleblowers rather than serve short-term 
partisan interests, and he said journalists also needed to defend their 
professional imperative to publish material in the public interest.

“What is at stake here is not simply a question of the prime minister’s legacy 
as communications minister, much as that legacy deserves close scrutiny,” 
Conroy said Tuesday night. “What this is about is the proper functioning of the 
parliament and our democratic system.”

“It is, at its core, about the constitutional right of the people of 
Australia, through their parliament, to hold the executive to account without 
fear or recrimination.”

“There must be no place for politics when it comes to such fundamental 
democratic principles.”

Federal police raids over NBN leak should ring alarm bells for journalists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/27/federal-police-raids-over-nbn-leak-should-ring-alarm-bells-for-journalists>
In accepting the referral Brandis told the chamber there were competing 
interests to balance and it would now be up to the privileges committee to 
determine how to proceed.

“The issue raises not one, but two important principles. Senator Conroy has 
rightly said it raises the matter of privilege of the Senate. It is not the 
privilege of individual senators, it is the privilege of the Senate, as Senator 
Conroy has rightly said,” Brandis said.

He noted that interest was set in tension with another principle. “That is the 
due and proper administration of the criminal justice system by those officers 
charged with its administration, in this case officers of the AFP.”
 