
The federal government will improve transparency around university admissions, 
after an expert report found entry score requirements mislead students and are 
inflated to enhance courses’ prestige.

The education minister, Simon Birmingham, will promise to improve transparency 
at the AFR higher education summit in Melbourne on Wednesday.

At the same the summit shadow education minister, Tanya Plibersek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, will argue that 
Labor’s promised extra funding for universities to help students from 
disadvantaged backgrounds will increase equity and prosperity.

Sydney University bereft over death of jacaranda tree: 'say it isn't so'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/29/sydney-university-bereft-over-death-of-jacaranda-tree-say-it-isnt-so>
On Wednesday Birmingham released a report by the Higher Education Standards 
Panel that found some higher education providers exaggerate Australian Tertiary 
Admission Rank requirements “in an attempt to boost perceived prestige” of 
their courses.

Many education providers publish only main round offer cut-offs, even when 
students are admitted in later rounds with lower ranks, it said.

The report warned that prospective students may be deterred by the Atar 
requirements of courses, which “can be misleading as it only accounts for a 
little over 30% of all new higher education enrolments”.

It recommended that published information should clearly identify the minimum 
Atar admission requirements for the course at the completion of all offer 
rounds.

The report proposed a template for universities to disclose the percentage of 
students admitted to a course with bonus points, the maximum number of bonus 
points available and the Atar required to be in the top and bottom 25% and the 
middle of the student intake.

The government will respond to the report within weeks but Birmingham will 
tell the summit that he supports the intent of “greater clarity and uniformity 
in the information available to students”.

“We must ensure that we provide students, and their families, with the 
information they need, on an easily accessible and understood platform, in a 
format that is comparable and consistent across jurisdictions to ensure they 
make informed decisions about their future.”

The Universities Australia chief executive, Belinda Robinson, welcomed the 
report as “a measured and sensible way out of an increasingly complex and 
confusing admissions information mire”.

The report struck the right balance between strengthening information 
standardisation and consistency while respecting universities’ autonomy, 
Robinson said.

“The university sector is unified in its acknowledgement of the need for 
greater transparency, consistency and clarity of information on university 
admissions policies, processes, [and] procedures.”

Universities Australia also said the panel’s report demolished media claims of 
“dramatic increases in the number of unprepared students being admitted into 
universities and escalating attrition rates”.

The report notes that offers to students with ATARs below 50 represented just 
4% of offers in 2016 and less than 10% of year 12 offers were made to students 
with ATARs below 60.

Plibersek’s speech to the summit will frame education as “a contributing 
factor to economic growth and a dividend of it”. Reinvestment in education is 
needed so people don’t feel left behind by economic growth, she will warn.

The speech reiterates Labor’s commitment to spend billions of dollars more 
than the Liberals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/20/labor-launches-new-higher-education-policy-promising-cheaper-degrees>
 on university education and increasing per-student funding.

Plibersek will seize on a Committee for the Economic Development of Australia 
report that found40% of jobs could be redundant in 10 to 15 years 
<http://www.ceda.com.au/2015/06/16/five-million-Aussie-jobs-gone-in-10-to-15-years>
 to argue greater investment in education is needed to prepare people for 
future jobs.

Inside the push to get more Indigenous students studying science and tech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/25/inside-the-push-to-get-more-indigenous-students-studying-science-and-tech>
She will recommit Labor to oppose university fee deregulation and so-called 
$100,000 degrees.

“We think everyone should have the chance to go to university without 
incurring a lifetime of debt.”

Plibersek told ABC’s AM that university is “not just a benefit for the 
individual student ... but it’s also an investment in our national prosperity”.

“We know that investment in education is a driver of economic growth,” she 
said.

“One of the commitments Labor has always had is to make sure that we’re not 
just offering a university education to kids who have wealthy parents but ... 
that’s [it’s] available for anyone who is prepared to work hard enough.”
 