
Coastal populations put about 8m tonnes of plastic rubbish into the oceans in 
2010, an annual figure that could double over the next decade without major 
improvements in waste management efforts, scientists warn.

The mountain of plastic litter, including bags, food packaging and toys, was 
equivalent to five full shopping bags of debris for every foot of coastline 
bordering nearly 200 countries the team studied.

Though researchers have known about plastic waste in the oceans for 40 years, 
the latest report, published in the journalScience 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/science.1260352>, is the first to 
attempt a detailed estimate of how much plastic made on the planet finds its 
way into the oceans.


The figures suggest that about 10 to 30 times more plastic debris ends up in 
the oceans than surveys have found floating about on the surface. In onerecent 
survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/10/full-scale-plastic-worlds-oceans-revealed-first-time-pollution>
, an international team reported more than 5 trillion pieces of plastic are 
floating in the world’s oceans, collectively weighing nearly 269,000 tonnes.


In the latest study, researchers at the University of Georgia and the Sea 
Education Association in Massachusetts calculated the amount of waste plastic 
generated in 192 countries with coastlines on the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian
Oceans <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oceans>, and the Mediterranean 
and Black seas. From data on regional manufacturing and waste management 
practices, they worked out that 4.8m to 12.7m tonnes of plastic rubbish wound 
up as ocean debris in 2010.


“This input of plastic waste to the oceans is several orders of magnitude more 
than we can see, which means there’s a lot of plastic out there that we are not 
finding,” saidJenna Jambeck <http://jambeck.engr.uga.edu/>, the first author of 
the study at the University of Georgia.


Some countries still dump plastic litter into watercourses that carry the 
material out to sea. But much of the plastic made on land becomes marine debris 
because it is not properly disposed of in landfills or at recycling plants. 
Left in piles in coastal areas, the waste can easily blow into waterways or be 
carried out to sea by flood water.


Once plastic reaches the oceans it forms floating waste, washes up on 
coastlines, and accumulates on sea floors. Larger items like bags, wrapping and 
fishing gear can entangle dolphins, turtles and even whales. Small pieces are 
eaten by fish, turtles and seabirds. Over time, the material weathers down into 
tiny particles that can be ingested even by small marine animals. The pollution 
is extremely difficult to remove from the environment or trace back to its 
source.

In the study, Jambeck and her colleagues ranked the 20 countries responsible 
for the most waste plastic ending up in the oceans. The greatest sources were 
not only the major plastic producers, but generally those nations with the 
worst waste management practices.

China topped the table with 1.32 to 3.53m tonnes of plastic reaching the 
oceans in 2010. Indonesia followed, where 83% of waste was mismanaged, added 
0.48 to 1.29m tonnes of marine plastic to the seas that year. The US ranked 20th
, where only 2% of waste was badly handled, and 0.04 to 0.11m tonnes of plastic 
found its way to the ocean. Sixteen of the top 20 polluters are middle income 
countries where fast economic growth is not accompanied by major improvements 
in waste handling.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fcoastal-communities-dumping-8m-tonnes-of-plastic-in-oceans-every-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423660298569%2F11e18b54-c927-4297-adef-9c972c1de32e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coastal%20communities%20dumping%208m%20tonnes%20of%20plastic%20in%20oceans%20every%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fcoastal-communities-dumping-8m-tonnes-of-plastic-in-oceans-every-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coastal%20communities%20dumping%208m%20tonnes%20of%20plastic%20in%20oceans%20every%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fcoastal-communities-dumping-8m-tonnes-of-plastic-in-oceans-every-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423660298569%2F11e18b54-c927-4297-adef-9c972c1de32e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kuta beach, Indonesia, strewn with plastic litter. Up to 83% of waste is 
mismanaged in the country. Photograph: Agung Parameswara/Getty Images 
According to the report, the cumulative amount of plastic in the seas will 
soar tenfold by 2025 if nothing is done to slash waste generation or manage it 
more effectively. The current annual rate of 8m tonnes put into the oceans 
could also double by 2025 without action.

If changes are made, they could have a huge impact, the scientists claim. 
Reducing mismanaged plastic waste by 50% in the top 20 ranked countries would 
cut the pile of plastic likely to end up in the oceans by 41% in 2025. More 
stringent caps on plastic in waste streams, and better disposal in the top 
ten-ranked countries could reduce the amount of new marine plastic to 2.4 to 
6.4m tonnes annually by 2025.


Though the greatest gains would come from better waste processing in regions 
where waste management is the poorest, Jambeck stressed that substantial 
improvements were possible even in countries with effective waste disposal. 
“It’s not just about improving the infrastructure in other countries.” she 
said. “There are things we can do in our daily lives to reduce the amount of 
waste plastic we all produce.”


In December, a team led by Lucy Woodall 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/our-science/departments-and-staff/staff-directory/lucy-woodall.html>
 at the Natural History Museum in London, found “microplastic” debris had 
accumulated in deep sea sediments, with someas deep as 3000m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/17/microplastic-deposits-found-deep-in-worlds-oceans-and-seas>
.


“Marine litter appears to be a much more serious phenomenon than previously 
thought with studies from the last six months suggesting this pollutant is all 
pervasive in our oceans and is present in much larger quantities than 
previously thought,” Woodall said.

Microplastic deposits found deep in world's oceans and seas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/17/microplastic-deposits-found-deep-in-worlds-oceans-and-seas>
“The world’s oceans cover such a large surface area and by nature are remote 
from much of human habitation, therefore it is unsurprising that every new 
study adds to our understanding how serious this issue is. This environmental 
challenge is one entirely of human making, but we can all help by starting to 
value, reduce, recycle and reuse plastic products.”
 