
The world's largest soft drink manufacturer has designed the first plastic 
bottle that uses renewable materials and is 100% recyclable.

PlantBottle uses a combination of recycled plastic and a plant by-product. Two 
billion have been in use since November 2009 and the company says its 
initiative has cut the number of bottles in circulation by 45-50%.

It is the first step towards the next generation of sustainable packaging, 
lighter bottles made from 100% renewable and recyclable materials, and moves 
the company towards its goal of cutting out all material, energy and water 
losses over the life of its packaging.

Ultimately, the goal is to replace all fossil fuel-based plastic with bottles 
made from responsibly-sourced materials that are 100% recyclable. PlantBottle 
is helping the company meet its 2012 targets to improve packaging efficiency by 
25% and recycle 50% of its bottles and cans.

The technology behind this first generation PlantBottle is a mixture of PET 
and up to 30% plant-based renewable feedstock. It has a lower carbon footprint 
and is 100% compatible with the existing PET recycling system.

A plant-based bottle reduces carbon dioxide emissions by 12-19% compared to a 
petroleum-based PET bottle. Converting all bottles would be the equivalent to 
eliminating the CO2 emissions from 2.7m barrels of oil.

Coca-Cola wants packaging to be seen not as waste but as a valuable resource 
for future use. Its policy is to make bottles recyclable, not bio-degradeable, 
arguing that environmentally and economically it is better to capture raw 
material in a plastic bottle and use it again.

The company says it is leading the way in turning plant-based material (and in 
the future by-products or waste) into packaging of consistent quality that 
makes consumers feel better about their purchases.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 