
Sitting, sun-dappled, under a canopy of trees, members of Vicoba - the Village 
Community Bank - are holding their weekly meeting "Pasha, Pasha, Boresha!" they 
cry, rubbing their hands and giving an enthusiastic clap as each member stands 
and hands over money.

This bank is run by villagers who were trained in saving methods, credit group 
responsibility and business planning by the Swedish organisation Orgut. It has 
28 members, aged between 22 and 86. They pay in at least 50 shillings (25p) a 
week and after 16 weeks can apply for a loan of three times their contribution. 
Loans for health or education are interest-free; otherwise, interest is charged 
at 10%.

John Modaha has benefited from a similar scheme. Having borrowed 100,000 TZS 
(£50) he bought beans from farmers and sold them to townspeople, making a 
profit of 60,000 TZS (£30). This helped him expand his farming business. "My 
life has changed since the loan," he says. "My family are better off. It is 
good."

In 2006, a survey revealed that over half the population of Tanzania had no 
access to any kind of financial service and less than one tenth had a bank 
account. For poor rural communities, micro-finance is the way forward. Even 
controversial economist and writer Dambisa Moyo - usually disparaging on the 
subject of aid to Africa - is enthusiastic. 'The important point," she writes, 
"is that the previously unbankable and excluded poor are now part of a 
functioning financial dynamic. With this comes a culture of borrowing and 
repayment crucial for financial development in a successful economy."

The enthusiasm and commitment displayed by members of Vicoba would give anyone 
grounds for hope.
 