
EE Sule 
Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099578512/midnights-children>
My favourite novel, over the years, has remained Salman Rushdie's masterpiece, 
Midnight's Children. On the one hand is its electric language that has, at 
every encounter, given me great inspiration; and on the other hand is the 
incredible, mind-boggling blend of the public and the private spheres of life 
which shows off how dazzlingly intricate and versatile a writer's mind can be. 
The novel is as deep as it is lengthy, and has sufficient intrigues and running 
humour to keep one reading to the end, and even wanting more. Coming from a 
tradition where writing cannot avoid being political, Midnight's Children 
remains, for me, the best example of how to engage the public sphere.
• EE Sule is the regional winner for Africa, with Sterile Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780435045753/sterile-sky>

 Michael Sala 
Darkness at Noon by Arthur Koestler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780099424918/darkness-at-noon>
 My favourite novel published by a writer in the Commonwealth. I love that the 
most interesting relationship in the book is conveyed entirely through the 
sound and rhythm of two people knocking on a wall. It's a very tightly-written 
book that, while set mainly in a prison and told only from one character's 
perspective, never feels claustrophobic. Although the fate of the protagonist – 
an old Bolshevik imprisoned during the Stalinist purges – is never really in 
doubt, the deceptively simple language and brilliant use of memory, the 
intensely focused imagery and the inventive use of perspective, carry the 
reader to a conclusion that is both startling in its psychological intimacy and 
deeply moving. It is, in my view, a perfect historical novel.

• Michael Sala is regional winner for the Pacific, with The Last Thread  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780987132680/the-last-thread>

Nayomi Munaweera 
Wave: A Memoir of Life after the Tsunami by Sonali Deraniyagala  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/scienceandnature/9781844089284/wave-a-memoir-of-life-after-the-tsunami>
It's not often that we are taken on a journey into the true heart of grief and 
this was my experience reading this astounding memoir. The author lost her 
parents, her husband and two sons in the 2004 tsunami in Sri Lanka. I read this 
book on an international flight and often had to rest my head against the glass 
to weep. The book made me intensely grateful to be flying back to my loved 
ones. I am astounded by her courage and this is a book I will carry with me all 
my days.
• Nayomi Munaweera is the regional winner for Asia, with Island of a Thousand 
Mirrors <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/nayomi-munaweera>

 Ezekiel Alan
A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780434021512/a-clockwork-orange>
Growing up in Jamaica I was mainly exposed to literature from the Caribbean 
and other parts of the Commonwealth. There were many wonderful reads, from 
Great Expectations to Paradise Lost and, closer home,Claude McKay's delightful 
Banana Bottom 
<http://nachalooman.wordpress.com/2010/02/04/banana-bottom-by-claude-mckay-book-review/>
. It was much later, however, that I came across the style of writing which 
would eventually influence my own work. It started with the American 
masterpiece Trout Fishing in America by Richard Brautigan. Later, I came across 
Anthony Burgess's A Clockwork Orange which stood out for me as an exceptional 
piece of literature. I found the novel brilliantly unconventional. I was 
particularly struck by Burgess's literary ingenuity; at times, it seemed he was 
able to construct comedy from the worst forms of human cruelty and depravity. I 
remember having an urge to laugh at the unusual prose and bizarre dialect even 
while I was being confronted with the absolute horror of the story unfolding. 
It was just so easy to lose sight of the evil that was clearly smiling at you 
from the pages. This is truly unique storytelling.
• Ezekiel Alan is the regional winner for the Caribbean, with Disposable 
People: Inspired by True Events 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Disposable-People-Inspired-events-ebook>

Lisa O'Donnell
Tony Hogan Bought Me an Ice Cream Before He Stole My Ma, by Kerry Hudson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780701186395/tony-hogan-bought-me-an-ice-cream-float-before-he-stole-my-ma>
Tony Hogan was my favourite read of 2012. It has a wicked opening line but I'm 
fairly confident it could not be printed in a family newspaper. Kerry was 
brought up in a succession of council estates and the story evolved from her 
own experiences living in Bed and Breakfasts and welfare housing. It is a 
coming-of-age story about Janie, born into a family of fishwives from Aberdeen 
and living amidst domestic violence, unemployment drink, and drugs. Janie is a 
natural survivor and, through all the neglect, abandonment and poverty, you 
will reach for her in every page. The honesty in Hudson's pen overwhelms with 
its perception and wisdom. This is a raw tale but not without tenderness and 
though you'll cry as I did, you will also laugh.
• Lisa O'Donnell is the regional winner for the UK and Europe with The Death 
of Bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099558422/the-death-of-bees>

Review your favourite Commonwealth book and have a chance of winning a set of 
the five regional winners form the 2013 Commonealth book prize.Find out how to 
enter here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/14/competition-commonwealth-book-prize-2013?INTCMP=SRCH>

• The Commonwealth book prize shortlist in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2013/may/14/commonwealth-book-prize-2013-fiction-in-pictures>
 