
Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> rose by $2 a barrel on 
Wednesday as a broad-based rise in commodities trimmed the FTSE 100's losses.

The blue-chip index finished 26 points down at 5,332, having been 76 points 
down at one stage.Brent Crude futures rose to $111 a barrel at one stage, while 
Gold was also rising - to $1,796 at its peak.

Miners did well, with silver-miner Fresnillo topping the FTSE 100 leaderboard. 
It finished 5.6% up at £19.66, whileENRC, which also had interim numbers out, 
rose 3.7% to 655p.Aquarius Platinum rose strongly too after the metal in its 
name gained ground. Aquarius finished 6.7% up at 260p.

The rise in miners rescued what looked like being a dismal day for the 
blue-chips - with financial services companies suffering from the prospect of 
an EU-wide transaction tax.

Anyone associated with trading was falling. Inter-dealer broker Icap was down 
3.7% to 428p, while theLondon Stock Exchange fell 2.8% to 846p. Standard Life, 
which also lost its dividend attraction on Wednesday, was the biggest faller in 
the FTSE 100, down 5.1% to 202p. IFAHargreaves Lansdown fell 3.2% to 443p, 
while all the banks were similarly under strain.

Brokers again were looking carefully at where the market goes next: are shares 
cheap after last week's falls, or could there be even more calamitous economic 
news around the corner?

With that in mind, UBS drew up a "black skies" analysis envisaging a deep 
recession. In that scenario shares could fall below the levels of March 2009, 
when the FTSE 100 dipped below 3,500. Current prices suggest the market is 
pricing in a 40% chance of recession, UBS added. More positively, its FTSE 100 
target for the end of 2011 is 6,100, 15% ahead of where the market is now.

Glencore slipped again, after RBS cut its price target on the stock. The 
commodities trader reports figures next Thursday. The shares fell a quarter of 
a per cent to 395p.

Another recent flotation, Ocado, was heading in the opposite direction, up 
4.3% to finish at 124p. It emerged separately that Kira Faiman, wife of 
co-founder Jonathan Faiman, sold shares on August 9 to take her stake below 3%.

The UK's largest building contractor Balfour Beatty was one of the biggest 
fallers among the mid-caps as turnover growth at the group slowed to 1% and 
profits fell. The group is heavily exposed to both UK and US construction 
markets. The shares fell 5.3% to 249p.

Insurer Admiral rose 1.1% to £15.48 after Nomura said next Wednesday's results 
should show strong growth, boosted by rising motor insurance premiums. The 
broker also said a ban on referral fees - mooted as part of the government's 
"no-win, no-fee" law reforms - would have a limited impact onAdmiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup>.
 