
Helen Kempster, career guidance and higher education adviser, Christ the King 
Sixth Form College <http://www.ctksfc.ac.uk/>

Challenge your own misconceptions: I work with sixth formers and the main 
concerns they have regarding HE are choosing the right course and institution. 
They are already studying studying A-levels or other Level 3 qualifications and 
they chose these qualifications so they would, at the very least, have the 
option of entering HE. I have not noticed any lack of general aspiration, in 
fact quite the opposite, and the students I work most closely with are those 
that are considered as being from disadvantaged backgrounds.

The parents of WP students are just as hard to reach: Many parents are acutely 
interested in the financial implications that entering HE may have on their 
children but from my experience, working in an environment where approximately 
three-quarters of our students are in receipt of full Education Maintenance 
Allowance (household income less than £21,000 a year) it can be just as 
difficult to engage the parents as it is to reach the students. They have high 
aspirations for their children, and often want them to enter HE, but often 
simply do not fully understand the process or the right questions to ask.

Students need concrete examples and easy ways to compare: Provide students 
with clear examples, such as: if you borrow this amount and are earning this 
amount, this is how long it will take you to pay it back and this is what you 
will be repaying each month. The issue is that universities will be offering 
different packages that will not just vary by institution but by student (as a 
function of their household income). This is where a personalised 
calculator-type tool for each university for each student would come in handy.

Student Finance England 
<http://www.studentfinance.direct.gov.uk/portal/page?_pageid=153,4680136&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL>
 has a calculator on their website which gives a rough estimate of a student's 
entitlement based on certain details. Perhaps universities should have a 
similar tool on the finance pages of their website? This might be particularly 
pertinent give the fact that the offer made under the guise of theNational 
Scholarship Programme <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/widen/nsp/> (NSP) looks set to 
vary so much between institutions - prospective students need an easy point of 
comparison.

Resource: Key Information Sets <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/learning/infohe/kis.htm>
 will make comparisons across different courses slightly easier, and here are 
some of the sites which aim to make comparisons between universities:WhatUni 
<http://www.whatuni.com>, BestCourse4Me <http://www.bestcourse4me.com> and 
UniStats <http://www.unistats.com>.

Tracey Lancaster, director of external relations, University of Birmingham 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/index.aspx>

Don't just focus efforts on prospective students: Universities can't just work 
with the prospective students. We have to be working and providing information 
to parents and to the teachers as well. The University of Birmingham recently 
ran a teachers conference, briefing them on both the government offer and 
national systems, as well as our own support packages. Open days too are great 
opportunities to get information to parents.

Students from widening participation backgrounds need specific attention both 
in the short and medium term: We need to have a channel of information that 
targets the issues and concerns of pupils from widening participation 
backgrounds directly. In addition, we should be keeping an eye on the cohorts 
coming through in three to four years time in case they are ruling themselves 
out of a university education, based on current misunderstanding and 
misinformation, before they even make their GCSE choices.

The single biggest influencer for potential applicants from WP backgrounds are 
students from WP backgrounds. Putting these usually driven and ambitious young 
people in front of kids in schools (through written case studies, online or 
face-to-face mentoring) makes it seem possible - because our university 
students are living proof that it is. Using academics who themselves would have 
been deemed to be 'WP' is also a good idea.

John Morgan, past president, the Association of School and College Leaders 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/home/> (ASCL), a professional association and trade 
union for secondary school and college leaders

The National Scholarship Fund should be in the hands of schools and colleges, 
not HEIs: We should never forget, in our haste to 'fix' 2012 entry, that the 
parents we should be aiming to reach are those of younger students and may not 
yet have become disaffected or disadvantaged. The schools and colleges who see 
know these kids and families need to be empowered. School and college leaders 
also need to make sure all adults who work in our institutions are up to speed 
with the facts and do not give out the wrong messages.

Universities should partner their students with school and college teachers: 
Messages need to come from people pupils know and trust - their teachers. If 
HEIs try to deliver the messages, students will think the institutions are 
simply trying to recruit them. Teachers should work alongside staff, and better 
still, students from universities.AimHigher 
<http://www.aimhigher.ac.uk/sites/practitioner/home/> partnerships across the 
country have been doing exactly this for many years to great effect. Sadly, the 
funding has gone but it would be false economy by universities to reduce their 
commitment. Maybe this could be an ideal project to bid for funding from the 
government's newEducation Endowment Fund 
<http://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/> which they have given to The 
Sutton Trust. Partnerships between organisations from school/careers/HE sectors 
would be great and the fund is £200 million over 15 years as it is looking, 
rightly, for sustainable, long-term projects not quick fixes.

Tricia King, pro-vice-master for student experience, Birkbeck, University of 
London <http://www.bbk.ac.uk/>

Not enough is being done for non-traditional students: Birkbeck teaches very 
non-traditional part-time students of all ages and backgrounds. Mostly they are 
not at school or college when they apply to HE and they apply directly to us 
not via UCAS. They are very hard to reach and often very under-confident 
students and rely on us to help them make sense of HE. They absolutely do not 
understand the changes that are coming, where part-time students (40% of the 
undergraduate sector in the UK) will be eligible for loans. They are also quite 
scared of high fee levels and perceptions of debt. Government campaigns are 
very targeted at young people and their parents. We need to work harder to make 
sense of change for mature students and their families.

Though fees will be higher, it could be advantageous for some to start 
university in 2012: For the first time in 2012, for young and old, full-time 
and part-time there will be a level playing field and HE will be free at the 
point of study for all under graduate students. This is unprecedented. Yes, the 
fees are high but the monthly repayments may not be. Fees are lower in 2011 but 
need to be paid up front, in full. Once prospective Birkbeck students 
understand future plans, many of them are choosing to defer to 2012 rather than 
come in 2011.Fees <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/fees> 
in 2012 are higher but can be repaid later in affordable monthly payments.

Case study: Our 'Birkbeck changed my life 
<http://cms1.its.bbk.ac.uk/about_us/bbk/bbk20/campaign>' campaign with lots of 
real examples of non-traditional student success worked really well to make HE 
seem accessible.

Martin Lewis, head of the Independent Taskforce on Student Finance Information 
<http://www.studentfinance2012.com/index>

Get the practice right before changing the terminology: Names such as the 
National Scholarship Fund (NSP) - which students can think applies to aptitude 
and not income level - are confusing and discussion about changing the terms 
away from fees and loans is justified. But my view is to change the terminology 
now amid all the political wrangling would make it look like spin and just lead 
to accusations of trying to blur the facts. We first need to ensure people 
understand it in practice before we start to talk about terminology.

Anyone with a choice should go for a bursary over a fee waiver: Fee waivers 
won't actually make any difference to lower graduate earners (and even mid 
graduate earners) as even those on starting salaries of £30,000 (and rising) 
will often not repay £6,000 fees in full. So getting a fee waiver on a £9,000 
course actually won't have any practical impact (though it may have a 
psychological one) barring reducing the treasury's loan book.

Resource: Messages on student finance 2012 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/students2012>

Pamela Flood, financial support manager, University of Oxford 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/>


Use case studies and current students to deliver your message: We use case 
studies on our website and rely heavily on current students who get involved in 
access and admissions work. Showing pupils that there is someone in the system 
"like them" is the best way of getting across accessibility. Funding can also 
help to challenge perceptions. I get comments when I say I work in hardship and 
bursaries at Oxford from people who assume no Oxford student requires either. 
However when I tell them that 30% of our first year get an income assessed 
bursary, it hopefully causes them to challenge their perception.

It is how we do this nationally to challenge the perception that access to HE, 
especially after the funding changes, isn't limited by the money you have. We 
have tried to be as open as possible from the start about our funding package 
for 2012 and announced clear details of our support the same day as the fees 
back in March. However if prospective students, and their families, are not 
going to come to our website because they have already decided Oxford is, for 
whatever reason, not going to be for them, we have to take the message to them 
not expect them to come to us.

Resource: Government information for part-time students 
<http://studentfinance-yourfuture.direct.gov.uk/part-time-students>

Click here 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Education/documents/2011/11/09/bestbitsfeesstructure.pdf>
 to download this resource as a pdf.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 