
Supporters and opponents of use of the Confederate flag clashed verbally in 
opposing demonstrations at Gettysburg national military park on Saturday, with 
tensions high at times.

South Carolina's Confederate flag comes down as history of hate meets modernity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
The Evening Sun newspaper in Hanover <http://bit.ly/1QBExoS> reported that 
Cumberland Township police and park officers had to separate a few people, 
before disagreements became physical.

The use and display of the Confederate battle flag has become a hotly 
contested issue since last June, when the suspect in a Charleston, South 
Carolina, mass shooting in which nine African American churchgoers were killed 
was shown with the flag in pictures published online, alongside a racist 
manifesto.

South Carolina removed the flag from a monument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
 on the grounds of the state capitol building, in Columbia. Debate has 
continued in other southern states.

The battle of Gettysburg, which took place from 1 to 3 July 1863 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/jul/02/photograph-gettysburg-gardner>
, was the biggest of the American civil war and the “high tide” of the southern 
Confederacy, which lost to Union forces and never again threatened to win the 
four-year war.

Abraham Lincoln delivered the Gettysburg address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/16/gettysburg-address-retraction-newspaper-lincoln>
, a founding text of the modern United States, the following November at the 
dedication of a cemetery for those who died in the battle. The battlefield is 
now a carefully maintained national site.

Pennsylvania newspaper retracts original criticism of Gettysburg Address
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/16/gettysburg-address-retraction-newspaper-lincoln>
The Sons of Confederate Veterans Gettysburg group said its Confederate Flag 
Day gathering at the park’s Eternal Peace Light Monument on Saturday was 
intended to honor southern ancestors.

A counter-demonstration was organized by a Gettysburg College associate 
professor of history and Africana studies, who said he wanted to offer a 
different perspective on the flag’s meaning.

Other than the trading of insults and invective, there were few interactions 
between the opposing groups, which were separated by a few hundred feet and two 
portable fences.
 