
South Carolina's Confederate flag comes down as history of hate meets modernity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
The Confederate flag was removed from South Carolina’s statehouse grounds on 
Friday after decades of protest against the symbol came to a head following the 
killing of nine black people in a church in Charleston.

The move came after Governor Nikki Haley signed legislation on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/09/south-carolina-confederate-flag-friday>
 that required the flag to be taken down within 24 hours and moved to a nearby 
Confederate museum.

The Rev Norvell Goff, the interim pastor of Emanuel African Methodist 
Episcopal church, where the shooting occurred, stood alongside Haley for the 
short flag removal ceremony. The families of the victims were there too, 
surrounded by a crowd of clapping and crying people.

South Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/south-carolina> highway 
patrol honor guard marched to the flag, before entering the gate surrounding it 
to cheers that erupted as they used a lever to wind down the flag. The crowd 
sang “Na na, hey hey, goodbye” as the honor guard folded the flag, before 
marching to the capitol steps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fconfederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a873f0c14f31bbcc128c7f898cae7b69fe59b57%2F0_110_2871_1757%2F2871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Confederate%20flag%20removed%20from%20South%20Carolina%20capitol%20in%20victory%20for%20activists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fconfederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Confederate%20flag%20removed%20from%20South%20Carolina%20capitol%20in%20victory%20for%20activists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fconfederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a873f0c14f31bbcc128c7f898cae7b69fe59b57%2F0_110_2871_1757%2F2871.jpg>
 People cheer as an honor guard from the South Carolina highway patrol removes 
the Confederate battle flag from the capitol grounds on Friday. Photograph: 
John Bazemore/AP 
Activists have been pushing for the flag to be removed for decades, after it 
was placed on the capitol dome in the 1960s. While some defended it as part of 
the south’s heritage, others believe it is a racist symbol.

South Carolina was the first state to secede from the Union and join the 
Confederacy during theAmerican civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/american-civil-war>, which began because 
of disagreements about slavery and states’ rights.

Lawmakers, activists and citizens put renewed pressure on the government to 
take down the flag after nine black people were fatally shot at a historic 
church in Charleston. The alleged gunman, 21-year-old Dylann Roof, had posed in 
photos with the flag andthe FBI is investigating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/20/dylann-roof-fbi-website-manifesto-charleston-shooting>
 a racist manifesto that he may have written.

Haley remembered the victims at the signing ceremony on Thursday, where she 
used nine pens to sign the bill and said that each one would go to the families 
of each of the victims.

“The Confederate flag is coming off the grounds of the South Carolina 
statehouse,” Haley said at the signing ceremony. “It’s hard for us to look at 
what is happening today and not think back to 22 days ago. It seems like so 
long ago because the grieving has been so hard.”

President Barack Obama, who spoke at the eulogy of one of the victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/26/obama-charleston-eulogy-pinckney-amazing-grace>
, hailed the removal of the flag as “a signal of goodwill and healing, and a 
meaningful step towards a better future”. South Carolina representative James 
Clyburn also praised the removal of the flag, saying “an era of division is 
over”.

“I look forward to the citizens of South Carolina being one under one flag, 
the American flag,” he said.

Three days after the shooting, hundreds rallied in Columbia to protest the 
flag.And last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/27/woman-removes-confederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse>
, activist Bree Newsome was arrested after she climbed the pole and took the 
flag down.

For the flag to be officially removed, however, a bill had to be introduced 
and get a two-thirds vote in both chambers of the legislature. It moved quickly 
through the state senate, but was subject to 13 hours of contentious debate in 
the house, where it passed just after 1am on Thursday.

The South Carolina state law enforcement division is investigating death 
threats made against lawmakers on both sides of the debate.

The hundreds who gathered to watch and cheer were joined by dozens people 
carrying Confederate flags, but the ceremony was a peaceful affair of competing 
demonstrations.
Grace Beahm (@GraceBeahm) 
.@postandcourier <https://twitter.com/postandcourier> Crystal Hampton of 
Columbia arrived at 3:30am to have a front row seat to history.
pic.twitter.com/crPqniRpTU <http://t.co/crPqniRpTU>
 <https://twitter.com/GraceBeahm/status/619464883822837760> July 10, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/GraceBeahm/status/619464883822837760> Christina Elmore 
(@celmorePC) 
Members of the crowd debating with an African American man carrying a 
Confederate flagpic.twitter.com/1UJZ0RNbM6 <http://t.co/1UJZ0RNbM6>
 <https://twitter.com/celmorePC/status/619487157162504192> July 10, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/celmorePC/status/619487157162504192> 
The flag was first flown on the state house dome in the 1960s and moved to a 
civil war memorial next to the capitol building in 2000. It will become a part 
of the collection of the South Carolina Confederate Relic Room and Military 
Museum.

“The museum is aware that this is a grave responsibility and will formulate 
plans to appropriately exhibit it,”the museum said in a statement. 
<http://www.crr.sc.gov/Pages/default.aspx> “The museum is humbled to play a 
small role in further uniting the citizens of South Carolina.”

As this debate played out in the South Carolina legislature, representatives 
in Washington DC discussed whether Confederate flags should be removed from the 
capitol building there.

And the house Republicans decided to hold off the vote on a bill that would 
allow Confederate flags to be displayed at National Park service-run cemeteries.
 