
Congratulations to Alex Ross <http://www.therestisnoise.com/>, the deserving 
winner of the 2008Guardian first book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/03/guardian-first-book-alex-ross-rest-is-noise>
. There's been a massedchorus of appreciation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/15/music> for this work already, so 
I shan't add much, except to say that what I particular enjoy about it is the 
connections it makes between musics and musicians. I'm the sort of person who 
goes to a lot of concerts, plays the violin, has some kind of grasp of how the 
history of music works – but frankly, it's all a bit fragmented and vague, 
since I have never studied the history of music properly and I can't really do 
the textbook musicological stuff. As I was reading Ross's book, it dawned on me 
that most of my knowledge of 20th-century music was based on reading the 
occasionalGrove <http://www.oxfordmusiconline.com/subscriber/book/omo_gmo> 
essay – and mostly, reading programme notes. What Ross's book does brilliantly 
is knit all these odd and isolated bits of knowledge together, so that 
everything starts to synthesise rather wonderfully, and you get to know what 
Sibelius thought of Stravinsky, say (not much – "stillborn affectations" was 
the phrase employed); or that Alban Berg was lionised by George Gershwin; or 
that David Bowie referenced Philip Glass and vice versa. That, and then the 
material is set against its historical and political background, such that this 
is a book for history-lovers as much as music-lovers.

By the way, there's a pungent criticism of the new-music scene by Hans Eisler 
in 1928, as quoted by Ross. How much have things changed, I wonder?

"The big music festivals have become downright stock exchanges, where the 
value of the works is assessed and contracts for the coming season are settled. 
Yet all this noise is carried out in the vacuum of a bell glass, so to speak, 
so that not a sound can be heard outside. An empty officiousness celebrates 
orgies of inbreeding, while there is a complete lack of interest or 
participation of a public of any kind."
 