
Theresa May must explain why it took so long for the government to establish 
that British-made cluster bombs banned by an international treaty were dropped 
by Saudi Arabia in Yemen,Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has said.

The Labour leader said there was “pretty strong evidence” available for months 
that cluster bombs sold from the UK in the 1980s had been deployed in the 
current conflict in Yemen, even though that was denied bySaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and rejected by government 
ministers in May.

The Guardian view on Yemen: stop helping the killing | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/the-guardian-view-on-yemen-stop-helping-the-killing>
Michael Fallon, the defence secretary, only admitted on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/michael-fallon-commons-statement-yemen-uk-cluster-bombs-saudis>
 that a limited number of British cluster bombs from the 1980s had been used 
after an official confirmation from Saudi Arabia. He made a statement to the 
House of Commons the day after the Guardian revealed the existence of aUK 
government analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/18/uk-cluster-bombs-used-in-yemen-by-saudi-arabia-finds-research>
 indicating the bombs had been used and which had been available to ministers 
for about a month.

Speaking to the Guardian, Corbyn said May and Fallon should both explain why 
it took so long for the UK to establish the truth. “I raised the issue of arms 
supplies, as did Emily [Thornberry], and a television programme that indicated 
pretty strong evidence of cluster bombs was there. So why it’s taken this 
length of time, I think they do have some questions to answer,” he said.

The use of the cluster bombs is particularly controversial because the UK is a 
signatory to the Ottawa convention banning their deployment or assistance with 
their deployment, although Saudi Arabia is not. They contain dozens of bomblets 
that can explode at a later date, causing indiscriminate killing and maiming of 
civilians.

The Labour leader also called on the government again to reconsider current 
arms sales to Saudi Arabia in light of the US suspension of some planned 
military exports. He said: “We have to ask the question about this relationship 
with Saudi Arabia, their bombing of targets all overYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, vast numbers of people being forced 
into exile and the huge number of deaths there. It is a terrible situation. I 
have had discussions with UN officials and there has to be a political process 
to bring about a ceasefire as there does in Syria.

“Even the US has suspended some military supplies to Saudi Arabia. Why can’t 
we do the same?”

He went on to raise concerns about the functioning of the parliamentary 
watchdog on arms export controls, known as the quadripartite committee because 
it is made up of members of the foreign affairs, business, defence and 
international development committees.

A suspension of arms sales to Saudi Arabia until there has been an 
international investigation into alleged war crimes was backed in September by 
MPs on two parliamentary committees – the business and international 
development groupings – as well as the chair of the arms export control 
committee. They said the reported use of cluster bombs “calls into question the 
coalition’s wider respect for the rules of war”.

A third group of MPs, the foreign affairs select committee, disagreed and 
suggested it should be decided next year by a court that is hearing a legal 
challenge from theCampaign Against Arms Trade <https://www.caat.org.uk/>. A 
fourth committee, the defence select committee, declined to endorse either 
conclusion.

Amid an ongoing row, Corbyn called for the committee on arms export controls 
to be put on a proper footing as a parliamentary select committee to enable 
better scrutiny.

May declined to answer a question about when she was made aware of the use of 
UK cluster bombs when asked by Angus Robertson, the Scottish National party’s 
Westminster leader, earlier this week. “Is it true that senior ministers have 
known for some time that UK cluster munitions have been used in the current 
conflict in Yemen?” he said. “When was she told about that, and when will the 
UK join our European partners in starting to have a more ethical foreign policy 
on both Saudi Arabia and Yemen?”

Downing Street has not yet replied to a request for comment.
 