
Too many people in the corporate sector are still in denial about climate 
change, according toKatherine Garrett-Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/18/davos-2015-fragile-world-leadership-garrett-cox>
, the CEO of investment firm Alliance Trust.

Is business action on climate change believable? - Guardian Live event
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/audio/2016/jan/14/is-business-action-on-climate-change-believable-guardian-live-event>
Speaking at a Guardian Sustainable Business debate on the role of business in 
tackling climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/15/is-business-action-on-climate-change-believable-sign-up-for-our-event>
, Garrett-Cox, herself anoutspoken advocate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/18/davos-2015-fragile-world-leadership-garrett-cox>
 on the issue, said: “Within the last 12 months, I’ve had conversations with 
CEOs of major corporates in Europe and they just say, ‘It’s not real, it’s not 
something I should be bothered about’.” It is “scary” how little discussion 
there is at boardroom level about whether climate change is a risk at all, she 
added.

One month on from a landmark climate change deal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/paris-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations>
at UN talks in Paris, Garrett-Cox hopes this will be the tipping point for 
businesses waking up to climate change. Ikea’s sustainability chief Steve 
Howard agreed, saying 2016 presents the corporate world with “an unprecedented 
opportunity” to reinvent its business models in line with the challenge.

However, speaking at the event, the UK’s only Green party MP Caroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/caroline-lucas> said the government was 
making this transition more difficult: “This is a government that doesn’t like 
scrutiny ... and that’s part of the whole way it’s going about its green 
policies.”


The UK government has been widely criticised since its election in May for 
making a series ofchanges to environmental policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/18/solar-industry-bosses-attack-government-over-jobs-and-subsidies>
 such as scrapping subsidies for onshore wind, ending the green deal scheme 
that helps homeowners insulate their homes and cutting support for the solar 
industry, which has since seen a number of firmsgoing into liquidation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/14/leading-solar-entrepreneur-to-put-business-into-liquidation>
.

“What this government is doing in the name of being business friendly is 
constantly moving the goalposts so that no one knows where it’s going to be 
safe to invest,” she said. “The green economy is actually one of the best 
places to invest for jobs, to enable us to get out of the economic crisis we 
face as well as to keep emissions down.”

And moving to a green economy means rethinking consumption patterns, 
especially in the west, according to Howard . “If we look on a global basis, in 
the west we have probably hit peak stuff. We talk about peak oil. I’d say we’ve 
hit peak red meat, peak sugar, peak stuff … peak home furnishings. If you look 
on a global basis, most people are still poor and most people actually haven’t 
got to sufficiency yet. There is a global growth opportunity ... but it’s a 
distribution issue.”

Ikea has hit the headlines for introducing a raft of environmental policies in 
the last year. It has pledged toinvest €1bn (£755m) in renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/04/ikea-pledges-1bn-on-renewable-energy-and-climate-change-efforts>
 and measures to help poorer communities deal with the impacts of climate 
change; announced that 100% of the energy used to power its shops and factories 
will come from clean sources by 2020; and phased out all non-LED lightbulbs 
from its stores.

Exploding the productivity myth: jobs, cuts and carbon slaves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/aug/18/productivity-myth-jobs-cuts-carbon-slaves>
Leading climate change scientist Kevin Anderson, from the Tyndall Centre for 
Climate Research, was more sceptical and said the idea that the green economy 
would enable people in the west to consume more was irreconcilable with 
international climate change commitments.


“At a global level – if you want to see any level of equity around the globe – 
the idea that people like us can consume and see improvements in material 
wellbeing is to me not compatible with what the science is telling us about 
climate change … there are real problems if we try to tell people that, 
actually, if we’re really clever in the wealthy parts of the world that we can 
have our cake and eat it. That misunderstands the severity of the challenge 
we’re facing.”

Anderson said that in the future it could be necessary to introduce a shorter 
working week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/09/fewer-working-hours-doctors-eu-negotiations>
, he added.


“Under the current model you need growth because there is a pursuit of 
productivity, which people always say is a good thing. If we have an increase 
in productivity that means you have fewer people producing the same number of 
goods. If you want to then maintain employment you have to maintain growth to 
have the same number of people employed,” he said.

“So you have to start unpicking all these pieces and saying, ‘Well what would 
that mean for our society?’ There are different reasons why we might be looking 
at a world where we have to work fewer hours. We consume fewer goods but we 
have a higher quality of life in that time that we have available.”

The panel featured:

 * Katherine Garrett-Cox, CEO of Alliance Trust 
 * Caroline Lucas, Green Party MP and climate change campaigner 

 * Steve Howard, head of sustainability at Ikea 
 * Kevin Anderson, Tyndall Centre for Climate Research 
 * Sasja Beslik, Nordea Responsible Investments  