
IUDs, implants, condoms and the ever-present pill: for years, contraceptive 
methods have remained run-of-the-mill while the search for a new alternative 
that could revolutionise the industry has come up short. Recent headlines have 
focused on the negative aspects of traditional hormonal birth control:the pill 
causes depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/women-taking-contraceptive-pill-more-likely-to-be-treated-for-depression-study-finds>
 andgender mutation in freshwater fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/jun/02/water-system-toxic-contraceptive-pill>
, while a clinical trial for amale contraceptive jab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/male-contraceptive-jab-as-effective-as-female-pill-trial-shows>
 was abandoned when the subjects began suffering side-effects already 
well-known to women.

But 50 years since it first became available, the pill remains the default 
option, and women still shoulder the responsibility for preventing pregnancies. 
Could software be the solution?Elina Berglund Scherwitzl 
<https://www.linkedin.com/in/elina-berglund-scherwitzl-43b68331>, founder and 
chief technical officer ofmobile fertility app Natural Cycles 
<https://www.naturalcycles.com/en/> thinks so.

Using a sensitive thermometer and sophisticated mathematics, Natural Cycles is 
an old-fashioned period tracker, with extra features. The app, which launched 
in 2014, asks users to take their temperatures in the morning, preferably 
before getting out of bed, then input that into the app, which tells them where 
they are in their menstrual cycle. Days when a woman can get pregnant become 
red; “safe” days are green. So far, so low-tech. What makes Natural Cycles 
unique, though, is the algorithm developed by Berglund.

The 32-year-old from Malmö in Sweden holds a PhD in particle physics and was a 
member of the team that discovered theHiggs boson at Cern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/higgs-boson>, before developing her 
life-changing formula.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnatural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bb3822204295bf30654705386446105b713924a%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20an%20algorithm%20replace%20the%20pill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnatural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20an%20algorithm%20replace%20the%20pill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnatural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bb3822204295bf30654705386446105b713924a%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Natural Cycles app Photograph: Danijela Froki/Natural Cycles 
Through daily use, the algorithm learns not just how to map an individual’s 
ovulation but to predict it, too. That allows the five days prior to ovulation 
to be identified in real time, alerting women to the fact that male sperm can 
linger for that long in their bodies, ready to pounce on an egg when it is 
released.

The app fills a gap in the market, spotted by Berglund when she felt fed up 
with the limited options on offer other than hormonal contraception. She 
devised the algorithm and started mapping her own cycle, as well as those of 
female colleagues at Cern. It proved so succesful that Berglund and her 
husband, fellow physicist and Natural Cycle’s CEO Raoul Scherwitzl, decided to 
devote more time to the app.

Berglund has hired a team of researchers that includes Kristina Gemzell 
Danielsson, a professor in obstetrics and gynaecology atKarolinska Institutet 
<http://ki.se/en/startpage> in Stockholm. Their most recently published 
clinical study showed that Natural Cycles, when used correctly, is as efficient 
in preventing pregnancies as the pill. Unlike the pill, though, it doesn’t 
offer any cover for fertile days, which means that comparing the app to medical 
contraception can be tricky.

Asking women to put faith in their phones to protect them from getting 
pregnant is a complicated business. In Sweden, the app was criticised for 
targeting young lifestyle bloggers and their impressionable readers. One 
example wasBlondinbella <http://www.blondinbella.se/>, by Isabella Löwengrip 
<https://www.instagram.com/blondinbella/?hl=en>, who is now a Natural Cycles 
investor. (Löwengrip says that the average age of her 1.3 million weekly 
readers is just over 30 – two years older than the typical Natural Cycles 
subscriber.) In December last year, the Swedish Medical Products Agency also 
banned the app from calling itself apreventivmedel – the Swedish word for 
“contraception”, which is associated with purely medical birth control. As a 
result, it’s now marketed as a “fertility monitoring device” that “can be used 
to avoid pregnancies”. Berglund doesn’t seem too worried, though.

“What we do is track fertility, right? And then women can use it how they want 
– it’s a tool for them to use this information either to prevent or plan a 
pregnancy.” Plus, she says, the company’s research shows that younger women are 
more disciplined in using contraception on red days; their pregnancy rates were 
much lower than those of users above the age of 35.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnatural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F618802328583eb0a0fd912449b6d1532130711e4%2F0_26_2430_1457%2F2430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20an%20algorithm%20replace%20the%20pill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnatural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20an%20algorithm%20replace%20the%20pill%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnatural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F618802328583eb0a0fd912449b6d1532130711e4%2F0_26_2430_1457%2F2430.jpg>
 The Natural Cycles app Photograph: Natural Cycles 
The ideal app user, Berglund says, is a woman in a stable relationship who is 
planning to have children at some point, and who would like a break from 
hormonal contraception ahead of trying. Gemzell Danielsson points out that it’s 
not a good option for women who absolutely want to avoid a pregnancy. Nor does 
she recommend it for anyone who has what she describes as “an irregular 
lifestyle”, irregular menstrual cycles or lacks the motivation to stay on top 
of their cycles. The latter of these categories might account for the 45% 
drop-out rate that the app is currently experiencing; women who sign up but 
fail to keep to their thermometer schedule.

The most important thing about Natural Cycles, Berglund and Gemzell Danielsson 
argue, is that it adds an alternative method to the mix. “I’m still surprised 
that there hasn’t been such a product before,” Berglund says. “I have been 
thinking about this since I was a teenager, because I didn’t feel well from 
taking the pill.”

Berglund is critical of the conveyor-belt style in which young women are 
prescribed it, and the fact that birth control is still very one-sided within 
relationships. “Sweden is supposed to be the most gender-equal country, but I 
think when it comes to contraception … the burden is very much on the woman.” 
Natural Cycles, she insists, is “more of a couple’s thing – the woman measures 
her temperature and the man sometimes has to wear a condom.” ”

The most important thing for the company, Berglund says, is to gain trust. 
“That’s why we keep performing clinical studies and why we try to achieve a 
higher ISO class of medical device status.”

But before Natural Cycles can become as trustworthy a contraceptive option as 
hormonal methods, larger-scale, independent studies will need to prove its 
efficacy. So while the app hasn’t killed the pill just yet, it is a welcome 
addition.
 