
Three distant worlds that orbit a feeble star in the constellation of Aquarius 
are the most likely places discovered so far to find life beyond the solar 
system, astronomers say.

Kepler 438b: Most Earth-like planet ever discovered could be home for alien 
life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/06/earth-like-planet-alien-life-kepler-438b>
The Earth-sized planets are all thought to have regions where surface 
temperatures fall within the Goldilocks zone and are neither too hot nor too 
cold for water to run freely, making them at least potentially hospitable to 
life.


Belgian astronomers found the planets using the Transiting Planets and 
Planetesimals Small Telescope (Trappist) at the La Silla Observatory in Chile’s 
Atacama desert. The planets revealed themselves through the periodic dimming 
that occurred as they passed in front of their parent star, an ultracool dwarf 
that lies only 40 light years away.


Known formally as 2MASS J23062928-0502285, but helpfully dubbed Trappist-1, 
the star is not much larger than Jupiter and emits a fraction of the sun’s 
radiation. The star is too faint to see in the night sky with the naked eye, or 
even through a large amateur telescope.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcould-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e2be627c050aac7e08b953c9bb3d68fcad9d13c%2F0_0_3338_3111%2F3338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20these%20newly-discovered%20planets%20orbiting%20an%20ultracool%20dwarf%20host%20life%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcould-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20these%20newly-discovered%20planets%20orbiting%20an%20ultracool%20dwarf%20host%20life%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcould-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e2be627c050aac7e08b953c9bb3d68fcad9d13c%2F0_0_3338_3111%2F3338.jpg>
 This chart shows the stars visible to the naked eye in the constellation of 
Aquarius. The position of the ultracool dwarf star Trappist-1 is marked. 
Although it is relatively close to the Sun it is very faint and not visible to 
the naked eye or through amateur telescopes. Photograph: ESO/IAU and Sky & 
Telescope 
Observations from the Trappist telescope taken from September to December last 
year, and follow-up measurements from larger instruments, revealed three small 
planets orbiting very close to the star, at 1%, 1.5% and about 3% of the 
distance that Earth lies from the sun. A year on the innermost planet passes in 
only 1.5 Earth days, and in 2.4 Earth days on the second. The orbit of the 
third planet is less certain, with a year passing in 4.5 to 73 Earth days, 
according to a report in the journalNature 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature17448>.


“Because the star is so faint, all of these planets have temperatures that are 
similar to those on Earth. They could have liquid water on the surfaces, and on 
Earth life is critically dependent on water. We don’t know, but maybe there 
could be life there,” said Michaël Gillon who led the research at the 
University of Liege.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrJINAguHQ5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrJINAguHQ5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrJINAguHQ5E&media=>
 A video from ESO explaining the discovery. 
Two billion planets in our galaxy may be suitable for life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/nov/04/planets-galaxy-life-kepler> 
The planets are thought to be tidally-locked to their star, meaning one half 
is in permanent daytime, and the other in constant darkness. If the planets 
have atmospheres, the alien air would even out the temperature difference 
across the hemispheres. At the hottest spots, the temperature would reach about 
100 Celsius on the innermost planet, 70 Celsius on the second, and perhaps 
30Celsius on the outermost world.


“These are the first temperate Earth-sized planets found outside the solar 
system, and the first we can study in detail,” said Gillon. “That makes them 
extremely promising targets for us.” The composition of the planets is not yet 
known, but the sizes mean they must be solid. “They could be iron-rich like 
Mercury, or mostly silicate rocks, or extremely icy, like the moons of 
Jupiter,” said Gillon.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcould-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff1ee48f540ce7ce0d9b955c8c8c43b960f801a9%2F0_1000_10000_6000%2F10000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20these%20newly-discovered%20planets%20orbiting%20an%20ultracool%20dwarf%20host%20life%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcould-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20these%20newly-discovered%20planets%20orbiting%20an%20ultracool%20dwarf%20host%20life%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fcould-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff1ee48f540ce7ce0d9b955c8c8c43b960f801a9%2F0_1000_10000_6000%2F10000.jpg>
 Another artist’s impression of an imagined view from close to the surface of 
one of the three planets. In this view one of the inner planets is seen in 
transit across the disc of its tiny and dim parent star. Photograph: ESO/M. 
Kornmesser 
Plans have already been drawn up to study the planets in greater detail. With 
the Hubble space telescope, the astronomers hope to learn whether the worlds 
have their own atmospheres. But future instruments will be needed to find out 
much more about the planets. If they do have atmospheres, then analysing the 
molecular constituents for water, carbon dioxide and ozone could reveal 
evidence for life.


Those measurements will be possible from two forthcoming observatories, the 
European Extremely Large Telescope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/mar/03/space-chile>, which is under 
construction in the Atacama desert, and theJames Webb Space Telescope 
<http://www.jwst.nasa.gov/>, Nasa’s new infrared observatory, which is due to 
launch in 2018. Once they are in operation, astronomers can begin the search 
for biological activity on the planets. “That’s a giant step in the search for 
life in the universe,” said Julien de Wit, a co-author on the study at MIT.

 