
AIM

To create new powers to gather and share information for counter-terrorism 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2008/ukpga_20080028_en_1>; to make further 
provision about the detention and questioning of terrorist suspects and the 
prosecution and punishment of terrorist offences; to impose notification 
requirements on persons convicted of such offences; and to confer further 
powers to act against terrorist financing.

MAIN PROVISIONS

• Enables a constable to take fingerprints and DNA samples from individuals 
subject to control orders, and ensure full use can be made of them in terrorism 
investigations.
• Enables post-charge questioning of terrorist suspects and the drawing of 
adverse inferences from a refusal to say something that is later relied on in 
court.
• Allows for extended sentences for offenders convicted of offences with a 
"terrorist connection".
• Enables the police to request monitoring information from convicted 
terrorists and prevent them from foreign travel.
• Removes the general bar on the use of intercept material in certain 
specified proceedings.
• Amends the definition of terrorism by inserting a reference to a racial 
cause.
• Enables the Treasury to direct the financial sector to take action on 
suspected money laundering or terrorist financing transactions in countries 
outside of the European Economic Area; and enables people affected by such 
actions to apply to have the decision reversed.
• Makes it a criminal offence to elicit or attempt to elicit information about 
a member of the armed forces, the intelligence services or a constable which is 
of a kind likely to be useful to a person committing or preparing an act of 
terrorism .
• Enables constables to enter – by force if necessary – and search the 
premises of individuals subject to control orders who are reasonably suspected 
of having absconded or of failing to grant access.
• Puts the secret service DNA database on a statutory footing and allows the 
cross-referencing of this database with the national police database.

BACKGROUND

In the 2006 Queen's Speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/nov/16/uk.queensspeech2006>, the 
government pledged that the ongoing fight against terrorism would be"at the 
heart" of its agenda 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/the-queens-speech-what-was-said-and-what-was-left-out-424489.html>
, with plans to increase the pre-charge detention period, allow intercept 
evidence to be used in court and reform the control order system believed to be 
included in thenew counter-terrorism bill 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2006/nov/20/terrorism.immigrationpolicy>, 
expected in 2007.

Action on the bill was beset by the government's failure to achieve 
cross-party consensus on arange of proposals 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/nov/07/uk.queensspeech2007> – 
dominated by the heated debate overpre-charge detention 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/nov/07/uk.queensspeech2007> – and by 
the time it was published in January 2008, many of the purported provisions had 
been dropped, includingallowing intercept evidence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/jan/18/uk.terrorism> to be used in 
terrorism cases.

Although a report from a cross-party committee supported the use of intercept 
evidencein certain cases 
<http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/cm73/7324/7324.pdf>, the 
government expressed concern that it could jeopardise the work of the security 
services. Prime minister Gordon Brown said he still had to overcome
"considerable objections" 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200708/cmhansrd/cm080206/debtext/80206-0004.htm>
 in the intelligence community, who suggested a ban on intercept evidence could 
damage thefight against terrorism 
<http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/hc0708/hc02/0252/0252.pdf>.

Civil rights campaigners had hoped that the use of intercept evidence in 
terrorist cases wouldmitigate the need 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/news-and-events/1-press-releases/2008/welcome-intercept-evidence.shtml>
 for extending the pre-charge detention period, and for thecontrol orders regime
 <http://www.justice.org.uk/images/pdfs/press060208.pdf>. 

The final act did, however, include certain provisions on intercept evidence: 
anamendment <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2008/ukpga_20080028_en_8> to the 
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (RIPA)enables the disclosure 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/ukpga_20000023_en_1> of intercepted 
communications in financial restrictions proceedings (ie in challenges to
asset-freezing decisions 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2008/em/uksiem_20083085_en.pdf>); while another 
amendment <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2008/ukpga_20080028_en_9> allows 
disclosure of intercept material to a person appointed as counsel to aninquiry 
held under <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2005/ukpga_20050012_en_1> the 
Inquiries Act 2005, if the inquiry panel is satisfied that there are 
exceptional circumstances that make it essential.

The most controversial provision to remain on the bill when it was introduced 
was aproposal to amend 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2000/ukpga_20000011_en_1> the Terrorism Act 
2000 to create a so-called "reserve power" for the home secretary to extend the 
maximum period of pre-charge detention in custody for individuals suspected of 
terrorism-related offences from 28 to 42 days. This followed the government's
failed proposal for 90 days 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/nov/09/uksecurity.terrorism> in 2005. 

Home secretary Jacqui Smith justified the move, saying, "We are facing an 
unprecedented threat from terrorism" – an argument backed by Home Office 
security minister, Tony McNulty, who warned that the new laws were needed 
because Britain could face "two or three 9/11s 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/may/15/terrorism.uksecurity>" in a 
single day.

The government also had the support of certain senior police officers. 
Metropolitan police commissionerSir Ian Blair had told 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200708/cmselect/cmhaff/43/7100902.htm>
 the Commons home affairs select committee: "At some stage 28 days is not going 
to be sufficient, and the worst time to debate whether an extension is needed 
would be in the aftermath of an atrocity."

The Association of Chief Police Officers said it could envisage circumstances 
in which the 28-day limit might prove inadequate given theincreasing complexity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/nov/07/uk.queensspeech2007> and size 
of the terrorist challenge, while commissioner Bob Quick told a committee of 
MPs considering the new legislation that 15 terrorist plots had been foiled 
since the London bombings in July 2005, with he and Blair using this as 
justification for their call to extend thepre-charge detention 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/cgi-bin/newhtml_hl?DB=semukparl&STEMMER=en&WORDS=ian%20blair%20left%20field%20terror&ALL=Ian%20Blair%20left%20field%20terrorism&ANY=&PHRASE=&CATEGORIES=&SIMPLE=&SPEAKER=&COLOUR=red&STYLE=s&ANCHOR=muscat_highlighter_first_match&URL=/pa/cm200708/cmpublic/counter/080422/am/80422s01.htm#muscat_highlighter_first_match>
 period.

The government's plan sparked large-scale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/mar/01/terrorism.labour>, cross-party 
opposition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/dec/07/humanrights.immigration> – 
althougha YouGov poll 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/letters/article4099574.ece> suggested 
the public was overwhelminglyin favour of the plans 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/politics/2109302/Gordon-Brown's-last-minute-bid-to-win-over-42-day-rebels.html>
 – and in April, ministers hinted that they would offer astring of concessions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/apr/25/terrorism.uksecurity> in order 
to stave off a Commons defeat.

In the end, the government won a majority by just nine votes, but was forced 
to defend itself against accusations that it had "bought" votes from the 
Democratic Unionist party and Labour rebels toprevent a revolt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/jun/12/terrorism.labour>.

The following day, shadow home secretary Davis Davis resigned as an MP in 
protest over 42 days,forcing a byelection 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/jun/12/daviddavis.conservatives> in 
his constituency of Haltemprice and Howden, which hewent on to win 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/jul/11/haltemprice.daviddavis1> on 11 
July.

The bill's passage through the Lords was just as bumpy. On 5 August, the House 
of Lords constitution committee criticised the proposed involvement of 
parliament in the detention of terrorism suspects, stating that it was "
institutionally ill-equipped 
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_committees/lords_press_notices/pn050808const.cfm>
" to do so.

On 13 October, 42 days was thrown out by the Lords, and in what was called "a 
face-saving gesture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/oct/13/terrorism-uksecurity1>", the 
government published draft legislation containing the proposal – the 
counter-terrorism (temporary provisions) bill – which will beheld in reserve 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/jacqui_smith_statement_on_counter-terrorism_bill> and 
introduced in parliament "if necessary".

The government was also forced to drop provisions allowing so-called "secret 
inquests <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/oct/14/justice-law>" – 
an amendment to the Coroners Act 1988 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1988/ukpga_19880013_en_1> would have allowed 
the secretary of state to issue a certificate requiring a coroner's inquest to 
be held without a jury in, among other things, "the interests of national 
security". The proposal was recently reintroduced in thecoroners and justice 
bill <http://www.justice.gov.uk/news/newsrelease140109b.htm>, published on 
January 14 2009.

CRITICISM

Liberty spearheaded the opposition from civil liberties and human rights 
campaigners with its high-profileCharge or Release campaign 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/issues/2-terrorism/extension-of-pre-charge-detention/index.shtml>
, and in the run-up to the bill's introduction revealed that Britain's existing 
28-day limit is alreadyfar longer 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/issues/pdfs/pre-charge-detention-comparative-law-study.pdf>
 than that for any comparable democracy. Liberty director Shami Chakrabarti 
told the Guardian that this "new, damning evidence …makes embarrassing reading 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2007/nov/12/humanrights.terrorism> for all of us 
in the land that gave Magna Carta to the world".

The human rights organisation also took on the government's professed goal of 
creating consensus around the pre-charge detention limit,building a coalition 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/issues/2-terrorism/pdfs/the-real-consensus-april-08.pdf>
 against extended detention. In October 2008,42 writers 
<http://liberty-human-rights.org.uk/42writers/> joined Liberty in opposing the 
plan. Dissent also came from across the political spectrum: Conservative David 
Davis said the proposal "risks creating arecruiting sergeant for terrorists 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/3640835/Tell-us-where-you-stand-on-security%2C-Mr-Brown.html>
", and Liberal Democrat Nick Clegg said "there is not ashred of evidence 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/nick-clegg-we-are-providing-ammunition-for-terrorists-399403.html>
 that it is necessary", while just one month before the bill was introduced, it 
was reported that onlya third of Labour MPs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/dec/27/uk.terrorism> backed extending 
pre-charge detention beyond 28 days.

Director of public prosecutions Sir Ken Macdonald 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/dec/27/uk.terrorism> also opposed the 
plans, telling the Guardian: "I think the basic point is whether you want to 
legislate on the basis of hypotheticals or whether you want to legislate on the 
basis of the evidence that we have acquired through practice." In April 2008, 
in giving evidence at committee stage, he also said that even if police could 
not complete their investigations within the present 28-day limit, they did not 
necessarily need to, because the threshold of evidence needed to bring charges 
in serious cases has been lowered. This, in certain circumstances, meant that 
people could be charged on the basis of "reasonable suspicion" that they may be 
guilty of a crime, rather than the full test of "a realistic prospect of 
conviction". This threshold standard, along with post-charge questioning,
invalidated the need 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/cgi-bin/newhtml_hl?DB=semukparl&STEMMER=en&WORDS=ken%20macdonald%20extraordinarili%20complex&ALL=ken%20macdonald%20extraordinarily%20complex&ANY=&PHRASE=&CATEGORIES=&SIMPLE=&SPEAKER=&COLOUR=red&STYLE=s&ANCHOR=muscat_highlighter_first_match&URL=/pa/cm200708/cmpublic/counter/080422/pm/80422s01.htm#muscat_highlighter_first_match>
 for extended detention.

Former attorney general Lord Goldsmith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/dec/08/terrorism.ukcrime>, meanwhile, 
said he would have resigned from office if parliament had approved a 42-day 
limit on his watch. He told the Guardian: "You shouldn't keep people in without 
trial longer than you need to. It's a basic civil liberty … I find it hard to 
see how once you've got to 28 days and haven't found enough evidence to charge 
them, that things are going to change fundamentally."

Amnesty International was concerned 
<http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/EUR45/010/2008/en/3e281fee-4924-11dd-94d4-8d51f8ac221b/eur450102008eng.pdf>
 that the power included no effective safeguards against arbitrary detention; 
that it could lead to other abusive detention practices; and that it undermines 
the safeguards built into international human rights law to ensure that vital 
rights are only restricted in genuine public emergencies threatening the life 
of the nation. It wasalso argued  
<http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/en/newsandcomment/Pages/EqualityandHumanRightsCommissiontoconsiderchallengingdetentionlimits.aspx>
that the provision wouldviolate European human rights legislation 
<http://assembly.coe.int/Main.asp?link=/Documents/WorkingDocs/Doc08/EDOC11725.htm>
.

In a letter to the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/jun/03/terrorism.justice?gusrc=rss&feed=global>
 in June 2008, Lord Rea, Sir Geoffrey Bindman and many others said that the 
bill "should be opposed in its entirety" – yet many of the proposals that they 
cited remain intact. For instance, they criticised how the bill widened "the 
net of innocent people who will be incriminated. It creates a new offence of 
seeking or communicating information about the armed forces which could be 
useful to terrorism, which we fear will become yet another convenient tool for 
use against the peace movement."

Amnesty International stated concerns about post-charge questioning, which was 
also retained in the final act. Amnesty said: "[T]heseproposals risk undermining
 
<http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/EUR45/010/2008/en/3e281fee-4924-11dd-94d4-8d51f8ac221b/eur450102008eng.pdf>
 the presumption of innocence, the right to silence and the privilege against 
self-incrimination. They also increase the risk of oppressive or coercive 
questioning."
 