
For centuries, scientists have wrestled with the deepest mysteries of space, 
time and the nature of consciousness. But not all of them. Some turn their 
minds to what can fairly be described as lower-hanging fruit. Like why our 
knuckles crack when we pull them.

The question has never been the subject of sustained scientific inquiry, but 
the puzzle crops up in medical literature reaching back more then 50 years. It 
began, perhaps, with a German physician called Nordheim, who in 1938 
demonstrated that most joints in healthy people can be made to pop when pulled 
upon.

In a report published today, Canadian scientists tackle the problem with 21st 
century technology. With an MRI scanner, a bespoke finger-pulling device, and a 
gifted and willing knuckle-cracker, they set about recording the first video 
footage of the innards of a knuckle being cracked.

“It’s such a common thing. Some people do it habitually. They love it. Other 
people find it repulsive. But there’s always been this argument over what 
actually happens to make the noise,” saidGreg Kawchuk 
<https://rehabilitation.ualberta.ca/about-us/contact-us/faculty-directory/greg-kawchuk>
, professor of rehabilitation medicine at the University of Alberta in Edmonton.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBHEcQluSzmM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBHEcQluSzmM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBHEcQluSzmM&media=>
 A University of Alberta team led by Greg Kawchuk used MRI video to work out 
why joints make a popping sound when they crack. Video: University of Alberta 
Kawchuk launched his study after a local chiropractor, Jerome Fryer, came to 
him with a new explanation for knuckle cracks. “It didn’t seem like we needed 
another idea,” Kawchuk said. “What we needed was to look inside the joints to 
see what was going on.”

In 1947, a pair of doctors at St Thomas’s Hospital in London performed their 
own investigation <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17105029> into the nature 
of knuckle cracks. They tied a cord around volunteers’ fingers and got them to 
tug until the joint went pop. They captured it all with x-ray images. A tension 
of about 7kg was needed to elicit a pop, during which the bones in the knuckle 
separated by about half a centimetre.

The doctors concluded that the crack sounded when the joint surfaces were 
suddenly wrenched apart. This caused a sudden drop in pressure in the synovial 
fluid between the joints, and the formation of a vapour cavity, or bubble. One 
cracked, it took 20 minutes of rest before the same knuckle would crack again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fcracked-it-scientists-solve-puzzle-of-why-knuckles-crack-when-pulled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429116180034%2F68b8ac8c-9bfc-44e6-bfcc-0544c71042d2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cracked%20it!%20Scientists%20solve%20puzzle%20of%20why%20knuckles%20pop%20when%20pulled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fcracked-it-scientists-solve-puzzle-of-why-knuckles-crack-when-pulled%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cracked%20it%21%20Scientists%20solve%20puzzle%20of%20why%20knuckles%20pop%20when%20pulled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fcracked-it-scientists-solve-puzzle-of-why-knuckles-crack-when-pulled%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429116180034%2F68b8ac8c-9bfc-44e6-bfcc-0544c71042d2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fryer’s hand, attached to the finger-puller and immobilised ready for 
scanning. Photograph: University of Alberta 
The explanation stood for 24 years, until 1971 when a group at Leeds University
challenged the idea 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1005793/?page=1>. They essentially 
repeated the London experiments but reached a different answer. The crack came 
not from the bubble forming in the joints, they argued, but from the bubble 
quickly collapsing. In science, detail is everything.

Fryer turned out to be adept at cracking his knuckles, and volunteered to have 
each of his ten fingers pulled, one by one, until they popped. To capture the 
process in action, each crack took place with Fryer’s hand in an MRI scanner.

Writing in the journal, Plos One 
<http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0119470>, Kawchuk describes how every 
crack occurred as the joints suddenly separated, and a gas-filled pocket 
appeared in the synovial fluid that lubricates the joint. The bubble comes from 
gas that comes out of the fluid as the pressure in it drops, just as bubbles 
appear in freshly opened bottles of fizzy drinks. “If you’ve ever washed up 
glass plates, you’ll know they can be hard to separate when they are wet. The 
film of water between them creates a tension that needs to be overcome. It’s 
similar with joints. When you pull on them, they resist at first, and then 
suddenly give way,” said Kawchuck.

The results suggest that the London doctors hit on the right explanation in 
1947. Kawchuk does not rule out other effects though, that were not picked up 
by the MRI scanner. “We have to be cautious,” he said.

But what use is the answer? Apart from solving, perhaps, a long-standing 
mystery, Kawchuk said the work could potentially help doctors understand why 
some people can crack their knuckles and others not. “The ability to do this 
can sometimes change in people over time. Maybe we can use it to ascertain the 
health of their joints. It could give us fresh insights,” he said.
 