
Last year's white paper, Putting students at the heart of the system 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/Consultations/he-white-paper-students-at-the-heart?cat=open>
, built on theBrowne review 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/hereview.independent.gov.uk/hereview//report/>
, which sought to put higher education on a sustainable footing.

There has been much debate about what we might call social sustainability 
since tuition fees rose to £9,000. Discussion has focused on higher fees 
putting off poorer students. Yet, although application rates have decreased, 
thus far this decrease has not added to social inequality, becauseapplications 
from poorer school-leavers have held up 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2012/feb/07/analysis-of-ucas-application-figures>
.

The reforms have introduced a lot of support for poorer students – increased 
maintenance grants, the national scholarship programme, bursaries and fee 
waivers from individual universities. But perhaps, most importantly, the 
message seems to have got through about the generosity of loan repayment terms: 
that if you go on to be a low earner, you'll come nowhere near paying back all 
you've borrowed; that repayment does not start until you earn £21,000; that the 
percentage of salary taken after this threshold is only 9%, meaning a graduate 
on £30,000 can expect to pay around £68 a month).

This is all well and good, you might think. If we are going to make students 
pay more towards their education, then we better establish substantial and 
progressive means of financial support.

So what's the problem?

In focusing on making repayment terms on loans as generous as possible, the 
government has lost sight of other very important issues of social and 
financial sustainability.

The first and central of these is the possibility that somewhere between 30% 
and 40% of student loans will never be paid back.Previously, the write-off rate 
for loans was about 26% 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/466-1987/Higher-Education--Students-at-the-Heart-of-the-System.-An-Analysis-of-the-Higher-Education-White-Paper-.html>
. The Treasury is concerned by the new higher write-off rate and, as a result, 
has insisted on the continuation of the cap on overall student numbers first 
introduced in 2008. It has also overseen a further tightening of the cap over 
the last two years, with an estimated25,000 university places taken out of the 
system 
<http://www.unialliance.ac.uk/site/2012/04/27/comment-of-university-places-annoucement/>
.

Enforcing the cap on numbers has the potential to do much more harm to social 
mobility than increased fees because most of those who would benefit from more 
places are from poorer backgrounds. TheHigher Education Policy Institute 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/files/2010%20demand%20report%20master.pdf> estimates 
that, by 2020, there could be as many as 100,000 applicants per year who are 
genuinely capable of entering higher education but who are locked out of the 
system, which is equivalent to more than one quarter of the 360,000 new 
entrants to higher education who went through Ucas in 2010.

So, although the recent changes to tuition fees look socially sustainable, 
they are in fact not. Debt might not be putting off poorer students from 
applying to universities, but many tens of thousands a year are unable to get a 
place when they apply. In a time of prolonged economic stagnation, where there 
are far fewer jobs, this denial of access seems particularly harmful.

So what can be done?

The government has two choices within the current spending restrictions. It 
can accept the status quo and publicly admit that it will never get back a 
large amount of its loans, defending the loss by saying it is the price of a 
fair and progressive funding system. Although doing this would store up future 
bad debt and leave England's higher education system unable to keep up with 
increasing demand.

On the other hand, the government could tighten up repayment terms so that it 
gets more money back. This would mean lowering the threshold for repayment and 
increasing the "tax" rate on income above that threshold, as well as raising 
interest rates for higher earners. The money saved from less bad debt could 
then be reinvested in increasing the number of total student places.

These two options leave us with a very tough choice – between making students 
slightly worse-off when they start work and locking out tens of thousands of 
young people from higher education each year. But, on balance, I believe siding 
with increased access through funding more places is the right thing to do, 
Moreover, it puts us on track to create a truly sustainable higher education 
system – both fiscally and socially - not just a progressive repayment system.

This is an excerpt from the Higher Education Careers Services Unit's spring 
edition of Graduate Market Trends. The full article can be viewed athecsu.ac.uk 
<http://www.hecsu.ac.uk/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 