
Alan McGee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alanmcgee> is staging a music 
business comeback by establishing a new label,359 Music 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/359-Music/372517199533251>.

The legendary indie mogul, responsible for signing Oasis, Primal Scream and My 
Bloody Valentine to hisCreation label <http://www.creation-records.com/> before 
then setting upPoptones <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Poptones>, has declared 
his intention to get back in the game with the new venture.

In a statement, McGee said: "My vision for 359 Music is a launchpad for new 
talent and some ignored older talent. We intend to release on average a dozen 
new bands per year every year â€“ maybe more if I find a lot of new talent I 
like. Hopefully some of the artists will stick around and make numerous albums 
with 359, but some will go on to other things and that is just the nature of 
the musical beast."

No artists have yet been announced for the label, but McGee put out an open 
appeal for talent, adding: "If you're an artist and want to be considered for 
359 Music, send an MP3 to infoat359music@aol.com and I will personally listen."

But despite the grand announcement, the mogul is insisting there is no hubris 
behind his new venture. "There is no agenda of 'let's be the biggest, like 
Creation Records'. If in five years' time people who I respect and who love 
music turn round to me and say 359 Music has put out some great music, then 
that to me will be a success."

McGee has been hinting at a new label for some time, after his passion was 
reawakened by working with the promoters of the Tokyo Rocks festival. Last 
September he said: "Since spending summer helping curate Tokyo Rocks, it's made 
me realise I do still love it. It was when I was flying back from Japan with 
the Primals that started me loving it again. To be honest I am seriously 
thinking about restarting Creation, or maybe Re-Creation if I can find the 
right people at a label to work with. Music needs a kick in the balls, and I 
have got the music buzz back."

McGee's last label venture, Poptones, was wound down in 2007 owing to 
financial difficulties.
 