
Aim

"To  combat crime and disorder 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2001/ukpga_20010016_en_1#Legislation-Preamble>
; to make provision about the disclosure of information relating to criminal 
matters and about powers of search and seizure; to amend the Police and 
Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) 
Order 1989 and theTerrorism Act 2000 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/19/terrorism-act>
; to make provision about the police, the National Criminal Intelligence 
Service and the National Crime Squad; to make provision about the powers of the 
courts in relation to criminal matters."

Main provisions

• Introduces on-the-spot fixed penalties 
<http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/operational-policing/crime-disorder/index.html/penalty-notice-introduction11?version=4>
 for a range of minor offences, including being drunk and disorderly.
• Grants local authorities the power to restrict anti-social public drinking 
in designated public places and empowers the police to confiscate alcohol in 
these zones.
• Amends the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 to allow police in England, 
Wales and Northern Ireland to indefinitely retain DNA samples and fingerprints 
from anyone arrested of a "recordable" offence, even if they are released 
without charge or found not guilty. This means samples are retained even if a 
person is acquitted of an offence or is not charged.
• Creates a new criminal offence of protesting outside someone's house in an 
intimidating manner and enables the police to direct an alleged offender to 
leave the vicinity of the home.
• Makes curb-crawling, "hit and runs" and the importation of indecent and 
obscene material arrestable offences.
• Empowers magistrates to remand children aged between 12 and 16 into custody 
when they are charged with offences such as theft and criminal damage.

Background

The Criminal Justice and Police Act was a flagship piece of legislation for a 
government determined tocrack down on anti-social behaviour 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/rise-in-street-crime-puts-straw-on-the-defensive-702883.html>
 and alcohol-fuelled public disorder. The government had been dismayed by an 8% 
rise in violent crime and blamed the rise on a combination of alcohol and a 
"yob culture", which prime minister Tony Blair described as bringing "misery in 
too many towns and cities on too many Friday and Saturday nights".

In launching an action plan to crack down on alcohol-related crime, the home 
office minister Charles Clarke said: "The government is determined totackle the 
problem 
<http://www.ginfo.pl/more/248833,action,plan,to,tackle,alcohol,related,crime.html>
 of alcohol-related crime by giving the police and local authorities the 
support and powers they need to deal with unacceptable, loutish behaviour. This 
includes introducing legislation where necessary."

A key part of the bill allowed the police to use a fixed-penalty fine system 
to deal with low-level anti-social behaviour. The proposal built on Blair's
much-ridiculed suggestion 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/blair-calls-for-pound100-spot-fines-for-drunken-yobs-714537.html>
 that police should march drunken yobs off to cash machines to pay on-the-spot 
fines. This refined version of the prime minister's idea gives offenders the 
choice of paying the fine within a set time-frame or going to court. The bill 
limits the fine to no more than "half the amount of the maximum fine for the 
offence".

The government were also under pressure to respond to the extreme tactics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2008/dec/23/ukcrime-animal-research> used by 
radical animal rights activists campaigning to closeHuntingdon Life Sciences 
<http://www.huntingdon.com/>, the controversial drug testing company. To this 
end the act creates a new criminal offence restricting protestoutside 
residential premises 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/Archive/Article/0,4273,3984711,00.html> and amends 
the Companies Act to limit availability of directors' and company secretaries' 
home addresses. It also extends the Malicious Communications Act to cover 
electronic communication.

Significantly, the act amends the Police and Criminal Evidence Act to allow 
fingerprints and DNA samples to be retained indefinitely where they "were taken 
from a person in connection with the investigation of an offence".Britain's DNA 
database 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/dec/05/dna-database-civilliberties> 
now holds the samples of 4.4 million people and is proportionately the world's 
largest. TheAssociation of Chief Police Officers claims 
<http://www.acpo.police.uk/pressrelease.asp?PR_GUID=%7B6F49FDCA-9150-4278-A5D7-9368DCF93CE4%7D>
 that in the four years after the act became law in May 2001, the DNA samples 
of 8,500 people who were not convicted of an offence were later linked to 
14,000 offences, including 114 murders and 116 rapes.

Criticism

In December 2008 the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the UK was in 
breach of Article 8 
<http://www2.guardian.co.uk/uslatest/story/0,,-8126614,00.html> of the European 
Convention of Human Rights by keeping the DNA samples of people with no 
criminal convictions. Article 8 protects the right to "private life". The 
decision could oblige police forces in England, Wales and Northern Ireland to
destroy hundreds of thousands of DNA profiles 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2008/dec/04/law-genetics> taken from people who 
have been arrested by police and then released without charge or found not 
guilty.
 