
"There is a bit of a sense of one thing after another about The Invention of 
Murder: a parade of dim villains, bent judges and bad literature, interrupted 
by the odd brilliant writer, ingenious murderer or shrewd detective."Sam Leith 
in theSpectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/6589898/theatre-of-the-macabre.thtml> had 
reservations about Judith Flanders's study of the 19th-century obsession with 
murder, but felt the author "retails her stories with sufficient brio, and 
picks out detail aptly enough, to overcome that".Andrew Holgate in the Sunday 
Times called it "engrossing" and noted that "Flanders excels at following the 
trends in detection", yet for all her "exhaustive research, it feels hard 
sometimes to detect a taut and cohesive thesis in all her graphic material". 
"While much of this ground has been covered before," concludedRobert 
Douglas-Fairhurst in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/8243451/The-Invention-of-Murder-How-the-Victorians-Revelled-in-Death-and-Detection-and-Created-Modern-Crime-by-Judith-Flanders-review.html>
, "Flanders brings to her writing a vivid storyteller's eye and nicely 
understated gallows humour. Her argument is equally understated, and sometimes 
has to be pieced together from fragmentary clues. More important, though, and 
far more impressive, is her tenacity in stripping away the gaudy layers of 
folktale and legend that have accumulated around the period's most notorious 
murders . . ."

"The stories in the collection are not themed in any obvious way, but there's 
a common thread of going deep into the overlooked, the apparently ordinary, 
even banal, and searching out what is remarkable in it."Helen Dunmore in the 
Times praisedPulse by Julian Barnes: "While the writing is as clear, as wry, 
dry and elegant as ever, there is something turning beneath its surface." 
According toKate Saunders in the New Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/books/2011/01/short-stories-barnes-love-sex>, "All 
the stories inPulse have the absolute completeness and density of the very best 
short fiction . . . Barnes writes wonderfully about dying, but is interested 
mainly in the experience of being alive." ButDJÂ Taylor in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/7e50ac26-0d51-11e0-82ff-00144feabdc0.html#axzz1Aja1X2XS>
 was less keen: "If anything gives the 14 stories in this patchy new collection 
a unifying link, it is their fascination with what might be called the humdrum 
materials of existence . . . These are tight, rueful and almost desperately 
ironic stories whose characters are in permanent danger of being engulfed by 
the things they do . . . what weakens the less successful stories inPulse is 
their surfeit of information."

Benjamin Evans in the Sunday Telegraph  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/8241449/Snowdrops-By-AD-Miller-review.html>
was impressed withSnowdrops by AD Miller, which "brilliantly showcases" Moscow 
as "his novel's strutting, charismatic star . . . A few infelicities suggest a 
greenhorn novelist . . . But certain aspects of this otherwise disturbing and 
dazzling debut are unforgettable."John Dugdale in the Sunday Times saluted an 
"artful and atmospheric first novel" that shows Miller "accomplished in control 
of narrative voice and characterisation. Yet this chronicle of a crime foretold 
leaves you with questions. Wouldn't its evocation of mid-noughties Moscow work 
even better as non-fiction? And isn't its suspense-spoiling construction an 
elaborate admission that its portrayal of Russia as 'the Wild East' lacks 
surprise?" ForDoug Johnstone in the Independent on Sunday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/snowdrops-by-ad-miller-2176838.html>
 "Miller is absolutely wonderful at evoking the seediness and cynicism of 
Moscow, and he is even better at physical description . . . One or two niggling 
faults with the writing tend to detract from Miller's otherwise beautifully 
rendered prose, though": for instance, the author "seems overly keen on 
foreshadowing and building up a sense of foreboding".
 