
The Cross Street Journal, the internal staff magazine of the Manchester 
Guardian and Evening News, was launched in 1949. Employees contributed their 
own news stories and an issue was produced every few months.

The history of the Manchester Evening News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/09/manchester-evening-news-theguardian>
 is closely intertwined with that of the Guardian. For more than 80 years until 
2010 the Guardian and the Manchester Evening News shared a common ownership, 
although they operated as separate newspapers and maintained their editorial 
independence.

The staff journal, which ran until 1962, was affectionately named after the 
Manchester street on which the newspapers' shared offices were located. Cross 
Street was home to the Guardian for 85 years.

In the opening issue Laurence Prestwich Scott 
<http://archiveshub.ac.uk/data/gb2726-lps>, chairman of the Manchester Guardian 
and Evening News Limited, described the journal's purpose as being: "to help 
each of us to understand what the rest of us are doing, to appreciate how and 
why we do it". The first issue proved so popular that there was a shortage of 
copies.
 Cross Street building, Manchester, showing shared signage. Robert Smithies 
for the Guardian 
The journal celebrates life at Cross Street, letting us today explore what it 
was like to work at a busy newspaper in the 1950s. Each issue is packed full of 
interesting information - as well as reports of births, marriages and deaths, 
and the hiring and retiring of employees, the journal follows the social 
activity of staff working at the newspapers.

Social occasions, such as the annual children's party – considered the 
highlight of the Christmas season – where over 300 children were fed and 
entertained, were recorded. Pages are filled with joyous engagement and wedding 
announcements, sometimes the result of an office romance between staff members. 
There was also news of the young male employees serving their compulsory 
military service in the armed forces during this period ofpostwar National 
Service 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/modern/peacetime_conscripts_01.shtml>. 
Readers of the journal could follow the progress of the newspapers' own sports 
teams in regular updates, including from the successful Manchester Guardian 
bowls club.

Manchester Guardian bowls team triumph in Manchester Newspaper League, 1950 - 
match photographs featured in the Cross Street Journal 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1396531407075/Bowls-team-triumph.-Cross-S.pdf>

Staff contributed reports for inclusion and some wrote about group days out 
and their holidays abroad, recounting their adventures overseas at a time when 
foreign travel was still very much a luxury. Reports came from all departments 
of the newspaper, with a regular column of news and views from the composing 
room.

The journal can be used to find out more about family members who worked for 
the Guardian in the mid 20th century. Interest infamily history 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/0/23493076> has been growing in recent years, 
thanks to the increased digitisation of records, websites devoted to genealogy 
and the popularity of television programmes such as the BBC seriesWho Do You 
Think You Are? <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007t575>

Today the famous Cross Street building shared by the newspapers has long since 
been demolished, but the staff journal serves as a record of their longstanding 
relationship.

Copies of the Cross Street Journal can be consulted in the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> reading room by appointment 
<mailto:archives@theguardian.com>. More information can be found on the archive 
catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
 