
Commuters in the south-east of England have been promised a faster, easier 
journey on the £14.8bn Crossrail line, but may find their progress slowed 
considerably by a lengthy walk to connect toLondon Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> services.

Crossrail, to be named the Elizabeth line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/23/crossrail-named-elizabeth-line-honour-of-the-queen>
 in honour of the Queen, is expected to speed up journeys and increase capacity 
between Reading, Heathrow, central London and Shenfield in Essex when fully 
operational.

Overcrowded and getting busier: why new train lines can't come fast enough for 
London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/sep/21/tube-overcrowding-london-train-lines>
However, commuters needing to change from Crossrail on to the tube or other 
services could find time savings eroded by the distances they need to cover 
within stations, according toAndrew Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis>, the chairman of the 
national infrastructure commission.

“The interchanges are not great. There are going to be a lot of passengers 
walking a long way to change between trains – and they are very long trains,” 
Lord Adonis said ofCrossrail <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail>, 
speaking at an infrastructure conference in London.

The former transport secretary, who held office in the last Labour government 
when Crossrail was officially announced in 2009, said: “I tried as a minister 
at the last minute to unpick this, but it was too late.”


Adonis compared the Crossrail interchanges unfavourably with other additions 
to theLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> transport network, 
especially the Victoria line, which was constructed in the 1960s and has 
cross-platform connections with the Northern and Bakerloo lines at Euston and 
Oxford Circus. “Those save passengers five to 10 minutes every day,” he said. 
“Not enough people pay enough attention to interchanges.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fcrossrail-interchanges-not-good-enough-lord-adonis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa551325dd1dca2aa8b59e4c8f7176dd5764e40c8%2F0_171_5116_3070%2F5116.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crossrail%20interchanges%20are%20too%20long%2C%20says%20Lord%20Adonis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fcrossrail-interchanges-not-good-enough-lord-adonis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crossrail%20interchanges%20are%20too%20long%2C%20says%20Lord%20Adonis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fcrossrail-interchanges-not-good-enough-lord-adonis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa551325dd1dca2aa8b59e4c8f7176dd5764e40c8%2F0_171_5116_3070%2F5116.jpg>
 Connections on the London underground. Photograph: Alamy 
He declined to say where he believed the biggest problems were, although 
Adonis did intervene in the plans for the Bond Street hub in central London, 
originally designed as a separate Crossrail station from the existing 
Underground station, which serves the Central and Jubilee lines.

On direct journeys, the high-capacity Crossrail line, due to open in phases 
between 2017 and 2019, will bring passengers to central London from outer 
western and eastern suburbs substantially faster than the tube. Crossrail 
trains will be more than 200m long, roughly double the length of trains on the 
Northern and Piccadilly lines, with a capacity of 1,500 passengers.

Howard Smith, Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for 
London’s operations director for Crossrail, said: “The Elizabeth line will 
greatly increase the capacity of central London’s transport network, supporting 
regeneration and cutting journey times across the city.

 “We are investing millions of pounds upgrading existing stations along the 
route, including at Paddington, Liverpool Street and Tottenham Court Road, to 
make it as easy as possible for our customers to interchange with our existing 
services.”

Senior sources at TfL acknowledged that Crossrail interchanges were not ideal, 
but said constraints such as sewers and existing lines had limited the 
construction of tunnels, and that alternatives would have been more expensive. 
The final budget, which was partially financed through local business rates, 
was subject to intense scrutiny before approval and reduced to £14.8bn in 2010.

The interchanges for the planned Crossrail 2 should be more successful, with 
Adonis havingchampioned the next cross-London line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/10/londoners-should-pay-at-least-half-of-crossrail-2-bill-lord-adonis-says>
 as a scheme of national importance since beingappointed head of the 
infrastructure commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
 last year. The chancellor, George Osborne, has approved development funding to 
speed up plans for the north-south route acrossthe capital, with a view to it 
opening in 2033.
 