
Perhaps you're looking for something that will give you a better return than a 
savings account. Maybe you fancy emulating the likes of Peter Jones and Duncan 
Bannatyne by becoming "an armchair Dragon" and investing in a fledgling 
business that you think has the potential to grow. Or perhaps you would like to 
do something good for your community, such as chipping in a few pounds towards 
solar panels for your children's primary school, or to support a vital local 
amenity.

Alternatively, you might jump at the opportunity to help finance your 
favourite artist's latest project in return for a name-check on their next CD, 
or tickets to their film premiere.

If any of these sounds appealing, check out one of the rapidly growing number 
of crowdfunding websites that are becoming an increasingly vital fundraising 
tool. These are where lots of people invest or donate small sums to help a 
project, business, charity or social enterprise get off the ground or grow. It 
may seem like a very "now" phenomenon, but it has been around for years – 
though the internet has given it a huge boost. In 2008, Barack Obama raised 
$137m (£88m) during his campaign for the US presidency by using crowdfunding, 
and nowadays it is perhaps best-known as a way for musicians, film directors 
and other "creatives" to get funding.

Last month Reuters reported 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/04/08/us-crowdfunding-data-idUSBRE9370QY20130408>
 crowdfunding had helped companies and individuals worldwide raise $2.7bn 
(£1.7bn) from the public in 2012 – an 81% increase on the previous year. This 
year the total is predicted to hit $5.1bn (£3.3bn).

Here we look at what's on offer in the UK and how you can get involved.

Films, music, games, art etc

For some people, crowdfunding has become synonymous with US website Kickstarter
 <http://www.kickstarter.com/>, which claims that, since its 2009 launch, more 
than 3.9 million people have pledged enough money to fund more than 40,000 
creative projects.

In October 2012 it opened to projects from UK-based individuals, and this week 
featured scores of ventures across the country, including a new musical based 
on Bret Easton Ellis's 1991 novel American Psycho that will open at London's 
Almeida Theatre in December and is looking to raise $150,000 (around £97,000); 
the Birmingham Architecture Festival on 24-27 May (whose target is just 
£1,250); and several Edinburgh Fringe shows.

Kickstarter can't be used to offer financial returns or shares – instead, 
project creators offer "rewards" to thank backers for their support.

In the case of the American Psycho musical, to be directed by Rupert Goold, it 
had, by Thursday, raised $30,000. A pledge of $5 gets you a download of one of 
the show's songs while, for $300, you will receive various goodies including a 
copy of American Psycho signed by Ellis.

On Kickstarter, a project has to reach its goal before the deadline or no 
money changes hands – less than 50% make it. The minimum pledge is usually £1 
or $1. Be warned, the site "does not investigate a creator's ability to 
complete their project".

There have been articles claiming some Kickstarter-funded ventures missed 
their stated delivery dates 
<http://money.cnn.com/2012/12/18/technology/innovation/kickstarter-ship-delay/index.html>
.

Ploughing a similar furrow are sites such as ArtistShare 
<http://www.artistshare.com/v4/>, Indiegogo <http://www.indiegogo.com/> and 
SellaBand <https://www.sellaband.com/>.

Energy/solar

Solar Schools <http://www.solarschools.org.uk/> is a UK project helping 
communities crowdfund the cost of solar panels for their school by gathering 
lots of small donations from parents, pupils past and present, local businesses 
etc. Run by10:10 <http://www.1010global.org/uk>, the climate change campaign 
the Guardian helped launch, it provides the resources, training and support to 
attract donations and get everyone on board.

Solar panels can be a great investment for a school – a 7kW system could give 
a £400-a-year saving on energy bills and provide feed-in tariff payments 
totalling almost £950 a year, says the website. But for many schools, the 
upfront costs can be prohibitive.

Those participating in Solar Schools usually have to raise a minimum of £8,000 
to instal a solar system, and the scheme allows you to chip in £5 or more to 
sponsor a virtual solar tile.

Solar Schools was rolled out nationally a year ago and is now looking for 
about 100 schools to come on board. Applications are open, though you need to 
register before 15 May.

Green-minded individuals, who would like to receive a regular cash return, can 
check outAbundance <https://www.abundancegeneration.com/>, which lets people 
invest as little as £5 in UK renewable energy schemes. Three projects – two 
solar and one wind – are now fully funded, with five more in the pipeline. You 
buy debentures, which are like IOUs issued by the individual projects and, in 
return, the project commits to pay you a share of the profits from generating 
green energy. Abundance is regulated by theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/>, though in the event that an energy project went bust, 
you could lose some of your money.

Small businesses and entrepreneurs

A string of new UK crowdfunding sites are giving ordinary people the chance to 
invest, Dragons' Den-style, in start-up businesses. These sites includeSeedrs 
<http://www.seedrs.com/> and Crowdcube <http://www.crowdcube.com/>, both of 
which offer a minimum investment of £10. Investing in start-ups is about 
picking new businesses you think have the potential to succeed. Invest, and you 
become a shareholder.

However, this isn't for the faint-hearted; as Seedrs points out, "if a 
business you've invested in succeeds, the shares you own will become worth more 
than you paid. However, if the business fails – as the majority of start-ups do 
– you'll lose your investment".

To use sites such as these two, you will usually have to complete a 
questionnaire and show you fully understand the high-risk nature of this type 
of investment, plus commit to build a portfolio with a spread of investments.

There are also sites such as Peoplefund.it <http://www.peoplefund.it/> and 
Crowdfunder <http://www.crowdfunder.co.uk/>, which are arguably hybrids of the 
Kickstarter and Seedrs/Crowdcube models in that they feature creative business 
ideas seeking backing in return for rewards from those behind the projects. For 
example, Kat Jackson, who runs a natural soap and skincare products business 
based in Cornwall calledRelaxAhh <http://www.relaxahh.com./>, has been trying 
to raise £4,000, including £2,000 from crowdfunding, in an attempt to rescue 
her business and set up a new shop after an "extremely tough winter". She is on 
Crowdfunder and is offering rewards including a pack of soaps for a £5 
investment or a gift hamper for £25. At the time of writing, with just a few 
days to go, she had raised £632 on the site.

Also look at Buzzbnk <https://www.buzzbnk.org/>, which specialises in helping 
social enterprises and charities raise funds, andCrowdBnk 
<https://www.crowdbnk.com/>, which launched yesterday and aims to include a 
variety of projects, from charities to "for-profit" businesses.

Community co-ops

There are always lots of community ventures looking for backers. Over the past 
couple of years Guardian Money has featured a number of these "community 
co-operatives", which typically aim to bring vital amenities back to life, 
secure the future of valued local businesses or generate renewable energy.

We've written about pubs, shops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/dec/07/keeping-local-rise-community-co-op?INTCMP=SRCH>
, ahousing co-op 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/aug/17/housing-co-op-the-drive-living-collectively>
, amusic venue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jun/22/community-investment-schemes> 
and many others. Often there is an opportunity for people to invest in them by 
buying shares. Some offer a return in the form of interest while, with others, 
the rewards are described as social rather than financial. They may not 
necessarily be listed on a snazzy crowdfunding website but they certainly fit 
into the model.

Schemes currently seeking finance include Ecodynamic 
<http://ecodynamic.org.uk/>, a community-owned enterprise where profits will be 
reinvested in renewable energy, biodynamic food and farming as well as 
providing a "fair rate" of financial return – projected at 3% per annum in 
years one to three and rising to 5% by year four – for investor members.

The share offer, to finance a wind turbine in Redruth, Cornwall, has been 
extended until 24 May.
 