
The producers who are most frequently hailed as avants, savants and auteurs 
tend to be from the dawn of modern pop (Joe Meek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/feb/07/popandrock.musicdocumentary>, 
Phil Spector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/apr/14/phil-spector-record-producers>
,Lee Hazlewood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/28/lee-hazlewood-guru-cowboy-psychedelia>
) or the golden age of modern R&B (Timbaland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/may/14/timbaland-10-of-the-best>
, NERD, Rodney Jerkins). With the exception of Trevor Horn, they are rarely 
from the mid-70s to the mid-80s, an era that teemed with back-room boys eager 
to get their hands on new synth-based gadgetry to create future pop: best of 
them all was Alan Tarney who, had he worn outsize, red-rimmed glasses and had 
the owlish presence of Trevor Horn, would be more widely acclaimed. Wrapped in 
warm synths, propelled by shiny-hard acoustic guitar, hits like A-ha’s Take on 
Me and Cliff Richard’s Wired for Sound are the essence of the Alan Tarney sound.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsn9mLnKmPco&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsn9mLnKmPco>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsn9mLnKmPco&media=>

Tarney spent his childhood in the Cumbrian coastal town of Workington (another 
reclusive production auteur, Xenomania’sBrian Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/jul/18/popandrock5>, would grow up a 
decade later in neighbouring Whitehaven). His parents emigrated to Adelaide in 
Australia when he was a teenager and he soon met up with Trevor Spencer and 
Terry Britten, friends who would stick with him when he came back to the UK in 
1969. They recorded as Quartet for Decca and put out a couple of moody singles 
(the swampy Joseph, the baroque downer Will My Lady Call) before settling as a 
session unit, working with fellow Anglo-Australian Olivia Newton-John and, in 
turn, the Shadows and Cliff Richard. They briefly faced the public again as 
Tarney & Spencer, and my main memory of their sole Top of the Pops performance 
in 1976 – when they played I’m Your Man Rock’n’Roll – is that Tarney wore a 
shirt straight from my dad’s wardrobe, and appeared slightly embarrassed to be 
there; I felt a little sorry for him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPpmf8lPJoic&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPpmf8lPJoic>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPpmf8lPJoic&media=>
Even at this stage, Tarney was clearly interested in adult pop – I’m Your Man 
Rock’n’Roll didn’t sound much like rock’n’roll to me, not as Led Zeppelin, Gene 
Vincent or even the Rubettes would have known it, but on Top of the Pops Tony 
Blackburn pointed out that Tarney had played all of the instruments bar the 
drums on their sleek single. That marked him out as different. With an ATV 
Music publishing deal, he had apparently spent the session musicians’ money on 
extra studio time, and becoming an adept guitarist and keyboard player as well 
as learning his way around a mixing desk. Alan Tarney was a studio-bound pop 
fan, one who went for smoothness and warmth over angularity and shock. The 
introduction of synthesisers into the equation would be the making of him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhtZir_Taizg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhtZir_Taizg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhtZir_Taizg&media=>
Cliff Richard <https://www.theguardian.com/music/cliff-richard> recorded 
Tarney’s We Don’t Talk Anymore in 1979. With its hum of modernity, from the 
intro hook to the electronic purrs on the verses, and with those those slick, 
unintentionally comical backing vocals (“shee-hee-hee-heep”), We Don’t Talk 
Anymore gave the audible sensation, the very first time you heard it, that it 
was a No 1 hit.


It was also an archetype. Tarney would often start with an instrumental hook, 
then drive the verse smoothly into the chorus, building the song with melody, 
counter-melody, backing harmonies and occasionally a guitar break. No hammy key 
changes, His productions were always, to use session musician parlance, in the 
pocket. Tarney oversaw everything he worked on, like an English Lindsey 
Buckingham (not such a cosmic call – Millionaire from Leo Sayer’s 1980 album 
Living in a Fantasy could easily slot into Tango in the Night).

It didn’t always work – Squeeze’s Annie Get Your Gun (1982) has the bright 
acoustic, the warm Korgs, with a cheeky bubbling electronic undertow, but this 
only served to emphasise the lack of a killer hook (point of interest: Cliff 
Richard had been a major cheerleader for Up the Junction when it came out, 
which could have led to this unlikely tie-up). Likewise, the Lotus Eaters’ You 
Don’t Need Someone New from 1983 – the follow-up to First Picture of You – 
saved its most perfect Tarney touches (crushed harmonies over a pretty acoustic 
melody) for the bridge and middle eight; the chorus was undercooked.

The Lotus Eaters experience had led to him initially turning down work with a 
new London-based Norwegian trio,A-ha <https://www.theguardian.com/music/a-ha>, 
as he’d realised he preferred to work with solo singers. A year or so later 
they returned with the same song, Take on Me, and Tarney relented. He 
rerecorded it, turning it into a massive global hit, then stuck with them for 
three albums cutting big, melancholy, grown-up pop hits like The Sun Always 
Shines on TV, I’ve Been Losing You and Stay on These Roads.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ4kKNz6RMWo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ4kKNz6RMWo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ4kKNz6RMWo&media=>
My Alan Tarney experience came in 1993 when he produced Saint Etienne’s You’re 
in a Bad Way. Recording the vocals at his favourite studio, RG Jones in Morden, 
London, he literally marked an X on the studio floor with tape and had singer 
Sarah Cracknell stand stock still. I was banned from the studio – Tarney didn’t 
want anyone making schmucky suggestions – so I never got to meet him. But, 
bingo, we had our biggest hit to date; Tarney’s gloss and single-mindedness had 
made the difference. I didn’t realise at the time that this was almost a last 
hurrah. He did the single mix (the one you always hear, that is) of Pulp’s 
Disco 2000 in 1995, but since then he’s largely worked with old mates, more for 
fun than financial gain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYH-iX6NboxM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYH-iX6NboxM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYH-iX6NboxM&media=>

I’ve left my favourite Alan Tarney production until last, mainly because it’s 
atypical. He broke his own rules on what might be his finest single, Leo 
Sayer’s Orchard Road. The lyric is suburban, misty, and the protagonist is on 
the phone to his ex, eating his heart out, trying to get back home. Sayer is 
backed by nothing more than a metronomic snare and the most embraceable 
keyboards this side of OMD’s Souvenir. There’s very little to it, but its 
incredibly affecting. The performance is rough around the edges because Tarney 
made a demo, recorded Sayer’s first take, and knew, for once, that spending any 
longer over it was the wrong thing to do – it was already perfect. A few years 
ago, he explained his production philosophy to Sound on Sound magazine: “You 
don’t have to be great, you just have to know the right things to do.”
 