
Why do the Ku Klux Klan wear white robes that look like bedsheets? We have 
been tol 
<http://blog.oup.com/2015/01/klansville-usa-david-cunningham-ku-klux-klan/>d 
that this silly uniform used to represent ghosts of the Confederate dead, but 
that’s not the whole story. TheKlan’s hooded masks 
<http://museum.unc.edu/exhibits/reconstruction/ku-klux-klan-mask-1870/> are one 
of the most warped cases of cultural appropriation in American history.

Across the Southern Black Belt – named for the extent of cotton cultivation 
and a black majority – different masking traditions survived the suppression of 
African cultures and spiritual traditions. FromJohn Canoe  
<http://ncpedia.org/john-kuners>in Virginia and North Carolina to Christmas 
masquerades and Mardi Gras celebrations along the Gulf of Mexico and lower 
Mississippi Valley, African Americans preserved hooded colorful costumes in 
imitation of those found along the coasts of West Africa.

Many early Klan members learned these traditions as children growing up among 
African-Americans. Many original Klansmen were raised by black elders who 
famously told their charges folktales and stories centered in the early 
African-American culture. They, as much as their black playmates, feared the 
revenge of “Raw Head and Bloody Bones”, witches and “the Hairy Man” for 
disobeying the authority of their caretakers. White children often dressed up 
along with black children and participated in masquerades – where they saw men 
dress like women and hide their identities under Spanish moss or animal skins. 
White children even joined in the revelry by darkening their skin to appear 
“colored”. All of these traditions would be later used by the early Klan as a 
way to intimidate African-Americans.

One account of the origins of the Klan’s outfits read 
<https://books.google.com/books/about/Black_Legacy.html?id=xasnxtz8mk4C>:

The thought occurred to one man, and others, the possibility of utilizing the 
new and mysterious organization, to restrain young Negroes who were beginning 
to run amuck at social conditions, by taking advantages of the Negroes’ 
superstitious fear of ghosts. It was agreed to give this man’s theory a trial.


Another account said 
<https://books.google.com/books/about/Black_Legacy.html?id=xasnxtz8mk4C>: 


Each member was required to provide himself with a mask for the face, with 
orifices for the eyes and nose; a tall fantastic cardboard head so constructed 
as to increase the wearer’s apparent height; a gown, or robe, of sufficient 
length to cover the entire person. No particular color or material were 
prescribed ... each selected what in his judgment would be most hideous and 
fantastic ... these robes added vastly to the grotesque appearance of the 
assembled Klan.


In the masquerade <http://www.mythicarts.com/writing/Egungun.html> tradition 
in West and Central Africa, masqueraders represent ancestral moral authority: 
they are the dead taking part in the deliberations of the living, going so far 
as to disguise their voices to represent the return from the spirit world. 
Masqueraders in this tradition were members of secret societies charged with 
keeping social order and reminding people of the authority of times past. 
Crossing or disrespecting the rules was met with intimidation and punishment – 
usually under double cover of mask and darkness. Violators of the ancestral 
customs might be whipped or exiled.

The Klan thus incorporated a spectrum of occult language from African 
traditions to scare, intimidate and harass the formerly enslaved by using a 
spiritual horror they felt more acutely than others. Their uniforms were 
colorful, menacing and full of mystical symbols like stars and crosses that 
were appliquéd onto the fabric. African-Americans were surrounded by war and 
violence: to them, an inexhaustible amount of negative spiritual energy – 
embodied by ghosts and other angry dead – surrounded them. The Klansman did 
their best to exploit their knowledge of those beliefs.

Of all the “mysterious signals” meant to terrorize the black community, none 
was more salient than the insignia of the encircled cross and the burning cross 
used to warn and intimidate. The encircled cross, a universal symbol, was 
embodied in the cultures of the African Atlantic as acosmogram 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kongo_cosmogram> – the symbol of spiritual 
power, and the the movement of soul from the land of the living to the dead and 
back.Archaeologists <http://www.webarchaeology.com/html/kongocos.htm> and 
anthropologists have found the use of the crossroads symbol across the South 
and across the African diaspora in the Americas. The Klan’s layering of 
Christian symbolism onto ancient African religious culture was a horrific omen. 
To this day, the Klan’s symbol is the encircled cross; their name derives from 
the Greek word “kuklos”, which means circle, or ring.

Yet, we should be cautious about declaring the Klan’s original modus operandi 
as merely “frightening the superstitious” into believing they were the angry 
Confederate dead or an otherworldly moral authority. While this tactic might 
have indeed worked for some, the violence – including whippings and lynchings – 
were the source of most of the fear. Beyond this, the Klan used African 
traditions in an attempt to place its crimes in a wider context of Southern 
masquerading, so as to help dismiss claims that they were doing anything more 
than having a little fun when investigated.

The late professor William D Piersen began to unravel the relationship between 
the Klan mask and the West and Central African spiritual tradition 22 years ago 
years ago in his classic bookBlack Legacy 
<http://www.amazon.com/Black-Legacy-Americas-Hidden-Heritage/dp/0870238590>. 
Since then, the work of scholars like Elaine Parsons has further established 
the connection between early Klan costumes and African andAfro-Caribbean  
<http://www.lameca.org/dossiers/rumba/eng/p4.htm>behavior and masquerading 
traditions in the colonial and antebellum South.


Like so much of American culture with African roots, the early Klan history is 
conveniently forgotten to obfuscate the contributions of enslaved people and to 
render them passive rather than active actors in their own narrative.


As a result, few know that the Klan unashamedly co-opted and perverted African 
spirituality, aesthetics and culture in their mission of restoring white 
supremacy to the American South. To this day, much of the Southern culture as 
practiced by many Klan members reflects this history: the banjo playing, 
soul-food eating and so-called rebel-yell (an imitation of the African/blues 
yodel) all serve as a reminder of how much culture was “borrowed” from the very 
people they had enslaved.

The group protesting the removal of the Confederate battle flag from the state 
capitol grounds in South Carolina would do well to remember this. They, and 
other white supremacists, like to cry over their lost Aryan purity, but the 
truth is from 1619 onward, that purity was gone with the wind.
 