
Defence secretary Michael Fallon has admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/saudis-dropped-british-cluster-bombs-in-yemen-fallon-tells-commons>
 that British-made cluster bombs were used by the Saudi armed forces in Yemen. 
He claimed though that the bombs had been used against “legitimate military 
targets”. Even if technically correct, this assertion will not assuage mounting 
concerns, not least in parliament, aboutBritish complicity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/british-arms-sales-saudi-arabia-immoral-illegal-yemen>
 in Saudi military action.

The Saudis are at the forefront of an Arab Gulf coalition which launched an 
intervention in Yemen in 2015 to reverse the advance of Iranian-backedHouthi 
rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/19/understanding-houthi-motives-complicated-essential-yemen-future>
. They had ousted the government ofAbd-Rabbu Mansour Hadi 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abdrabbuh_Mansur_Hadi>. While it was initially 
backed by the UN, the ensuing civilian casualties and destruction of civilian 
infrastructure has been condemned as a violation of the laws of war.

At the very least there will be questions for the British government to answer 
about when it became aware that the Saudis were using British cluster bombs 
supplied as long ago as the 1980s. Having signed theconvention on cluster 
munitions <http://www.clusterconvention.org/> that bans their use and which 
came into effect in 2010, Britain asserts that it opposes the production and 
deployment of such weapons.

Saudis dropped British-made cluster bombs in Yemen, Fallon tells Commons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/saudis-dropped-british-cluster-bombs-in-yemen-fallon-tells-commons>
Since Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> is not, 
however, a signatory to the convention, it seems it cannot be held to account – 
and nor can the British for originally supplying the bombs decades ago. 
According to Fallon, meanwhile, we can be reassured: “The Saudis believe that 
in this particular instance they did respect international humanitarian law.” 
Plus, the Saudis claim, a decision to use old stocks (previously declared 
defunct) was made by a battlefield commander without clearance from above.

Fallon was unable to say what would happen to the remaining stocks, how many 
cluster bombs had been used or how many were left. But apparently the Saudis 
have assured the British that they will make no further use of the weapons, 
which can kill and maim long after the initial delivery. The individual 
bomblets released on impact can remain undetonated for years until stumbled 
upon by unwitting civilians.

This reliance on Saudi disclaimers will not assuage the concerns of those MPs, 
including members of thecommittee on arms export controls 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/other-committees/committee-on-arms-export-controls/>
 and theforeign affairs committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/foreign-affairs-committee/>
, which had already called for an independent inquiry or court ruling on the 
use of any British-supplied arms by the Saudis in Yemen. At issue is whether 
such use amounts to the legitimisation by Britain of a Saudi strategy that has 
caused the deaths of so many civilians, including children.

Last week the US administration signalled its revulsion at the civilian 
casualty rate and what it called “flaws in the coalition’s targeting practices 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/13/politics/us-arms-sales-saudi-arabia-yemen/> 
and overall prosecution of the air campaign”, by announcing a curtailment of US 
arms supplies, in particular precision-guided weapons, to Saudi Arabia. 
However, prime minister Theresa May said the British would not follow suit, 
relying instead on Saudi assertions of innocence. Previously, Britain has said 
that its personnel who train the Saudis routinely warn them against 
transgressing international humanitarian law.

This kind of obfuscation and acceptance of the Saudi line demonstrates the 
intricacies of the Saudi-British relationship. The Americans are the leading 
suppliers of arms to Saudi Arabia, but since at least the 1980s the UK has 
occupied a subsidiary role which has assured British manufacturers a niche 
market that is essential to its defence industry.

Saudi Arabia and UK-supplied cluster bombs: what do we know?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/saudi-arabia-uk-supplied-cluster-bombs-yemen-war-what-do-we-know>
Without lucrative contracts to supply the Saudi armed forces over the years, 
it would not have been possible to keep the production lines rolling as the 
transition was made fromTornado <http://www.raf.mod.uk/equipment/tornado.cfm> to
Typhoon <https://www.eurofighter.com/> fighter jets at BAE Systems. So not only 
are British jobs at stake but also Britain’s independent arms production 
capability. And to maintain its niche in the market in the face of fierce 
competition, Britain has undertaken to provide training and maintenance 
packages that place its technicians at the heart of the Saudi defence 
establishment.

Alongside this, for years the British have developed a high level of 
cooperation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/defence-and-security-blog/2015/oct/07/uk-saudi-arabia-the-new-special-relationship>
 with the Saudi intelligence services which successive prime ministers have 
claimed helps to keep British citizens safe from terrorists. When awkward 
questions are asked – whether by MPs or human rights campaigners – about the 
Saudis’ humanitarian record, their rulers have only to remind the British 
government of the defence contracts and security cooperation.

This is the uncomfortable reality, not just for the government but for British 
citizens. If presented with a detailed tally of the actual costs of a break 
with Saudi Arabia to the British defence industry, jobs, the economy, 
intelligence and security, it may well emerge that British enthusiasm to take 
the moral high ground will waver.
 