
The idea of disruption, as it is used in the world of technology, has changed 
my frame of reference for creativity, and made me think about culture in a 
broader sense.

The new meaning of the word was coined by Harvard Economics professor Clayton 
Christian in a 1995 article called Disruptive Technologies: Catching the Wave. 
It spread even further after his 1997 bestseller The Innovator’s Dilemma (a 
personal favourite of Jeff Bezos who founded Amazon.com).


Today, Silicon Valley has stepped into a leadership position in so many 
fields, and the idea of “disruptive innovation” is one of the central myths 
that galvanises it. The term appeals to thinkers who value the flexibility and 
creativity of startups – and it has now been used in the worlds of science, 
economics, music and visual art.

Rethinking my artistic heroes in line with this model has let me think more 
about game-changing ideas, and how valuable unpopular forward-thinking 
propositions can turn out to be.

Disruption can be used to defend things that are out of step with current 
thinking – and can be used as a tool for appreciating radical difference. 
Recognising “disruption” as both a principle and a goal has inspired me to make 
art that invests in risk and celebrates the flexible culture needed to foster 
real innovation.

So this month’s challenge, as part of The A to Z of Reader’s Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/01/a-to-z-of-readers-art-new-project-share-your-art>
, is to create a work of art that expresses your experiences of disruption.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.
 