
Taking a low dose of aspirin every day may reduce the risk of cancer and slow 
the spread of the disease, according to a study that followed the health of 
more than 100,000 patients.

Research by a team at the American Cancer Society in Atlanta found the overall 
risk of dying from cancer was16% lower 
<http://www.oxfordjournals.org/our_journals/jnci/press_releases/jacobsdjs318.pdf>
 among people who took a daily aspirin pill for up to 11 years, with deaths 
from gastrointestinal cancers, such as oesophageal, stomach and colorectal 
cancers, falling by around 40%. Deaths from other cancers fell by 12% on 
average.

The findings, based on 100,139 men and women with no prior history of cancer, 
support previous claims that aspirin can protect against some forms of the 
disease, but suggest the effect is not as strong as those earlier studies found.

In research published in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/20/cancer-drugs>, Peter Rothwell 
<http://www.clneuro.ox.ac.uk/people/peter-m-rothwell/> at Oxford University 
reported that the risk of dying from cancer was around 37% lower for people who 
took aspirin for more than five years. Those who had a daily dose of the drug 
for three yearsreduced their risk of cancer by about a quarter 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2811%2961720-0/fulltext>
, his study found.

The latest work, led by cancer scientist Eric Jacobs 
<http://www.cancer.org/Research/ResearchProgramsFunding/Epidemiology-CancerPreventionStudies/OurStaff/eric-j-jacobs>
, points to a more modest protective effect from aspirin, though the authors 
concede that the design of the study may have led them to over- or 
underestimate the drug's anti-cancer properties.

"Even a relatively modest benefit with respect to overall cancer mortality 
could still meaningfully influence the balances of risk and benefits of 
prophylactic aspirin use," the authors write in the Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute.Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> did not 
reduce lung cancer among smokers, suggesting that cigarette smoking negated its 
benefits.

Scientists are unsure how aspirin prevents cancer, but it may act by damping 
down inflammation in the body, or slowing the buildup of mutations in cells 
that ultimately turn cancerous. The drug appears to slow the spread of cancer 
around the body by preventing cancer cells from sticking to blood platelets.

Despite the evidence that regular low doses of aspirin – 75mg a day – can keep 
cancer at bay, many doctors believe it is too early to encourage widespread use 
of the drug to prevent the disease. One of the most serious side effects of 
aspirin is damage to the stomach lining. This can cause internal bleeding, 
which in rare cases is fatal, especially in those aged 70 and older.

"Although recent evidence about aspirin use and cancer is encouraging, it is 
still premature to recommend people start taking aspirin specifically to 
prevent cancer. Even low-dose aspirin can substantially increase the risk of 
serious gastrointestinal bleeding," said Jacobs.

He added: "Decisions about aspirin use should be made by balancing the risks 
against the benefits in the context of each individual's medical history. Any 
decision about daily aspirin use should be made only in consultation with a 
health care professional."

In an accompanying editorial 
<http://www.oxfordjournals.org/our_journals/jnci/press_releases/barondjs338.pdf>
, John Baron, a clinical epidemiologist at the University of North Carolina in 
Chapel Hill, wrote: "This is exciting: simply taking a pill can prevent cancer 
incidence and cancer death. However, just because aspirin is effective does not 
mean it necessarily should be used. Aspirin is a real drug, with definite 
toxicity. As for any preventative intervention, the benefits must be balanced 
against the risks, particularly when the benefits are delayed whereas the risks 
are not."
 