
Taking a low dose of aspirin each day may prevent cancer and stop it 
spreading, according to three papers to be published in leading medical 
journals on Wednesday. It could also possibly have a use as a treatment for the 
disease.

Dr Peter Rothwell from Oxford University and the John Radcliffe hospital and 
colleagues, the authors of the studies inthe Lancet <http://www.thelancet.com/> 
and Lancet Oncology have previously shown that long-term daily aspirin, for 10 
years or so, reduces the risk of colorectal (bowel) cancer and other common 
cancers, but some experts have voiced concerns over potential long-term 
side-effects, because aspirin can cause stomach bleeding.

The new studies reinforce aspirin's claim to be a weapon against cancer. They 
show thattaking daily low-dose pills for just three years 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(11)61720-0/fulltext>
 can reduce your risk of cancer by about a quarter – 23% for men and 25% for 
women. The risk of dying of cancer is cut by 15% – and by 37% for those who 
take aspirin for longer than five years.

All the data came from 51 trials giving low-dose aspirin to people at risk of 
a heart attack or stroke.Aspirin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aspirin> 
thins the blood, making it less likely to clot.

The second study 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(12)60209-8/fulltext>
 found that aspirin helped prevent the spread of cancer – or metastasis – to 
other organs, which is a serious threat to the patient's survival. Aspirin 
reduced the proportion of cancers that spread instead of staying localised 
by 48%.

The drug also reduced the risk of being diagnosed with a solid cancer that had 
already spread by 31%. For patients initially diagnosed with a local cancer, 
the risk of later metastasis was reduced by 55%.

Aspirin's ability to slow metastasis may be linked to its effect on platelets, 
the clotting bodies in the blood, said the scientists. The role of platelets in 
promoting cancer spread in mice was reported more than 40 years ago.

Rothwell said the effect of aspirin on the spread of cancer was unique and 
might be useful in treatment. "Previously, no drug has ever been shown to 
reduce metastasis as a specific effect," he said. "It opens up a completely new 
therapeutic area."

Many people take a low 75-milligram dose of aspirin each day to guard against 
heart attacks and strokes.

Experts advise against this for people who are at no special risk of heart and 
artery disease because of the possible long-term side-effects of aspirin. The 
drug, which prevents blood clotting, can increase the likelihood of internal 
bleeding in the stomach, intestines and brain.

In some people, such as pregnant women at risk of high blood pressure, the 
benefits of taking aspirin are said to outweigh the risks. However, to date, 
cancer has not been part of this calculation.

Rothwell said it was time to think again. "It's certainly time to add 
prevention of cancer into the analysis of the balance of risk and benefits of 
aspirin. So far, all the guidelines have just been based on the prevention of 
strokes and heart attacks.

"This research really shows that the cancer benefit is as large, if not 
larger, than the benefit in terms of preventing heart attacks and strokes. It 
does change the equation quite drastically."

A spokeswoman for the Department of Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> said: "We are currently 
considering how to ensure the public gets the best advice on this issue, given 
that there are risks as well as potential benefits from taking aspirin."

Rothwell suggested that the National Institute for Health and Clinical 
Excellence, which issues treatment guidelines for the NHS, should issue advice 
on the use of aspirin to combat cancer.

"I think it would be helpful in the fullness of time if a body like Nice, for 
example, would come up with an independent recommendation on the basis of all 
the evidence that has been gathered," he said. "That would give people 
confidence."

Nice has never been asked by the department to develop guidance on aspirin and 
cancer prevention.

But the drug is mentioned in the latest Nice guidance on colorectal cancer. It 
says that "regular use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), 
notably aspirin, seems to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer".

Two American experts commenting in The Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(11)61654-1/fulltext>
 pointed out some limitations to the research. Dr Andrew Chan and Dr Nancy 
Cook, from Harvard Medical School in Boston, said the analysis did not include 
findings from two large US trials that failed to show an anti-cancer benefit 
from taking aspirin every other day. Some analyses were also limited by the 
quality of available data.

However the US experts concluded: "These caveats notwithstanding, Rothwell and 
colleagues show quite convincingly that aspirin seems to reduce cancer 
incidence and death."
 