
In a deliberately provocative essay, the critic James Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/05/critic-james-wood-religious-view-of-fiction>
 compares Chekhov with Ibsen and finds in Chekhov’s favour. Ibsen, Wood 
believes, orders life into three trim acts. The Norwegian thinks of his 
characters as envoys, sent into the world to convey the dramatic ironies and 
ideas of their author. The people in the Russian plays by contrast, “act like 
free consciousness, not as owned literary characters”. Wood rates Chekhov next 
to Shakespeare because these two alone, among the world’s writers, respect the 
absolute complexity of life, never allowing their creations to be used for any 
other purpose than being themselves. The special genius of the human beings in 
Chekhov’s plays and short stories is that they don’t have to behave like people 
in a purposeful drama. “Chekhov’s characters”, Wood declares, “forget to be 
Chekhov’s characters.”

David Hare v the establishment: a memoir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/21/david-hare-v-establishment-memoir>
Who can deny that this is an alluring and potent idea? Who doesn’t love the 
notion that there existed an author so free that he was able to summon up men 
and women who trail a sense of mystery as profound as human beings do in 
reality? It would be wonderful if plays and books could be written that were 
seen not to reorder life, but that we were able to experience as if they were 
life itself. What a marvellous thing that would be! But behind Wood’s 
apparently novel theory: let’s applaud a writer who is not felt to intervene – 
you can hear the echo of another critical battle that has been raging since 
Chekhov’s death. Wood is firing a fresh round of artillery on behalf of that 
section of the playwright’s admirers who value him as the ultimate 
universalist, the man too squeamish to say anything too specific about his own 
time and his own class. They think of their hero as a portraitist. But Wood 
ignores that other, equally vociferous section of admirers who believe that 
their man was as political, as social and as specific a writer as Gorky or 
Tolstoy. They think of him as a moralist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fdavid-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443787363151%2F516c3b16-110b-4483-8eca-414fb9590a0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hare%20on%20Young%20Chekhov%3A%20'thrilling%20sunbursts%20of%20anger%20and%20romanticism'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fdavid-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hare%20on%20Young%20Chekhov%3A%20%27thrilling%20sunbursts%20of%20anger%20and%20romanticism%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fdavid-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443787363151%2F516c3b16-110b-4483-8eca-414fb9590a0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jonathan Kent, left, and David Hare at Ivanov rehearsals, Chichester Festival 
theatre. Photograph: Johan Persson 
It is my own conviction that we can’t address these contentious questions 
unless we take time to consider those plays that Chekhov wrote before he was 
Chekhov. WhileThe Cherry Orchard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/16/the-cherry-orchard-chekhov-simon-stephens-katie-mitchell>
,The Three Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/09/three-sisters-review> and Uncle 
Vanya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/18/great-performances-michael-redgrave-uncle-vanya-chichester>
 have been in the international repertory since they were written, less 
attention is paid to the playwright’s earlier work. It is essential to see 
these much more direct plays for what they are – thrilling sunbursts of 
youthful anger and romanticism – rather than for what they portend.

The text of Platonov is so prolix that the most successful adaptations have, 
significantly, tended to be the freest. But my strategy was that I should try 
to stick, in architecture at least, to Chekhov’s original plan. I would clear 
away massive amounts of repetition and indulgence, recoin and rebalance much of 
the dialogue, but nevertheless aim that the audience should see the play in 
something recognisable as the form in which Chekhov left it.

It was a risky undertaking. A faithful performance of Platonov will test to 
the limit the idea that an evening in a playhouse needs to be held together in 
one governing style, but for me, something wholly original lies at its spine. 
The form, often accused of being undisciplined, can be seen as a deliberate 
irising down onto one particular character. Capitalism is arriving, and its 
practices, all too recognisable today, are sweeping aside a privileged class 
that no longer knows how to maintain its way of life. Once he has established 
the context of his vision, Chekhov goes on to embody the contradictions of this 
superfluous class in one single individual.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fdavid-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443787446271%2F9643770a-aee9-4fff-9f1e-96c719efd2b0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hare%20on%20Young%20Chekhov%3A%20'thrilling%20sunbursts%20of%20anger%20and%20romanticism'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fdavid-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hare%20on%20Young%20Chekhov%3A%20%27thrilling%20sunbursts%20of%20anger%20and%20romanticism%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fdavid-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443787446271%2F9643770a-aee9-4fff-9f1e-96c719efd2b0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘A moment of revelation’ … Ralph Fiennes and Harriet Walter in Ivanov at the 
Almeida in 1997. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
In Platonov we have a great example of Chekhov exposed, like Osborne through 
Jimmy Porter, willing to let his own passion and his own political despair 
spill onto the stage. This writer is not Wood’s stringless puppet-master, 
rather a man unafraid by a mix of direct address, monologue, farce and tragedy 
to let us know how strongly he feels about the social decay around him.

Chekhov’s own words about his first performed play Ivanov, “I’ve tried to be 
original. I have not introduced a single villain or a single angel … nor have I 
accused or vindicated anyone. Whether or not I’ve succeeded I can’t tell … The 
actors don’t understand it and say the most ridiculous things, they’re badly 
miscast, I’m constantly at war with them. Had I known I’d never have got 
involved with it”, chime neatly with Maxim Gorky’s observation: “How lonely 
Chekhov is. How little he’s understood.” With hindsight we know that Chekhov 
was about to begin the process of banishing melodrama from the 19th-century 
stage, but as a result it has been easy and convenient to forget that he wrote 
an exceptional melodrama himself. Drafted in a fortnight, the play uses 
monologue and direct address. But what entitles us to think these techniques 
are not deliberate and just as skilfully deployed as the more muted strategies 
the author later adopted? Unless we can admit that Ivanov is not a lesser play 
but simply different from his later work, then we will miss its significance.

At the Almeida in 1997, Ralph Fiennes, in a moment of revelation for British 
theatre,finally played the part the way the author wanted 
<http://www.playbill.com/news/article/ralph-fiennes-taking-his-london-ivanov-to-moscow-69760>
, revealing Ivanov not as a landowner lost in useless introspection, but a man 
who found the whole Russian tradition of introspection and self-pity 
humiliating, a man fighting with all his willpower not to surrender to 
stereotype. Viewed in this light, the play’s tragic ending which provided the 
author with so much difficulty seemed to have a terrible logic.

Of all 19th-century plays, The Seagull is most insistently modern. It is also 
the most adapted. Because The Seagull deals with an artistic argument between 
the avant-garde and the traditional, it updates peculiarly well.Anya Reiss’s 
transposition of the play to the Isle of Man in the present day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/nov/13/the-seagull-southwark-review> – 
people go into town in Land Rovers – seemed to have none of the usual problems 
of arbitrary transposition. It was triumphantly apt and alive. Reviewers who 
complained of the presence of fridges, sunglasses and high heels inLuc Bondy’s 
stunning production for the Vienna Burgtheater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/aug/31/edinburghfestival2001.edinburghfestival>
 seemed blind to the beauty of what the director was doing: nudging a play that 
is set on the cusp of change into a visual language that made it more immediate.
 Jutta Lampe as Arkadina and Gert Voss as Trigorin in Luc Bondy’s The Seagull 
at the Burgtheater, Vienna. Photograph: Reinhard Werner 
The bones of the plot are routine. A promising young woman is casually ruined 
by an older man. We are once more in the realm of melodrama, as in Platonov and 
Ivanov. But in this climactic work something new has arrived that is not purely 
a matter of technique. Instead of giving us single characters striving for 
individual self-expression, he has found a marvellous ability to suggest 
something beyond them, something inexpressible. His characters are starting to 
be victims of events and changes in themselves which it is almost impossible 
for them to recognise or understand. He is putting them under the eye of 
eternity.

The balance in writing here has changed, but there is enough of Chekhov’s 
early romanticism still showing to make it the most perfect, and most perfectly 
achieved, play he ever wrote. Are the characters victims of their traits, or 
are they choosing paths which might have led elsewhere? In Platonov, time is 
something which stretches ahead, meaningless. In Ivanov, it represents waste, 
like an abacus of failure. But in The Seagull, with its clever structure of 
inter-act jumps, time represents something infinitely more powerful: both the 
element in which we act out our own misfortunes, but also the reason for so 
many of them.


The Seagull was made by a great second production. On its first outing, it 
flopped. This seems to me hardly a coincidence. With The Seagull, Chekhov is 
for the first time beginning to write plays that crucially depend on how you do 
them. At the outset, as a short-story writer, he palpably condescended to the 
form of theatre. By the time he writes The Seagull, you can feel Chekhov’s 
increasing fascination with it, a desire to advance the history of that form. 
On the surface, The Seagull is a play about theatre and about art. But the 
struggle to create something lasting and worthwhile in life is what really 
drives the play.Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> is only the 
metaphor. Chekhov’s own youth is ending, and ending with a new determination 
not to knock away the past but to try, however doomed, to find some sort of 
future. It is a very long distance in this trilogy from the criminal Osip in 
Platonov who lives in the forest like a medieval thief, to the young Konstantin 
dreaming of an art that has never been seen before. As we watch, we are moving 
from the 19th century to the 20th, and, implicitly to our own. We are seeing 
the birth of the new.

 * This extract is taken from the introduction to Young Chekhov, published by 
Faber <http://www.faber.co.uk/shop/drama/9780571313020-young-chekhov.html>. The 
Young Chekhov season, comprising The Seagull, Ivanov and Platonov, is at
Chichester Festival theatre <https://www.cft.org.uk/young-chekhov> until 14 
November. David Hare will be talking about his new memoir, The Blue Touch 
Paper, at aGuardian Members event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-a-life-in-theatre-with-david-hare-17392234642>
 on 24 November.
 