
Soon after becoming a playwright, I resolved to have nothing to do with 
adaptation. There were two reasons. First, I wasn’t any good at it. My early 
version ofPirandello <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/luigipirandello>’s The 
Rules of the Game, written when I was 23, and performed by Paul Scofield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/20/2> and Joan Plowright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/20/national-theatre-50-joan-plowright>
 for the National Theatre, decisively proved that I knew nothing about 
Pirandello and still less about adaptation: it was inept. But I had also gone 
into it with a puritanical belief that dramatists should write their own plays, 
not hitch a free ride by adapting other people’s. Nothing in the world was 
harder than telling a new story. Reconfiguring old ones was going to be far 
less important work.

Ibsen didn’t seem to mind that audiences might talk as much about his peculiar 
psyche as they do about his hero’s

This belief held good until 1991 when Jonathan Kent, at the start of his 
shared artistic directorship of theAlmeida theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/almeida-theatre>, asked me whether he could 
restage the Pirandello. Reading it again after nearly 20 years made me feel so 
ashamed that I offered, for free, to entirely redo it rather than allow my 
youthful incompetence to be displayed again. The authority of the result owed a 
great deal toRichard Griffiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/29/richard-griffiths>’s elegant, 
lethal performance as the jealous hero, Leone. But, spurred on by Jonathan, I 
then felt ready to tackle Brecht and Chekhov. The Almeida’s overall mission to 
rediscover and reinterpret the European repertory resulted in some of the best 
theatre-going of my life, and I was proud to be a small part of its 
realisation. In 1998Sam Mendes <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sam-mendes> 
moved me on to think about a free modernisation ofReigen AKA La Ronde, which 
eventually emerged as a big Broadway scandal calledThe Blue Room. To everyone’s 
surprise, the play was splashed over the entire front page of New York Daily 
News, an unexpected place to findArthur Schnitzler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/01/arthur-schnitzler-archive-formally-acquired-by-cambridge-university>
. Howard Davies then asked forLorca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/federico-garcia-lorca>, and in 2006 
Michael Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/11/michael-attenborough-to-leave-almeida>
 encouraged me to try Gorky.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdavid-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d14252d308aec59abd378bba3a847103bf7558%2F0_0_4473_3102%2F4473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hare%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20love%20adaptation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdavid-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hare%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20love%20adaptation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdavid-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d14252d308aec59abd378bba3a847103bf7558%2F0_0_4473_3102%2F4473.jpg>
 A scene from David Hare’s adaptation of Chekhov’sPlatonov at the Chichester 
festival theatre, 2015. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Affinity with some authors, even with some plays, was easier than with others. 
You never know till you start. The first five pages are always agony, often 
taking as long as the next 50. Last summer, when seeking to animate the plays 
of young Chekhov for the Chichester festival theatre, I for once slipped 
straight away into an idiom that seemed appropriate and supple.Platonov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/05/david-hare-young-chekhov-excerpt-seagull-ivanov-platonov>
 was so clearly about the reckless dazzle of youth,Ivanov about its passing, and
The Seagull about the determination of the middle-aged to destroy the hopes of 
the young, that a shared, subtly modern rhetoric suggested itself unforced for 
all three plays. In the case ofThe Seagull, which is, quite simply, a perfectly 
written play, I was able to work at ridiculous speed. But with Lorca’sThe House 
of Bernarda Alba <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/mar/16/theatre1> I 
always felt a long way off the pace, grasping hopelessly for a surrealist tone 
that was beyond my reach.

Although his family were flattering about the result, Lorca’s distinctive 
approach seemed to needPedro Almodóvar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pedroalmodovar> more than it needed me. 
Brecht’sLife of Galileo, with its implication that an individual can change 
history, was a breeze. But hisMother Courage, arguing the exact opposite, and 
full of what German speakers optimistically describe as “Bavarian humour” was 
depressing and intractable, a tough play to work on and an even tougher one to 
get right.Tonya Pinkins <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0684371/>’s withdrawal 
earlier this month from a prominentMother Courage in New York after a couple of 
previews because she could not agree an interpretation of the central role with 
the director did not surprise me in the least. It’s that kind of play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdavid-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e35e3d907bafb65d8de10194ed86d77c7c43e9a%2F0_0_1459_2410%2F1459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Hare%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20love%20adaptation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdavid-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Hare%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20love%20adaptation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fdavid-hare-adaptations-the-master-builder-chekhov-old-vic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e35e3d907bafb65d8de10194ed86d77c7c43e9a%2F0_0_1459_2410%2F1459.jpg>
 Nicole Kidman inThe Blue Room, Hare’s adaptation of Arthur Schnitzler’s Reigen
, 1998. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Whatever the success of the individual outcome, sustained exposure to the 
skills and techniques of other playwrights was always pleasurable. I would lay 
the pieces out on the garage floor and think, “Oh, so that’s how they do it”. 
It wasn’t coincidence that I took to adaptation in the theatre at exactly the 
same time that I gave up directing. My best way of describing stage adaptation 
is “direction by proxy”. It’s not that you do the director’s job for them – far 
from it – but essentially, as you adapt, you do create a little production in 
your head. When you work with a great director, you notice that what they are 
doing is effectively tuning the play to the audience’s understanding. It is 
like turning a lens to crisp focus. The great ones mediate the experience 
between the stage and the auditorium, so that everything – light, sound, image, 
rhythm – helps to reveal to the onlooker exactly what it is they are watching.

When remaking a classic, the adapter aims to judiciously choose which aspects 
of the literal translation to emphasise and which to downplay. There can never 
be any such thing as a word-for-word faithful translation, or if there were, it 
would be dreary and academic. No one tongue perfectly parallels another. 
Nuances abundant in a word in one language are entirely absent in another. For 
that reason fluency in the original language may well be a huge bonus in 
theatrical transposition – inMichael Frayn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-frayn>’s Chekhov or Michael 
Meyer’s Ibsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/aug/07/guardianobituaries.books>, 
clearly it is – but it is not essential. My job is to pitch a play so that the 
resonances intended by the play of words in one tongue seem still to be 
sparking in an entirely different time and culture.

Ibsen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ibsen> came to the very same 
conclusion when he insisted that if his plays survived after his death, they 
would need to be revised constantly for foreign production. He didn’t believe 
any one translation could ever become standard. Ibsen requested the plays 
always be presented in what he called “the everyday speech of the time”, and, 
by definition, he expected that speech to change. It wasRalph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes>, a fellow graduate of the 
Almeida of the 1990s, who came to me asking to play the part of Halvard 
Solness, because he had reached that stage in his life when only the most 
challenging texts attracted him. It seemed appropriate to the play’s dizzying 
abstraction thatMatthew Warchus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/matthew-warchus>’s production is 
international, withSarah Snook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/17/predestination-sarah-snook> 
coming from Australia to play Hilde andLinda Emond 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0256599/>, the consummate player of Arthur Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miller> and of Tony Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tony-kushner>, coming from New York to play 
Aline.

David Hare v the establishment: a memoir
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/21/david-hare-v-establishment-memoir>
The Master Builder, as it happens, is an especially demanding text because it 
moves almost everywhere between the everyday and the sublime. It is a play that 
changes its apparent subject more times than any I can think of. Just when, as 
an audience, you settle on one meaning and think, “So that’s what he’s getting 
at”, Ibsen flips the action and takes you off on a different course entirely. 
The timing with which he judges these switches is immaculate. At curtain-up, 
Ibsen appears to be offering a realistic portrait of an architect who fears 
that the young will come knocking at the door to challenge his professional 
supremacy. But by the time he and the young woman, Hilde, are arguing about 
events that may or may not have happened in another town 10 years previously, 
and both invoking demons and trolls to explain their behaviour, the play is 
moving into far slippier territory. As a tragic subtext about past events 
between the architect and his wife Aline begins to take hold, there is a 
fractured quality in the Norwegian dialogue. The play is full of broken speech, 
as if words are being spoken, unbidden, from their subconscious. Finding a 
style for this technique of deliberate hint, block and allusion is the main 
challenge for any version ofThe Master Builder.

Clearly, there is a strong autobiographical element in the portrait of an 
artist who, when he loses faith in God, gives up designing sacred buildings and 
chooses instead to make domestic ones – only to find making homes equally 
unsatisfactory. Anyone who has followed Ibsen’s journey from his early poetic 
dramas to his increasing interest in the realistic will realise that an old 
man’s obsession with the young, and in particular the sexual young, is not the 
only obvious parallel between the ageing author ofThe Master Builder and its 
hero, Solness. There are moments in the play when the author seems to be 
drawing attention to his own predicaments, as though he did not mind that 
audiences might walk away from the theatre talking as much about his peculiar 
psychology as they do about his hero’s.

This is a play working at many different levels – the mythic, the 
psychological and the subconscious. It has been open to countless 
interpretations, not least by those who believe that the entire story is taking 
place in the central character’s head. Like many great plays, it flirts with 
madness. But, throughout, the disparate elements are held together by the 
strong musical grip of the action. Ibsen was, above all, a musical writer: he 
aimed for a theatre that in its formal movement would closely resemble music. 
He wanted emotional power and human detail, but, more than anything, he wanted 
shape. That is why he is such a joy to adapt.

• The Master Builder is at the Old Vic 
<http://www.oldvictheatre.com/whats-on/2016/themasterbuilder/>, London SE1, 
from 23 January to 19 March.
 