
"Evolution" is emblazoned across the publicity for the rebooted Planet of the 
Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/01/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-review>
 prequels, but is that label justified by their plots? One challenge for 
screenwriterMark Bomback <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0093560/> was to show why 
the apes needed to develop the ability to speak. It has been theorised that
speech evolved 
<http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/367/1599/2152.full> because of 
the survival benefits of imparting information to large numbers of individuals 
at once. When the former San Francisco mayor Dreyfus (played by Gary Oldman) 
addresses a crowd of human survivors we see this benefit come into play, but we 
also see it when the chimpanzee Caesar holds court in his ape community. Wars 
can only be won or lives defended if those in the ranks are united through 
shared information.

Of course, humans and chimpanzees have distinctive anatomies for vocalisation, 
which presents further challenges. Chimps have avocal air sac 
<http://digitalcommons.wayne.edu/humbiol/vol85/iss5/1/>, for example, but 
humans don't.When I interviewed Andy Serkis last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2014/jul/17/-sp-dawn-planet-apes-scientifically-plausible-caesar-andy-serkis>
, I asked him whether he was coached to get the correct breathiness? "No, I 
instinctively arrived at the voice, Caesar's urgency to express his thought, 
plus the expulsion of air through the larynx created the voice. If the emotion 
behind the word was anger or frustration the words were physically easier to 
produce. But if it was a reflective observation those words were harder to 
achieve."

In the latter part of Dawn, Caesar becomes increasingly philosophical 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2734449/> and his self-reflection 
causes him sadness. When I tell Serkis thatKeri Russell's line 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005392/> to Caesar, "Try not to speak", made me 
want to applaud, he laughs, "Yes, it's very smart dialogue."

Another problem with portraying language in the film is that different ape 
species and different individuals will have different capacities for speech. 
"The biggest fear for me was that we all start fluently talking and we fail to 
show the steps in the acquisition of language," said Serkis. "The premise was 
the apes all had their individual vocalisations and Caesar taught sign language 
to some of them. Some apes have had the intelligence drug coursing through 
their veins longer than others and are more advanced. We figured the older apes 
wouldn't be able to learn sign language as easily as the younger apes, as it is 
with humans learning [language].
 A researcher works with Kanzi, a male bonobo chimpanzee, on linguistic skills 
using a lexigram keyboard at the Language Research Centre, Georgia State 
University, Atlanta, US. Photograph: Frans Lanting/Corbis 
"This phenomenon is seen in intelligence studies with captive female apes that 
are suckling an infant. The mother ape is the pupil but unbeknownst to the 
researchers unintentional hothousing of the infant takes place, eventually 
resulting in an exceptionally smart adult ape.Chimpanzee Ai 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ai_(chimpanzee)> in Japan and bonobo Kanzi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanzi> is the US are both examples of this.

"We went through the whole script and had American sign language (ASL) for 
every single line of dialogue, then we stripped it back. We needed the apes to 
develop a mix of facial expression, gesture and the spoken word. As the apes 
respond to the effects of the drug the overall ape communication is pushed from 
reality."

With Dawn on cinema screens, Serkis plans to continue mining this rich seam of 
close-to-life animal performances made possible by motion-capture technology. 
Orwell's Animal Farm and Kipling's Jungle Book are on the slate at Imaginarium, 
hismotion-capture studio <http://www.theimaginariumstudios.com/> at Elstree. "I 
think performance capture has applications in demonstrating different species 
through serious observation and via the way the human body is re-targeted into 
the character map. We can assign different parts of an actor's body to the 
animal's joints, so you are driving them and eventually you can calibrate it, 
it's very authentic."

What is he working on right now? "A project about Neanderthals. It's possible 
to digitally recreate a Neanderthal from thegenome sequences 
<http://www.mpg.de/7666848/neandertal_genome_project>, so we are doing an 
experiment to show how motion capture can bring extinct species to life."
 A bonobo uses a rock as a tool to break nuts open as other bonobos watch at 
Lola Ya Bonobo Sanctuary at Petites Chutes De La Lukaya, in the Democratic 
Republic of Congo. Photograph: Martin Harvey/Barcroft Media 
All the great ape species 
<http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/endangered_species/great_apes/> that inspired 
Pierre Boulle <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pierre_Boulle> to write the 
original Planet of the Apes novel 52 years ago are now threatened with 
extinction. When they no longer exist in the wild possibly the only way future 
generations of children will see new footage of apes will be via actors and 
motion capture. "Motion capture does have an educational role," said Serkis. 
"Thebushmeat trade <http://www.4apes.com/working-groups/bushmeat> and loss of 
habitat is tragic."

In Dawn, the ape Utopia started well with "Ape shall not kill ape" as its 
guiding principle. But with war brewing, can such ideals survive? They haven't 
fared well among humans. Personality tests on chimps reveal that they share all 
our traits except for "openness to experience" and "neuroticism" (though there 
issome <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2654334/> debate 
<http://www.plosone.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0095741> 
about the latter). Caesar appears to have developed openness to experience, but 
what if he or the other apes were to become neurotic?

No ape in his or her right mind would want those around to develop the 
pathological disorders 
<http://ink.library.smu.edu.sg/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=> of narcissism, 
excessive greed, sadism and callousness. People with these personality traits
lack empathy <http://www.sakkyndig.com/psykologi/artvit/holtzman2010.pdf>, but 
it could be argued that others on the same spectrum have their uses in an 
advanced society.

This type of mind is described as systemising. Those highly skilled, or 
extreme, in systemising may be on theautistic spectrum 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Zero-Degrees-Empathy-Simon-Baron-Cohen/dp/0141017961>, 
with neurosis and zero empathy at its extreme. Represented in all walks of life 
they tend tocluster in professions 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Essential-Difference-Penguin-Press-Science/dp/0141011017>
 that follow rule-based repetitive systems, as found in academia, languages, 
law, politics, technology, banking and engineering.

If Caesar wants to build a society based on the human model, this brain type 
will need to be represented in the ape population. Can apes learn from the 
mistakes of humans? My recommendation would be for Caesar to emulate theway of 
the bonobo 
<http://www.life.umd.edu/faculty/wilkinson/BIOL608W/deWaalAnnRevPsych2008.pdf>, 
promote the female of the species and forgo nuclear fission. In human society, 
there is anempathy gender divide 
<http://isik.zrc-sazu.si/doc2009/kpms/Baron-Cohen_empathy_quotient_2004.pdf>, 
with females tending to exhibit higher levels of empathy. Among other apes, the 
bonobo is amatriarchal ape 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Bonobo-Atheist-Humanism-Primates/dp/0393073777> 
and far less aggressive than patriarchal chimps.

In spite of the chimp's increasing sophistication, the climactic, vast and 
trunkless Statue of Liberty, buried in sand and defining human civilisation as 
a forgotten colossal wreck, remains many winters away. Happily, several more 
films will be needed to get us there.

I pushed Serkis to comment on the next film's plot, but he gave little away, 
apart from confirming that Caesar will be facing many more dilemmas.
 