
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> has vowed she 
will not allow Germany to be “paralysed by fear” after rightwing populist 
politicians rushed to blame the chancellor and her refugee policies for Monday 
evening’s deadly truck attack on a Berlin Christmas market.

Speaking at her chancellery on Tuesday morning, Merkel was quick to sketch out 
a worst-case scenario – unusually for a politician who prefers to deal in 
pragmatic solutions.

“Given our current information, we have to assume we are dealing with a 
terrorist attack,” she told reporters. But she added: “We do not want to live 
paralysed by the fear of evil. Even if it is difficult in these hours, we will 
find the strength for the life we want to live inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> – free, together and open.”

Political opponents rejected her plea for unity, renewing their criticism of 
her refugee strategy and laying the blame for the attack unambiguously at her 
door.

“The environment in which such acts can spread was carelessly and 
systematically imported over the past one and a half years,” said Frauke Petry, 
leader of the rightwing populist Alternative for Germany (AfD). “It was not an 
isolated incident and it won’t be the last.”


Petry’s partner, MEP Marcus Pretzell, posted a message on Twitter for what he 
called the “Let’s-wait-and-see brigade” less than an hour after the attack: 
“This is what happens when you wait and see”.
Marcus Pretzell (@MarcusPretzell) 
An die "Erstmal-abwarten-Fraktion": Sowas kommt von abwarten.#Breitscheidplatz 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Breitscheidplatz?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/MarcusPretzell/status/810949415708069888> December 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MarcusPretzell/status/810949415708069888> 
Horst Seehofer, the leader of Merkel’s Bavarian sister party, the Christian 
Social Union, criticised her policies in more diplomatic but no less forceful 
terms: “We owe it to the victims, to those affected and to the whole population 
to rethink our immigration and security policy and to change it.”


When she appeared before the television cameras on Tuesday morning, Merkel did 
not shy away from the possible ramifications of the attacker being identified 
as a refugee or migrant. “I know that it would be particularly hard to bear for 
all of us if it was confirmed that a person committed this crime who asked for 
protection and asylum inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>,” 
she said.


That confirmation appeared to follow soon after the end of her press 
conference, only to be withdrawn just a couple of hours later.
Merkel approval ratings 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/merkel-zip/giv-3902jjMD04464hxv/>
As Merkel, together with the foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, and 
Berlin’s mayor, Michael Müller, were laying down flowers at the site where the 
truck had crashed into the side of a Christmas market,the chief of Berlin’s 
police admitted it was unclear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/police-uncertain-they-have-suspect-in-berlin-christmas-market-attack>
 whether the suspect they had arrested shortly after the attack was indeed the 
driver behind the deadly rampage. Later, the man – a 23-year-old Pakistani 
citizen who had arrived in Germany on 31 December 2015 – was released.

The political significance of Monday night’s tragedy, however, had by then 
been made clear.

At the end of a year in which Merkel has seen some of her closest allies on 
the international stage succumb to populist anger – including US President 
Barack Obama, David Cameron in Britain, François Hollande in France and Matteo 
Renzi in Italy – and just before the start of a year in which she is determined 
to avoid a similar fate, a deadly attack on German soil was precisely what her 
supporters feared most.

Police pore over Polish truck driver’s final hours for clues to Berlin attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/police-pore-over-polish-lorry-driver-lukasz-urban-final-hours-berlin-attack>
Whatever the ongoing investigations into the perpetrator’s motives reveal, the 
German chancellor will be faced with part of her electorate asking if the 
tragedy came about as a direct result of her policy decisions last year, when 
Merkel kept open Germany’s borders for refugees stranded in Hungary.

Reactions to the Berlin attack have already shown the extent to which an 
answer to that question is ideological. Hajo Funke, a politics professor at 
Berlin’s Free University, suggested that Merkel would get little political 
mileage out of atoning for past decisions. “Germany’s voters will choose 
politicians based on whether they have workable political answers, not empty 
promises,” he said. “The AfD has no actual solutions to the terrorist problem 
and 90% of the population sees that.”

Merkel’s approval ratings dropped considerably after two terrorist attacks in 
southern Germany in the summer, but recently recovered to the levels the 
chancellor enjoyed before the start of the refugee crisis.

While recent polls have put Petry’s party on 12-13% 
<http://www.wahlrecht.de/umfragen/>, Funke argued that the “base of political 
power” in Germany’s coalition-based political system would continue to lie with 
Merkel’s Christian Democrats, currently on 33-36%, the centre-left Social 
Democrats (21-23%) and the Green party (10-11%).

Yet in the wake of Monday’s attack, even shoring up that base of support will 
require Merkel to do more to assure her electorate that she can guarantee their 
safety. At the Christian Democrats’ conference earlier this month, it was clear 
that a party that once stood faithfully behind its leader now contained a 
backbench cabal agitating for a rightward lurch.

'It was terrifying': Berlin market attack witnesses describe carnage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/terrifying-berlin-market-attack-witnesses-describe-carnage-germany>
Merkel has repeatedly shown that she is less averse to populist gestures on a 
domestic stage than her international admirers give her credit for: since 
September 2015, her government has gradually restricted the list of countries 
whose citizens can rightfully claim asylum in Germany, a point underlined by a 
series ofhigh-profile deportations to Afghanistan 
<http://www.dw.com/en/mass-deportation-of-rejected-afghan-asylum-seekers-from-germany-imminent-report/a-36760373>
 that commenced last week.

Last month, the German chancellor even endorsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/angela-merkel-cdu-partial-ban-burqa-niqab-german>
 her party’s proposal for a ban of the full facial veil. She placed a caveat on 
her demand in characteristic style with the phrase “wherever it is legally 
possible” – a move echoed on Tuesday when she vowed that the perpetrator of the 
Berlin truck attack would be punished “as severely as our laws demand”.

Even in the centre of the political spectrum, the room for manoeuvre is not 
limitless, however.

After Monday’s attack, and following a high-profile hunt for a man filmed 
kicking a young woman down a flight of stairs at a Berlin metro station, there 
may be an opportunity for Merkel to take a more hawkish stance on the use of 
CCTV surveillance in public space, traditionally a sensitive issue in 
privacy-conscious Germany.

But after almost two years of a highly polemicised political debate over the 
refugee crisis, some policy avenues are now permanently closed to the 
chancellor.

A set upper limit on the number of refugees who can enter the country – which 
many in her party believe would have reassured traditional conservatives – is 
out of the question because it would amount to a climbdown in her ongoing 
standoff with Seehofer and thus a serious loss of face.

Merkel has gone way beyond the point where she can ever win back members of 
the AfD and their dyed-in-the-wool supporters. Arguably she does not need to, 
but a loss of political authority, and a party that tacks right while she 
steers left, could fatally undermine her campaign for a fourth term in next 
year’s elections.
 