
All the talk about who will or won’t do post-election deals with independents 
and minor parties misses the point – they might reject formal “deals” but 
neitherMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> nor Bill Shorten 
has yet ruled out leading a minority government reliant on winning enough 
crossbench support for each bill they try to legislate.


Despite the spectacle of both leaders signing a “solemn pledge” drafted by the 
Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/federal-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-pledge-to-never-repeat-gillardgreens-experiment/news-story/c62ed14911e5c4b4933934586416adb6>
 ruling out a “deal or alliance” with the Greens, neither has ruled out seeking 
to govern in the event of a hung parliament if enough of the crossbench agreed 
to the two basic prerequisites – to support the money bills needed for the 
government to function and not to support a no-confidence motion moved by the 
other side.

The idea of any formal agreement with crossbenchers was already unlikely 
because most of the non-Green independents with a reasonable chance of winning 
have categorically ruled out striking such a deal with either major party and 
both major party leaders have ruled out such a deal with the Greens (despite 
the Coalition’s repeated claims that a “Labor/Greens alliance” is looming).

David Leyonhjelm 'disappointed' by resignation of policy adviser Helen Dale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/david-leyonhjelm-disappointed-by-resignation-of-policy-adviser-helen-dale>
The “formal agreements” struck by Julia Gillard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/julia-gillard> in 2010 were really just 
designed to give the electorate reassurance, because of the unfamiliarity of 
minority government.

In 2016 the possibility of an informal arrangement is, at the moment, still 
live. With the polls tightening and a hung parliament at least a possibility, 
neither leader has been prepared to renounce the idea, or say that in the event 
of a hung parliament they would prefer another election to such an arrangement.

And several crossbenchers who could be the other parties to such an 
arrangement have told Guardian Australia an informal agreement in which they 
agree to give one or other party confidence and supply, and then negotiate each 
bill on its merits, is exactly what they are contemplating in the event that 
neither major party wins enough seats to govern in its own right.

Of course neither Turnbull nor Shorten want to talk about the possibility that 
they won’t win in their own right on 2 July, so they are both choosing their 
words carefully.

Turnbull said on Monday minority government was a “theoretical possibility” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/mathias-cormann-refuses-to-rule-out-coalition-governing-with-independents>
 but only ruled out formal “deals”.

“I have made it very clear before ... I am surprised you would have thought it 
was possible we would be doing deals with the Greens or independents,” he said.

Kristina Keneally on why the leaders' debate doesn't matter – Behind the Lines 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/may/30/kristina-keneally-on-why-the-leaders-debate-doesnt-matter-behind-the-lines-podcast>
The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, made the reality clear in a recent 
interview on Radio National.

“We are not interested in any Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> agreements with any 
party,” he said. “I wrote about this in my book in 2013; Labor governs alone or 
not at all. Who parties vote for in a confidence vote is up to them. If there 
is a confidence vote after the election, and independents and other parties 
have to choose who to support, that’s a matter for them. We will not be 
entering into any agreements, coalitions or deals with the Greens or anybody 
else.”

But many crossbenchers are happy to consider informal arrangements.

Andrew Wilkie <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, who 
stands a good chance of being re-elected in this election in his Tasmanian seat 
of Denison, ruled out any formal agreement with either party but said in the 
event of a hung parliament he would “weigh up the outcome of the election and 
the views of my Denison electorate and make a decision about who I would 
support on confidence and supply”.

“Once I made that decision I would stick to it as far as possible in the 
interests of stability,” Wilkie said. “In the end I don’t think it makes much 
difference whether the agreement is formal or informal. I entered into an 
agreement with Julia Gillard and then, after 18 months, I ended it and it 
really didn’t make much difference to how things operated.”

Tony Windsor <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-windsor>, who 
has some chance of winning the NSW seat of New England from Barnaby Joyce, says 
he won’t sign another formal deal but that doesn’t mean it wouldn’t be possible 
to form a functioning parliament.

“If the election turned out to be dead even, then the prime minister could go 
back to the polls or assume the treasury benches and form a minority government 
and test whether Labor could get the numbers for a no confidence motion or 
could put together his own deal to form government,” he said.

“It’s entirely possible for the crossbench to support the government on 
confidence and supply and deal with everything else on a case by case basis ... 
that’s basically what we did after 2010. The pieces of paper we signed were 
really just to show the Australian people the whole thing could be stable.”

Windsor concedes an informal approach would mean he didn’t get the sweeteners 
for his electorate that came with his deal with Gillard in 2010 but he says he 
wouldn’t be giving up “the leverage that comes with a hung parliament.”

Liberals yet to finalise western Sydney candidates as Senate ticket hangs in 
balance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/liberals-yet-to-finalise-western-sydney-candidates-as-senate-ticket-hangs-in-balance>
Bob Katter <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bob-katter>, who is 
seeking re-election in the north Queensland seat of Kennedy, has said he would 
present the major parties with the same demands he had in 2010.

The sitting independent in the Victorian seat of Indi, Cathy McGowan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cathy-mcgowan>, says she will do no 
formal deal, but would look at every piece of legislation that came up as she 
has done for the past two and a half years and consult with her community.

In 2010 Gillard signed agreements with the Greens, and independents Rob 
Oakeshott, Tony Windsor and Andrew Wilkie. But the reality was not much 
different to Labor governing with only the basic assurances of supply and 
confidence. Wilkie ended his deal with Gillard in 2012 and the Greens ended 
theirs in 2013 and the government continued.

 