
For a few hours one morning two weeks ago, private cars were banned from 
driving into the heart of oldDelhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi>. 
It was hard to tell at the messy road junction in front of the historic Red 
Fort and the shopping street of Chandni Chowk, though, which was still crammed 
with auto-rickshaws and buses barrelling along the roads with seemingly little 
regard for any traffic rules.


But Delhi’s so-called “car-free day” experiment was nevertheless a success: 
scientists monitoring the air here, routinely one of Delhi’s most polluted 
areas, found a dramatic 60% drop in the amount of dangerous pollutants – the 
tiniest particles that come out of traffic exhausts and which can exacerbate 
health problems such as asthma, heart disease and stroke – compared to the 
previous day.

Delhi is the most polluted city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/india-untamed/2014/oct/20/india-air-quality-delhi-polluted-city-world>
 in the world,according to the World Health Organisation (WHO) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/08/india-admits-delhi-matches-beijing-air-polllution-world-health-organisation-cities>
, and doctors and scientists say the locals there are facing a public health 
crisis.Beijing has historically drawn international attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/28/beijing-smog-unliveable-mayor-wang-anshun-china>
 when it comes to poor air quality but, in reality, that city’s air is nowhere 
near as dangerous as many of India’s major cities.

The rapid development of the country in recent years means India has the 
dubious honour of having 13 of the world’s 20 most polluted cities. TheWHO found
 <http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/cities/en/> that 
Delhi had anaverage of 153 micrograms of the smallest particles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/08/india-admits-delhi-matches-beijing-air-polllution-world-health-organisation-cities>
, known as PM2.5s, per cubic metre in its air. The international “safe” level 
for these particles is 6 micrograms per cubic metre.

Delhi’s bad air is already causing a spike in the people with asthma and 
reduced lung function.

Filming in the city’s leading chest hospital, for a series of stories for ITV 
News at Ten on India’s challenges ahead of theclimate change summit in Paris 
that begins later this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
, a doctor told me he had to now keep his clinics open for double their normal 
hours in order to keep up with demand. Even then, the corridors were overrun 
with wheezing patients and a room that had a line of oxygen masks for patients 
to take respite breaths as they waited, had queues snaking out of the door.

The air is already having long-term effects on children in the Indian capital, 
4.4 million of whom already have irreversible lung damage. “The children’s lung 
is in the budding stage, they are not mature,” said Prof Raj Kumar a 
respiratory specialist at the Vallabhbhai Patel Chest Institute, University of 
Delhi.

“Ultimately their bronchi or alveoli are going to be damaged and the lung 
function is harmed. [Since] that is the main organ where the oxidisation is 
taking place, if the lung is affected then the whole of your body will be 
affected.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdelhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F291a592ef1b5066ec473b3d6a3a8eaea9f33433d%2F0_253_3264_2094%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delhi's%20air%20pollution%20is%20causing%20a%20health%20crisis.%20So%2C%20what%20can%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdelhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delhi%27s%20air%20pollution%20is%20causing%20a%20health%20crisis.%20So%2C%20what%20can%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdelhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F291a592ef1b5066ec473b3d6a3a8eaea9f33433d%2F0_253_3264_2094%2F3264.jpg>
 A baby born with malformation. It’s believed the pollution the mother was 
exposed to during pregnancy could have contributed to the condition. 
Photograph: Roohi Hasan/ITV News 

The damage goes beyond that – reaching even further back in people’s lives. At 
the Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, neonatologist Professor Neelam Kler has been 
working with the PublicHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
Foundation of India to track an increase in premature and underweight babies 
and those born with birth defects. “People are probably not so aware of the 
hidden effects of pollution and that is on the pregnant woman and the growing 
foetus in her body, which is a very vulnerable period,” she said.

There is already evidence of a spectrum of health problems, ranging from 
allergies and respiratory conditions, malformations, growth restrictions and 
even an increasing incidence of cancers, all of which could be related to 
increased pollution. “Putting it together, we are heading towards health 
disasters,” said Prof Kler.

The reasons behind the worsening air are manyfold – more than 8m vehicles on 
the roads already, with 1,400 new ones added every day. Most of those new 
vehicles burn diesel and face relatively low emissions standards, belching out 
clouds of the tiny PM2.5 particles that can be most harmful to health.

In addition to vehicles, there are an increasing number of diesel-burning 
electrical generators attached to the swanky apartment blocks springing up 
across the capital. Farms and coal-burning factories around the region further 
worsen the air.

The pollution has a double-whammy effect. Health problems are happening now 
but the vehicle and factory exhausts also contain greenhouse gases such as 
nitrous oxides, ozone and carbon dioxide. These will linger in the atmosphere 
for many decades and contribute to future climate change. India’s cities are 
facing the problems right now but the pollution (and its problems) is a stark 
indication of what many more developing nations will face in future.

The Indian government says it is aware. Environment minister Prakash Javadekar 
said he wants to fast-track the construction of a bypass that would prevent 
around 50,000 polluting lorries having to drive into the city every day. And he 
wants the car companies to clean up their vehicles to the more exacting 
standards in Europe. “We want to migrate early but auto industry is not ready,” 
he said.

The car industry in India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> could 
produce Euro-6 compliant vehicles, he said, but they have been lagging behind. 
“We will deal with this menace of air pollution and we will win the battle and 
there will be marked difference in the next two years.”

Delhi has managed to clean up its air before. At the turn of the century, the 
local government moved polluting industries out of the city, shut down 
coal-burning power plants and forced public transport vehicles to move from 
diesel and petrol to cleaner gas alternatives. The air quality improved 
steadily until 2007, said Anumita Roychowdhury of the Centre for Science and 
Environment, a Delhi thinktank.

“But after that, if you look at the data, 2009 onwards, you will find the 
levels are going up again and gone up so high that now what we are saying is 
that we have lost the gains of the first generation action,” she said. “And 
that’s the scary story unfolding today. What has gone wrong is that the 
momentum that we had built to clean up, we could not keep that momentum going. 
Somewhere along the line the pollution source has overwhelmed the action.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdelhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff45152ec10c6ac08572a3735adc1722a741eed7%2F0_489_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delhi's%20air%20pollution%20is%20causing%20a%20health%20crisis.%20So%2C%20what%20can%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdelhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delhi%27s%20air%20pollution%20is%20causing%20a%20health%20crisis.%20So%2C%20what%20can%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fdelhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff45152ec10c6ac08572a3735adc1722a741eed7%2F0_489_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Delhi skyline in smog. Photograph: Roohi Hasan/ITV News 

For Profs Kler and Kumar, all Delhi citizens need to do their part in dealing 
with the pollution problem. Health professionals need to petition authorities 
to act and individuals must work out how to keep the city growing without just 
buying more cars.

“Development not only means industrialisation,” said Prof Kler. “I think its a 
time that we take a note of it and do something about the quality of air, the 
quality of water, our waste disposal, so that we don’t become a heap of 
garbage.”

As Delhi chokes, initiatives such as the car-free day around the Red Fort two 
weeks ago will become more important in bringing attention to the pollution 
crisis. A small crowd had gathered that morning with banners and wearing 
T-shirts with slogans reading “NoPollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution>, No Congestion”. They 
marched around the road in the shadow of the Red Fort on the day, handing 
leaflets out to passers by.

Sunil Dahiya, a campaigner with Greenpeace India who was measuring the levels 
of pollutants in the air around him, said: “If you talk to anybody there will 
be appreciation of yes Delhi air is very hazardously polluted and there should 
be something done about it.”

• Alok Jha is science correspondent for ITV News. You can see the first of his 
three reports on the India’s challenge in tackling climate change on Tuesday on 
News at Ten on ITV1.

 