
Slaven Bilic was left to reflect on a costly 90 seconds after West Ham 
suffered more jitters in Giurgiu. The Hammers were leading the Romanian 
champions,Astra Giurgiu <https://www.theguardian.com/football/astra-giurgiu>, 
1-0 with nine minutes of the first leg of their Europa League qualifying 
play-off remaining when the 18-year-old Marcus Browne raced through on goal.

Browne opted to square the ball seemingly for Michail Antonio to slide into an 
unguarded net and kill the match off but the winger hit the side netting and a 
minute and a half later Astra were level.

West Ham failed to clear a corner and the substitute Denis Alibec crashed the 
ball home as Astra, whobeat Bilic’s side in the qualifiers last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/06/west-ham-europa-league-astra-giurgiu-report>
, secured a positive result before next week’s second leg at the London Stadium.

However Bilic, without Dimitri Payet, Manuel Lanzini and the club record 
signing, André Ayew – who this week wasruled out for four months through injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/west-ham-olympic-stadium-capacity>
 – remains confident his side will not suffer a repeat of last year’s 
embarrassing exit.

“When you concede late of course you are not happy, especially when you know 
we had a glorious chance on the counter-attack and we could and should have put 
the game to bed,” he said. “Then we concede after a set piece, which we had 
always looked comfortable with. It would be better to be 2-0 or 1-0 up and now 
next week is an open game.

“But under the circumstances, with the pitch and the team we had out there, 
it’s a good result. We should create more on a better pitch, which ours will 
be. It would have been ideal to win here 5-0 and rest Thursday. But it’s OK. 
And the score is very simple – if we can’t beat them at home, then we shouldn’t 
be in theEuropa League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league>
.”

West Ham were handed the lead a minute before half time when Cristian Sapunaru 
handled in the area and Mark Noble scored from the penalty spot. The Astra 
manager, Marius Sumudica, had made a surprise appearance on the bench having 
been serving a lengthy ban for betting on matches. He must have had some choice 
words for his side at the break because they looked far better in the second 
half and deserved their draw.

“It was a weird feeling to be back but I helped my team from that point of 
view,” Sumudica said. “I gave them my desire to win and to be fighters. I knew 
we were facing a very strong team who have one player who cost as much as our 
squad but in the second half we were at the same level.”
 