
A mobile phone company controlled by Denis O’Brien, the Irish media mogul, has 
started blocking advertisements on its networks.

Digicel <http://www.digicelgroup.com/en.html>, the leading operator across the 
Caribbean, has launched the initiative as a way of forcing internet companies, 
such as Google, Yahoo and Facebook, to pay for access its customers.

In so doing, says the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/technology/denis-o-brien-s-digicel-takes-on-google-and-facebook-1.2373553>
, O’Brien has effectively picked a fight with the largest web companies in the 
world. He believes it is unfair that those companies generate revenue through 
Digicel’s network and says his company is “taking a stand against them to force 
them to put their hands in their pockets.”

He wants them to share some of the revenue they make from ads sold during 
browsing activities by Digicel customers on its system.


In a statement on the Digicel website 
<http://www.digicelgroup.com/en/media/news/2015/september/30/digicel-first-operator-to-implement-ad-control-technology-to-imp.html>
, the company states: “Ad control technology benefits both consumers and 
network operators alike.

“With ads using up as much as 10% of a customers’ data plan allowance, this 
move will allow customers to browse the mobile web and apps without 
interruption from unwanted advertising messages.”

The Financial Times reports 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/73262f80-676d-11e5-97d0-1456a776a4f5.html> that 
Digicel is working withShine 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/search/search-7.1213540?tag_company=Shine%20Technologies&article=true>
, an Israeli company that has created software to prevent online ad networks 
from delivering display and video ads to mobile browsers and apps.

If the move proves successful, it will buttress Digicel’s revenue as it 
prepares to become a publicly-listed company through a flotation in New York.

O’Brien, Digicel’s chairman, said a statement on the company’s site: “This is 
about giving customers the best experience and about getting access to 
broadband to the unconnected and allowing them to benefit from the 
opportunities it affords.

“Companies like Google, Yahoo and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> talk a great game and take a 
lot of credit when it comes to pushing the idea of broadband for all – but they 
put no money in.

“Instead they unashamedly trade off the efforts and investments of network 
operators like Digicel to make money for themselves. That’s unacceptable.

“As a network operator, are taking a stand against them to force them to put 
their hands in their pockets and play a real role in improving the 
opportunities for economic empowerment for the global population.”

O’Brien is Ireland’s largest media owner. He controls Independent News & 
Media, the company formerly run by Tony O’Reilly that owns the country’s 
largest-selling daily and Sunday titles, and the Communicorp group that runs 
Ireland’s two commercial national radio talk stations, plus other city stations.

Through other companies he also runs a host of non-media assets in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, including a chain of petrol 
filling stations, a commercial aircraft company, a civil engineering business, 
a venture capitalist firm, a utility services company and a luxury hotel.

Sources: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/technology/denis-o-brien-s-digicel-takes-on-google-and-facebook-1.2373553>
/Digicel 
<http://www.digicelgroup.com/en/media/news/2015/september/30/digicel-first-operator-to-implement-ad-control-technology-to-imp.html>
/Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/73262f80-676d-11e5-97d0-1456a776a4f5.html>
 