
Desmond Tutu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/desmond-tutu> has said he 
would like the option of ending his life through assisted dying as he called on 
politicians, lawmakers and religious leaders to take action on the issue.

In an article published on his 85th birthday on Friday, and following several 
spells in hospital this year for recurring infections, the emeritus archbishop 
of Cape Town and anti-apartheid activist reiterated his support for assisted 
dying, firstdisclosed in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/12/desmond-tutu-in-favour-of-assisted-dying>
 in 2014.

“With my life closer to its end than its beginning, I wish to help give people 
dignity in dying,”he wrote in the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/archbishop-desmond-tutu-when-my-time-comes-i-want-the-option-of-an-assisted-death/2016/10/06/97c804f2-8a81-11e6-b24f-a7f89eb68887_story.html?utm_term=.4cc2de5dd1be>
.


“Just as I have argued firmly for compassion and fairness in life, I believe 
that terminally ill people should be treated with the same compassion and 
fairness when it comes to their deaths,” he added.


Desmond Tutu: a dignified death is our right – I am in favour of assisted 
dying | Desmond Tutu
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/12/desmond-tutu-in-favour-of-assisted-dying>
“Dying people should have the right to choose how and when they leave Mother 
Earth. I believe that, alongside the wonderful palliative care that exists, 
their choices should include a dignified assisted death.”


Tutu had changed his mind over assisted suicide two years ago after a lifelong 
opposition but had remained ambiguous about whether he personally would choose 
such a death.

He said: “Today, I myself am even closer to the departures hall than arrivals, 
so to speak, and my thoughts turn to how I would like to be treated when the 
time comes. Now more than ever, I feel compelled to lend my voice to this 
cause.”


He believed in the sanctity of life but also that terminally ill people should 
not be forced to endure terrible pain and suffering, he wrote. Instead they 
should have control over the manner and timing of their death.


He added: “I have prepared for my death and have made it clear that I do not 
wish to be kept alive at all costs. I hope I am treated with compassion and 
allowed to pass on to the next phase of life’s journey in the manner of my 
choice.”


Tutu pointed to laws in California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/05/california-assisted-dying-legal-fifth-state>
 andCanada <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-36566214> that permit 
assisted dying for terminally ill people. But “there are still many thousands 
of dying people across the world who are denied their right to die with 
dignity”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdesmond-tutu-assisted-dying-world-leaders-should-take-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8f6e80982d59573ab660827f7751708fcc3e9a6%2F0_124_3776_2266%2F3776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Desmond%20Tutu%3A%20I%20want%20right%20to%20end%20my%20life%20through%20assisted%20dying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdesmond-tutu-assisted-dying-world-leaders-should-take-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Desmond%20Tutu%3A%20I%20want%20right%20to%20end%20my%20life%20through%20assisted%20dying&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdesmond-tutu-assisted-dying-world-leaders-should-take-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8f6e80982d59573ab660827f7751708fcc3e9a6%2F0_124_3776_2266%2F3776.jpg>
 Desmond Tutu: ‘For those suffering unbearably and coming to the end of their 
lives, merely knowing that an assisted death is open to them can provide 
immeasurable comfort.’ Photograph: Rodger Bosch/AFP/Getty Images 
He said: “For those suffering unbearably and coming to the end of their lives, 
merely knowing that an assisted death is open to them can provide immeasurable 
comfort.”


He concluded: “In refusing dying people the right to die with dignity, we fail 
to demonstrate the compassion that lies at the heart of Christian values. I 
pray that politicians, lawmakers and religious leaders have the courage to 
support the choices terminally ill citizens make in departing Mother Earth. The 
time to act is now.”


Tutu, who won the Nobel peace prize in 1984, has been admitted to hospital 
several times, most recently in September, for recurring infections as a result 
of surgery for prostate cancer.


Assisted dying <https://www.theguardian.com/society/assisted-suicide> is legal 
in Switzerland, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Albania, Colombia and Japan as 
well as Canada. Several US states have enacted measures on assisted dying, 
including Washington, California, Oregon, Vermont and New Mexico.


I have prepared for my death and have made it clear that I do not wish to be 
kept alive at all costs
Desmond Tutu 
In September last year, the UK parliament rejected a bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/11/mps-begin-debate-assisted-dying-bill>
 to allow assisted dying for the terminally ill, with 330 MPs voting against it 
and 118 backing the measure, despite anopinion poll showing it was supported by 
82% <http://www.dignityindying.org.uk/assisted-dying/public-opinion/> of the 
public. The same poll suggested that 44% of people would break the law to help 
a loved one to die, risking a jail sentence of up to 14 years.


Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, who sits in the House of Lords, 
urged MPs to reject the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/05/religious-leaders-urge-mps-throw-out-assisted-dying-bill>
 along with other faith leaders.


Former archbishop of Canterbury Lord Carey has argued for assisted dying  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/religion/11799620/Assisted-dying-would-be-profoundly-Christian-and-moral-former-Archbishop-of-Canterbury.html>
to be lawful, saying such a move would be “profoundly Christian and moral”. 
Tutu wrote: “His initiative has my blessing and support – as do similar 
initiatives in my home country, South Africa, throughout the United States and 
across the globe.”


Tutu has also been a vocal advocate for women’s rights, a staunch opponent of 
homophobia, a campaigner on poverty, for people with HIV/Aids and on climate 
change. He headed the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in post-apartheid 
South Africa. Nelson Mandela described him as the “voice of the voiceless”.

 