
There is going to be a mighty battle between Richard Desmond's Northern & 
Shell (N&S) and Independent News & Media (INM) if Desmond goes ahead withhis 
threat to close down the Irish Daily Star. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/sep/16/irish-daily-star-fears-closure-richard-desmond>

INM believes closure of the paper, because of its publication of topless 
pictures of the Duchess of Cambridge, is "disproportionate",reports the Irish 
Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/frontpage/2012/0917/1224324092507.html>.

Though the Dublin-based publisher said the matter warranted "immediate 
investigation", which is under way, it believed termination of the title would 
be "disproportionate to a poor editorial decision". It would result in the loss 
of up to 120 jobs.

That decision to publish the pictures, which was apparently taken by the 
editor Mike O'Kane, was reported to have been made without reference to the 
senior managements of either INM or N&S.

The Irish Daily Star is a joint venture dating back to 1987, 13 years before 
N&S acquired control of ExpressNewspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, publisher of the Daily Star 
titles.

INM was then run by Tony O'Reilly, who was succeeded by his son, Gavin. But he 
departed earlier this year after media tycoonDenis O'Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien> became the largest 
shareholder and insisted on changes at board level.

Since then, continuing company upheaval means that editors of INM titles have 
tended to operate without traditional management control or, in the words of 
one insider, any effective control whatsoever. Aside from budgets, there has 
been little editorial oversight.

The managing director of the division responsible for the Irish Daily Star is 
Ger Colleran, a former editor of the paper.He spoke to INM's Sunday Independent 
 
<http://www.independent.ie/national-news/irish-star-future-under-threat-from-kate-middleton-topless-shots-3230143.html>
in support of the editor's decision, implying that he had been consulted by 
O'Kane prior to publication.

Colleran is quoted as saying: "What we do in the Irish Daily Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailystar> is to produce an Irish newspaper 
for an Irish audience. The photographs of images taken from the magazine were 
not printed in our Belfast edition and there were two reasons for that -- 
sensitivity to our British partners, Express Newspapers, and a slightly 
different legal regime."

He said he was "surprised about the furore... particularly in a British media 
that gave freedom of speech to the world and is rightly called the Mother of 
Parliaments, underwritten by freedom of expression and a free press."

The Irish Daily Star published reproductions of pages from French Closer 
magazine, which included 10 grainy shots of Prince William and his wife 
sunbathing on the balcony of a villa in Provence.

If Desmond does pursue his closure threat, the Irish Times's business affairs 
correspondent, Ciarán Hancock,argues that he may face "significant hurdles." 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/ireland/2012/0917/1224324092377.html>

The Irish Daily Star operates in Dublin under INM's umbrella under a licence 
from NS that does not expire until 2037. The contract between the two companies 
allows each of them to give notice to the other of an intention to withdraw.

But to executive a sudden exit from the agreement is fraught with legal 
problems, not least the problems caused by making about 80 full-time staff 
redundant.

Aside from redundancy payments, Hancock also says there would be "significant 
costs incurred" in N&S terminating the printing contract with INM and the lease 
of its offices in Dublin.

That said, Desmond does hold a strong hand because N&S controls the trademark 
of the Star title and a great deal of sport, celebrity news and features 
material is supplied by the London-based Daily Star.

Both INM and N&S jointly agreed last year to stop publishing the Irish Daily 
Star on Sunday for financial reasons. But the daily title does make money.

According to the latest accounts for the division known as Independent Star 
Ltd, in 2010 it made a pretax profit of €4.3m (£3.5m) on turnover of €40.6m 
(£32.9m). Its profits declined by 11.4 per cent that year.

Though figures for 2011 have yet to be published, informed sources cited by 
Hancock estimate that the accounts would show a decline in profits of between 8 
and 10%. In 2010, the company paid a dividend of €4.55m (£3.7m) jointly to INM 
and NS.

The Irish Daily Star sells about 70,000 copies a day in the Republic and has 
been losing circulation in line with the market.

Footnote: The code administered by the Irish Press Council states that "taking 
photographs of individuals in private places without their consent is not 
acceptable, unless justified by the public interest".

The Irish Daily Star signed up to that code when the council was set up in 
January 2008. At the time of writing, no complaint had been received.

A footnote to the footnote: I'm not quite sure what Ger Colleran means by his 
reference to "a slightly different legal regime" inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> as distinct from Britain. Both have 
incorporated the human rights convention into their laws.
 