
In May 1993, three children were murdered in a wooded area in West Memphis. 
With pressure mounting from the local community to catch those responsible, 
local police narrowed their investigation to three teenage boys, using 
circumstantial evidence, including the boys’ interests in occult literature, 
heavy metal and black clothing, to tie them to the murders. All three were 
found guilty and received sentences ranging from life imprisonment to the death 
penalty. And then Hollywood got involved.

In the two decades since the case ended, five movies and countless TV specials 
have been made on the subject of the West Memphis Three. Joe Berlinger and 
Bruce Sinofsky’s Paradise Lost trilogy provides a full picture of the case as 
it unfolded. Amy Berg’s acclaimed West Of Memphis offers a broader, punchier 
overview of the investigation. And now, Atom Egoyan’s Devil’s Knot serves up a 
dramatic reconstruction of events, complete with a flurry of well-meaning 
Hollywood stars eager to place themselves on the right side of history.

Given the glut of material already available on the subject, Egoyan is wise to 
shift his focus away from the details of the case and towards the human lives 
caught up in the frenzy. Among them are Pamela Hobbs, the mother of one of the 
victims, played by Oscar-mode Reese Witherspoon, and Ron Lax, a principled 
private investigator. He is channelled by Colin Firth, whose southern accent is 
terrible but perhaps not that surprising from an actor best known for playing 
George VI.

Of course, Ron and Pamela’s lives aren’t particularly interesting in the 
abstract, and so Devil’s Knot is soon drawn back into the minutiae of the 
trial. At which point, anyone familiar with the case is liable to feel as 
though they’ve seen it all before, only with the benefit of documentary 
realism, and without the distraction of Colin Firth’s admittedly stellar 
Foghorn Leghorn impression.

DVD, EV
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Yetw7UeTXU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Yetw7UeTXU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_Yetw7UeTXU&media=>
ALSO OUT THIS WEEK

A Million Ways To Die In The West Clapped-out western vehicle for Seth 
MacFarlane.

Cilla Pre-fame biopic of Blind Date icon.

24: Live Another Day Destructive London outing for Jack Bauer.
 