
I played Mrs Danvers in 1979, in a four-part TV adaptation by Hugh Whitemore 
(which, incidentally, starred Jeremy Brett, my first husband, as Max de 
Winter). I was too young for the part. Mrs Danvers was meant to be in her late 
60s but I was nowhere near. In the book, she is described as having grey hair 
tied up in a bun, and wearing a Victorian dress with a long train. I saw no 
reason to play it like that - I didn't see why, age-wise, she couldn't have 
been a contemporary of Rebecca's.

Rebecca is an extremely romantic and rather sexual novel. I think Mrs Danvers 
is one of the sexual participants - maybe not consciously, but she's certainly 
a sexual thread through it. We know that Rebecca didn't love Max, but we don't 
really know what Max's feelings were for Rebecca - apart from the fact that he 
was obsessed by her beauty. We do know his feelings were totally tarnished by 
the end of their marriage. Whether Mrs Danvers was a latent lesbian, I have no 
idea. But she was certainly in love, totally and utterly obsessed with Rebecca. 
The book is littered with sexual symbols - the hairbrush and the nightie laid 
out carefully on the bed. So I played her rather like a lesbian in a French 
film, in a slinky black silk dress.

Essentially, I played what I imagined Du Maurier had subconsciously written, 
though it also seemed an interesting new angle on the part. Of course, I would 
not want to detract from Judith Anderson's startlingly scary and brilliant 
performance as Mrs Danvers in Hitchcock's Rebecca. I didn't see this version 
when it came out in 1940, as I was three years old, but I must have seen it 
when I was 9 or 10 and I remember being very scared by her. Mrs Danvers is a 
very scary part, whether you play her in a Victorian dress or in a slinky silk 
dress. What she wears is only an outward carapace: underneath she's one of the 
really evil female characters in literature. You never forget that malevolent 
smile.

Â· Anna Massey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/anna-massey> was talking to 
Aida Edemariam
 