
Diana Vishneva <http://www.vishneva.ru/en/> could not be mistaken for anything 
but a Russian ballerina, when she walks into the New York hotel where we’ve 
arranged to meet. A white practice tutu dangles from one elegant wrist (she’s 
come straight from rehearsal), and she takes her tea Russian-style – black and 
sweetened with spoonfuls of blueberry jam. Although she laughs a lot, and has a 
very public addiction to fashion, she’s clearly dedicated to her work. We do 
actually have a conversation about the nature of the Russian soul.

Diana Vishneva: On the Edge review – stamina and conviction pushed to the limit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/15/diana-vishneva-on-the-edge-coliseum-dance-review>
Yet, as purely Russian as Vishneva appears, she is one of the most 
cosmopolitan ballerinas of her generation. For over a decade she’s been a 
principal with both theMariinsky Ballet  
<http://www.mariinsky.ru/en/company/ballet/troupe/#pfilter-all-all--1>in St 
Petersburg andAmerican Ballet Theatre <http://www.abt.org/default.aspx> in New 
York, as well as jetting between numerous other companies worldwide. Two years 
ago, when she married her husband Konstantin, a sports agent, the complications 
of her performing schedule meant that the most convenient location for their 
wedding was Hawaii.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN2GJTEFlgjw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN2GJTEFlgjw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN2GJTEFlgjw&media=>
“Being a multicultural person is very, very important to me,” she says, “the 
feeling of collaborating with other people and being in touch with other ideas. 
During my childhood, I was always inspired by videos of dance from the west, 
and I always knew this was something I wanted to explore.” Now 38, Vishneva 
believes her whole stage identity has been shaped by that decision to pursue a 
global career. Sometimes talking to me directly in English, sometimes relying 
on a translator, she continues, “Everything that I learned in Russia, at the
Vaganova Academy <http://vaganovaacademy.comand> and the Mariinsky has been 
very important to me, but to have stayed in that one little box would have been 
too comfortable. Dancing works by different choreographers in different 
countries has opened something new for me – not only how I feel my body but the 
feelings I’ve been able to express.”

In London this month, Vishneva will be performing a long way outside the box 
as she dancesOn the Edge 
<http://londondance.com/whats-on/diana-vishneva-on-the-edge/>, a double bill by 
American modern dance-makerCarolyn Carlson 
<http://www.atelierdeparis.org/en/carolyn-carlson> and French contemporary 
ballet choreographer,Jean-Christophe Maillot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/07/jean-christophe-maillot-les-ballet-de-monte-carlo-interview>
. Both pieces were created especially for her, and Vishneva’s brief to her 
choreographers was that they should respond to her as a woman as well as a 
ballerina. “I wanted to know what different things these two choreographers 
could see in me, what things as a mature dancer I could say about myself.”

In Maillot’s Switch, the focus is on Vishneva the star. Maillot’s choreography 
showcases all the delicate expressiveness of her long arms and cantilevered 
back, and while it maximises the virtuoso power of her supple legs and feet, it 
also probes the pressures and conflicts she carries with her as a world-class 
ballerina. Carlson’s Woman in a Room is more minimalist in style and more 
psychologically stripped bare: “Carolyn insisted that every detail had to be 
truthful, just me naked without a social skin.” Yet with both choreographers 
Vishneva says she experienced a rare honesty and engagement: “I felt I was 
sharing my world with them, and they were sharing theirs with me. We came to 
know each other so well, the negatives as well as the positives.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fdiana-vishneva-on-the-edge-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F10%2F1428681597861%2Ff9f84f4c-3dd0-4180-bc1a-1c5c09a136a9-2060x1434.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diana%20Vishneva%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20not%20my%20wish%20to%20run%20the%20Bolshoi%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fdiana-vishneva-on-the-edge-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diana%20Vishneva%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20not%20my%20wish%20to%20run%20the%20Bolshoi%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fdiana-vishneva-on-the-edge-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F10%2F1428681597861%2Ff9f84f4c-3dd0-4180-bc1a-1c5c09a136a9-2060x1434.jpeg>
 Vishneva in Cinderella in 2014. Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex 
That honesty, Vishneva rightly believes, has affected the way she dances her 
more traditional repertory. Last summer when she was in London with the 
Mariinsky, she blew away the dust of decades inher passionately nuanced 
performance of the company’s rather ancient production of Romeo and Juliet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/29/mariinsky-ballet-romeo-and-juliet-review-diana-vishneva>
.Alexei Ratmansky 
<http://www.abt.org/education/archive/choreographers/ratmansky_a.html>, a 
choreographer with whom Vishneva has worked extensively, says he’s been hugely 
impressed by the range she’s achieved – from the purity of the 19th-century 
classics to the angular intensities ofMartha Graham’s Errand Into the Maze 
<https://vimeo.com/101932250> to the blunt human comedy of Mats Ek’s The 
Apartment <https://www.facebook.com/video.php?v=788319477845367>. “Diana’s 
determination to widen her horizons has been quite amazing I think, her talent 
for preserving her individuality in all the different styles she explores.”

But while Vishneva expands her own cultural horizons, she’s become 
increasingly concerned about the narrowing of those back home. “In Russia, 
these are conservative times,” she says diplomatically. While she doesn’t 
choose to engage, publicly, with the cultural politics of Putin’s government, 
she’s become very active within the world of Russian dance via the foundation 
she launched five years ago to raise money for education and performance 
projects, and for the annualVishneva festival <http://vishnevafest.com> in 
Moscow.

Vishneva is particularly concerned about the underdeveloped state of 
contemporary dance in Russia – “it’s at a very low level still”. The 
performances she programmes for her festival cover as wide a range as she can 
afford, from celebrated companies likeNederlands Dans Theater 
<http://www.nederlandsdanstheater.nl/en> to the lesser known Ate9 dance company 
<http://ate9dancecompany.com> directed by Danielle Agami in Los Angeles. Around 
those performances she also runs a programme of educational lectures, films and 
workshops (with a tranche of heavily discounted tickets for students).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fdiana-vishneva-on-the-edge-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F10%2F1428681698158%2Fc396d4bf-6870-462e-927b-dd3fa51d74e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diana%20Vishneva%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20not%20my%20wish%20to%20run%20the%20Bolshoi%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fdiana-vishneva-on-the-edge-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diana%20Vishneva%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20not%20my%20wish%20to%20run%20the%20Bolshoi%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fdiana-vishneva-on-the-edge-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F10%2F1428681698158%2Fc396d4bf-6870-462e-927b-dd3fa51d74e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Being a multicultural person in very important to me’ … Vishneva. Photograph: 
Neville Elder/Corbis 
But aside from opening up Russian audiences to the larger dance world, the 
festival also offers help to young choreographers – a still very small and 
struggling community in Russia. Five choreographers are commissioned to create 
short works for the festival and two are selected for an award that will fund 
their studies at a foreign dance institute likeRotterdam’s Codarts academy 
<http://www.codarts.nl>. Vishneva believes that the nurturing of choreographic 
talent is something the big ballet companies should be doing in Russia. And 
given her increasingly outspoken views on the way that these monoliths are run 
(includingher opposition to the appointment of controversial dancer Nikolai 
Tsiskaridze as director of the hallowed Vaganova Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/29/bolshoi-dancer-ikolai-siskaridze-vaganov-russian-ballet>
), there’s been some speculation that Vishneva might eventually take charge of 
one herself.

Specifically, there have been rumours that when Sergei Filin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergei_Filin> retires from the Bolshoi Ballet, 
she may be in the loop for succeeding him as artistic director. Vishneva, 
however, looks genuinely disconcerted when I ask if this has any basis in fact. 
“It would be a big experience of course, maybe I would have to accept if 
someone offered it to me. But it’s not my wish. I don’t think it’s my story. 
I’m not interested in power, but in the creative side of things. I will help 
other companies with pleasure, but I have my festival, I have my own projects.”

Vishneva has always said that as a dancer, she’s created her own ideal career: 
“No theatre could do for me what I’ve done for myself.” And she’s determined to 
remain a free agent. She wants to be able to start a family with Konstantin and 
expand the work of her foundation, and she still has huge ambitions for herself 
as a performer. Eventually she’d like to move towards theatre – “I’m very 
interested in work that would involve movement with some dramaturgy and 
psychology” – but she’s still meticulously focused on her dance technique. With 
a “deep connection” to her two ballet coaches in St Petersburg and New York, 
and with a call list of masseuses and sports therapists around the world, 
Vishneva, at 38, is still very far from resting on her laurels. “I always have 
to move forward,” she says. “I don’t ever like to be the same today, as I was 
the day before.”

• On the Edge is at the Coliseum, London <http://eno.org>, 14-18 April.
 