
• More worries for welfare-to-work firm A4e, its year blighted by press 
controversies and a police inquiry into alleged fraud. It needs friends with 
friends in high places. And lummy, it has just lost one. A4e hired Jonty 
Olliff-Cooper in September 2010, after Big Dave ascended to No 10. 
Olliff-Cooper was an assistant to eccentric strategy guru Steve Hilton. But it 
has been a tricky time for A4e's erstwhile director of policy and strategy. 
After months of complaints, the first official figures on the work programme 
last November revealed thatit failed to meet its "minimum performance levels" 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/exclusive-a4e-finds-jobs-for-3-5-per-cent-of-job-seekers>
, helping fewer people into work than the DWP had estimated would get a job 
without its help. New work programme figures are due for release at the end of 
this month. Who knows, they may be even worse.A4e has lost its best link to the 
government 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/exclusive-a4e-finds-jobs-for-3-5-per-cent-of-job-seekers>
, although there's always Quiller, the lobbyists whose consultants include 
George Bridges, a pal of chancellor George. Last year, having turned to 
Quiller, Olliff-Cooper tweeted: "Quiller was a one-off thing on crisis 
management during Feb/March [2012]" Jonty has gone,Quiller is still there 
<http://www.appc.org.uk/members/register/register-profile/?company=Quiller%20Consultants>
. Funny how things pan out.

• A sorry impasse in Doncaster, where activists have been trying to find out 
more abouta dodgy letter sent to minority groups about funding cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/27/hugh-muir-diary-tony-blair>. 
You may recall it bore an electronic signature identifying the author as the 
authority's most senior minority officer when in fact it was not his signature 
and he had explicitly distanced himself from the decision. The borough has 
since apologised and paid him damages. But will anyone be held to account? 
Apparently not. The signature wasn't faked, writes chief executive Jo Miller. 
It was just "the insertion of the officer's name, ie, an electronic signature 
with express prior consent". As for the guilty party – long departed. "Had the 
employee remained in service I would have taken appropriate action." Wonder if 
they wrote themselves an electronic reference.

• The life and times of Henry Vlll were marked by regular spasms of brutality, 
and we can reportacademic fisticuffs prompted by the Last of Days 
<http://headlinepublishing.gwaplive.co.uk/Books/detail.page?isbn=9780755397853>
, the historical novel by teacher and historianPaul Doherty 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_C._Doherty>. Doherty suggests Henry may have 
been suffocated or just been left to die and then stuffed into the casket and 
coffin. Oh, please, says Diarmaid MacCulloch, professor of the history of the 
church at Oxford University. "This idea may be OK as an entertaining plot for a 
novel or for that very unhistorical BBC TV series The Tudors, but as history, 
it is idiotic. We have a perfectly adequate and circumstantial account of 
Henry's last hours from John Foxe, ofBook of Martyrs 
<http://www.ccel.org/f/foxe/martyrs/home.html> fame." Yes, we have an account, 
says Doherty. But it is just one account. There are different perspectives. I 
didn't make this stuff up. There is evidence." Harsh words, intrigue, division. 
Like Henry's life with all those wives.

• The Euro struggle between Tories and Ukipians who want to claim the name of 
Margaret Thatcher for their own separate meeting rooms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jun/04/hugh-muirs-diary-margaret-thatcher>
 threatens to become a soap opera. The tug of war was to have been decided at 
the next bureau meeting of wise heads from the European parliament. But the 
complexity of the issues is such that it has been put back for a month. Martin 
Schulz, the president of the European parliament, has to consult with the group 
leaders: Martin Callanan, who the leads the Tories and the European 
Conservatives and Reformists; and Nigel Farage, talisman for Ukip and the 
co-chair of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy faction. "It could be 
interesting," a source tells us. "Particularly as Farage has been before Schulz 
several times to be fined for unparliamentary behaviour, for example whenhe 
called Herman Van Rompuy a damp rag <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bypLwI5AQvY>
!" Memories are long, and what goes around comes around. Still, it seemed a 
good idea at the time.

• And who says our everyman leader won't fly, asks Ukip, following our item 
yesterday suggesting reluctance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jun/10/hugh-muirs-diary-nigel-farage>
. Actually, it was one of the most senior figures in your party. You can't 
believe them, we're told. In recent months Nigel has been to the US, Canada and 
Chile, and he didn't swim to any of them, a spokesman assures us. Swimming was 
never an option. He would have spilled his pint.

 Twitter: @hugh_muir <https://twitter.com/hugh_muir>
 