
The desperate and the displaced of Syria’s war should not be cast as climate 
refugees, observers have told the Guardian, as this overstates the role of 
global warming in setting off the conflict.

Many agree that the collapse began in March 2011, when a group of Syrian 
teenagers sprayed the words 
<http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/regions/middle-east/110423/syria-assad-protests-daraa>
 “Ash-shab yurid isqat an-nizam” on a wall in the southwest Syrian town of 
Dara’a.

The words, which translate to ‘the people want to topple the regime’, were a 
rallying call of the Arab Spring in Tunis and Cairo. The boys were caught, 
beaten and tortured by president Bashar al-Assad’s secret police. Their 
powerful parents were enraged. Protests and repression spread and spiralled 
into the disaster that has sent hundreds of thousands of Syrians fleeing toward 
Europe’s uncertain reception.

Failure to act on climate change means an even bigger refugee crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/07/climate-change-global-warming-refugee-crisis>
The narrative has since been fleshed out 
<http://www.upworthy.com/trying-to-follow-what-is-going-on-in-syria-and-why-this-comic-will-get-you-there-in-5-minutes>
 byjournalists 
<http://www.npr.org/2013/09/08/220438728/how-could-a-drought-spark-a-civil-war> 
and observers to incorporate the impact climate change was having on the lives 
of those youths.

“... drought, in addition to its mismanagement by the Assad regime, 
contributed to the displacement of two million in Syria. That internal 
displacement may have contributed to the social unrest that precipitated the 
civil war,” Francesco Femia director of the Center for Climate and Securitytold 
Time <http://time.com/4024210/climate-change-migrants/> on Monday. After four 
years of the worst drought on record, the boys and those around them had simply 
had enough.

This is one story of how the Syrian crisis began. But the story is apocryphal 
– useful only as a way of identifying how thingsmay have transpired. Global 
climatic events influence the lives of individual actors, before being diluted 
again in the beginnings of a complicated civil war that has many regional 
players. Along the way, a lot of nuance gets lost.

“This is what a climate refugee looks like,” read a headline 
<http://www.nationalobserver.com/2015/09/04/news/what-climate-refugee-looks> in 
the National Observer over a picture of a policeman carrying the body of 
three-year-old Syrian boy Alan Kurdi up a beach in Turkey.

But David Butter, an associate fellow with Chatham House’s Middle East and 
North Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast> programme said such 
a conflict “could have happened at any time in Syria, irrespective of the 
drought”.

“The fact that this did escalate nationally is all to do with the structure of 
the regime as a brutalising kleptocracy that has for years and years taken 
people off to jails and tortured them,” he said.

In the case of the protests in Dara’a “there could be dozens of different 
local factors at play”. This likely included the appropriation of a large 
swathe of nearby land for a wealthy cousin of Assad, Rami Makhluf, to create a 
large duty free zone along the Jordanian border.

Some elements of the story can be verified. While climate scientists shy away 
from linking any single extreme event to climate change, they are able to say 
how much more likely those events are today than before humans began warming 
the atmosphere. In the case of the 2007-2010 Syrian drought,one study found 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/112/11/3241> that such an abnormally long and 
severe drought is now two to three times more likely to happen.


Testing these probabilities was possible using climate models, said Andrew 
Solow, a scientist at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. But 
extrapolating these findings to Syria’s human maelstrom was beyond the reach of 
science.

“You have a story. And I think that could be true,” he said. “But to pretend 
that you could make a real accurate model of how human beings respond to 
complex changes in the physical environment and the political environment, I 
don’t think that’s probably possible.”

Climate change is by nature ubiquitous, affecting every life on the planet to 
some degree. In this regard, its fingerprint on Syria’s war is hard to argue 
against. In May this year,US president Barack Obama recognised 
<http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/obama-climate-change-contributed-to-rise-of-boko-haram-syrian-civil-war/article/2564772>
 the contribution of the drought in Syria’s fall.

“I understand climate change did not cause the conflicts we see around the 
world, yet ... It’s now believed that drought and crop failures and high food 
prices helped fuel the early unrest inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, which descended into civil war in 
the heart of the Middle East,” said the president in a commencement address to 
the US Coast Guard Academy in New London Connecticut.

But Doris Carrion, a colleague of Butter’s at Chatham House, said it was “one 
factor amongst many”.


“You can see a link between drought-induced displacement and the actions of a 
couple of children and the government’s response to that. But it’s a little bit 
too deterministic to assume that all of that is what lead to the war in Syria 
as we see it today,” she said.

The Guardian’s migration correspondent Patrick Kingsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrick-kingsley> said Syrians arriving on 
Europe’s borders did not consider themselves, even tangentially, to be climate 
refugees.

“In all my time interviewing people in the Middle East, no one has ever linked 
their struggle or flight to climate change,” he said, while noting that climate 
change would inevitably drive future mass migrations.

“I think [overstating the link between climate change and the Arab Spring] is 
a bit patronising to the political movements that focussed purely on political 
change and fighting political injustice, that were built up steadily over time 
as a response to the political situation in their countries, and that were 
ultimately the main engines of unrest in the Arab uprisings.”

And the president of the London-based Syrian Human Rights Committee Walid 
Saffour said he did not believe the drought was a factor in the uprising.

“Oppression, corruption and regional involvement (namely Iran) which enhanced 
the sectarian feelings and reaction, influenced by the Arab Spring movement 
encouraged the Syrian people to dash to streets calling for freedom and the 
collapse of Assad’s dictatorship,” he said.

But Carrion said studying the effects of climate change in Syria was far from 
redundant. “When we think about what is it going to take for Syria to 
eventually recover from war and to create the conditions for refugees to have 
something to return to, then climate change and the impact that that has on 
Syria’s potential for an agricultural industry that’s going to have to be 
addressed,” she said.

Globally, it is clear that the impacts of climate change are tipping the 
scales in favour of strife. The Pentagon waswarning President Bush as much over 
a decade ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2004/feb/22/usnews.theobserver>. And 
in 2010, theUS military ranked global warming as a destabilising force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/31/pentagon-ranks-global-warming-destabilising-force>
 that was fuelling conflict. “While climate change alone does not cause 
conflict, it may act as an accelerant of instability or conflict, placing a 
burden on civilian institutions and militaries around the world.”

Last year one of the UK’s most senior military figures, Rear Admiral Neil 
Morisetti expressed similar concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/10/climate-change-will-see-more-uk-forces-deployed-in-conflicts-around-world>
. “Climate change will require more deployment of British military in conflict 
prevention, conflict resolution or responding to increased humanitarian 
requirements due to extreme weather impacts,” he said.

A 2014 analysis of climate-conflict research 
<http://www.nber.org/papers/w20598> found that drought and rising temperatures 
“systematically increase the risk of conflict, often substantially”.

On Monday in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/07/climate-change-global-warming-refugee-crisis>
, Friends of the Earth chief executive Craig Bennett raised the prospect that 
more climate change will mean more refugees. The impossibility of joining the 
dots in Syria does not undermine his concern.

Note: An amendment was made to the age of the Syrian boy Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-kurdi>. The article originally said he 
was five, he is three. His body was found in Turkey, not Greece.
 