
Perhaps this was one fight we just couldn’t duck. Despite all manner of 
date-shifting and schedule-juggling, our film Kajaki will be released on DVD in 
the same week asAmerican Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>. Two similarly-themed 
movies, but worlds apart in terms of production spend and star wattage, have 
picked the same window to hit the UK home-entertainment market. Accidental? We 
can’t be sure: we moved, they moved, they moved, we moved, and there came a 
point we had to pick a date and stick with it. If we are going to be sharing 
shelf space, the two films bear comparison. Traditionally, however, your 
average shopper will only pick up one DVD when doing the weekly shop. So, will 
it be Sniper or Kajaki ?

Kajaki: The True Story – an unusual war movie with ballistic grit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/03/kajaki-reel-history-british-army-afghanistan>
For me, producing a film is a profound adventure. While the genesis of a 
project is often deeply personal, you are very soon open to wide-ranging 
comments, on both the subject matter and the commercial potential of your 
project. Everyone has an opinion. And rarely do they concur. So the only thing 
you can go back to is your own interpretation and judgment. And that can be an 
extremely lonely place at times.

The big question for us: is the UK ready for a rebirth of modern warfare films 
depicting our own troops? I am sure many of us grew up with the legacy of the 
classic British war movie: Zulu, The Bridge on the River Kwai, The Great 
Escape, The Dam Busters, Ice Cold in Alex … the list is a long one. But what 
made them uniquely British? The clipped accents? The jaunty moustaches? For me 
it was the message that war is pretty bloody awful, but if you are going to 
have to do it, best to do a good job and make sure you keep your mates alive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaFJFkliZe24&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaFJFkliZe24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaFJFkliZe24&media=>
That was what I kept hearing from the veterans we were working with on Kajaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kajaki>. Meanwhile, in the background, you 
could feel a shift in public attitude as the Afghan and Iraq wars ground on. As 
the coffins continued to come back through Royal Wootton Bassett, the nation 
took on a more sophisticated view of the war. It was acceptable to be anti-war 
– no one wanted us in that conflict – but still be supportive of our troops. 
Whether it was a poppy, a badge, a wristband or a T-shirt, there was a more 
visibly present level of public support on the streets.

American Sniper, on the other hand, comes from a very different tradition. The 
70s and 80s saw some remarkable US war films: Platoon, M*A*S*H, The Deer 
Hunter, and the ultimate anti-war war film, Apocalypse Now. As America 
struggled over its involvement in Vietnam, it produced acute commentaries on 
the nature of war. But Sniper is in a very different place. In Chris Kyle, the 
film-makers chose to identify and highlight the work of the most productive and 
efficient sniper in theIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> conflict, 
whose Call of Duty-level statistics were admired by his contemporaries, and 
promoted by his superiors. American Sniper posits him as the ultimate warrior.

American Sniper: propaganda movie or tale the nation needed to hear?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/23/american-sniper-propaganda-political-row>
The story of corporal Mark Wright is very different. What happened on that 
particular day on Kajaki Dam was unique. This wasn’t an improvised explosive 
device, or a contact with the Taliban. Through Mark’s story we see the life of 
your average soldier, placed in an extreme event. No polemic or hand-wringing 
guilt. This was a bunch of guys caught in the wrong place in the wrong time, by 
the horrendous legacy of a prior conflict: a field of Russian-sown 
anti-personnel mines, ordnance abandoned like beer cans after a music festival. 
It was only a matter of time before they would be found, either by the military 
or, as is sadly often the case, local inhabitants once the armies have cleared 
out.

The bravery this group of lads displayed on that day was incredible. But it is 
their everyman charm that is really remarkable. None of them sees themselves as 
a hero: they’re just doing a job, which they pride themselves in doing well. 
That’s the recognition they seek. They aren’t 10ft Rambos itching to see 
action; they are the sons and daughters of your friends and neighbours.

Why is Hollywood’s take on the Afghan conflict so different from the UK’s?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/20/why-is-hollywoods-take-on-the-afghan-conflict-so-different-from-the-uks>
So does the British public have a different relationship with its soldiers 
than the US does with theirs? We don’t seem to lionise our warriors; there will 
be no stadium-filling parades for those returned fromAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. We mark our respect in a more 
quiet, reserved manner. Even the difference in how our film engaged with the 
UK’s Ministry of Defence compared to the Department of Defense in the US, is 
striking by comparison. It took 18 months to get a meeting in Whitehall, 
whereas the Pentagon read the script and responded within 48 hours.

We have, I believe, delivered a film accurately recounts the events of that 
day, but in a broader way affords the viewer a genuine insight into military 
life – and thankfully the critics agree. One of our proudest moments came when 
one of the veterans who worked with us saw a post on Facebook that called our 
film’s accuracy into question. He replied: “It’s as it was. I should know … I 
was there.”

 * Kajaki: The True Story is released on DVD/Blu-Ray and VOD on 8 June. 
American Sniper is available on DVD now. Gareth Ellis-Unwin is the producer of 
Kajaki and The King’s Speech.
 