
 This Christmas, Somerset House is putting up its ice rink again. Thousands of 
people went last year, looked at the elegant 18th-century buildings surrounding 
them as they skated - and perhaps some even went to one of the amazing 
galleries too.

In 2001, the arts are the backdrop to much metropolitan socialising. Drinks at 
the top of Waterstone's bookshop in Piccadilly, say, or a meal at Tate Modern. 
Accessibility in action. Or is it?

The question posed in the title of this supplement - Arts for All? - is 
whether more people really do have access to the arts. Is it really the case 
that a wider group of people are enjoying the arts now, or that the same sort 
of people who would have attended arts events 20, 30 or 40 years ago are simply 
enjoying them more often, and in different ways, than they would have done 
then? The articles included here offer evidence both for and against.

Not so long ago, the arts were proudly elitist and exclusive. There was an us 
(cultured, educated, superior) and a them (everyone else). If you weren't able 
to climb the stairs to your theatre seat, tough; if you didn't visit the opera 
because you couldn't hear it adequately, or didn't understand the language, too 
bad. If you couldn't afford it, obviously it wasn't for you.

Nowadays, things are different. Despite a few small voices raised to the 
contrary, the arts are meant to be culturally democratic. Arts organisations 
now want to be accessible - culturally, physically, financially. Indeed, their 
funding depends on it. The Arts Council of England, which assists them, has as 
one of its aims: "To promote access, education and excellence in the arts 
through partnership" and its priorities include bringing the arts to a wider 
audience.

What no organisation wants to be (in theory) is inaccessible: cliquey and 
forbidding, populated only by people who are richer and further up the class 
scale, with tickets priced so that only the super-rich or companies with large 
entertainment budgets can afford them.

Step forward an easy target: the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, which 
proudly proclaims in its current season guide: "over half the House will cost 
Â£50 or under for all opera performances". True, opera is expensive to stage, 
but how much disposable income do they think the average person has? A few 
reasonable, even very cheap, tickets are available but navigating the pricing 
structure and restrictions is complex.

RoH also lay themselves open to misinterpretation with the cover photographs 
on their current brochures: pictures of young toffs in evening dress. Actually, 
they're ballet and opera stars, some dressed for performance, but the RoH 
novice won't necessarily know that. It's ironic that people should be put off 
visiting at a time when RoH is particularly keen on getting daytime visitors to 
its beautiful, under-seen and free floral hall, with its reasonably priced cafe.

That's sad; because there are many people who would enjoy arts events and 
activities, the RoH included, but who still think they aren't for them. If all 
the policies on accessibility can help change that, in however limited a way, 
they are working.
 