
The director who sent a balaclava, nails and a roll of duct tape to critics as 
part of a press pack for his Northern Ireland Troubles-themed filmA Belfast 
Story <http://abelfaststory.com/> has apologised for any offence he may have 
caused.

Nathan Todd told BBC Radio Ulster's Good Morning Ulster 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007cps5> that he and his colleagues had not 
intended to frighten or offend recipients of the press kit for the drama, which 
stars Colm Meaney. The writer-director said: "The idea was to interest people 
in a movie we were making, which is the story of the two choices which face 
Belfast, do we engage in retribution or reconciliation?The [promotional 
material] box, when you open it, gives you this choice 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-23792723>. It's got artefacts of 
violence on one side and artefacts of living happily to an old age on the other.

"Obviously, the intention is not to offend anyone. We apologise if we did. The 
intention is to raise awareness for something that delves into some legitimate 
questions and tells interesting stories about the city and the country."

Set 30 years on from the height of the Troubles, A Belfast Story stars Meaney 
as a detective investigating the killings of ex-IRA men in a city still 
struggling to escape the horrors of the past.Stephen Gault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/nov/03/enniskillen-bomb-anniversary-gault-killed>
, whose father, Samuel, was killed in the1987 Enniskillen bombing 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/november/8/newsid_2515000/2515113.stm>
, told the Belfast Telegraph that the film's press campaign was "highly 
offensive".
Chris Hewitt (@ChrisHewitt) 
For those asking for proof: balaclava, gaffer tape, nails. Needless to say, I 
shall not be seeing this movie.pic.twitter.com/buZLwLDWpx 
<http://t.co/buZLwLDWpx>
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisHewitt/statuses/370196158603616256> August 21, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisHewitt/statuses/370196158603616256> 
"He is making a mockery of terrorism," Gault said. "The balaclava is symbolic 
of a terrorist, but he has used it as a joke â€“ it is completely insensitive. It 
is very hurtful for anyone who has lost a relative at the hands of terrorism."

Empire magazine's Chris Hewitt, who is originally from Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, tweeted: "Just been sent the 
most distasteful freebie ever: a box containing a bag of nails (for a nail 
bomb) and a balaclava, for The Belfast Story. Genuinely stunned by this."

He added: "Not quite sure what point whoever sent it is trying to make. But 
I'm pretty sure it's a moronic one. I'm now not going to see it. There is such 
a thing as bad publicity."

The publicity firm Way to Blue announced 
<http://www.thedrum.com/news/2013/08/22/publicity-agency-way-blue-drops-belfast-story-following-misguided-balaclava-mailer#reGHQg0q6BqdG2fS.99>
 that itwould no longer be promoting the film following the offensive stunt, 
which it said it had not been involved with. "We wanted to assure you all that 
press mailers for A Belfast Story have not been created, produced, or 
distributed by Way To Blue," the company said in a statement. "We were very 
surprised to hear of the content via Twitter and do not in any way advocate 
these having been sent to anybody as a promotional tool. Our involvement on 
this project to date has been PR strategy and screening, and in light of this 
very misguided activity, we no longer feel we can be associated with this film 
and will no longer be working on the publicity campaign."
 