
Q We have spent two years renovating our love nest. Unfortunately the original 
York stone floor in the kitchen has lost its beauty due to being covered in 
plaster dust and general grime. We have spent many a weekend scrubbing and 
washing the stones, which seem to come up a treat but as soon as they dry again 
return to their dull dusty state. We do not know what to do in order to return 
the floor to its splendour, which is what sold us the house in the first place.
Cat and Gavin

A York stone is porous, soaking up liquids, oils, dust and grime if not 
protected, and it sounds like you've given yours a right beating. A tip for 
next time: put down thin plywood sheets. But for now you will need to strip the 
floor totally, which household cleaners will not be able to do. Use Lithofin 
Wexa (www.lithofin.com <http://www.lithofin.com>) for oil, dirt and dust, or 
Wax Off for layers of paint, resin, wax or glues. Once it's stripped clean, 
leave it until it's totally dry. Then protect the stone with MN Stain Stop - a 
stone impregnator which will sink into the material but shouldn't alter the 
colour or appearance - to make it oil, grease and water repellent, and fit for 
anything else your 'love nest' can throw at it.

Q I was lucky enough to receive a few dinner plates from the Thirties 
modernist LondonHomes <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/homes> 
collection by People Will Always Need Plates. Can you recommend a non-naff way 
to display them - do I really want to hang them on my wall?
Cath

A As these plates feature illustrated representations of some of the best 
modernist architecture in London, think about how the architects may have 
viewed such decorative pieces in their own homes. Think geometric shapes and 
strong lines. You may want to mount them on a painted backing board and lift 
that away from the wall you hang them on. Look at the way others have lived 
with collections of art: visit the sublime Kettle's Yard (www.kettlesyard.co.uk 
<http://www.kettlesyard.co.uk>), once owned by Tate Gallery curator and friend 
to the artists Jim Ede, or the rarely open but wonderful shop Story in Wilkes 
Street, London E1 (020 7377 0313), where every object becomes part of a 
narrative, displayed alongside photos, books, paper clippings and mementos - 
personal and enchanting.

Â· If you have a question, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 