
Anti-euthanasia campaigners have targeted the UK premiere of the Hollywood 
adaptation of the novel Me Before You, which has faced criticism over its 
depiction of disability and its assisted-dying plotline.


A group of activists unfurled a banner castigating it as a “disability snuff 
movie”, as cast members including Emilia Clarke, Jenna Coleman and Joanna 
Lumley arrived on the the red carpet at the London event for the film, based on 
the best-selling novel by British author Jojo Moyes.

Among the protesters was Sian Vasey, who was born with SMA (spinal muscular 
atrophy). She said: “I know the basic plot, which is that the male lead has an 
accident and becomes disabled, but after a year or so of time in quite a happy 
relationship then decides that he doesn’t want to be a burden and takes himself 
off to Dignitas to commit suicide.”

She and others from Not Dead Yet – a group that campaigned against the bill 
which would have changed the law to allow doctors to help terminally ill people 
end their lives, but which was rejected in September by MPs – chanted and 
briefly exchanged words with Moyes. The US branch of Not Dead Yet has said it 
plans to picket the film there.

Clarke, the Game of Thrones star who is the film’s romantic lead, told the 
Guardian, however, that it was “never our intention” for the film to devalue 
people with disabilities.

“I think that the movie is a Hollywood movie, but I think that what we are 
showing is something that we took a lot of care over, with Jojo being there as 
well, because she wrote the book first, so that’s the story that we were going 
off,” she said.

“We were very careful with how we wanted to present things. And we are showing 
a situation, we are not showing an opinion.”


True to the novel, which has sold more than six million copies, the film is a 
love story centred around the relationship between Traynor, a quadriplegic 
former jet-setting banker played by Sam Claflin (best known for his role as 
Finnick Odair in The Hunger Games), and his carer, Lou, played by Clarke.

Director Thea Sharrock told the Observer this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/22/me-before-you-film-love-disability-thea-sharrock-sam-claflin>
 that the film offered a chance to pause and reflect on the real value of life.


“I wanted to stick to the universal theme of the simple and yet wonderful way 
these people fall in love, while creating a space for people to think about 
what matters,” said Sharrock, adding that she saw the subjects of life-altering 
disability and the morality of euthanasia as difficult rather than “dark”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEh993__rOxA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEh993__rOxA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEh993__rOxA&media=>
 Me Before You: the official trailer.  