
A major disaster was avoided on Friday as an estimated 40,000 supporters 
packed into the Ahmadu Bello Stadium in Kaduna to watch Nigeria’s 1-1 draw with
Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt>.

Listed as a 16,000 capacity venue, the stadium in the north west of the 
country was subject to a heavy military presence after a pitch invasion marred 
the last international there in June.

But a decision by the Kaduna State government to open the gates to fans to 
attend the crucial 2017 Africa Cup of Nations qualifier for free created a 
frenzied atmosphere.

Johan Cruyff tribute: Holland v France halted in 14th minute to honour legend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/johan-cruyff-tribute-holland-france-halted>
Hours before kick-off supporters started arriving, with some scaling fences to 
find their way in. Some were even pictured clambering up floodlight scaffolding 
to gain a vantage point.

“I felt the game was not going to take place because I thought the number of 
people on the pitch side was going to cause encroachment,” Rotimi Akindele, a 
reporter for Beat FM,told Goal.com 
<http://www.goal.com/en-ng/news/17252/super-eagles/2016/03/25/21696792/kaduna-stadium-escapes-major-crowd-incident?ICID=HP_HN_HP_RI_1_1>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fdiaster-avoided-nigeria-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ad6a34d17f000b42bc1b0730f90be2a4fea859%2F0_106_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disaster%20avoided%20as%2040%2C000%20cram%20into%2016%2C000%20stadium%20for%20Nigeria%20v%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fdiaster-avoided-nigeria-egypt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disaster%20avoided%20as%2040%2C000%20cram%20into%2016%2C000%20stadium%20for%20Nigeria%20v%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F25%2Fdiaster-avoided-nigeria-egypt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ad6a34d17f000b42bc1b0730f90be2a4fea859%2F0_106_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Supporters sit on the roof of a house to watch the African Cup of Nations 
qualification match between Egypt and Nigeria. Photograph: Pius Utomi 
Ekpei/AFP/Getty Images 
In the end the match passed without major incident off the pitch, although 
Nigeria’s captain, John Obi Mikel, accused Egypt’s players of “cheating” after 
Mohamed Salah’s late equaliser kept the Pharaohs on top of Group G.

Oghenekaro Etebo had put the Super Eagles in front on the hour and looked like 
claiming a crucial win as the match entered the dying minutes. But with Godfrey 
Oboabona having limped off injured, Egypt’s players refused to kick the ball 
out and Salah was able to score after being played in by Ramadan Sobhy.

“I think we played very well but we lost a lot of chances that we created that 
could have fetched us total victory in today’s match against Egypt,” Mikel said.

“Everybody is saying we lost the game in the last three minutes but all I can 
say is that fair play is fair play, it doesn’t matter, fair play is fair play.

“OK, you can say we should have concentrated a little more but Fair Play is 
Fair Play. This is cheating, that is all I can say. It happens in Egypt, it 
happens everywhere. It doesn’t matter how many minutes it is, you have to allow 
it. It is the referee that controls the game.”

The Arsenal youngster Alex Iwobi was brought on as a late substitute by the 
Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> coach, 
Samson Siasia – an appearance that means he can no longer represent England on 
the international stage.

Elsewhere there were victories for Tunisia, Mali and Ivory Coast over Togo, 
Equatorial Guinea and Sudan respectively, while Leicester’s Riyad Mahrez 
started forAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> as they 
thrashed Ethiopia 7-1 in Blida.
 