
From landing the Curiosity rover on Mars after a 350m-mile journey, to the 
discovery of the world's most wanted sub-atomic particle, thetop 10 scientific 
achievements of 2012 have been nominated by the journal of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science 
<http://news.sciencemag.org/sciencenow/2012/12/top-10-sciencenows-from-2012.html?ref=hp>
, giving a snapshot of the march of human knowledge in genetics, physics, 
cosmology, medicine and nanoscience.

The discovery of the Higgs boson by physicists using the Large Hadron Collider 
in Switzerland was named breakthrough of the year by Science magazine, with 
runners-up including the pin-sharp DNA sequencing of a Siberian cave girl who 
lived 50,000 years ago and a delicate brain implant in a Pennsylvania woman 
paralysed from the neck down that allowed her to use the power of thought to 
manipulate a robotic arm to grasp a bottle and take a sip of coffee.

Adrian Cho, a writer on the journal, said: "For all the hype, the discovery of 
the Higgs boson easily merits recognition as the breakthrough of the year. Its 
observation completes the standard model, perhaps the most elaborate and 
precise theory in all of science."

The discovery proves there is an energy field all around us that gives mass to 
the fundamental particles that make up our world. The announcement of its 
discovery in Geneva was met by cheers usually heard at football matches or rock 
concerts.

"The feat marks an intellectual, technological and organisational triumph," 
said Cho.

The result of the 43-year long hunt for the Higgs boson was not the only 
exercise in exploring the world's very smallest particles to make the 
shortlist. A team of Chinese physicists won plaudits for describing how elusive 
particles called neutrinos morph into one another as they zip along at 
near-light speed. The discovery looks set to open up the field of neutrino 
physics and may help solve a puzzle that has long vexed scientists across the 
globe: how the universe evolved after its creation to contain so much matter 
and so little anti-matter.

Researchers believe there could be some as-yet-unknown differences between the 
two types of particles or else the laws of physics might need to be modified. 
The breakthrough saw the Chinese beat teams working in France, South Korea, 
Japan and the US.

In genetics, the results of a £180m decade-long study to create an 
encyclopedia of DNA elements, known as Encode, were published to wild acclaim 
in parts of the science media with this newspaper describing it as "the most 
significant shift in scientists' understanding of the way our DNA operates 
since the sequencing of the human genome".

The portrait of DNA helps explain how genes are controlled and some 
researchers have already used the insights to clarify genetic risk factors for 
diseases such as multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease.

From the tiny to the vast, Science's shortlist celebrated the eight-month trip 
through space of the four-tonne Curiosity rover, which landed on Mars on 5 
August like something out of a Boy's Own adventure using a crane "festooned 
with retro-rockets". It went on to explore the Gale crater and the successful 
landing reassured Nasa planners that it can now send a rover to collect samples 
from Mars and land a second mission on the spot to pick up the samples and lift 
them into Mars' orbit for eventual return to earth.

But amid the celebration of scientific achievement, the journal also 
highlighted an ongoing global controversy over the safety of research into bird 
flu, which it said was mired in moratoriums amid fears over which studies were 
safe and which could lead to the creation of potentially even more devastating 
strains of the virus that could fall into the hands of terrorists. Fears grew 
when a Rotterdam-based virologist, Ron Fouchier, announced said his team had 
engineered a version of the bird flu virus that could be transmittable between 
humans.

The journal has also predicted next year's breakthroughs, which it believes 
include the most precise map yet of the afterglow of the big bang, the event in 
which the universe is thought to have been born, and the exploration of a 
mysterious sub-glacial lake four kilometres beneath the Antarctic ice, which is 
likely to have been cut off from life on the rest of the planet for millions of 
years.

Breakthrough of the year


Discovery of the Higgs boson <https://www.theguardian.com/science/higgs-boson> 
– the elusive "god" particle of physics.

Runners-up

Denisovan DNA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/30/scientists-genetic-makeup-denisovan-girl>
 – sequencing genetic code from an extinct group of humans who lived in Siberia 
50,000 years ago.

Genome engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/oct/31/genomes-project-inventory-human-genetic-variation>
 – new "cutting" tools that can modify the genomes of rats, crickets and human 
cells.

Neutrino mixing 
<http://www.rdmag.com/news/2012/03/daya-bay-unveils-last-neutrino-mixing-angle> 
– last part of the jigsaw describing how neutrino particles morph from one 
strain to another.

Eggs from stem cells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/oct/04/baby-mice-stem-cells> – 
embryonic stem cells from mice coaxed into becoming viable egg cells.

Curiosity's landing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2012/aug/06/curiosity-rover-mars-landing-live-blog>
 – "sky crane" dropped Mars rover from a hovering platform.

X-ray laser 
<http://phys.org/news/2012-11-x-ray-laser-sickness-exploiting-parasite.html> – 
used to determine structure of an enzyme required by the parasite that causes 
African sleeping sickness.

Majorana fermions <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-17695944> – 
discovery of particles that act as their own antimatter and annihilate 
themselves.

Encode project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/sep/05/genes-genome-junk-dna-encode> 
– human genetic code is more functional than first believed.

Brain-machine interface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/dec/17/paralysed-woman-robotic-arm-pittsburgh>
 – hope for people paralysed by strokes and spinal injuries as technique by 
which thought can move robot arms is improved.
 