
A few years ago - Bartleby the Scrivener should have been living at that hour 
- I had the idea of recording the titles and authors of books as I read them. 
Though not the clerkly sort, I kept it going for five years. Analysing the list 
afterwards I recalled that as a young man of 20 I had done a similar 
accounting, for three years, in a blank wireless operator's logbook purloined 
from the Royal Air Force. It told me that in 1949 I had read 128 books.

The list was both instructive and nostalgic. Having decided to become a writer 
I read hungrily, for pleasure as much as to learn. Before that time I had taken 
in little beyond the juvenile productions of Captain Marryat, GA Henty, RM 
Ballantyne, Jules Verne, Conan Doyle, Rider Haggard, Robert Louis Stevenson, 
Victor Hugo and Alexandre Dumas, all works of adventure and travel, which 
influenced me to the extent that by the age of 30 I had spent eight years out 
of the country.

Back from service in Malaya, I was diagnosed as having tuberculosis, and my 
sudden passion for reading was, I now think, a necessary barrier against the 
shock of having to spend time in hospital. A middle-aged woman pushed a 
double-decker book trolley along the highly polished floor of the ward, and 
from my prone position I plucked out a copy of Homer's Odyssey in a recently 
published Penguin translation by EV Rieu. The date was May 5 1949.

On the back cover of The Odyssey was an announcement that a new translation of 
The Iliad, also byHomer <https://www.theguardian.com/books/homer>, would be 
published soon. Fascination with the classics led me in the next few years to 
read works by Aeschylus, Tacitus, Xenophon, Sophocles and Virgil. Even before 
the Penguin Iliad appeared I had found Lord Derby's blank verse translation and 
Pope's rhyming version of The Odyssey.

By this time I had left the air force, more or less cured, and was tackling 
with enthusiasm Plato, Euripides and Herodotus, as well as working my way 
through Shakespeare and the Bible. I regretted not having been to university to 
learn Latin and Greek. Even so, translations into English were of the highest 
quality so one could not complain.

From then on I never stopped reading, which brings me back to the recent 
five-year list, a total of 285 titles read mostly in that hour or so before 
sinking into sleep around midnight. Among the books reread was that same copy 
of Homer's Iliad from 1949. I hope the shade of blind Homer will forgive me if 
I state that my first impression was more of a novel than a poem. I was also 
intrigued as to what other tales had been sung or written from the dawn of our 
civilisation, or in antiquity. Nothing is known about them, though The Iliad 
and The Odyssey could not have sprung from a cultural void.

The story of The Iliad, told in 24 books, nearly 17,000 lines of superb 
poetry, concerns a quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon, Greek commanders in 
the punitive expedition to Troy, around 1200BC. The reason for the war was to 
obtain revenge against that city for harbouring Paris, who had abducted (if 
that's the word) the fair Helen, wife of Menelaus.

Towards the end of the 10-year campaign, Achilles, denied his prize of the 
captured princess Briseis by Agamemnon, refuses to take his place in the line 
of battle against the Trojans unless she is given back to him. The drama 
centres, during the back and forth sway of the fighting, on the eventual 
patching up of the feud, and the resumption of Achilles' part in it. The last 
two books are devoted to the funeral rites of Patroclus the Greek, and those of 
Hector on the Trojan side.

Though Lord Derby's version is in unrhymed iambic pentameters, rather than the 
dactylic hexameters of the original, the narrative retains the density of an 
exciting though tragic war novel, never matched for scenes of ferocity and 
courage and the maintenance of honour, with its graphic descriptions of ghastly 
wounds, nearly all of which result in death.

Individual encounters of the combatants begin at the whim of the gods, and 
Homer deals equally with the warriors of both sides. Because the gods are in 
control, the conflict seems almost like a civil war, as in a way all such 
fighting is between men who are of one blood and one nation under heaven. Men 
at war are the playthings of the gods who, like children, possess perfect and 
obedient toy soldiers which they set against each other.

Domestic anguish is at its most poignant in Book VI, when Hector, before going 
outside the walls of Troy to fight and die at the hands of Achilles, says 
farewell to his wife Andromache and their infant son: "Silent he smiled as on 
the boy he gazed: / But at his side Andromache, in tears, / Hung on his arm..."

The speeches of man and wife are impossible to read or to forget without 
feeling their grief, in a parting which must be the most heartbreaking in 
literature. Countless millions throughout history have endured such separation 
before going off to die in war, and still do. At the capture of Troy, though 
this is not told in The Iliad, Andromache's child is thrown from the 
battlements of the conquered city by the Greeks, and she is carried off into 
captivity.

I envy those who have not yet read The Iliad, if such there are. They have a 
profound experience in store, and might begin with EV Rieu's prose translation 
of that and The Odyssey. Both are among my best-loved books, but The Iliad, a 
great work of art, is read again and again.

Â· Alan Sillitoe's A Flight of Arrows: Opinions, People, Places is published by 
Robson Books
 