
Taking a daily dose of aspirin in the hope that it will prevent heart attacks 
may do more harm than good among healthy people, according to theBritish Heart 
Foundation <http://www.bhf.org.uk/>.

The warning has been issued following publication of medical research into the 
benefits of the drug 
<http://www.escardio.org/congresses/esc-2009/congress-reports/Pages/706001-706002-fowkes-patrono.aspx>
 and the dangers of internal bleeding.

Millions of Britons are thought to be taking low doses of aspirin every day in 
the belief that the tablets will protect them against heart attacks and strokes 
by lowering the risk of blood clots.

"We know that patients with symptoms of artery disease, such as angina, heart 
attack or stroke, can reduce their risk of further problems by taking a small 
dose of aspirin each day," said Professor Peter Weissberg, the foundation's 
medical director.

"The findings of this study agree with our current advice that people who do 
not have symptomatic or diagnosed artery or heart disease should not take 
aspirin, because the risks of bleeding may outweigh the benefits."

The new study, partially funded by the foundation, followed a group of 
Scottish patients, aged 50 and above, who had no history of cardiovascular 
disorders. Over an eight-year period they were prescribed 100mg of aspirin or a 
placebo.

The results have now been presented at the European Society of Cardiology 
Congress <http://www.escardio.org/Pages/index.aspx> in Barcelona.

The lead author was Professor Gerry Fowkes 
<http://www.chs.med.ed.ac.uk/cphs/people/staffProfile.php?profile=ffowkes>, 
from the Wolfson Unit for Prevention of Peripheral Vascular Diseases in 
Edinburgh. His paper said: "The benefits of antiplatelet therapy in the 
prevention of future cardio- and cerebrovascular events is well established in 
patients with a clinical history of arterial vascular disease. However, 
evidence in primary prevention is limited, with studies suggesting that any 
benefit of aspirin must be weighed against the risk of bleeding.

"It is possible that, in the general population, aspirin could produce a 
smaller reduction in vascular events than this trial was designed to detect, 
but it is questionable whether such an effect, together with aspirin-related 
morbidity, would justify the additional resources and health care requirements 
of an ABI [ankle brachial index] screening programme."

The aim of the trial was to determine the effectiveness of aspirin in 
preventing cardiovascular problems in people with asymptomatic atherosclerosis 
â€“ the undetected build-up of waxy plaque deposits on the inside of blood 
vessels.

Major bleeding episodes among the patients being followed required admission 
to hospital of 34 (2%) of subjects in the aspirin group but only 20 (1.2%) of 
the placebo group.
 