
It has been a deeply depressing week: bombings in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/21/iraq-car-bomb-baghdad-sadr-city>,
scores dead in a Pakistani church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/23/pakistan-church-bombings-christian-minority>
, a new alliance of extremist Islamic brigades formed in Syria and thesiege of 
a top-end mall in Nairobi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/westgate-mall-attacks>, with at least 72 
people killed by militants from the Somalia-based al-Shabaab group.

Twelve years after the 9/11 attacks, our tolerance for such violence is 
higher. But every few months, there is an incident that is sufficiently close 
to home, literally when a soldier is killed on the streets of London, or 
figuratively when weekend shoppers are targeted, to provoke the existential 
dread that is the aim, by definition, of terrorism.

There are, however, several reasons to be more cheerful about the future than 
the week's events might suggest.

First, the al-Qaida central leadership is, most analysts agree, very much 
weaker than before. The death ofOsama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/osamabinladen> crippled an organisation that 
owed much of its influence to its media image. The current leader, Ayman 
al-Zawahiri, is an effective strategist and organiser but has nothing of his 
predecessor's charisma.

Second, the overarching strategic objective of al-Qaida was to radicalise and 
mobilise tens of millions of Muslims and to terrorise the west to achieve a 
radical rearrangement of, if not the world, then certainly the Middle East, 
much of Asia, some of Africa and, arguably, parts of Europe. This has not 
happened. Realistically, whatever the chill consequences of the desperate turn 
taken by the Arab spring, it is still difficult to envisage the establishment 
of an Islamic caliphate stretching from Pakistan to Morocco in the next decade 
or so.

Third, though the fate of the Muslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> in Egypt has been 
understood by many as a clear message that Islamist aims will not be achieved 
through democratic process and will have pushed some, particularly locally, 
further towards violence, al-Zawahiri himself has recognised the continued 
marginalisation of extremists in much of the Muslim world. He recently issued 
guidelines that urged local al-Qaida-linked groups to avoid earlier mistakes 
that had so alienated local communities.

Fourth, the phenomenon of Islamic militancy today is more fissured and 
fragmented than at any time since the late 90s, when al-Qaida began to draw 
together some of the myriad fractious groups then operating across the Islamic 
world. This is true at local levels, too – in Pakistan, in Syria, in Iraq, in 
the Maghreb, in the Sahel. It is certainly true inSomalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/somalia>. It may well be that Ahmed Abdi 
Godane, the leader of a splintered and weakened al-Shabaab group, decided to 
launch the strike in Nairobi to establish definitively his own authority as 
leader by an action no rival would contemplate. Such "internal competition" is 
typical of extremist groups, as multiple recent studies of "jihadis" by 
security services have established. Palestinian groups in the 1970s or 
anarchists in the 19th century were no different.

Fifth, the territory actually held by militant groups looks impressive on a 
map but is largely composed of places that no one else wants: large tracts of 
remote mountains or deserts for the most part. Al-Shabaab is one of the few 
groups, outside Syria, that controlled decent sized towns. Another plausible 
reason for the Nairobi attack is that Godane hoped a new international profile 
would bring in cash from the wealthy donors in the Gulf who continue to fund 
extremism.Al-Shabaab <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-shabaab> lost 
significant revenues when forced out of the Somali port of Kismayo by Kenyan 
troops last year.

Finally, intelligence services are more worried now than they were a year or 
so ago but much less concerned than they were back in the darkest days of 
2003-06 when bombs were going off from Casablanca to Jakarta, hundreds were 
dying in Europe, Iraq was in total chaos, Afghanistan was deteriorating fast 
and senior spooks in London looked gloomily into their pints and spoke of "the 
wheels coming off".

Now for the reasons to be less sanguine. First, al-Qaida tried repeatedly to 
graft a global ideology on to individual local struggles. This project usually 
failed because the vision of the group did not sufficiently respect local 
circumstances. Bin Laden believed that spectacular attacks broadcast to 
hundreds of millions could replace years of work on the ground. Events proved 
otherwise.

But Godane seems to be trying to plug a local struggle into a global ideology. 
Being Somali himself, Godane is better placed to know what will work in his 
homeland. That he is less acquainted with geopolitics doesn't really matter. A 
similar project has already been relatively successful inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, where the militants that western 
intelligence agencies believe pose the greatest threat to the west appear 
solidly rooted.

So far however, most militant groups have remained obstinately local in their 
focus, if not their rhetoric. The vast proportion of all violence involves 
attackers striking close to where they live. They don't get on planes – either 
to destroy them or to fly to where they can destroy something else – very 
often. But clearly this could change.

Second, the territory held or contested by militants is certainly 
unattractive, but is often of strategic value. The Sinai, parts of Syria and 
Yemen, the Afghan-Pakistan border regions, southernAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> are all remote but critical bits of 
real estate on the global map. That is a genuine concern and can prompt clumsy, 
often counterproductive, responses from local and western powers.

Third, Modane emerged after less extreme figures were killed off by US drones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/drones>. The elimination of leaders can be 
extremely useful but has unpredictable consequences. Assassination is now seen 
as a key weapon in the struggle against extremism in western capitals at the 
moment. But it is a tactic, not a strategy.

Fourth, Islamic militancy, a phenomenon with deep historical roots in social, 
economic, religious, cultural and political factors in the Islamic world and in 
the Islamic world's relationship with the west, appears durable.

The recent phase dominated by al-Qaida lasted roughly from the early 90s to 
2011, peaking with the 9/11 attacks. A previous phase lasted from the late 60s 
to the end of the 80s, another 20-odd-year period, and peaked with a wave of 
extremist activity between 1979 and 1981. If this new dynamic, chaotic phase 
follows this pattern, we are looking at another two-decade cycle with a peak in 
about 2022, something the security planners of theQatar World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022> might like to chew over.

What is clear is that we cannot defend every Westgate in the world against 
terrorist attack. Indeed, we cannot defend even a tiny fraction of them. If it 
is unlikely there will be more 9/11s, it is certain there will be more 
Westgates – as there will be moreMumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mumbai-terror-attacks>s, London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/july7>s, Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/madridtrainbombs>s and Bali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/11/bali-bombings-10-years-on>s. We 
can mitigate the threat, but we cannot eliminate it. Hyperventilating, though 
inevitable, will not help. We are just going to have to live with it, and for 
some considerable time to come.

Jason Burke is the author of The 9/11 Wars 

• This article will be opened for comments on Sunday morning
 