
Clint Eastwood has denied that he threatened to kill fellow film-maker Michael 
Moore in 2005, in alleged retaliation for Moore’s doorstepping of Charlton 
Heston while shooting his Oscar-winning 2002 documentaryBowling for Columbine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/nov/15/artsfeatures4>.

At a lunchtime event at the CinemaCon expo 
<http://deadline.com/2015/04/clint-eastwood-feted-says-he-is-not-doing-the-richard-jewell-movie-and-has-choice-words-for-michael-moore-cinemacon-1201414540/>
 in Las Vegas, Eastwood is reported to have said: “Everyone kept saying I was 
going to kill Michael Moore but that’s not true.” He then added, to laughter 
from the crowd: “It isn’t a bad idea.”

“I think once years ago somebody asked me what would I do if a guy like him 
came to my house with a whole film crew and started filming away like he did 
with Charlton Heston. Unfortunately, Charlton Heston was ill at the time with 
Alzheimer’s. But I thought if somebody was on your property, you could shoot 
him.”

The issue was raised by Moore himself back in January, when the documentary 
makerwrote a lengthy Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/mmflint/posts/10152576593336857> “confirming” events 
at a National Board of Review event in 2005. After writing that Eastwood 
announced to the assembled attendees that “he would ‘kill’ me if I ever came to 
his house with my camera for an interview”, Moore added: “I was a bit stunned 
to hear Eastwood, out of the blue, make such a violent statement. But I 
instantly decided he was just trying to be funny.”

Moore added that his principal objection was that Eastwood was echoing similar 
“jokes” by the likes of Glenn Beck and Bill O’Reilly and that “this kind of 
thing wreaked all kinds of havoc in my life because of what this hate speech 
does to inspire the more deranged among us”.

Moore’s post came shortly after a spat with Eastwood over the latter’s 
record-breaking war film American Sniper, in whichhe said snipers were “cowards”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/20/michael-moore-american-sniper-clint-eastwood-bradley-cooper>
. Moore also describes Sniper as “a mess of a film that rewrites history”.
 