
My experiences of institutional meals have not been happy ones. In school, a 
large woman with forearms like hams, expression entirely free from the milk of 
human kindness, was employed by the nuns to ensure we choked down every scrap 
of granular, grey mash and leathery-skinned custard. In a flagship hospital, 
all gleaming glass and statement artworks, my bedside cupboard was filled with 
roast peppers, focaccia and salami from the Italian deli across the road 
because the beige, sloppy food trundled round at mealtimes made me feel sicker 
than I already was.

I was lucky enough to be able to afford to do that; many can’t. Admittedly, 
it’s a while since I was either at school or in hospital (and I’m yet to do 
porridge), but our institutions remain bywords for diabolical food. “School 
dinners” is still lobbed around as an insult by food writers (yes, me 
included), and both school and hospital catering continue to be the subject of 
lobbying bodies, online petitions and passionate reformers. In the prison 
service, bad food served to an audience already in poorer health than the 
general population has beenshown to be a catalyst for aggression 
<http://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/12161/1/Prison_ICCAS_as_at_10_Dec_071.pdf>. 
Lord Ramsbotham, the former chief inspector of prisons, is on record as saying 
that he is“absolutely convinced there is a direct link between diet and 
antisocial behaviour” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/oct/17/prisonsandprobation.ukcrime>.

Despite new government rules introduced last year dictating that hospital food 
should meet mandatory standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/29/nhs-hospital-meals-quality-hunt>
, including fish twice a week and seasonal produce, what’s actually on offer 
can be terrifyingly dismal. Initiatives such asthe Campaign for Better Hospital 
Food <http://www.sustainweb.org/hospitalfood/> invite patients and their 
families to post pictures of the“slop” and “pigswill” 
<http://www.sustainweb.org/hospitalfood/> served in the wards, a sorry 
cavalcade of greige unpleasantness. The site is peppered with miserable 
anecdotes of “cook-chill” food sent from manufacturers in Wales to hospitals in 
Yorkshire, and of traumatic weight loss by patients.Sustain 
<http://www.sustainweb.org>, the body behind the crusade, also fronts the 
Children’s Food Campaign <http://www.sustainweb.org/childrensfoodcampaign/>, 
which maintains that, with poor school food and junk food, children’s diets are 
in “crisis”. It’s clear that our most vulnerable people simply aren’t being fed 
properly.

Many big names have tried to remedy the problem. Chef and Saturday Kitchen 
presenterJames Martin <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006v5y2> has attempted 
to do for hospitals whatJamie Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/oliver> did for schools, improving 
food standards – although Oliver’s 2005School Dinners 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/jamies-school-dinners> programme had an 
unfortunate side-effect:the Turkey Twizzler furore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2005/mar/06/schoolmeals> turned even more 
parents on to packed lunches for their children, so canteens had to struggle 
harder to pay their way (theSchool Food Plan <http://www.schoolfoodplan.com> 
says “only 1% of packed lunches meet the overall nutritional standards that 
currently apply to school food”). But what happens once the celebrities and 
cameras move on?

I found a school, a hospital and an institute for young offenders where 
serious efforts are being made to ensure their food is far better than just 
about fit for purpose. I decided I was going to review them. Yes, a snooty 
restaurant critic, more used to eating ortolans and larks in oligarch-infested 
Mayfair, compelled to ingest institutional food. Would they survive? Would I?

‘I’d happily serve this macaroni cheese to my family’ 
Royal Brompton hospital, London SW3
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702232909%2F4d2fa045-c15a-4382-ae40-48abb7abc5c5-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702232909%2F4d2fa045-c15a-4382-ae40-48abb7abc5c5-1020x612.jpeg>
 Vegetable soup, macaroni cheese, bread and butter pudding with custard. 
Photograph: Louis Porter for the Guardian 
My jaw drops when cardiorespiratory dietician Ione Ashurst tells me that up to 
40% of all hospital patients are admitted suffering from malnutrition. We are 
in Chelsea, one of the wealthiest of wealthy London’s boroughs; I know its 
patients come from all over, but it’s still hard to grasp.

There are a lot of things I haven’t taken into account as I breeze in to try 
the food. The challenges of cooking for a large hospital are many and 
demanding. Of course they are. There’s the more obvious stuff: budgets and 
scale and diets tailored to the hospital’s specialisms. Royal Brompton is the 
largest heart and lung centre in the UK, meaning the food has to perform a very 
specific, curative and restorative function. Long-term patients can suffer from 
sarcopenia – age-related muscle wastage exacerbated by being bedridden – so 
protein in its most concentrated form is vitally important. But food also plays 
a hugely important psychological role: hours are long when you’re lying ill 
abed, and a meal is not just sustenance, but one of the very few potentially 
pleasurable elements of interminable, monotonous days. It becomes something to 
look forward to in a way that even the loveliest lunch on the outside can never 
be.

Catering manager Paul Hammond, a former RAF chef, has a massive job on his 
hands. “We try to get extra protein into everything: milk powder into our fruit 
jellies, cheese in our mashed potato. We need them to eat.” His budget for 
three full meals a day, plus afternoon tea, is £3.50-£4 per patient. It doesn’t 
promise a great deal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702650540%2F347f6ba9-355c-46d9-a26b-0fd67440b08e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702650540%2F347f6ba9-355c-46d9-a26b-0fd67440b08e-1020x612.jpeg>
 Vegetable soup, tuna salad. Photograph: Louis Porter for the Guardian 
The first dish to arrive is a minestrone soup. Very little is bought in, most 
dishes are made fresh on the day, and the kitchen works through from early 
morning (this is very much not standard hospital catering practice). The soup 
is vivid with tomato and fresh vegetables, the stock slightly gloopy; they use 
a commercial base, but that is one of the kitchen’s rare shortcuts, and soups 
themselves are freshly made. Calories are stealthily shoehorned into 
everything, so a salad of fresh leaves, cucumber and tomatoes, cut into 
teatime-at-your-nan’s quarters, is topped with pasta shells liberally laced 
with rich tuna mayonnaise. It’s never going to turn up on Instagram tagged
#artofplating <https://instagram.com/explore/tags/artofplating/>, but it’s 
soothing and comforting.

Much of the food isn’t as bland as I expected. There’s a jerk chicken dish 
where the bird – farm-assured (over 30% of the hospital’s produce is now local 
or organic or both, remarkable given that budget) – is coated in a sticky, 
treacly jerk glaze. Perhaps it’s not spicy enough for my taste, but then I’m 
not recovering from major surgery. And it comes with Caribbean-style dirty rice 
studded with kidney beans, the grains fluffy and separate and fully flavoured. 
To get rice like this on an industrial scale is a genuine achievement. Yes, the 
green beans are cooked more thoroughly than I’d like, but in my experience 
older people enjoy their vegetables boiled to buggery.

The job the kitchens have here is Sisyphean. The menu changes on a 
three-weekly basis, ensuring the appetites of both short- and long-term 
patients are constantly stimulated. Then there are procedural headaches: 
overcoming the effects on food caused by long journeys between kitchen and ward 
in heated trolleys. But macaroni cheese is excellent: the pasta with substance 
and bite, the creamy, cheese-rich sauce with a fine, oven-baked crust. They’ve 
used decent cheddar. I’d happily serve this to my family for tea. I might not 
accompany it with a side order of rice, even though I’m not averse to a spot of 
double-carbing, but again, the need is there for calories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702781128%2F30aedcd9-1fe8-4059-8be8-34679f94347f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702781128%2F30aedcd9-1fe8-4059-8be8-34679f94347f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sandwiches, yoghurt, drinks. Photograph: Louis Porter for the Guardian 
Seemingly inconsequential things matter: Hammond tells me they’re about to 
change their sandwich packaging from the familiar corner shop-style Cellophane 
pack to a tray layout of four smaller triangles. It’s about eye appeal, and 
also lets appetite-lacking patients reseal for later, after nibbling on a 
cheese and tomato on white. (“White?” I ask Ashurst. She smiles: “Wholegrain 
would fill them up too quickly. With white, they’re likely to eat more.”) Even 
bought-in items are scrupulously sourced: a thick, creamy, black cherry yoghurt 
has 4.2g of protein and is, of course, live.

I laugh that they don’t need to worry about the likes of TripAdvisor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/tripadvisor>, only to be told that patients 
are encouraged to feedback via weekly forms and forums. Which is why the 
teatime cake is a moist, homemade-tasting sponge, and why pies and pastries are 
made on site. For an operation that’s walking the vertiginous tightrope between 
health issues and the need to please a hugely disparate demographic of 
“customers”, while at the same time ticking all the boxes dictated by 
government standards, well, frankly, they do an amazing job.

‘I have never been moved to tears by lunch, but I am now’ 
Hydebank Wood young offenders college, Belfast
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702932772%2F51548889-4488-4939-82da-daac23901b6d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438702932772%2F51548889-4488-4939-82da-daac23901b6d-1020x612.jpeg>
 Slow-cooked beef short rib, vegetable and potatoes, homemade lemonade. 
Photograph: Rob Durston for the Guardian 
Security is, clearly, a priority. But in the airy, newly built reception of 
Northern Ireland’s only youth prison, the machine designed to issue my pass has 
malfunctioned. So, rather than being allowed to walk through the bright, modern 
corridors, I have to go through a dingy concrete and metal holding pen, a 
decompression chamber between freedom and incarceration.

What was formerly known as Hydebank Wood Young Offenders Centre and Prison is 
changing. It’s now a “secure college” with the emphasis firmly on education and 
rehabilitation, a place of hope rather than a house of correction. Cell blocks 
are “residential houses”, inmates are “students”. I’m here to review the Cabin 
Cafe, a new project set up by cook/restaurateur/writerPhilip Dundas 
<http://www.philipdundas.com>, where nine inmates – sorry, students – are 
effectively running a small cafe/restaurant. Customers are Hydebank Wood’s 
staff.

“When I first suggested they eat food prepared by the prisoners,” Dundas says, 
“the answer was, ‘It’ll never happen.’” The restaurant also feeds fellow 
students: one boy is taking a break from grounds duties to enjoy a bowl of 
chicken and vegetable soup. (“Neverending soup,” Dundas laughs. “We aim for 
little or no waste, so everything goes back in the pot.”) The soup thrums with 
goodness: you can really taste the chicken, with a fresh backnote of lemon and 
the bright jab of black pepper. It comes with bread from Belfast’sYellow Door 
Deli <http://yellowdoordeli.co.uk> (I’m forgiving the foil-wrapped pat of 
butter). When it first made an appearance, one of the boys marvelled, “I never 
knew bread could taste like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703074475%2F9fa5eaae-fd92-4e48-a885-f02c0d52b900-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703074475%2F9fa5eaae-fd92-4e48-a885-f02c0d52b900-1020x612.jpeg>
 Goat’s cheese crouton on home-grown salad, lemonade. Photograph: Rob Durston 
for the Guardian 
With input from the women’s wing, they have done creative things with the 
boxy, municipal space, painting trompe l’oeil panelling on doors, and 
wallpapering with pages from vintage cookery and nutrition books. Basic 
furniture has been upcycled with help from the city’sStudio Souk 
<http://www.studiosouk.com>. The most attractive feature is the display of 
cakes and biscuits: orange shortbread, cornflake cookies, a genuinely flawless 
banoffee pie – rich, sticky, creamy top, crumbly base – all priced from 50p. 
The cafe has to be self-supporting, with any profits ploughed straight back. 
Sue McAllister, director general of the Northern Ireland prison service, who is 
in today with colleagues for lunch, tells me about one lovely, karmic source of 
income: revenue from assets recovery or, as McAllister says, “The money from 
baddies.”

Behind the counter, they’re plating up goat’s cheese on croutons with salad, 
the cheese donated by a neighbouring farmer who’s also in line to supply the 
institution with its own goats. The salad is first class: wonderfully perky 
leaves, mandolined radish and raw courgette, tiny, sweet peas, chard – all 
grown in the many polytunnels just outside. Presentation is beautiful, a 
youthful spring onion lolling over the top, nasturtiums dotted about. Today’s 
main dish is short ribs, or Jacob’s ladder as they’re known by Jason at
Carnbrooke <http://www.carnbrookemeats.co.uk/carnbrookemeats.co.uk/Home.html>, 
the butcher who supplies them at a generous discount. It’s fine meat, too, 
Dexter beef, slumping off the bone, in a sauce fragrant with orange peel. “We 
put them in the warming drawer overnight,” Dundas says. “The smell when you 
come down in the morning is amazing.” Vegetables are all from the garden, and 
they’re restaurant quality. I speak to the young guy serving me. Has working 
here changed his attitude to food? “Oh yes,” he shakes his head in wonder. “I 
didn’t have a clue. I didn’t even know it took just minutes to make an 
omelette.”

The boys seem a little nervous, but smiley and friendly. There are five 
working today – they self-select and do their own rotas, helped by Nicky Orr, 
who has moved over from the unit’s conventional canteen. McAllister points at 
the youth manning the coffee machine. “He volunteered to come in and cover 
another lad who was unable to make it. Volunteered,” she emphasises. “This 
never happens in a prison environment. Never.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703221402%2F225fded1-72ca-454d-878c-d4d5c3b7fa21-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703221402%2F225fded1-72ca-454d-878c-d4d5c3b7fa21-1020x612.jpeg>
 Banoffee pie, tea. Photograph: Rob Durston for the Guardian 
I ask how she and Dundas connected. It was via the networking website 
LinkedIn, surely the first instance of anything valuable ever coming from 
there. She continues: “The change in these boys in a matter of weeks is 
amazing. Their eyes are brighter, their shoulders straighter. They now look you 
in the eye.” I have never been moved to tears by lunch (unless you countGregg 
Wallace’s restaurants 
<http://metro.co.uk/2012/03/20/greggs-table-bermondsey-square-restaurant-review-359099/>
), but I am now.

Dundas echoes McAllister’s observations. “I absolutely believe you can 
cultivate emotional intelligence through diet. There was a… situation earlier. 
A few weeks ago it might not have ended so well, but today they simply sorted 
it out between them and moved on.” The students are in charge of the only metal 
cutlery allowed in the unit (“They count it religiously each evening and panic 
if anything has gone missing.”). And the till. Not once, Dundas says, has it 
ever been anything other than dead on the money. Often, these young men have 
grown up in poverty and nutritional deprivation, with the relentless stress 
those entail. And stress hormones inhibit cognitive functions: planning, 
attention and, crucially, emotional control.
 Philip Dundas at Hydebank Wood. Photograph: Louis Porter for the Guardian 
The cafe’s staff have been involved in every step of the process, from naming 
it to their uniforms (all black, with The Cabin Crew on the back), to their 
loyalty scheme – in a deliberately comic touch, it uses fingerprints. Mutually 
agreed rules of engagement decorate the counter: “I will always turn up on 
time, ready to start work with a smile.” They’re absorbing skills that could be 
hugely valuable to them in the outside world. McAllister and Dundas are hoping 
to transform disused stables owned by the unit into a Northern Ireland food 
hub, with major input from the students; they’d love to see Hydebank Wood 
become a test case. They see no reason why prisoners (some of whom can work 
“outside”) shouldn’t provide meals on wheels services, or feed the homeless.

As I leave, the lads sit down to a lunch they’ve helped grow, prepare and 
serve, and call on Dundas to join them. I ask one if the boss shouts and swears 
in the kitchen, as chefs famously do. “Oh no,” he laughs. “He knows what he’s 
doing, so he does.” The whole experience has been completely uplifting for me. 
I can only imagine what it’s like for them.

‘This is very different from the cabbage reek I remember’
Gayhurst community school, London E8
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703400067%2Fc7a41abe-0d67-4eb9-b729-c0ad7acd3f90-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703400067%2Fc7a41abe-0d67-4eb9-b729-c0ad7acd3f90-1020x612.jpeg>
 Samosa, Indian spiced vegetables, coconut sponge, vanilla ice-cream. 
Photograph: Louis Porter for the Guardian 
The first thing that strikes me as I’m buzzed through the gates of the 
handsome, red-brick Gayhurst school in Hackney, east London, is the aroma. 
Walking past a splashily painted planter of herbs, I breathe in the fragrance 
of garlic and spices – very different from the damp cabbage reek I associate 
with school dinner halls.

Inside, I’m shown to my seat at the end of a long, communal table under the 
baleful gaze of an enormous cardboard robot. On the table are boards laden with 
chopped avocado and cucumber salad, and labneh laced with orange blossom water. 
“It’s one of my cheffy touches,” admits Nicole Pisani, the former head chef of 
Yotam Ottolenghi’s Nopi, whocaused waves when she left that high-profile gig to 
take over the school’s canteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/apr/02/why-i-quit-ottolenghis-nopi-to-cook-school-dinners>
. “I love working here and seeing the kids eat our food, but there has to be 
something in it for me, too.”

Pisani applied for the job following a tweet from Henry Dimbleby 
<https://twitter.com/HenryDimbleby/status/522676446440194048>, co-founder of 
Leon <http://leonrestaurants.co.uk> and architect of the School Food Plan 
<http://www.schoolfoodplan.com>, saying that his son’s school was in need of a 
cook. School hours allow Pisani a quality of life – “I get to see my friends!” 
– and work on other projects in the holidays. But, watching her talking to the 
children as they clear their plates, it’s obvious she is utterly committed to 
the job. “I stand by the bins so I can hear what they’re saying,” she says. 
“But, just as importantly, I can see exactly what they’re eating.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703550680%2Ff7a9d3e6-81df-46c1-a7cf-3d3cd6443ae4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703550680%2Ff7a9d3e6-81df-46c1-a7cf-3d3cd6443ae4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Fried chicken, tandoori carrots, dhal, coconut sponge. Photograph: Louis 
Porter for the Guardian 
Today’s main dish is fried chicken, given exactly the same treatment as it 
gets in those cool, brick-walled restaurants: brined, marinated in buttermilk 
and fried at the last minute. (Other dishes might be Vietnamese beef noodles, 
or homemade fish fingers. “We try to do healthy versions of the kind of thing 
they love to eat,” Pisani says. “I asked one child what her favourite vegetable 
was and she said ‘chicken nuggets’.”) Her fried chicken is gorgeous, the meat 
tender and moist, steam rising from its crisp coating. It sits on 
tandoori-style carrots and peas, and gently spiced coconut dhal. I hear one 
junior wag, clearly alarmed at this novelty, bellowing to his pals, “Don’t eat 
that!” His loss.

Since I’m trying everything, I intend to have only a bite or two of each dish. 
But faced with a vegetable samosa, the thin, crisp pastry homemade, the spices 
subtly insistent, finished with a flourish of that avocado salad on top and 
Indian-style chickpeas beneath – all the work of Pisani’s colleagues Samia, 
Zahra and Hodan – I find myself polishing off the lot. There’s homemade coconut 
sponge, topped with silky, rich vanilla ice-cream made by Cheryl, formerly a 
chef atthe Riding House Cafe <http://www.ridinghousecafe.co.uk>. You’d never 
guess that this was food plonked on to plastic plates from huge metal catering 
trays. The staff all dress in chef’s whites, and address each other as chef. 
And why not?

The children are dolloping the avocado on their plates; at the end of lunch, 
it’s been demolished. “If we handed it to them, they’d leave it,” Pisani says, 
“but left to help themselves, it all goes.” The salad is the work of Elizabeth, 
75, who’s worked as a dinner lady for decades. She’s a total convert to the new 
system. “She’ll now tell me off,” Pisani says, “especially if she thinks 
something lacks colour.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703659889%2F4e30e4b6-426c-4250-bc9d-618c4e98425b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doing%20porridge%3A%20prison%2C%20school%20and%20hospital%20meals%20put%20to%20the%20test&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fmeals-transformed-prison-school-hospital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F4%2F1438703659889%2F4e30e4b6-426c-4250-bc9d-618c4e98425b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Gayhurst’s chef, Nicole Pisani. Photograph: Louis Porter for the Guardian 
Headteacher Louise Nichols is planning to phase out packed lunches completely 
towards the end of the year. Wow, that’s brave. Nichols smiles: “We like a 
challenge.” Something else they’re phasing out is the prison-style, 
compartmented plastic food trays, in favour of actual plates, made of recycled 
material. Eating food at school, they reckon, should reflect the real 
experience of dining as closely as possible.

Feedback from parents is almost universally positive. Since Dimbleby was 
instrumental, I ask what he thinks. “The change Pisani has brought about is 
extraordinary,” he says. “She has focused on encouraging children to eat more 
broadly. And, critically, while bringing down food costs, because they’re 
wasting less and eating more vegetables. I hope more chefs are inspired by what 
she’s doing, to think of cooking in schools as a serious career option.”

Pisani’s energy is incredible. As is her food – done for a ridiculous 85p a 
head per day. (She expresses her discomfort at a London restaurant scene where 
bills routinely hit £300 for two.) Never mind me, though; the biggest critics 
are the kids. At the end of lunch, they fill a tub with either green ping-pong 
balls (like) or yellow (don’t like). Feedback doesn’t get more instant. Yes, 
there are yellow ones in there – older children, with more entrenched tastes, 
are more resistant to change than the little ones – but green wins the day. And 
they’re learning to embrace the likes of chicken in soy, penne pesto and 
aubergine parmigiana. Bite that, chicken nuggets.
 