
Name: Lord Lloyd-Webber.

Age: 67.

AKA: Andrew Lloyd Webber; Baron Lloyd-Webber of Sydmonton (the name’s not 
hyphenated, but the title is).

Occupation(s): composer, impresario, parliamentarian.

What’s he been up to lately? Mostly getting his new musical, School of Rock 
<http://deadline.com/2015/10/school-or-rock-trailer-andrew-lloyd-webber-360-degrees-1201582128/>
, ready for its New York opening in a fortnight.

I’ll bet he’s missing home. Nah, he’s just been on a flying visit to London.

Andrew Lloyd Webber kicks out the jams with School of Rock musical
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/19/andrew-lloyd-webber-school-of-rock-musical-broadway>
How come? Trouble in the West End? After a fashion – he turned up in the House 
of Lords tovote in support of tax credit cuts for the working poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/26/tax-credit-cuts-halted-as-lords-vote-to-protect-low-income-earners>
.

Remind me again - how much is Lord Lloyd-Webber worth? About £650m, give or 
take.

A rich man flying across an ocean to vote to impoverish people – how 
unattractive.To each his own. I’d say he’s never looked better.

Still, I guess it shows a dedication to political duty that’s sort of 
admirable.And unusual. The last time Lloyd-Webber voted was more than two years 
ago 
<http://www.publicwhip.org.uk/mp.php?id=uk.org.publicwhip/member/100381&showall=yes>
. In fact, he has only voted 30 times in the past 14 years, despite having had 
1,898 opportunities.

Why this sudden determination to fight for the government’s right to make 
low-wage earners worse off? A spokesman for Lloyd Webber said: “He voted last 
night because he feels that it is important for democracy that theHouse of Lords
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> should not override decisions 
made by the elected House of Commons.”

Did it work? No. The government lost by 17 votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/oct/27/tax-credit-cuts-defeat-lords-osborne-grayling-tax-credits-defeat-grayling-says-politics-live#block-562f4341e4b01b6c191ab425>
.

It’s like something out of a musical: the lone millionaire on a doomed mission 
to rescue a bill that would have cut the incomes of 3m people by an average of 
£1,300 …Oh, he wasn’t alone. Lots of famous millionaires voted with the 
government, including Tim Bell, Sebastian Coe, Maurice Saatchi, Julian 
Fellowes, Anthony Bamford …

George Osborne says he will 'lessen the impact' of tax credit cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/27/george-osborne-lessen-impact-tax-credit-cuts>
Careful. I think you’ll find Lord Bamford is a billionaire. My mistake.

Did anybody attempt any musical references while making light of Lloyd 
Webber’s mission of mercilessness?A few tweeters implied he was trying to 
create his own Les Miserables.

But he didn’t write Les Miz! I know. Fools.

Do say: “Don’t cry for me, working people – the truth is I’m Britain’s 
127th-richest person.”

Don’t say: “Never mind, Lord Lloyd-Webber. At least you can claim your £300 
allowance for a day’s attendance.”
 