
The latest data 
<https://www.ucas.com/corporate/news-and-key-documents/news/2015-cycle-applicant-figures-january-deadline-2015>
 from the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) confirm 
expectations that the number of students applying for university places this 
coming autumn will be up for the third year running.


The figures are apparently defying the gravity of the falling 18-year-old age 
cohort and show no sign of a backlash against £9,000 a year tuition fees.

 With other recent reports showing rising employer demand for graduates 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-30745839> and record starting salaries for 
the best, the outlook for higher education students and providers appears rosy.

Low-income students more likely than ever to apply to university, Ucas says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/30/low-income-students-likely-apply-university-ucas>
 But it would be dangerous for university leaders and policy-makers to 
conclude that demand for higher education is and will remain buoyant. Equally, 
they cannot be certain that the recruitment outlook justifies the huge 
investments that many have made in new academic buildings and facilities and 
supports their bullish revenue forecasts.


In fact, beneath the surface of Ucas applications and other recent statistics, 
there are big and (for some) worrying shifts emerging in the flow of new 
students into the university system. In particular, rising levels of 
applications – up 2-3% overall in each of the past three years – have been 
accompanied by falling numbers of students actually taking up places each year.

Since the last peak in 2010, total student enrolments (according to the Higher 
Education Statistics Agency) have actually fallen by more than 10% over recent 
years.


Between 2013 and 2014 total enrolments were down over 40,000, equivalent to 
the annual intake of around eight universities. The fall has been particularly 
marked among part-time and mature (aged over 20) students, whose numbers have 
almost halved in recent years. This probably reflects the adverse impacts of 
the new fee and loans regime for these students and the reluctance of employers 
to contribute towards their costs.

Another disconcerting feature of the shifting demand is the falling proportion 
of males among applicants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/21/gender-gap-university-admissions-record>
 and recruits which is leading towards a 55:45% female majority among 
university students.

 What is also clear is that the changes have been unevenly distributed across 
the 150 or so higher education providers in the UK.


Ucas analysis of the last three year’s figures show that a third of providers 
have experienced growth of 10% or more since 2012, with some 9% growing by more 
than a fifth.


However, these winners are outnumbered by the losers. A quarter of providers 
saw enrolments over this period fall by 10-20% and a further 11% experienced 
even more dramatic falls.


We are also seeing big differences in participation rates across the UK with 
45% of 18-year-olds in London now in higher education, but the equivalent rates 
in Scotland, Wales and most English regions are nearer 30%.

 There is no obvious pattern to this imbalance, with some prestigious Russell 
Group universities among the losers and several post-92 institutions among 
those experiencing sharp growth.

Our experience from working with numerous providers of all kinds, and talking 
to others, suggests that the disparities reflect providers’ differing responses 
to the new market for higher education places.

 That market is a buyers’ market, reflecting the incentive to providers of 
£27,000 in tuition fees for each extra recruit, coupled with the relaxation, 
and now the abolition of enrolment quotas.

Aspiring students have quickly learned to play this to their advantage, 
favouring those institutions prepared to offer the best deal for their custom. 
As a result, the admissions process no longer works in the traditional 
formulaic way where Ucas applications led to planned proportions of conditional 
offers, provisional acceptances, A-level results and confirmed places.


Universities now have to continue working to woo prospective students right 
through the recruitment cycle. Previous ratios between offers made and numbers 
turning up in September are no longer reliable.

 This change can be seen very clearly in the Clearing process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> after A-level results each 
August. It is no longer a frenzied mopping up of spare places and unplaced 
students but asecond round of mainstream recruitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/aug/19/university-clearing-spectacle-students-power-balance-shifted>
. Many students now enter the system for the first time in Clearing and others 
use their new freedoms to shop around for better offers from more attractive 
institutions.

 All of this is good news for students, as it is becoming significantly easier 
to get a place at their preferred university. They can often secure entry with 
lower exam grades than they would have done even a year or two ago. It is also 
good for those universities willing and able to enrol higher student numbers, 
and those that are smart enough to adapt to the new rules of the recruitment 
game.


But there is a worrying number of universities that are stuck in an old 
mindset and may not be as attractive to prospective students as they think they 
are. The outlook for some of these this September is much more uncertain, and 
we can expect more surprising outcomes at the end of the recruitment season.

 * Mike Boxall is a higher education expert at PA Consulting Group 
Join the higher education network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 