
I am a specialist registrar who will be able to apply for consultant jobs in 
three years’ time. I am not alone in feeling unsure about what the future holds 
for me as a doctor in the NHS. And what appears clear fromJeremy Hunt’s 
seven-day proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/16/jeremy-hunt-nhs-reformation-showdown-with-doctors>
 is that he has never directly worked for our world-renowned, precious 
institution.

There is no doubt that the medical needs of the public remain significant at 
weekends and that I, along with the British Medical Association, fully support 
the idea of more seven-dayNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
services. However, focusing on the need for consultant presence at weekends is 
merely shifting attention away from bigger issues that are staring government 
in the face.

Jeremy Hunt's divisive approach to seven-day NHS services benefits no one
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/16/jeremy-hunt-seven-day-nhs>
As a specialist registrar, I rely heavily on the guidance and experience of my 
consultants, most of whom have been practising medicine for more than 20 years. 
They, like most doctors I come across, are hard-working people. They work for 
the NHS, rather than for private firms, because earning lots of money isn’t 
their driving force for practising as a medic. Most of us actually really care 
about our patients, our colleagues and our communities. I’d be surprised if you 
could find me a doctor who hasn’t skipped lunch three days in a row or stayed 
two hours late because a patient has become acutely unwell, without receiving 
any time or monetary compensation and, quite often, no thanks.

All doctors have had to spend a good chunk of their lives working weekend and 
night shifts. And while this antisocial pattern was “what we signed up for”, 
there’s no denying that such working patterns can be emotionally and physically 
tough, often to the detriment of family, friends and personal health. Studies 
have shown that working night shifts canincrease your risk of serious health 
problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/17/night-shift-work-linked-obesity-sleep-calories-research>
 and that divorce rates are higher in those working in caring professions and 
with unpredictable working hours. And on a logistical note, transport and 
childcare costs can soar at the weekend, further adding to time and financial 
pressures. So if doctors are expected to work within these parameters for the 
extent of their career, we need to feel that we are being considered within 
this decision, not just being told what to do.

Jeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> states that 
“timely consultant review when a patient is first admitted and 
consultant-directed interventions” will save lives. This is undoubtedly true. 
However, even consultants can’t do everything and if the health secretary wants 
consistent 24/7 care then he’s going to need to give them a hand. Doctors work 
as part of a cohesive team and rely on diagnostics in order to give patients 
the best care possible. So we need to know where the extra nurses, 
radiographers, laboratory staff, porters, administration staff etc are coming 
from too.

What he likewise does not acknowledge is that healthcare professionals have 
many roles. Clinical care is at the forefront but don’t forget that consultants 
have important managerial, educational and health improvement roles alongside 
their practising duties that require adequate time to fulfil. This may be 
alongside trying to have a personal life too. So while working weekends may 
improve standards of patient care on a Saturday and Sunday, what happens on a 
Monday when that doctor has accrued much-needed time off the shop floor? Again, 
something we need to know.

Is Jeremy Hunt's vision for the NHS already mired in difficulty?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/17/jeremy-hunt-vision-nhs>
What Hunt’s proposals also painfully neglect are the issues of elderly care 
and social placement. Significant numbers of accident and emergency admissions 
are for elderly patients or those with other social and long-term health 
difficulties that do not require emergency care but present as they “had 
nowhere else to go”. The government needs to look at how these groups of people 
can be effectively supported on a day-to-day basis to improve their individual 
outcomes and remove pressure from already bursting-at-the-seams emergency 
departments. Hunt also neglects to mention his recent public health cuts, which 
are taking money away from preventative health strategies and stealing 
decision-making responsibility from the very people delivering care.

What our NHS needs now is more staff, adequate compensation and consideration 
during antisocial hours and sufficient budget to cover our expanding ageing 
population with ever increasing needs. It does not need stab-in-the-dark ideas 
to make it look like progress is being made. NHS workers are already working in 
low-morale conditions, demonstrated by the the high levels of stress and 
anxiety observed among staff and the falling numbers of new doctors wanting to 
train in general practice and accident and emergency medicine. The government’s 
unwillingness to propose any solid plan to implement a well-supported seven-day 
service for patients and staff alike is only further testing the goodwill and 
capability of its frontline workers, the consequences of which could be 
irreversible.


If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 