
Margaret Hodge <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaret-hodge>, MP, 
redoubtable chair of the Public Accounts Committee, never minces her words and 
this week she was typically blunt in saying the Department for Work and 
Pensions is on the verge of meltdown as it struggles to implement huge welfare 
changes.

Hodge has been scathing about practically everyone involved in the entire 
business of bidding for government contracts, now a huge business worth more 
than £100bn a year. Her committee's report, published on 14 March, was, she 
said, one of the most important pieces of work it had done. And, coming from 
the woman who has taken on some of the worst taxdodgers of the land, that's 
saying something.

But amid her calls for government to get a grip on its management of deals 
with the private sector, for companies to start behaving ethically and pay 
their taxes, and for both sides to lift what she described as a veil of secrecy 
over big government deals – Hodge has also raised one aspect of the whole 
outsourcing scandal that has had much less attention.

She wants to know why scandal-hit welfare-to-work firm A4e 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/a4e> is still in the running to bid for public 
services, such as the forthcoming contracts to run probation services.

In all, 13 former employees of the company have now been charged as a result 
of a whistleblower raising concerns that staff were billing taxpayers for 
"successful" work not actually carried out or for non-existent clients.

Last month, four former employees of A4e pleaded guilty in Reading Crown Court 
to 30 acts of fraud and forgery. But even Hodge was forced to acknowledge this 
was not a case of individuals trying to enrich themselves. None of the former 
staff benefited personally, she noted.

Of course what these people did was wrong. But is it wrong to feel a smidgeon 
of sympathy for the poor sods? Not of course, for their actions, but for the 
situation they were in.

Spare a thought for the staff at A4e and the other companies now running 
multimillion-pound government programmes. Most are doing the best job they can, 
on painfully low wages. As infuriated union bosses have been pointing out, 
outsourcing services has meant cutting costs – and that means cutting wages. 
Hodge's committee has highlighted one instance where staff were moved out of 
the public sector on wages of £26,000 – but new staff doing the same work were 
paid £7,000 less.

This is what happens when services are ground down to the bone and it is not 
clear how open book accounting and transparency will make any difference. Once 
again, there will be all the right words spoken at the top – but the real cost 
will be borne, yet again, by the footsoldiers of public service.

Right now, whether you work for the DWP or Serco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup>, whether you're on the 
government payroll or on a private sector payroll/ casual contract/ zero hours 
contract – you're taking the brunt, and no-one's going to be thanking you 
anytime soon.

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com.

Join the Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>.
 