
Due credit to the Telegraph second time round. What do you do when you’re 
digging yourself deeper into a hole? Dig a new one under the Palace of 
Westminster. So a bad week got much better (except for Malcolm Rifkind and Jack 
Straw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/22/jack-straw-malcolm-rifkind-cash-for-access-channel-4-dispatches-telegraph>
). It wasn’t a pristine hit, perhaps. The subsequent shame and departures 
depended more on what the disgraced duo said on camera to Channel 4’sDispatches 
programme. But no one could doubt a public service sting, absolutely as 
powerful a force for MPs’ good behaviour as another bout of rule-making and 
line-drawing by party leaders facing an election.

Pause for just a minute, though. This phoney Chinese business stuff was a 
trawl round the palace, not a targeted operation. Only two out of 12 of the 
honourable members who were approached seemed to bite. There doesn’t seem to 
have been specific targeting then – just as (an earlierTelegraph exploit) there 
wasn’t specific targeting of gabby, disloyal Lib Dem MPs when a couple of 
winsome lady reporters posed as eager constituents.

The Press Complaints Commission, as was, found against the Telegraph then. 
Ipso, as is, promised deeper analysis of theBrooks Newmark sexting sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/01/brooks-newmark-sexting-scandal-five-controversial-political-stings>
, but didn’t deliver.

And now for the Rifkind-Straw trawl? Expect only silence. The bigger the fish 
who apologise and quit, the less that modus operandi seems to matter. Not codes 
and rules at all: just brute common sense.

■ Readers and numerous writers were shocked last week at the thought that the 
big advertisers could cow news judgments insideTelegraph Towers. But 
manipulation and threat come in many shapes and sizes. Consider theculture, 
media and sport select committee report last week on the future of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/26/mps-demand-shakeup-at-top-of-the-bbc>
.

There goes the BBC Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, 
replaced by an executive board with an HMG-appointed chairman. There, on a 
half-life support system, goes the licence fee. Here comes a German-style TV 
levy, plus extra payments for extra services and encryption to keep freeloaders 
at pay. Here come new injunctions to subsidise local journalism and world 
services. Here’s the return of top-slicing.

All this, and more, is yet another heavy cloud hanging over Broadcasting 
House. All this, and more, is bound to wrinkle controllers’ brows as they begin 
another fraught election campaign (with retribution in various forms awaiting). 
Such a selectively menacing selection of wheezes could have been left for three 
more months so a fresh government, just elected, could begin to mull the 
options.

But why wait until then if you can finger Tony Hall’s collar now?

Lebedev leaves it to his editors

My editors can decide which party to back in May (says Alexander Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev>, owner of the Standard 
and three differentIndies). Oh, and they can also decide whether to sign up for 
Ipso regulation or not. The editors rule OK. All very laudable stuff from a 
laudable Russian press baron – but strangely leaving out one bit of the 
equation. Do journalists on his four papers see Evgeny Lebedev, the 
long-standing scion in London situ, as a benign, saintly champion of 
non-interference? Does Evgeny somehow not exist day after day, month after 
month, as though exiled to his Italian villa? Like father, perhaps, but not 
quite like this son.
 