
Like many people, I have been watching, and rewatching – and then rewatching 
again – the best thing on television:John Oliver’s magnificent denunciation of 
Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/mar/02/john-oliver-targets-trump-with-make-donald-drumpf-again-campaign-video>
 on his HBO show Last Week Tonight. It was smart, funny, acute: even more so 
for the connoisseur’s way he conceded that Trump’s own gag about an opponent 
sweating was “objectively funny”.

John Oliver launches anti-Trump campaign: #MakeDonaldDrumpfAgain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/01/john-oliver-last-week-tonight-donald-trump-hbo-drumpf>
Oliver dug up the obscure fact that Trump’s family name was once “Drumpf” and 
is campaigning for him to be called that. Great stuff. But people are calling 
the Oliver piece a “demolition” of Trump. Sadly, it isn’t quite that. I was 
reminded of the moment inWoody Allen’s Manhattan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/manhattan> when the great and good at a fancy 
black-tie party are talking about Nazis marching in New Jersey and someone 
says: “There was this devastating satirical piece on that on the op-ed page of 
the Times!”

It is great to annoy Trump by calling him “Drumpf”, and perhaps Hitler was 
annoyed by newspaper columnists in the 30s and 40s derisively calling him 
“Schicklgruber” (his father’s original surname). I don’t think it’s futile. 
Actually, it’s vital. But irony doesn’t work on its own. The simple truth is 
that there’s only one person who can stop Trump and that is the un-ironic 
figure ofHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>.

Like the tactical voters of the French left faced with a Le Pen presidency, 
Republicans will have to act against their instincts; the rightwing pundits of 
America will just have to swallow their pride and pin on a Hillary badge. 
Otherwise, our satirical bemusement will mean nothing. Meanwhile, I thinkJohn 
Oliver <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/john-oliver> deserves an OBE.

There’s an eff in Salford

Salford council has met with astonishment and derision after attempting to ban 
swearing on the streets around the new development of Salford Quays. Those 
heard using “foul and abusive” language will be slapped with an on-the-spot 
fine. It’s a very tough and somewhat Singaporean initiative that calls to mind 
the comedianJeremy Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/29/glastonbury-2014-10-questions-for-jeremy-hardy>
’s plaintive objection to the idea of banning the C-word: how are you supposed 
to drive?

Swearing, for me, is one of the most fascinating aspects of language. An 
arbitrary collection of sounds and marks on a page are attached to meaning by 
common consent. In English-speaking societies, we understand that the sound 
“cat” means the thing that purrs – but there is no physical link. Yet swearing 
is different and feels different. When you swear, it feels physical – like 
sneezing.

When you stub your toe, only a proper swearword will give you relief. What 
possible pleasure can Italians get from “stronzo”? Meanwhile, those shouting 
the F-word in Salford can maybe get off the ban by doing what I do: quickly add 
the phrase: “—oodness’ sake”.

Thank you, queen of crime
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdonald-trump-drumpf-john-oliver-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10c663719c4aadf3a0d2150e7351da613d7475fd%2F0_0_2845_1707%2F2845.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%2C%20or%20Drumpf%3F%20Satire%20may%20annoy%20him%2C%20but%20it%20won%E2%80%99t%20stop%20him%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdonald-trump-drumpf-john-oliver-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%2C%20or%20Drumpf%3F%20Satire%20may%20annoy%20him%2C%20but%20it%20won%E2%80%99t%20stop%20him%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fdonald-trump-drumpf-john-oliver-hillary-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10c663719c4aadf3a0d2150e7351da613d7475fd%2F0_0_2845_1707%2F2845.jpg>
 ‘We didn’t have “young adult fiction” in the 1970s. We had Hercule Poirot.’ 
David Suchet as Agatha Christie’s detective. Photograph: ITV Plc 
Thursday’s World Book Day was the occasion for the film writer Guy Lodge to 
tweet a perennially interesting question 
<https://twitter.com/GuyLodge/status/705334380814794752>: what was the first 
grownup book you remember reading? Not a kids’ or a young adult (YA) book – an 
actual, proper, grownup book.

Guy said his was Jane Eyre. I remember mine as if it were yesterday: Sad 
Cypress by Agatha Christie <http://www.agathachristie.com/stories/sad-cypress>. 
And I’m prepared to bet that the queen of crime provided the gateway drug to 
grownup novels for many others too. We didn’t have YA in the 1970s. We didn’t 
have gutsy abstinence-loving youngsters in an apocalyptic landscape battling 
for survival over seven books (unless you count Narnia). We had Hercule Poirot, 
with his exotic Clouseau mannerisms, elegantly questioning middle- and 
upper-middle-class British people about their terrible secrets.

Sad Cypress was a gripping courtroom drama as well as a detective story. And, 
however affected it sounds, the title led me to Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night.

• This article was amended on 7 March 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Cymbeline, rather than Twelfth Night, as the source of Sad Cypress.
 