
As the Donald descended from the steps of Trump Force One and attempted to 
shield his wayward hair from the easterly winds sweeping across the Tarmac of 
Aberdeen airport, he would have expected a frosty reception. Trump, ignoring 
the record-breakingpetition calling for him to be banned from the UK for “hate 
speech” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-35321834>, is in Scotland as 
part of a whistlestop tour of his two Scottish golf courses. The first port of 
call will be Turnberry – now renamed Trump Turnberry – after an investment 
claimed by the Trump Organisation to be £200m. But it is at his Menie estate in 
Aberdeenshire where the Mexican flags are flying high.

Beware a boring Donald Trump. He’s more dangerous than a maverick one | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/23/boring-donald-trump-dangerous-maverick-outrageous-republican-party>
Michael Forbes and David Milne, who were among the residents Trump threatened 
with compulsory purchase orders when they refused to sell him their properties 
to make way for a luxury golf resort,have hoisted the flags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/21/trump-golf-course-scotland-mexican-flag>
 in a show of solidarity with the people of Mexico. Trump, of course, has 
pledged to build a 2,000-mile wall along the Mexican border “very 
inexpensively” to stop “rapists and drug dealers” from entering the US if he 
becomes president. And as the residents of the Menie estate know only too well, 
Trump has form on walls.

As I documented in my first Trump film, You’ve Been Trumped 
<http://www.youvebeentrumped.com/youvebeentrumped.com/THE_MOVIE.html>, at the 
crack of dawn one morning in 2010, the billionaire’s bulldozers sprang into 
action and began dumping thousands of tons of earth around the homes of local 
residents Susan Munro and David Milne, after the tycoon had branded their 
houses ugly. Trump’s builders (who had no planning permission for these works, 
according to the residents) had already been caught on camera, burying trees in 
an enormous hole next to the mounds of earth piled up to shield Forbes’s farm 
from the view of Trump’s golfers. Trump had blasted Forbes on national 
television for “living like a pig” and his working farm “a pigsty”.

In many ways, Trump’s loss-making development at the Menie estate is a 
microcosm of what’s been going on during his run for the White House. When 
Trump pledged to be the “jobs president”, Scots were quick to remember his 
broken promises on jobs. Trump claimed he would create6,000 jobs 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/trump-fails-to-create-promised-jobs-and-investment-in-scotland-locals-say-a6801466.html>
 through his golf course resort and spend £1bn building the “greatest luxury 
golf resort in the world”. In fact, no “resort” was ever built. Around 100 jobs 
have been created on the Menie estate and a single golf course is in operation, 
along with a granite-clad clubhouse. It is estimated he has spent less than 5% 
of the original investment pledged. Plans for a second golf course have yet to 
materialise – much to the relief of local residents who fear it would destroy 
another stretch of wild dunes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-frosty-reception-scotland-broken-promises-golf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5351fa1d8eff474faa585a20013767cafe79114%2F0_35_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20deserves%20his%20frosty%20reception%20in%20Scotland%20%7C%20Anthony%20Baxter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-frosty-reception-scotland-broken-promises-golf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20deserves%20his%20frosty%20reception%20in%20Scotland%20%7C%20Anthony%20Baxter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdonald-trump-frosty-reception-scotland-broken-promises-golf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5351fa1d8eff474faa585a20013767cafe79114%2F0_35_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Donald Trump on the sand dunes of the Menie estate. Photograph: David 
Moir/Reuters 
The non-partisan website PolitiFact <http://www.politifact.com/> has 
determined that Trump’s campaign statements are riddled with an astounding 
number ofoutright falsehoods 
<http://www.politifact.com/personalities/donald-trump/>. That’s hardly news to 
Forbes, who has the phrase “NO MORE TRUMP LIES” daubed on one of his farm 
sheds. Forbes has watched for more than a decade as the Trump claims and 
promises have come to nothing. The 450-bedroom hotel has never been built. The 
1,500 houses failed to materialise. Instead a golf course for the wealthy now 
stands between him and his salmon fishing boat, with Forbes complaining he is 
unable to access the beach to fish.

Trump claimed his Menie estate golf course would be “environmentally perfect”. 
But in fact it destroyed the ability of the sand dunes to move and shift 
naturally, something that was highlighted by every credible environmental group 
in the land when his plans were first submitted.

Trump also insists he has been a good neighbour. But local residents think 
otherwise. In April, a woman walking on the dunes near Trump’s golf course was 
charged by police and accused of“a disgusting and shameful act” 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14432743.Donald_Trump_s_staff_film_Scots_granny_caught_short_on_golf_course_then_call_police/>
 by the Trump Organization. Her crime? Answering a call of nature. This 
incident shook local residents, who had hoped the police had learned lessons 
after spending years appearing to act like a private security force for Trump. 
I should know. The police arrested me and threw me in jail, for daring to ask 
why Molly Forbes who is now 92, had her water supply cut off by Trump’s 
bulldozers.

He has used his money and access to power and the media to intimidate ordinary 
people

The bullying of local residents and failure to deliver on economic promises 
are perhaps the main reasons why the billionaire’s popularity rating in 
Scotland is at rock bottom. Former first minister Alex Salmond, who once 
enthusiastically welcomed the Trump development, now says the billionaire
“couldn’t get elected the dog catcher” 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/more-sports/trump-couldn-elected-dog-catcher-scotland-article-1.2606893>
 in Scotland. And as Trump steps up the rhetoric in his campaign to be 
president, with ideas such as banning all Muslims from the US, it is little 
wonder that Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen finally saw sense andstripped 
him of the ludicrous honorary degree 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-35054360> he received 
in 2010.

While there has been endless debate about the many outrageous statements that 
Trump has made during the presidential campaign, the events at the Menie estate 
prove that what Trump says and what he does are two very different things. Here 
he used his money and access to power and the media to intimidate ordinary 
people; he made outrageous promises to hoodwink the gullible (including, alas, 
the Scottish government); and he showed a breathtaking disdain for the 
environmental toll of his relentless pursuit of personal gain. It is a 
cautionary tale for Americans going to the ballot box in November, and for the 
people of Britain, who have lost, for ever, an irreplaceable part of our common 
natural heritage.
 