
Douglas Alexander has been accused of "destructive and divisive" leaks by 
former spin doctorDamian McBride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/damian-mcbride>, whose revelations about 
the Gordon Brown era have cast a shadow over the first day of the Labour party 
conference in Brighton.

Alexander, the shadow foreign secretary, found himself dragged into the row 
after he criticised McBride for publishing his memoirs. The MP told the 
conference McBride's confessions about smear tactics and dirty tricks while 
working for Brown were "destructive" and "deeply damaging to our party". He 
added: "I and others paid a price for opposing that style of politics at the 
time."

Within minutes, McBride hit back on Twitter – saying Alexander had "some brass 
neck" for criticising him, suggesting he had leaked a humiliating story about 
Brown. "How does Douglas feel about the destructive & divisive tale about GB's 
[Gordon Brown] desperation to secure a 1:1 meet with Obama in Sep 09?" he wrote.

The row threatened to undermine Ed Miliband's claims that the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party has changed after McBride 
published extracts of a book expressing regret for his past behaviour. Miliband 
was forced to start the party's conference by denying any role in the "macho" 
and "reprehensible" smear campaigns of McBride, whose book is being serialised 
in the Daily Mail.

As the conference got under way, the Labour leader said he had been aware of 
McBride's reputation for briefing against colleagues andtried to get him sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/22/ed-miliband-gordon-brown-damian-mcbride>
 when they both worked for Brown.

Miliband told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0080bbs> he had never been part of the 
"macho" group around Brown. "I'm not sure I've ever been accused of being 
macho. I think that is a first. I will take that away. I think there are 
definitely lessons to be learned from the past."

Asked by Marr if he had advised Brown to remove McBride, he said: "I did." 
McBride confirmed Miliband had urged Brown to sack him and did succeed in 
getting him removed from his role in briefing the press in 2008. He wrote on 
Twitter: "He complained about me and told Gordon to get rid. Quite right too."

Yvette Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper>, the shadow 
home secretary, also said McBride had been "out of control" and denied 
suggestions he had ever been a guest at the home she shares with her husband Ed 
Balls.

The timing, on the eve of a crucial party conference for Miliband, appears 
designed to inflict damage. Also unhelpful are claims that the Labour leader 
could in future be embarrassed by emails he exchanged with a friend of 
McBride's, Derek Draper.

As the party was meant to be concentrating on a series of new policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/22/ed-miliband-labour-proposals-at-a-glance>
 announced before the conference, shadow cabinet members had to spend time 
denying that Labour still has a negative culture.

Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, insisted Miliband has established 
a "new generation leading the party" that is entirely different from the 
culture under Brown.

"As far as I'm concerned, [McBride] is a relic from the past and there is no 
place for that kind of nasty, vile politics in Britain today and I'm glad we've 
seen the back of him," Umunna said. "One of the things Ed has been so clear 
about – and I remember because I was in the shadow cabinet meeting – is he will 
not tolerate any of that kind of behaviour. If anybody is found briefing 
against anybody, you are out – there will be no discussion, you will be out. 
That is not the way Ed Miliband's party does things. If anything positive comes 
from Damian McBride's indulgence, it is to remind people that that is not the 
way we do things."Umunna, who has been tipped as a potential future leader, was 
also at pains to stress that he personally is untainted by the scandal, as he 
was not in politics at that time.

"There is a new generation leading the party," he said. "Ed has surrounded 
himself with a shadow cabinet, two thirds of whom weren't in the last cabinet. 
There's quite a few members, like myself, who weren't even in parliament the 
last time. Everyone who was around knows how damaging that was."

He added: "I just feel grateful I wasn't around for it."

Rachel Reeves <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/rachel-reeves>, a shadow 
Treasury minister, also said she "wasn't an MP but what I do know, as a member 
of the shadow cabinet for the last two years, is that these things are not 
happening under the leadership of Ed Miliband."

The publication was condemned by Alastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell>, Tony Blair's former 
spin doctor, who called the actions of McBride in allowing his book to damage 
Labour on the eve of conference "sickening".

Downing Street's former director of communications said he would not be able 
to live with himself had he allowed his own books to wreck Labour's conference.

Apart from a briefing that led the Observer's Andrew Rawnsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewrawnsley> to quote an unnamed source 
describing Brown as "psychologically flawed" and "losing my temper in briefings 
about Clare Short", Campbell said he had never briefed against a minister. "I 
never ever did it," he said.
 