
Hay fever <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hay-fever> season is kicking 
off again, and for nearly a quarter of the population, that can mean seasonal 
misery and debilitating symptoms.

Hay fever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/25/climate-change-hay-fever-ragweed-pollen-europe-uk>
 is an allergy to airborne particles such as pollen and fungal spores that 
affects the nasal passages, eyes and lungs, causing sneezing, an itchy, runny 
or congested nose, watering and sore eyes, aching sinuses and a wheezy cough. 
The symptoms can interfere with sleep and make it hard to concentrate.

Climate change could bring misery for hay fever sufferers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/25/climate-change-hay-fever-ragweed-pollen-europe-uk>
In the UK, trees pollinate from late March to mid May, grasses from mid May to 
July and weeds from the end of June to September. The pollen “season” is 
normally March to August, but it can start in January and last until November. 
When your symptoms start depends on whether you are allergic to tree, grass or 
weed pollen.Different tree species pollinate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/10/hay-fever-infographic-trees-grass-pollen>
 at different times and you may be much more allergic to one type oftree pollen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/may/13/weatherwatch-ravilious-research-michigan-pollen-trees-rain-clouds-asthma>
 than another.

People who are highly allergic will get severe symptoms even if pollen counts 
are low. And even non-allergic people may experience some sneezing and itchy 
eyes if they spend a lot of time outdoors when pollen counts are unusually 
high. TheMet Office provides a five-day pollen forecast 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/health/public/pollen-forecast#?tab=map&map=Pollen&fcTime=1461841200&zoom=5&lon=-4.00&lat=55.71>
 that can help you take preventive action.

The best approach to hay fever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/28/hay-fever-remedies-worst-season-decades>
 is to avoid the triggers – but pollen gets everywhere and it’s miserable to 
stay indoors when the sun’s shining.NHS Choices suggests you rub Vaseline just 
inside your nostrils 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/hayfever/Pages/Allabouthayfever.aspx> to keep 
pollen out, and stay indoors with windows shut when the pollen count is above 
50. Pollen counts are highest in early morning, evening and night, so avoid 
cutting the grass at those times or camping in grassy fields. Shower and change 
clothes after being outdoors, wear sunglasses, and keep car windows closed. 
Consider getting a pollen filter for airvents in the car.

Any hay fever sufferer needs a kit of effective treatments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/may/29/weather.medicineandhealth>
. Oral antihistamines work but older ones, such as chlorphenamine (Piriton) 
make you sleepy. That’s good if you need a comfortable night’s sleep – less so 
if you have an exam the next day. Newer antihistamines such as cetirizine 
(Zirtek) are less likely to cause drowsiness. Buy the cheapest – there’s an 
extraordinary markup for certain brands and smaller pack sizes. I found a 
supermarket own-brand cetirizine for 9p a pill that was identical to Zirtek 
sold by an online pharmacy for 41p a pill. An antihistamine nasal spray, 
azelastine (Rhinolast), is as effective as an oral antihistamine for nasal 
symptoms, but won’t help your eyes, sinuses or lungs in the same way.

Steroid nasal sprays such as beclometasone (Beconase) are as effective as oral 
antihistamines. They reduce all hay-fever symptoms if started early enough in 
the year because they damp down nasal inflammation and stop pollen triggering a 
widespread allergic response. Dymista is a newish nasal spray that combines a 
steroid and antihistamine. It is expensive and not approved for NHS 
prescription in all areas.

Oral decongestants such as pseudoephedrine (Sudafed) can be helpful if you are 
very bunged up. You can take Sudafed for a few days until a steroid nasal spray 
starts working. Actifed is a tablet that combines an antihistamine with 
pseudoephedrine, but the combination may not be much more effective than 
antihistamines alone and the risk of side effects and interactions with other 
drugs is much greater. Decongestant nasal sprays such as oxymetazoline (Vicks 
Sinex) work faster than oral decongestants, but you cannot use them for longer 
than a week because you get a rebound effect and end up with worse congestion 
than you started with.

Allergy specialist Dr Glenis Scadding says: “The new thing in hay fever is 
Serenz <http://www.capnia.com/Products/Serenztrade.aspx>.” It’s a carbon 
dioxide nasal washout that works well as a rescue treatment when symptoms are 
troublesome.

Holly Shaw, nurse adviser at Allergy UK, says: “Natural remedies such as 
allergen barrier balms, and nasal saline douching are very effective add-on 
treatments that can be purchased over the chemist’s counter.”
Met Office pollen calendar showing pollen seasons of different plants and trees
 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/pollen/giv-12515VKjOezr2Jj3h/>
When all else has failed and you are facing an exam or your wedding day with 
swollen eyes, streaming nose and a head that feels like bursting, you can get 
oral steroids from your GP that should work a treat. It is only a short-term 
fix, and repeated or prolonged courses are harmful, but it will get you through 
the exam or down the aisle.
 