
A total of 33 migrants have died in the Sahara desert in Niger while en route 
to Europe this year, including 18 found dehydrated last week near a road to the 
border withAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, the government 
of Niger said on Tuesday.

 International assessments, however, have put the number closer to 50. Many 
thousands attempt to cross the vast and inhospitable terrain in orderto reach 
the Libyan coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/17/death-mediterranean-africans-migrant-sea-libya>
, where they hope to begin anotherhazardous trip by boat to Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/24/libyas-people-smugglers-how-will-they-catch-us-theyll-soon-move-on>
.

 Six foreigners were found dead near a road between Agadez and the Libyan 
border on 12 May, while nine were found dead on 2 June and four more are 
missing on a road to Libya, the interior ministry said.

 “The use of unsecured routes and the refusal to take military convoys is 
always at the origin of these tragedies,” its statement said.

 The International Organisation for Migration (IOM) said on Tuesday 
<http://www.iom.int/news/iom-cites-discovery-more-victims-sahara-among-migrants-bound-libya>
 30 migrants had been found dead in the Sahara near Dirkou in Niger on Monday, 
bringing to 48 the number of bodies recovered in the country this year.
IOM (@IOM_news) 
Remains of 30 #migrants <https://twitter.com/hashtag/migrants?src=hash> found 
on Monday in Dirkou, northeast of#Niger 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Niger?src=hash>’s Agadez crossroads. 
https://t.co/s6VU8uWURv <https://t.co/s6VU8uWURv> pic.twitter.com/F3pH35F1vW 
<http://t.co/F3pH35F1vW>
 <https://twitter.com/IOM_news/status/610750063229276160> June 16, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/IOM_news/status/610750063229276160> 
 In a separate case, the bodies of 18 migrants were discovered on Sunday near 
Arlit, a route to Algeria, the IOM said.

 It is likely given reports from migrants and others that far more than 48 
migrants have died in Niger’s desert this year, said an IOM spokesman, Joel 
Millman.

 “We know that traffickers are increasing in the area through the desert to 
Libya. We believe that there has been an undercount [of the dead] because of 
the remoteness and the difficulty of patrolling,” he said.

 While the figures differ, both offer a glimpse into what migration experts 
say is a hidden tragedy in the Sahara.
 