
When the great Welsh critic Saunders Lewis 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saunders_Lewis> gave a radio lecture early in 
1962 on the fate of the Welsh language, it was like a call to arms for a young 
nationalist like me. Welsh wasn’t spoken publicly and was being badly 
neglected. Many scholars like myself were worried: Lewis’s lecture inspired us 
to do something about it.

That summer, at a Plaid Cymru summer school, about a dozen of us – including 
the historianJohn Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/25/john-davies>, who recently died 
– decided to form the Welsh Language Society. Our aim was to bring the fate of 
Welsh into the public eye. It was decided that John and I would organise some 
sort of public protest. Trefechan Bridge, as it’s become known, has gone down 
in Welsh history.

We didn’t want violence, but we did want to get arrested. The idea was, we 
would insist on a trial in Welsh, and make our cause known by giving speeches 
in court. A lawyer atAberystwyth University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/aberystwythuniversity> – which I had 
recently joined as a lecturer – advised us that plastering public buildings 
with posters was illegal, so we decided to do that.

On the day, we were joined by students from Bangor as well as Aberystwyth – 
including many of my own students – and others passionate about the cause. We 
printed the posters ourselves: they read “Official status for the Welsh 
language” and “Use the Welsh language”. We met in Home Cafe before heading to 
the post office and covering it in posters.

Almost from the start, it was obvious that the police had been instructed to 
take no action. So we moved on to the police station. I remember pasting a 
poster over the door and saying to a policeman: “This is against the law!” He 
just smiled.

It was very frustrating. So we reconvened at Home Cafe and decided on a 
sit-down protest on Trefechan Bridge in town. It stopped traffic for about half 
an hour and got a lot of attention, though there were still no arrests. But the 
day was a great success.

The early 60s was the start of an upsurge in Welsh nationalism that saw the 
first Plaid Cymru politician elected to parliament – Gwynfor Evans, in 1966. By 
that point I was a well-known nationalist, so I was a little surprised when the 
university asked me if I would teach Welsh toPrince Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles>, for a term, in 1969. This was 
ahead of his investiture as Prince of Wales in July.

Rebecca Barnaby watches Oasis at Maine Road, April 1996
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/23/thats-me-picture-rebecca-barnaby-oasis-maine-road-1996>
He had a one-on-one tutorial with me once a week. He was eager, and did a lot 
of talking. By the end, his accent was quite good. Toward the end of his term, 
he said good morning – “Bore da” – to a woman at college; she turned to him and 
said: “I don’t speak Welsh!” His presence caused a bit of a stir. Crowds would 
gather outside the college as he drove up in his sports car.

Welsh received official status a year after our protest. We’ve lost speakers 
over the years, but Welsh language schools are flourishing. I may be 84 now, 
but I’m hopeful for its future.
 