
The plurality of possible permutations of pommes de terres

Items that are made of potatoes – REVIEWED
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdrakes-tattoo-potatoes-a-glum-curtain-dapper-gentlemen-boris-johnson-reviewed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F16%2F1444998420995%2F74f97a59-06aa-40c0-a6ac-58a20932f79a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drake's%20tattoo%2C%20potatoes%2C%20a%20glum%20curtain%2C%20dapper%20gentlemen%2C%20Boris%20Johnson's%20tackle%20%E2%80%93%20REVIEWED&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdrakes-tattoo-potatoes-a-glum-curtain-dapper-gentlemen-boris-johnson-reviewed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drake%27s%20tattoo%2C%20potatoes%2C%20a%20glum%20curtain%2C%20dapper%20gentlemen%2C%20Boris%20Johnson%27s%20tackle%20%E2%80%93%20REVIEWED&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdrakes-tattoo-potatoes-a-glum-curtain-dapper-gentlemen-boris-johnson-reviewed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F16%2F1444998420995%2F74f97a59-06aa-40c0-a6ac-58a20932f79a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tasty. Photograph: Alamy 
Raised as a child in the secretive Church of the Glorious Tuber, I used to 
think everything was made from potatoes. Bridges, aeroplanes, Katy Perry, the 
lot. I know better now. But, still, a lot of thingsare made from potatoes and 
the range is so diverse it would seem perverse to give them a rating based on a 
random sample. Still, that’s what I’m going to do.

Mashtags Birds Eye product that shapes potato into @ and # symbols, thus 
finally giving children the opportunity to pretend they’re posting on Facebook 
while eating their dinner. Presumably at the same time as actually posting on 
Facebook. Sad indictment of our times.

Mash By mixing potato with milk, butter, seasoning and raspberry jam you can 
take the humble potato and turn it into a smooth, substantial and utterly 
disgusting dish. Madness.

Potato battery You can power a tiny clock for a small time by plugging copper 
and zinc poles into your humble spud. In other news, they sell Duracells at the 
shop. Bad.

Mr Potato Head A toy from back in the day when children only had root 
vegetables to play with, Mr Potato Head was definitely better than Mrs Parsnip 
Leg. Nowadays, though, it’s laughable.

Potato-based art Actually this can often be better than the works of Damien 
Hirst. Nice.

Chips The emperor of all foodstuffs. Divine.

Cumulative potato rating 8/10, largely because of chips.

PM

Obtuse physical metaphors for Conservative policy

Boris Johnson’s rugby tackling prowess – REVIEWED
 See a Tory squash a child. 
Just look at him. Look at his face. Look how hard he’s trying. If that were 
Barack Obama, he’d have cheekily held the ball above the child’s head for a few 
seconds like a cool and boisterous uncle. David Cameron would have dad-run 
around for a bit like a fat horse, before handing the nipper the ball and 
scruffing his hair, safe in the knowledge the cameras definitely caught him not 
being evil just then. But no. Not Bojo. Bojo wants this try. He wants it more 
than he’s ever wanted anything in his life. He doesn’t care who stands in his 
way – and it so happens that the only person in his way is a comparatively 
minuscule boy, utterly defenceless against the rolling alabaster tsunami of 
hair and lovehandles tumbling inexorably towards him. The little shit’s going 
down. It’s an inevitability. It’s already happened.

You can almost pinpoint the exact moment Bojo regresses from a 51-year-old 
nobbish mayor of London to a gangly, plum-cheeked 13-year-old oik from Ashdown 
House boarding school. You can see him careering backwards though time to 
rugger practice; to bigger boys called Quentin, and Sebastian, and Timothy; to 
a thousand brutal towel-flicks across the rump; to the endless jibes the young 
Boris – ungainly, uncoordinated,one of those inflatable Air Dancer men found 
outside US car dealerships made flesh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rkg9ov-2N4g> – must endure, day in, day out. 
Boris lost every game of rugby he ever played, and the indignity of it all 
haunts him to this very day. It’s the fire in his belly. He sees all this 
anger, this humiliation, manifested in the kind face of this really 
spectacularly tiny boy. I’m a man, he thinks. A powerful man. A mayor! “Watch 
this Timothy!!!” his id screams like lit magnesium as his fingers clasp the 
3/4-sized ball and he eases into the canter that will be his redemption, “WHO’S 
BLOBBY BORIS NOW!!!” He charges. He drops the shoulder. Contact. It’s beautiful.

The boy takes him down. And that’s Boris’s problem: he’s clearly still very 
crap at rugby. Great, he thinks. Another mortifying failure to add to the list. 
You win again, Timothy. Revenge will have to wait until another day. It’ll have 
to wait, he thinks, until I’m prime minister, for instance. “You’ll see,” he 
whispers to the abyss of his soul. “You’ll all see....” He forces a smile for 
the cameras. His id cackles like Vincent Price. God help us all.10/10.

LH

Inexplicable curtainry

NHS cutbacks – REVIEWED

Remember being ill as a child? It’s weird; a disorientating and almost 
hallucinatory experience. Particularly if you have to spend time in hospital 
where you wake up, already discombobulated by sickness, in an unfamiliar room, 
surrounded by unusual sights, sounds, smells and sensations. What fragile young 
minds in such distressing circumstances need more than anything else is some 
fragment of comforting normality to cling onto. Like some nice curtains, for 
example.

With that in mind, consider these bad boys. They’re like a nightmare rendered 
in cheap acrylic fabric. Look at the terrifying maribou stork, hiding in the 
spiky tree and preparing to pounce on the orange blob creatures and tear them 
to pieces. Check out the upright hippo chatting up the armadillo and imagine 
the hideous spawn they’re about to create. In short, imagine the unbearable 
dreams of the poor children forced to gaze at these demonic drapes as they 
drift off to heavily medicated sleep. We’re warned that our beloved NHS faces a 
winter meltdown this year. But we had no idea things were so bad that hospitals 
are now reduced to scaring children until they beg to be taken home. “Good 
morning little Johnny. It’s time for your lumbar puncture.’ “Thank Christ for 
that. At least it’s not the curtains…”8/10.

PH

Unnecessary sartorial excellence


Elderly men who dress in a suit, shirt and tie just to go to the Post Office 
or clear some chip wrappers from their paths – REVIEWED

If there’s one last frontier of the “anything” that this feature claims to 
“review”, it has to be human beings themselves. Artists might take things 
overly personally, but most critics sleep at night knowing they have spent 
their days slamming a product, performance or abstract concept rather than a 
person. That is because it’s widely accepted that nobody is so transcendently 
great as to qualify to pass judgment over humanity. Except maybe the Pope, and,
judging by a recent New York Times profile, Rihanna 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/12/t-magazine/rihanna-miranda-july-interview.html?_r=0>
.

But now I have to critique old men who dress up in formalwear to do mundane 
tasks. I have to provide a verdict on the relative merits of people who treat 
the minutiae of life with the kind of significance most would only afford to a 
major and glamorous event. Well I have to draw the line somewhere, and offering 
feedback on pensioners who either a) are clutching desperately at the customs 
of an all but faded society in order to give themselves even the vaguest of 
bearings in the modern world, b) have so little else to occupy their time that 
clearing up rubbish from outside their front door counts as an occasion, is 
something I’m just not in a position to do. Think of this as a kinder 
reviewing; criticism for the Corbyn era (despite him being an older man who, 
somewhat ironically, refused to wear a tie for his entire leadership campaign).

Or failing that, ask Rihanna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> 
instead.10/10.

RA

Sycophantic corporeal scribblings

Drake’s BBK tattoo – REVIEWED 


Here is what I imagine was running through Drake’s mind when he decided to get 
the acronym for legendary UK grime crew Boy Better Know as a tattoo. “Pfft, so 
what if Kanye got all those grime lads onstage with him at the Brits. So what 
if A$AP Rocky went on tour with Novelist and JME. And so what if Pharrell is in 
the studio with Skepta? None of them have a BBK tattoo on their shoulder do 
they. DO THEY FAM?”

Then later, as he settled on its gothic script: “Fuck that minimalist tattoo 
trend, man, let’s bring back that David Beckhamshit.” And finally, as he 
strokes its grainy, inky likeness, casting an eye over the temporary transfer 
tattoo paper wetted and then discarded in the bin and refreshing his Instagram 
feed as the likes come flooding in, he chuckles to himself. It looks 100% 
genuine. “We got away with that one, Drizzy. They will never leave me out ever 
again.”10/10.

KH









 