
The wonder of the desolate outback is on view in two very different shades 
this week: pallid and parched in David Michôd'sThe Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-rover>, and fleshily vibrant in John 
Curran's marvellousTracks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/27/tracks-review-engrossing-outback-journey>
 (Entertainment One UK, 12), a film that got far less than its due in UK 
cinemas this spring. Shot with a besotted camera that gives sand the shimmer of 
silk, the landscape is at once an antagonist and an object of celebration in 
this lean, literate biopic of Robyn Davidson, the headstrong young explorer who 
in 1977 set out to cross the 1,700-mile west Australian desert on foot. She's 
played here with doughty presence and a dry twinkle of irony by the 
ever-interestingMia Wasikowska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/apr/23/tracks-mia-wasikowska-video-interview>
, withAdam Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/18/adam-driver-girls-inside-llewyn-davis>
 (the lanky lothario ofGirls) on hand as the National Geographic photographer 
who becomes her peevishly tolerated love interest. The film is a romantic quest 
narrative of full-bodied, old-fashioned intelligence.

Captain America: The Winter Soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-america-the-winter-soldier> (Buena 
Vista, 12), meanwhile, strives for its own kind of robust classicism: of all 
the Marvel comic-based screen adventures that have flooded the screen in recent 
years, it's the one most hale and hearty in its heroism, and least inclined 
toward hip, post-modern snark; you suspect Robert Redford wouldn't have agreed 
to a villainous supporting role otherwise. It does its duty with as much burly 
efficiency asChris Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/01/captain-america-chris-evans-not-quitting-acting>
's time-trotting Captain himself, as he fends off the eponymous frosty assassin 
with a committed perma-grimace. This might be Marvel's most solid franchise. 
Perhaps its dullest, too.

With five features in six years, prodigious Québécois actor-writer-director 
Xavier Dolan hasn't established himself as an enfant terrible so much as a 
fabulous son. Not all the 25-year-old's films quite hit the nerve they aim to, 
but their presentation is never less than exquisite. TheCannes laurels for the 
upcomingMommy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/22/xavier-dolan-my-generation-mommy-cannes-2014-palme-dor>
 notwithstanding,Tom at the Farm (Network, 15) is comfortably his most 
satisfying and sensually stimulating film to date, a crafty, creepy neo-noir in 
which a young gay hipster (Dolan) visits the bereaved rural family of his late 
lover, only to encounter a surging undertow of menacing prejudice. The boy 
wonder borrows from Highsmith, Hitchcock and Fassbinder with preternaturally 
unerring confidence.
 Chris Evans as Captain America. Photograph: Allstar Picture Library 
Confidence isn't exactly the issue in Akiva Goldsman's daft supernatural 
romanceA New York Winter's Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/20/new-york-winters-tale-review> 
(Warner, 12), which maintains its insane fabulism – flying horses, century-long 
amnesia, Will Smith as Lucifer in diamond earrings – with a commendably 
straight face. That's about all there is to commend in this lumbering, 
tin-eared tale of a thieving charmer (Colin Farrell) escaping his demonic 
guardian (Russell Crowe) to find love with a consumptive noblewoman, but its 
awfulness is of the hell-for-leather variety that could beckon cult status. 
That's more than can be said for The Love Punch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/love-punch> (Entertainment One, 12), a 
flaccid romantic caper with Emma Thompson and Pierce Brosnan marking time 
against admittedly pretty Riviera backdrops, or the retrograde post-Balkan war 
thrillerKilling Season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jun/11/killing-season-trailer-de-niro-travolta>
 (Lions Gate, 15). If there's a hall of fame for horrible film facial hair, 
however, thechin-sock beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jun/11/killing-season-trailer-de-niro-travolta>
 adorning the mug of John Travolta's gruesomely accented Serbian soldier may 
earn it a place.
 Xavier Dolan in Tom at the Farm … a crafty, creepy neo-noir 
This week's upsetting one-two punch of movie-star passings has had a visible 
effect on the download and streaming charts, as viewers have rushed to keep the 
screen legacies ofRobin Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/12/robin-williams> and Lauren Bacall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/13/lauren-bacall-obituary> 
immediately alive. It's as agreeable a way to mourn as any. iTunes, meanwhile, 
has been resourceful enough to group all its Williams titles in ahandy 
retrospective section, 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/artist/robin-williams/id63714> which, in addition 
to the obvious, includes his underacclaimed work in Bobcat Goldthwait's gutsy 
2009 black comedyWorld's Greatest Dad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/26/worlds-greatest-dad-robin-williams-film-review>
and his still-winning breakout turn as a Soviet defector inMoscow on the Hudson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/from-the-archive-blog/2014/aug/12/robin-williams-films-reviews-archive-died>
.
 