
It is still fairly unorthodox for a major blockbuster's online release to 
precede its arrival on DVD. If you're going to try it out, however, it may as 
well be on a film aimed at an audience that probably ranks DVDs just below 7in 
singles on the quaintness scale. Most post-teen viewers are unlikely to feel 
the full, scowling impact ofDivergent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/divergent-review-film-shailene-woodley>
 (eOne, 12), the latest would-be franchise to spring from a hit series of young 
adult novels, which is available to download on Monday, and on DVD in 
mid-August.

The film, with its elaborately constructed metaphor for pressured adolescent 
self-identification, and its earnestly humourless take on same, is set in a 
dystopian future. Humanity is divided into tribes named things such as Amity 
and Abnegation, the members of which are not expected to boast more than their 
allocated virtue. Naturally, our multi-hued heroine Tris (Shailene Woodley) 
fits into no such convenient box and is reassigned to the outlyingDivergent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/divergent> caste, whereupon her quest begins, 
for what we never quite find out, since this lengthy film is all 
sequel-building setup and no payoff.

What it lacks is the sense of immediate social peril that makes the Hunger 
Games films engaging; what it has is Woodley, an increasingly sparky and 
committed actress who seems divergent from the film itself.
 Brutish and buzz-cut: Russell Crowe in a scene from Darren Aronofsky's Noah. 
Photograph: Niko Tavernise/AP 
There's ample abnegation of a more hessian-clad variety in Darren Aronofsky's 
Noah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/06/noah-review-preposterous-epic-russell-crowe>
 (Paramount, 12), an impressive misfire that recasts the biblical ark-builder 
as a severe environmentalist of indistinct faith and potentially destructive 
allegiance to his higher calling. There's a crazed intelligence to its 
theological questioning; ditto Russell Crowe's concentrated bottling of Noah's 
manifold ambiguities in brutish, buzz-cut form. Where it falters, unexpectedly 
for an Aronofsky film, is in the visual execution. Bar one extraordinary 
animated time-lapse sequence that daringly fuses evolutionist and creationist 
theory, the film is a menagerie of murk, burying the production designer's 
grandest gestures beneath sooty cinematography and uneven effects; Noah's 
lunkish quarry of Transformers-like fallen angels seems a particular failure of 
vision.

Not challenging himself nearly as much as Aronofsky, and narrowly getting away 
with it, is Roman Polanski, whose marginal stage-based chamber comedyVenus in 
Fur <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155226/venus-in-fur> (Artificial 
Eye, 15) is more fun thanCarnage, thanks mostly to the fearless efforts of his 
wife, Emmanuelle Seigner, as a power-hungry actress possessing her director 
(not Polanski this time, but Mathieu Amalric) via the mother of all auditions. 
The role was originated on Broadway by a far younger actress, Nina Arianda, 
making this a case of productive miscasting: Seigner's age gives the slight 
play's sadomasochistic dalliances greater urgency.
 Humane and heart-swelling: We Are The Best! finds Swedish director Lukas 
Moodysson in fine form 
File it in the inessential curiosities folder, alongside Lee Sang-il's 
Unforgiven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/27/unforgiven-review-japanese-remake>
 (Warner, 15), a faithful, gracefully shot reimagination ofClint Eastwood's 
swansong western <https://www.theguardian.com/film/1992/sep/17/1> as a 
Meiji-era samurai drama. The robes fit surprisingly well, and the action 
rattles along nicely, but Eastwood's film was made by its elegiac, 
self-addressing sense of directorial purpose. This is just a handsome 
distraction. Plenty of those in Chris Mason Johnson's well-meaningTest 
(Peccadillo, 15), an early-Aids-crisis flashback centred on Bronski 
Beat-listening dancers in San Francisco. The dancing is arresting, the period 
detail oddly ersatz.

One for the inessential on all counts folder is A Long Way Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/long-way-down-review-nick-hornby>
, an excruciatingly tone-deaf adaptation ofNick Hornby's already iffy novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/may/01/fiction.shopping> about 
suicide-club bonding, and already a formidable candidate for the year's most 
objectionable film. Awkwardly meshing black comedy with sitcom-style hugging 
and healing, it squanders Toni Collette's best efforts and actively revels in 
Imogen Poots's worst.

After that, the week's standout release comes as all the more welcome a tonic. 
Lukas Moodysson's knowingly titledWe Are the Best! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/we-are-the-best> (Metrodome, 15) is a return 
to humane, heart-swelling form for the Swedish auteur that comes in a 
cheerfully unassuming package: a nostalgic adolescent comedy following the 
misadventures of a gangly all-girl punk trio in 1980s suburban Stockholm. Dizzy 
period kitsch and endearingly inept tunes abound, sometimes at once, as in the 
girls' infectious protest song Brezhnev and Reagan Fuck Off, but there's a 
nuanced appreciation of nascent female assertiveness, of rebellion both sincere 
and uncertain, amid all the high jinks. It's certainly a more rewarding study 
of divergent teen identity than, well, you know.
 