
When Ryan Coogler’s debut, Fruitvale Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fruitvale-station> (Spirit Entertainment, 15),
split opinion <https://twitter.com/AVAETC/status/293090700168396800> at 
Sundance last year, the ensuing critical debate proved noisier than the film’s 
belated UK release. It’s worth seeing for reasons of argument alone, 
particularly on DVD, which flatters its brightly modest aesthetic, but I remain 
in the unconvinced camp.

Coogler’s dramatisation of the last day in the life of Oscar Grant, a young 
black fathershot dead by a white Bay Area cop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/09/oscar-grant-oakland-police-shooting>
 on New Year’s Day 2009, is short, sincere and gracefully acted, yet there’s 
something discomfitingly artificial about its version of the truth. Compressing 
and occasionally fabricating details of Grant’s existence, the film fashions 
its story as one of a flawed, working-class hero; Grant may well have been 
that, but his construction as a character invites viewers to feel worse about 
an unarguable atrocity than they would do otherwise. With echoes of theTrayvon 
Martin case <https://www.theguardian.com/world/trayvon-martin> contained in its 
fury, this is compelling but emotionally irresponsible film-making.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412256419033%2F34afc042-f51a-4aeb-b662-fce16166170d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Fruitvale%20Station%2C%20Devil%E2%80%99s%20Knot%2C%20Omar%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Fruitvale%20Station%2C%20Devil%E2%80%99s%20Knot%2C%20Omar%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412256419033%2F34afc042-f51a-4aeb-b662-fce16166170d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Disappointingly utilitarian’: Colin Firth and James Hamrick in Devil’s Knot. 
Photograph: Allstar/Image Entertainment/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
It’s still a more urgent take on a true-crime tragedy than Atom Egoyan’s 
disappointingly utilitarianDevil’s Knot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-devil-s-knot> (EV, 15), which brings 
little to the grimly fascinating story of theWest Memphis Three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/26/damien-echols-i-survived-death-row>
, the trio of American teenagers unjustly convicted of child murder in 1993, 
which hasn’t been covered in the comprehensiveParadise Lost documentary trilogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143102/paradise-lost-3>. Colin Firth is 
nobly miscast as the southern PI who helped crack the case open, while a more 
interesting arc goes to Reese Witherspoon, fine and flinty as the lone doubter 
among the victims’ parents, but the film can’t commit to a point of view.

More recent headline news is fused with fictional melodrama in Hany 
Abu-Assad’s Oscar-nominatedOmar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/omar> (Soda, 
15), an effective thriller about a young Palestinian baker (the promising, 
arrestingly handsome Adam Bakri) forced by the Israeli authorities to become an 
informant after participating in the execution of a soldier. Essentially 
mirroring the narrative of the still-unreleased Israeli filmBethlehem 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/10/03/israeli-film-bethlehem-brings-the-war-back-into-our-homes.html>
, it’s tight, thoughtful, slightly over-tidy discussion cinema.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv5dSeBD-qiY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv5dSeBD-qiY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv5dSeBD-qiY&media=>
Big-studio animated features come down the pike with such frequency these days 
that I had entirely forgottenMr Peabody & Sherman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/09/mr-peabody-sherman-mark-kermode-review>
 (Fox, U) by the time it arrived on DVD. Not that there’s much to remember 
about this glib, perky recycling of the eponymous 1960s cartoon sideshows, 
despite the bewildering premise of a genius time-travelling dog fighting for 
custody of his adopted human son.

There’s man-and-boy bonding of a more conventional sort in David Gordon 
Green’s effortfully grimy backwoods thrillerJoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/27/joe-review-nicolas-cage-return-to-form-deep-south-drama>
 (Curzon, 15). It’s been heralded as an artistic comeback for Nicolas Cage, 
which is to say he goes less nuts than usual in it, though I’m not sure how 
much that works in his favour. He merely seems dedicated and stifled as a 
grizzled ex-con forester who becomes an unlikely mentor to a headstrong teen: 
it’sMud <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/12/mud-jeff-nichols-review> 
redux, then, with additional stagnant water odour.

That still makes it more fragrant than Seth MacFarlane’s wretched western spoof
A Million Ways to Die in the West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-ways-to-die-in-the-west> (Universal, 
15), in which theTed creator plays a milquetoast sheep farmer who falls for a 
ruthless gunslinger’s girl. Anti-Islam jokes and spatters of literal excrement 
notionally modernise material that would have seemed too hoary forBlazing 
Saddles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412256620419%2F28b75180-96f6-4714-94b3-362dabd8bec6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Fruitvale%20Station%2C%20Devil%E2%80%99s%20Knot%2C%20Omar%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Fruitvale%20Station%2C%20Devil%E2%80%99s%20Knot%2C%20Omar%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412256620419%2F28b75180-96f6-4714-94b3-362dabd8bec6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Stagnant water odour’: Tye Sheridan and Nicolas Cage in Joe. Photograph: 
Allstar Picture Library 
Heading directly to DVD (and, potentially, slow-burning cult status), Jack 
Plotnick’sSpace Station 76 is considerably funnier as a genre parody, not least 
because the genres it is sending up are themselves so incompatible. Half macho, 
mustachioed 1970s space opera, half doleful, mustachioed 1970s relationship 
drama in theCarnal Knowledge vein, it’s wholly, winningly bizarre, earning 
extra points for giving the chronically underused Patrick Wilson something to 
do.

The 70s are recalled with a straighter face, meanwhile, in Guillaume Canet’s 
swollen, Scorsese-apingBlood Ties (Lionsgate, 15), a James Gray-scripted New 
York crime melodrama that betrays its French director’s lack of familiarity 
with the territory, but has its moments — most of them belonging to Belgian 
up-and-comer Matthias Schoenaerts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412257884841%2Ffc34ee76-9cf3-48ff-833c-8fd525ec9efb-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Fruitvale%20Station%2C%20Devil%E2%80%99s%20Knot%2C%20Omar%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20Fruitvale%20Station%2C%20Devil%E2%80%99s%20Knot%2C%20Omar%20%E2%80%93%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Foct%2F05%2Ffruitvale-station-devils-knot-omar-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F2%2F1412257884841%2Ffc34ee76-9cf3-48ff-833c-8fd525ec9efb-1020x612.jpeg>
 Adeel Akhtar in Channel 4’s Utopia, to be remade for HBO in the US by David 
Fincher. Photograph: Ryan Mcnamara 
The week’s best box set arrives neatly in time for any Only Lovers Left Alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/14/dvds-and-downloads-two-faces-of-january-only-lovers-left-alive-frank>
 converts who have caught the Jarmusch bug: theJim Jarmusch Collection (Soda) 
gathers the American weirdmeister’s first (and largely best) six features, from 
1980’sPermanent Vacation to 1995’s Dead Man (now there’s a postmodern western 
to treasure) on beautifully mounted Blu-ray with a fair scattering of extras; 
it’s one for many cinephiles’ early Christmas lists.

The small-screen scene was been abuzz last week with the news that David 
Fincher, fresh fromGone Girl, will direct every episode 
<http://blogs.indiewire.com/theplaylist/david-fincher-will-direct-the-entire-first-season-of-hbos-utopia-in-2015-20140929>
 of HBO’s US remake of Channel 4 sensationUtopia. If you’re insufficiently 
familiar with the original to be neither excited or dismayed,Netflix has 
helpfully chimed in <http://www.netflix.com/WiPlayer?movieid=70307679> with the 
first series of Dennis Kelly’s violent, conceptually ornate genre hybrid. It’s 
fascinating stuff that hardly requires translation into American, though it 
offers more than enough sick, slick potential for a 13-hour Fincher film.
 