Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ48g1ijnSlI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ48g1ijnSlI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ48g1ijnSlI&media=>
Last year, the writer behind such landmarks of American cinema as Taxi Driver 
and Raging Bull made an unexpected move into the fashion industry. Paul 
Schrader’s first and only clothing design was a promotional T-shirt for his new 
movie Dying Of The Light, dutifully modelled on his Facebook page by the film’s 
stars Nicolas Cage andAnton Yelchin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anton-yelchin>, as well as executive producer 
Nicolas Winding Refn. But rather than featuring the film’s title, the shirts 
instead bore a single declarative sentence: “No publicity issued by artist or 
lender, whether personal publicity or otherwise, shall contain derogatory 
mention of company, the picture, or the services of artist or others connected 
with the picture.”

The line is an excerpt from Schrader’s non-disparagement agreement, which 
prohibits him from openly stating his opinion on Dying Of The Light, which he 
claims “was taken away from me, re-edited, scored and mixed without my input”. 
This week, the film hits DVD, allowing UK audiences to imagine the vitriol that 
might have been spilled had Schrader’s hands not been so restrictively tied.

Against drab grey cinematography and a clumsy orchestral score, Cage plays 
veteran CIA agent Evan Lake, who develops a form of dementia that we’re told 
will cause “mood swings” and “inappropriate reactions” (two central tenets of 
Cage’s acting style that finally have a reason for being). The diagnosis 
inspires Lake to knuckle down and finally solve That One Case that’s haunted 
his career for decades, despite his colleagues’ quite reasonable assessment 
that he’s no longer equipped for the task.

What follows is an unsteady riff on Homeland, complete with a cartoony 
terrorist ringleader and a gravelly voiced agency sidekick (in this case, Anton 
Yelchin, lowering his voice by at least an octave like a teenager at the off 
licence). Whatever his culpability, Schrader was wise to wash his hands of it 
all.

Signature Entertainment




Also out this week

Mr Turner Sputum-flecked Romanticist portrait from Mike Leigh. 

Pride Fun and forthright gays-and-miners romp.

Nightcrawler Heavy-handed TMZ satire with a greasy Jake Gyllenhaal.
 