
Sita frowns as she recalls giving birth to her first child on a mat, in a hut, 
up a mountain. She was living with her husband's family in a village north of 
Nepal's capital city of Kathmandu. She was 16, scared and bleeding heavily, 
with only her mother-in-law and a collection of old wives' tales to get her 
through. "And then," Sita says, "she forced me to eat cow dung."

Five years ago Sita trained as a community health volunteer. She educates 
people about the danger of harmful medical practices (such as administering cow 
dung in cases of excessive bleeding), and promotes maternal health by 
encouraging pregnant women to access medical facilities.

Maternal health is the focus of the fifth millennium development goal (MDG5), 
which aims to reduce worldwide maternal deaths by three-quarters by 2015. Last 
year, on average, a woman died every minute from complications related to 
pregnancy and childbirth. Over 99% of these 500,000 women lived in developing 
countries. More than 2,500 of them lived in Nepal.

Sandwiched between India and China, Nepal is known for trekking and temples, 
but also for political instability (it has had 19 governments in 20 years) and 
a decade-long civil war, which it staggered out of as a republic in 2008. 
Despite this, successive governments have committed to improving maternal 
health. Maternal mortality has decreased by about 40%, but still every year 
about 10,000 Nepalese children lose their mothers to unnecessary, 
pregnancy-related deaths.

"Addressing maternal mortality requires a focus on three things," says Kamala 
Thapa from Sunaulo Parivar Nepal (SPN), the local partner of Marie Stopes 
International. "Family planning, safe and legal abortion and medical care 
during delivery."

Nepal has invested heavily in all three. Family planning services and 
contraception reduce the number of unwanted pregnancies and are available free 
at government and NGO clinics. Abortion was legalised in 2002 (an important 
milestone because unsafe, illegal abortions are a major cause of maternal 
death). The Aama Programme, co-funded by the UK Department for International 
Development (DfID) and the Nepalese government, offers financial incentives of 
up to 1,500 Nepalese rupees (equivalent to Â£12 or three weeks' wages) to women 
who give birth in a medical facility. The government has also trained 48,000 
health volunteers like Sita to support the national health system, providing a 
link between hospitals and clinics, and the local community.

"The initiatives are there," says Dr Pathak from the Ministry of Health, "but 
what is unusual about Nepal is the combination of cultural and geographical 
factors that deter uptake." KP Bista, director general of the Family Planning 
Association of Nepal agrees. "What do you see when you look at the number of 
maternal deaths in Nepal?" he asks. "You see the number of women dying, sure. 
But you also see poverty. You see the level of education. You see the number of 
rural health posts and the state of the roads. Most importantly you see the 
status of women." He is right. A woman in Nepal is 100 times more likely to die 
from her pregnancy than a woman in the UK.

The majority of Nepalese people live in remote hill and mountain areas, 
one-third of the population live a four-hour walk from a road. A Ministry of 
Health report estimates that 80% of maternal deaths occur in these 
hard-to-reach areas of the country where women's access to medical services is 
limited by both geography and strict gender norms.

"What the government says on one level and what happens in the home is very 
different," says Sarah Sanyahumbi from DfID Nepal. The life of an educated 
woman in a city is very different to a woman's life in the mountains where many 
are discriminated against from birth. They are more likely to suffer from 
malnutrition, less likely to attend school, likely to be married before they 
are 16 and likely to have little control over their lives or their fertility. 
"Having children is seen as a gift," continues Sanyahumbi, "and giving birth is 
not seen as a medical procedure. Changing these attitudes is extremely 
difficult. The initiatives are great but the next steps are access and ensuring 
that women know about their right to family planning and healthcare."

This is where volunteers such as Sita play a vital role. More than 97% work in 
remote and rural areas, and are invaluable in communicating messages between 
the government, NGOs and the communities. Sita works in collaboration with SPN, 
a maternal health NGO that reaches some of Nepal's most under-served areas 
through mobile outreach camps. She encourages couples to visit the camp to 
receive family planning advice and free contraception.

Strong government policies, expanding NGO services and a network of committed 
community health volunteers have improved Nepalese women's access to healthcare 
and contributed to a decline in maternal deaths. But is it sustainable? "What 
we have in Nepal is a crisis," argues Ian McFarlane from the United Nations 
Population Fund (UNFPA). "A pregnant woman dies every four hours. Handing out 
money to mothers, relying on a fleet of volunteers, this is basically crisis 
management. If we are to make a real difference, we need to think outside the 
health sector. We need better roads and better education. We need to raise the 
status of women, reduce domestic violence and we need more trained medical 
staff." Sita agrees. "Things are changing for the better," she says, "and I am 
very proud of what I do. But if we are to have a real impact the government 
needs to train more volunteers and more health workers because we are not 
reaching everybody that needs us."

Whether or not Nepal will meet MDG5 is uncertain. "But even if it does," says 
McFarlane, "we won't meet it meaningfully. We might tick the box, but there is 
no way that we are going to change the lives of the majority of women in this 
country by 2015."

But every woman reached is another life potentially saved. Manini, a coffee 
harvester and mother of five children, is recovering at an SPN outreach camp in 
the village of Sakute near the Chinese border. She has just had a sterilisation 
operation. "I knew I didn't want any more children" she says. "After each birth 
I became weaker and labour was more difficult, but I didn't know what to do. 
Then the community health volunteer told me this family planning camp was 
coming. My husband is angry but I know this is my right." Sita smoothes 
Manini's hair back from her forehead and asks her if it hurts. "No," says 
Manini resting her hands on her stomach. "Actually, yes it does," she laughs, 
"but it will be worth it".
 