
Q I live in a ground-floor Victorian-conversion flat, and I am desperate for 
advice about how to stop my upstairs neighbour waking me at 4am every day with 
his early-morning ablutions. He swears he's had insulating wool inserted 
between the joists, the floorboards screwed down, and insulating underlay laid 
under carpet (as I asked). Surely I should no longer be able to hear him pee? I 
know that I can have a false ceiling fitted, but that means covering up the 
period features in my bedroom. I bought the flat in 2000, but this has only 
become a problem in the past year. Are there any solutions short of having to 
move? Many thanks.
Vicky

A If this problem has only started to bother you in the past 12 months, 
perhaps something has changed upstairs (such as the floor surface). Most simply 
you could switch your bedroom and the lounge so that you are not directly under 
noisy areas while you sleep. Or suggest he fits a number of acoustic-absorbing 
features to his floor - a heavy layer matting, acoustic carpet underlay, and 
carpet. He could also lag the water pipes and fit damping material for the 
underside of the bath (www.domesticsoundproofing.co.uk 
<http://www.domesticsoundproofing.co.uk> can help). But the simplest methods 
are the best: buy him some slippers and yourself some earplugs.

Q The gable ends of my house are covered with oak cladding which is beginning 
to crack and warp. Can you suggest a suitable treatment? The house was built in 
1925 and I have occupied it for the past 20 years.
Mrs Fearon

A A treatment (every few years) of Danish oil would prevent the timber warping 
and cracking. However, since this has now happened you will either need the 
timber replaced or treated. The latter will require contractors to use a 
scaffold tower to initially clean and sand the timbers. Cracks can then be 
filled with wood filler and sanded. Lastly, the timber could be stained before 
being sealed with an external grade varnish (such as a polyurethane) or oil. A 
little regular maintenance is starting to seem like a better option already.

Â· If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 