
Eaten Fish, the award-winning cartoonist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/27/refugee-artist-detained-on-manus-island-wins-international-cartooning-award>
 and Iranian asylum seeker detained on Manus Island, has had his refugee claim 
rejected and been told he must return to Iran, despite severe mental illness 
and Iranrefusing to accept asylum seekers who are forcibly repatriated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/15/iran-refuses-to-take-back-asylum-seekers-who-have-been-forcibly-returned>
.

In a letter dated 17 October, Papua New Guinea’s minister for foreign affairs 
and immigration told 25-year-old Ali, who goes by the pen name Eaten Fish, that 
a final decision had been made to reject his application for refugee status.

The letter informed Ali he was now in the country unlawfully and would be 
detained indefinitely – until he either left voluntarily or was forcibly 
removed.

Happy Bloody Christmas: The True Story of Faysal, by Eaten Fish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/25/happy-bloody-christmas-the-true-story-of-faysal-by-eaten-fish>
Janet Galbraith, an Australian poet and and human rights worker who advocates 
for Ali, said the status determination process was a sham, since Ali was too 
ill to be able to take part in the interviews and was unable to fully explain 
his trauma to the authorities.

“Mr Fish has not been well enough to disclose to immigration authorities the 
information expected of him in order to complete and comply with the RSD 
[refugee status determination] interview process,” Galbraith said.

In a statement passed to the Guardian via Galbraith, Ali said: “‘I attended 
all of them [refugee status determination meetings]. I don’t remember how many. 
My memory is not good now but I think there were five important ones but I was 
sick and couldn’t pass it.

“I didn’t tell them my story because I do not feel safe to tell them and now 
they say I am not a refugee and want to send me toIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, where I will be hanged or keep me in 
a prison here for a long time.”

Galbraith said Ali suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder and severe 
obsessive compulsive disorder that causes him to wash himself until he bleeds. 
In one medical complaint seen by Guardian Australia, Ali describes debilitating 
panic attacks and pain all over his body.

Galbraith said Ali’s anxiety is so severe he sometimes collapses and Ali 
cannot speak publicly about his reasons for seeking asylum for fear that his 
family in Iran will suffer retribution.

The terrible true story of Mr Eaten Fish, Manus Island cartoonist | First Dog 
on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/20/the-terrible-true-story-of-mr-eaten-fish-manus-island-cartoonist>
Ali has also complained of physical and sexual assault while in detention. In 
response to one of his complaints of physical assault by police onManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island>, International Health 
and Medical Services (IHMS) said that “physical findings during assessment 
corroborated resident’s claims of assault”.

Galbraith said the negative assessment needs to be overturned, since the 
process was not fair.

“There are so many men in this situation because there are so many incredibly 
sick men,” Galbraith said. “So going through this process is impossible. It’s 
not something they can actually participate in. So they get these negative 
findings because they are so damaged and so sick.

“What I think, there needs to be recognition of the damage and the fact this 
so-called process can’t happen because of the damage that is being inflicted on 
these men in the process itself.”

A spokesman for the Australian Department of Immigration and Border Protection 
said: “The processing of asylum claims inPapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> is a matter for the 
government of PNG.”
 