
Does not being able to see make your other senses more acute? An extraordinary 
show at theSydney Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/09/sydney-festival-highlights-10-things>
, starring Malian duoAmadou and Mariam 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2014/Music/Amadou-Mariam-Parramatta/>, allows 
the audience to test this theory for themselves, since it takes place in total 
darkness. And it really is pitch black, so much that your eyes, deprived of any 
stimulus at all, start to see things that aren’t there – weirdly swimming 
lights for me and at one point, spookily, an eye.

Amadou Bagakado and Mariam Doumbia have been blind since the ages of 15 and 
five respectively, so Eclipse presents the world from their perspective. As 
well as their joyous mix of Afropop and desert blues – which has made them 
arguably Africa’s most famous musicians and sent stars likeDamon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/12/damon.albarn.produces.amadou.mariam>
 andManu Chao <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J43T8rEOg-I> rushing to 
collaborate with them – we get the scents of sandalwood, mosquito repellent and 
cloves, as well as moments where air is blown onto our faces, at one point to 
represent a plane journey Amadou and Mariam take to international stardom.

It’s part avant garde theatre piece, part beginner’s guide to the duo’s 
career. Through spoken word interludes from the gorgeously-voiced Malian poet
Hamadoun Tandina <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmJjsgk_Kpg>, Eclipse delivers 
the story of their life, from meeting at the Insitute for Blind Youth in 
Bamakou, through falling in love and getting married, to playing festivals all 
around the world and supporting the likes of U2 and Coldplay. Each song 
illuminates a different stage in their career, and the fact that the show is so 
schematic means that it risks not feeling spontaneous. Also, with it being so 
dark, can we really be sure that there’s a band up there and not just a record 
playing?

Just as you start to ponder these questions, the curtain is drawn back and 
Amadou and Marian are revealed, playing in front of a giant backdrop depicting 
them silhouetted against a full moon. They’re resplendent in orange robes and 
Bagakado plays a gold guitar. The big reveal is a euphoric moment, though it 
does also remind you of one big upside of being plunged in darkness – the fact 
that you can’t see other middle-class white folk attempting to dance to African 
music.

The incredible artistry of Bagakado’s playing and the warmth and joy of 
Doumbia’s singing is reaffirmed by the fact that you can now see them. But 
really, if you trusted your senses, you could have discerned the human presence 
there all along – in the intricate interplay between the musicians, the 
extraordinarinessy of their story, and most of all, in the lusty “yeah …” with 
which Doumbia finishes every song.
 