Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdjV11Xbc914%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdjV11Xbc914%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FdjV11Xbc914%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch the video for A-ha's Take On Me here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djV11Xbc914>

Say what you like about Ed Miliband's Desert Island Disc choices – and people 
will – his eight selections do have a warped sincerity about them. Attempts by 
politicians to appear "down with the kids" routinely curl the toes; here, 
Miliband circumvents the danger of doing a Gordon Brown (who claimedfalse 
familiarity with Arctic Monkeys in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/sep/24/uk.arts>) by exhibiting no 
taste, of any kind, whatsoever.

From Ed-Mili's selection, you can only conclude that he doesn't do music. His 
choices subdivide into two categories: the political statements and the 
"cheesy" ones (his words). Often these are songs someone else actually put on – 
either his parents, or a DJ – while Miliband was passing on the way to the 
politics library. At least when David Cameron opines on Hull's selection ascity 
of culture <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/uk-city-of-culture>, the 
Housemartins reference trips out effortlessly. (Cameron often specialises in 
winding up leftwingers with his student tastes.)

So there's A-ha's hit Take On Me, a hit from Miliband's youth. There is no 
such thing as a guilty pleasure, if you like something. But there is no 
enthusiasm evinced here for the song, orits groundbreaking video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=djV11Xbc914>, or the gap between Morten 
Harket's teeth. Miliband merely remembers it was on at a disco, once.

Of all Miliband's choices the most arresting, artistically and historically, 
is The Ballad of Joe Hill, sung by Paul Robeson. It's doubly red. The song 
recalls a US union activist accused of murder; Robeson, of course, was one of 
the most sonorous voices of the trade union and civil rights movements, an 
operatic baritone whose time on the London stage and compassion for the plight 
of those excluded by capitalism – workers, Africans, Spanish communists – makes 
this a revealing selection; one that Miliband associates with his dad.

And what of Neil Diamond's Sweet Caroline? Written for JFK's daughter, Sweet 
Caroline is played frequently at Boston sporting events. Throughout his 
session, Miliband only really becomes animated when talking about theBoston Red 
Sox <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boston-red-sox>, an allegiance 
presumably forged at Harvard. Had this been desert island ball games, Miliband 
may have emerged as quite a dude. As it is…
 