
England have the opportunity of emulating their 2003 side by defeating 
Australia on Saturday to go through the year unbeaten, butEddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> said he was more concerned 
about putting one over on his former employers than repeating history.

The head coach was in ebullient mood after his side overcame Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 despite playing all except the opening four minutes of the match at least a 
man down after the wing Elliot Daly was sent off for a dangerous challenge on 
the Pumas’ No8 Leonardo Senatore. He will receive a suspension of at least two 
weeks while the No8 Billy Vunipola faces a longer period out of action after 
appearing to damage knee ligaments.

England and Owen Farrell dig deep to win 14-man battle with Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report>
“It was an outstanding performance,” said Jones. “The players showed 
flexibility, adaptability and courage after having to abandon the gameplan 
minutes in. They did exceptionally well and we left a few points out there. 
When it came to the 65-minute mark, there was only one team out on its feet and 
it was not us. It was a game so high on drama that it was like 10 episodes of 
EastEnders.”

Asked about the prospect of going through the year unbeaten – he was the 
Australia coach in 2003 when England last achieved the feat by defeating the 
Wallabies in the World Cup final – he replied: “I am looking forward to the 
game; it will be a lot of fun. The best win [of the year] is to come. Australia 
will be the best win. We are not concerned with records, just playing good 
rugby.

“When we were out there in June, the media were disrespectful to us and I am 
sure they will be again. We will be prepared for that and we are very keen to 
speak with the referee [South Africa’s Jaco Peyper] about Australia’s 
scrummaging. They have issues with it and I will invite their coaching team to 
come along. It should be fun.

England 27-14 Argentina: rugby union international – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/england-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-international-live>
“We will submit an agenda and make sure that everything is above board. They 
were penalised four times in a row against France so they have got some 
technical issues. I am not going to sort it out for them.”

Jones said he did not dispute Daly’s red card in a match when two players were 
sent off – Argentina’s replacement prop Enrique Pieretto followed five minutes 
from the end – and four were sent to the sin-bin. “It was an error of judgment 
and he will get over it. Billy is in some pain and we will have to wait for his 
medical examination.”

Chris Robshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-robshaw>, who was named 
man of the match, was focused on going through the year undefeated. “It is a 
massive target, our sole objective,” he said. “It is all about how we improve 
and we want to make sure we win all four games in this series. I am enjoying my 
rugby and delighted to be part of a good side.”

His comments were echoed by the scrum-half Ben Youngs. “It would be an 
incredible effort and show how far we’ve come in 12 months,” he said. “We have 
got the chance to make history and all the boys are loving it. An unbeaten year 
would show the team application, the detail from the coaches and how we are 
learning as a side.

“We had to dig it out today and the desire was there for everyone to see. We 
adapted well after Elliot was sent off. Losing him was tough: he went into the 
challenge with good intentions and was unfortunate. The forwards were 
outstanding and it was a great team effort.”
 