
More than 800 writers, politicians, actors and scientists, from Eimear McBride 
and Jonathan Safran Foer to Gordon Brown and Thomas Keneally, will gather at the
Edinburgh international book festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edinburgh-book-festival> this August, where 
they will address issues from the EU referendum to the refugee crisis.

“This year’s festival is about the desire for us to engage in bold, positive, 
creative thinking about what we want the world to be like,” said director of 
the festival Nick Barley as he unveiled a programme that also features the actor
Alan Cumming <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming>, Scots makar 
Jackie Kay and Man Booker International prize winner Han Kang, from Korea. “If 
you look at the political discourse in Britain, around the EU referendum and 
the Syrian refugees, it has been characterised by fear and negativity. And I 
don’t believe that the great steps forward for the human race have ever been 
made on the basis of fear.”

Author and journalist Bidisha will be leading a wide-ranging discussion on the 
refugee crisis at the festival, with speakers includingWolfgang Bauer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolfgang_Bauer_(journalist)>, a reporter who 
went undercover with a party of Syrian refugees as they attempted the 
sea-crossing to Europe, andGulwali Passarlay 
<https://gulwalipassarlay.wordpress.com/>, who has written a book about how he 
was smuggled away from Afghanistan at the age of 12, and spent a year 
travelling to Europe.

Former prime minister Brown will be looking at globalisation and the new 
populism in his address at the festival, and major German historianJürgen 
Osterhammel 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/arts-and-books/book-review-the-transformation-of-the-world-by-jurgen-osterhammel>
will be considering the history of the 19th century. Kay, following an 
interview with Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon, will curate a series of 
events with writers including Carol Ann Duffy and Lemn Sissay on the importance 
of poetry in everyday life.

“Writers are about creative ideas and imagining a better world,” said Barley. 
“The festival will look at everything from how we can make Europe a better 
place for Britain to be involved with, to how we solve the refugee crisis. We 
will be asking a series of big questions, and I think novelists and writers and 
scientists – everyone who puts a pen to a paper – are the people who, 
throughout history, have helped us make these great leaps forward.”

With more than 800 speakers drawn from 55 countries, the festival will also 
host the launch of Foer’s new book, Here I Am. His first novel in more than a 
decade, it sees the Middle East devastated by an earthquake, and a pan-Arab 
invasion of Israel. McBride will launch The Lesser Bohemians, the follow-up to 
her bestselling, award-winning debut A Girl is a Half-Formed Thing, while 
Cumming, comedianStewart Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stewart-lee> 
and survival expert Ray Mears will also provide previews of their new books to 
festival audiences.

On the children’s side, the programme will include appearances from authors 
includingJulia Donaldson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/julia-donaldson>, 
Chris Riddell and Judith Kerr, presenting her first new novel in 37 years, 
Mister Cleghorn’s Seal. It will also address the question of whether 
age-related classifications, such as the young adult genre, inhibit the way 
people read.

“YA author Frances Hardinge won the Costa book of the year with her novel The 
Lie Tree which was published as young adult fiction but clearly of a quality to 
stand alongside any great adult novelist,” said Janet Smyth, director of the 
children’s programme. “I do worry that YA fiction, the major publishing 
creation of the last decade, means many readers will never experience some 
wonderful writing. Some of the bravest, boldest and darkest fiction is 
currently being created but it is often too readily overlooked. If Salinger had 
been writing The Catcher in the Rye today it would have been classified as YA.”

 The festival, in Charlotte Square Gardens in Edinburgh, runs from 13 to 29 
August <https://www.edbookfest.co.uk/>. 
 