
Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> has 
condemned Australian law enforcement for collecting the communications records 
of a Guardian journalist without a warrant.


The world’s most prominent whistleblower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, who disclosed dragnet 
surveillanceunprecedented in its scale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/nov/01/snowden-nsa-files-surveillance-revelations-decoded>
 by the National Security Agency and its allies, singled out for critique the 
Australian government’s contention that it broke no laws inits leak 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/federal-police-admit-seeking-access-to-reporters-metadata-without-warrant>
 of Paul Farrell, a Guardian reporter who in 2014 exposed the inner workings of 
Australia’s maritimeinterception of asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/07/asylum-seekers-will-be-handed-to-police-on-return-sri-lanka-confirms>
.

Australia's attacks on journalists' sources are about politics, not national 
security
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/15/australias-attacks-on-journalists-sources-are-about-politics-not-national-security>
“Police in developed democracies don’t pore over journalists’ private 
activities to hunt down confidential sources,” Snowden told the Guardian.

“The Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> are 
defending such operations as perfectly legal, but that’s really the problem, 
isn’t it? Sometimes the scandal is not what law was broken, but what the law 
allows.”

Throughout 2015 the Australian parliament enacted a series of controversial 
laws that curbed privacy and freedom of expression rights.

Geoffrey King, director of the Committee to Protect Journalists’ Technology 
Program, said the AFP’s actions were “obviously outrageous”.

“This should not be happening. But it is the inevitable result of mandatory 
data retention and mass surveillance, which is neither necessary nor 
proportional to any threat,” King said. “It doesn’t line up with the values 
that we all adhere to, to good counter-terrorism strategy, and it certainly 
doesn’t line up with a free and open society where journalists can do their 
jobs.”

In March 2015 the Australian Senate passed legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/26/new-data-world-order-government-can-read-every-australian-like-an-open-book>
 requiring internet and mobile phone companies to retain customer metadata for 
24 months. The bill was vehemently opposed by the Australian Greens, whose 
communications spokesman, Senator Scott Ludlam, called its new provisions a 
“form of mass surveillance”.

Although a last-minute amendment obliged security agencies to get a warrant 
before accessing a journalist’s metadata, the law essentially expands the 
Australian government’s ability to conduct dragnet surveillance.

Australia, along with the US, UK, Canada and New Zealand, is part of the Five 
Eyes signals-intelligence sharing network.

Documents leaked by Snowden in 2013 revealed that Australian spying 
authorities had offered to share bulk metadata  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/02/revealed-australian-spy-agency-offered-to-share-data-about-ordinary-citizens>
of ordinary Australian citizens with their partners in the Five Eyes network. 
Other documents Snowden leaked revealed Australian spies had attempted tolisten 
in to the phone calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/18/australia-tried-to-monitor-indonesian-presidents-phone>
 of former Indonesian president Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and his inner circle, 
causing an extended diplomatic rift between the two countries.

The investigation into Farrell’s sources, for a story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/17/australian-ship-went-far-deeper-into-indonesian-waters-than-disclosed>
 relating to the activities of an Australian customs vessel and a controversial 
operation to turn back a boat carrying asylum seekers from Indonesia, was 
conducted in 2014, before the amendment passed parliament. Law enforcement did 
not need a warrant for accessing the information at the time.

The case marks the first time the AFP has confirmed seeking access to a 
journalist’s metadata in a specific case, although the agency has admitted to 
investigating several journalists reporting on Australian immigration.

The acknowledgement that authorities had sought access to Farrell’s records 
was only divulged after the reporter lodged a complaint with Australia’s 
privacy commissioner under the country’s Privacy Act.

The AFP and me: how one of my asylum stories sparked a 200-page police 
investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/12/the-afp-and-me-how-one-of-my-asylum-stories-sparked-a-200-page-police-investigation>
In July 2015, the Australian government passed the Border Force Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/08/let-me-clear-up-the-governments-clarification-about-the-border-force-act>
, which criminalises whistleblowing from within Australia’s hardline 
immigration detention network, making it an offense punishable with up to two 
years in prison.

The country’s “Operation Sovereign Borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/operation-sovereign-borders-begins-wednesday>
”, a harsh, military-led crackdown on asylum seekers who attempt to enter 
Australia by boat, includes a policy of turning back boats carrying migrants 
and deporting every arrival including children to harsh, offshore detention 
centres in Papua New Guinea and the tiny Pacific island state of Nauru, for 
permanent resettlement.
 