
Edward Docx's first novel, The Calligrapher, was published to widespread 
acclaim in 2003 and has now been translated into eight languages. His second 
novel, Self Help, published in 2007, was longlisted for the Man Booker prize 
and went on to win The Geoffrey Faber prize. In 2003 and then again in 2007, 
Docx travelled in South America as part of the research for his third novel, 
The Devil's Garden, which is published this week.

"I have always preferred reading in the insightful company of lunatics. 
Sometimes, it's a gradual Nabokovian thing – the unassuming reader and the 
engaging protagonist set off together and only gradually does the former begin 
to realise that the latter is a madman. And sometimes, as with Burgess, it's 
all abundantly clear from the off.

"Either way, the reason that there is such a great tradition of madness in 
literature is that it provides the author with a way to tell the terrible truth 
about the world while opening up a gap between what is superficially being 
narrated and what is really going on – adding depth, in other words. Of course, 
these characters encompass the same spectrum – from benign to dangerous – as 
the rest of humanity. But I love to read those apparently blank-faced and 
emotionally-cauterised protagonists – Camus, Greene - who seem to have to stand 
extra still in the narrative in case they accidentally detonate the fearsome 
rage of their true feelings. And fairly early on in the writing of The Devil's 
Garden, I knew that my own protagonist wouldn't make it to the end without 
ripping up the false floors that I had built to fireproof him from what burned 
below …"

Buy The Devil's Garden by Edward Docx from the Guardian bookshop  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330463508>
 

1. Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099469698>

All the greatest mad protagonists in modern western literature are descended 
either from Quixote or Hamlet. Undaunted by reality, Quixote is determined to 
believe the world is exactly as he declares it to be. He is not a delusional 
codger but a young chivalric knight, his lady is not the unwitting farm girl 
but the beautiful Dulcinea del Toboso and all those windmills are giants.

2. Sabbath's Theater by Philip Roth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099582014>

"Stop it! Stop it, please, being a maniac!" So begs the lover of our hero, 
Mickey Sabbath, on page 21. Epic, vital, savage, relentless, insane, 
existentially incandescent, horrifying, excruciating, not funny, very funny, 
this is the great tragicomic howl of a madman at full Shakespearean tilt. One 
of the greatest novels written in my lifetime.

3. L'Etranger by Albert Camus 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141182506>

If sentiment and schmaltz were truly the twin tyrants of our age, then this 
book would no longer sell. A cold, emotionless man remains throughout utterly 
uninterested in his own life story – his mother's death, his neighbour's 
violent misogyny, his girlfriend, the murder he commits, his trial for that 
murder, the possibility of redemption or even his own humanity. And yet, from 
JM Coetzee to Brett Easton Ellis, Camus's hero has become the modern archetype 
for the ostensibly distant protagonist who has it all going on beneath the 
surface.

4. Diary of a Madman by Nikolai Gogol 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140449075>

A masterclass in the authorial management of derangement. Having locked 
himself in the padded cell of the first-person diary form (as written by a 
lowly clerk) Gogol simultaneously manages to allow the reader to peer through 
the jailer's hatch and observe why his protagonist is mad and how the madness 
is worsening. 

5. Time's Arrow by Martin Amis 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099455356>

People hate this book. But, from the point of view of insane protagonists and 
formal invention, it is endlessly fascinating. It tells the story – backwards – 
of Odilo Unverdorben, a doctor whom we meet at the end of his life in America 
but who once worked in the concentration camps in Germany. Everything is in 
reverse: people become younger and smaller until they eventually squeeze back 
their mothers' wombs where they finally cease to exist. Doctors cause injuries 
and blows heal. Pimps give money to hookers and lead them out of prostitution. 
A totally crazy book in every dimension.

6. Metamorphosis by Franz Kafka 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141188126>

All that is necessary here is to remind ourselves of the opening line: "When 
Gregor Samsa awoke one morning from uneasy dreams he found himself transformed 
in his bed into a gigantic insect." I can't read the original German – 
"unruhigen" – but I love the translation into that word "uneasy".

7. Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas by Hunter S Thompson 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007204496>

I know, I know: it's the drugs. But you'd have to be mad to take that many at 
once and, anyway, the writing is irresistible: "I remember saying something 
like 'I feel a bit lightheaded; maybe you should drive . . .' And suddenly 
there was a terrible roar all around us and the sky was full of what looked 
like huge bats, all swooping and screeching and diving around the car, which 
was going about a hundred miles an hour with the top down to Las Vegas. And a 
voice was screaming: 'Holy Jesus! What are these goddamn animals?'"

8. Pale Fire by Vladimir Nabokov 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141185262>

Nabokov is the undisputed king of the charming, demented narrator. In Pale 
Fire, Charles Kinbote is ostensibly an academic ostensibly commentating on what 
is ostensibly his best friend's poem. But it becomes slowly apparent that 
Kinbote actually believes himself to be Charles the Beloved, the exiled king of 
Zembla, a fairytale kingdom. And yet, Kinbote may not be Kinbote at all but an 
alter-ego of the insane Professor V Botkin, to whose delusions the ostensible 
poet, Shade, and his campus colleagues apparently pander.

9. A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141182605>

If ever there was An English Psycho then this is it – to my mind one of the 
most original novels ever written. Young Alex and his droogs (friends) go in 
for random and terrifying drug-fuelled rape, theft and murder to the soundtrack 
of Beethoven – "lovely lovely Ludwig Van".  So disturbingly gleeful, too.

10. Hamlet by William Shakespeare 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780198328704>

Not strictly a novel, I realise, but along with Quixote, the prince of Denmark 
is the other great figure whose ghost beckons all subsequent protagonists over 
the dreadful cliff. Is he but mad north-north-west? And when the wind is 
southerly does he know a hawk from a handsaw? We must forever be deciding. But 
how many other protagonists leap into open graves to grab their ex-jester's 
skull and reminisce about the kisses they once shared?  
 