
An al-Qaida-inspired group has emerged as Egypt's biggest terrorist threat in 
a decade, after a week in which its membersclaimed responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/24/cairo-egypt-four-explosions-insurgency-escalates>
 for shooting down a military helicopter, assassinating a senior policeman, and 
exploding a huge bomb outside Cairo's police headquarters.

Ansar Beyt al-Maqdis (ABM), or Champions of Jerusalem, first emerged in 2011, 
amid a security vacuum caused by the fall of Hosni Mubarak. Based in the 
isolated northern Sinai desert, next to the Israeli border, ABM's operations 
expanded drastically after the Islamist ex-presidentMohamed Morsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi> was overthrown in July 2013.

But what began as a Sinai-based insurgency now seems to have spread to the 
Egyptian heartland, with ABM now capable of increasingly sophisticated attacks 
both in and outside the peninsula.

"They are the premier terrorist threat to Egypt, both in Sinai and on the 
mainland," said Zack Gold, a Sinai-focused analyst, and author of apaper on 
militancy in the region. 
<http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2013/10/22-sinai-hamas-egypt-israel-gold>
 "They have advanced their capabilities from fighting primarily a battle of 
survival in Sinai to targets west of the Suez [canal] that include car bombs 
and assassinations."

So far ABM's primary targets have been limited to police and soldiers, in what 
they say isrevenge for the security forces' suppression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/jul/18/cairo-republican-guard-shooting-full-story>
 of Islamist dissidents following Morsi's ouster, and for the army's ongoing 
counter-insurgency in Sinai. 
<http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2013/10/10/desert_fury_egypt_sinai> In 
September, they attempted to kill Egypt's police minister. They successfully 
assassinated a senior secret policeman in November, and a month laterkilled a 
dozen policemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/24/egyptian-police-headquarters-explosion>
 at a security headquarters in northern Egypt.

This steady series of attacks grew more frantic this week with a bomb blast in 
the heart of Cairo, theassassination of an aide to the police minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/28/mohamed-morsi-charged-2011-jail-break-conspiring-foreign-groups>
, and the downing of an army helicopter in Sinai with the help of a 
sophisticated portable missile launcher – known as Manpads.

The latter, which were not previously known to exist in Sinai, caused military 
analysts significant alarm. While ABM has shown no prior interest in targeting 
tourists, whose custom is essential to the livelihood of many Sinai tribes, 
Manpads can bring down commercial airliners.

"That was always our worst nightmare: that a civilian airliner would be shot 
down by one," former CIA directorDavid Petraeus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/david-petraeus> said this week, calling 
the development a "big deal".

Sinai experts cautioned that another similar missile attack was not 
necessarily within ABM's immediate ambitions or capabilities. But the 
uncertainty underlines just how little is known about the shadowy group.

The Egyptian government and media do their best to link ABM to the leadership 
of Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood, in an attempt to tar the latter. But in reality 
no one knows exactly who runs it, or how centralised its operations are, nor 
its relationships with local tribes, other smaller militant groups in Sinai, or 
al-Qaida itself.

It is nevertheless considered the most active and proficient of the several 
groups at large in Sinai. At least 295 attacks have been reported there since 
July, and ABM has claimed more far more of those than any other group, 
according to David Barnett, a researcher who monitors ABM activities.

ABM's membership is estimated at 700–1,000. Its numbers are thought to be 
expanding, with a combination of decades-old tribal disenfranchisement in Sinai 
and the ongoing suppression of political Islamism acrossEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> making membership a markedly more 
appealing prospect. Charles Lister, a jihadist expert and visiting fellow at 
the Brookings Institution, said: "In some respects, ABM was around at the right 
time – had Morsi not been overthrown, there's no way it would be the group it 
is today."

In its video propaganda and literature, ABM displays an affinity for al-Qaida, 
and the proficiency of its attacks suggest some level of external training. But 
until Ayman Zawahiri, al-Qaida's leader, mentioned"our people in the Sinai"  
<http://www.longwarjournal.org/threat-matrix/archives/2014/01/zawahiris_message_to_our_peopl.php>
in an audio message on 24 January, there had been no confirmation that al-Qaida 
recognised Sinai jihadists.

"It really caught my attention," said Barnett. "It supports the view that 
there are foreign fighters in the Sinai, and it's a message from al-Qaida that 
your cause is being recognised by us and foreigners are likely coming to aid 
you."

For now, it is thought that the vast majority of ABM's members are Egyptians – 
though how many are from Sinai itself, and how much support locals give the 
group, is unclear.

"It's very hard to quantify," said a Sinai-based researcher, speaking 
anonymously for safety reasons. "The tribes right now are divided because of 
the loss of business" – the army's counter-insurgency has destroyed many of the 
smugglers' tunnels to Gaza, a lucrative source of local income – "but many 
people support the group just because the military operations have destroyed a 
lot of houses, people and trees."

The government speaks of ABM and the Brotherhood in the same breath, but 
analysts say the links are tenuous. According to Barnett, ABM may even seek to 
draw disenfranchised Brotherhood members away from the latter group, on the 
basis that the Brotherhood's main tactic of dissent – the protest march – seems 
only to end in Muslim Brothers getting arrested and killed.

"What ABM is saying is that your peaceful approach is fine if you want to keep 
getting killed," said Barnett. "We're here to defend you, [whereas] the 
Brotherhood isn't here for you any more."
 