
1 | Crack down on illicit financial flows and tax evasion

An estimated $1tn [£0.8tn] flows illegally out of developing countries and 
emerging economies each year – more than they receive in foreign direct 
investment and aid combined. Beyond bleeding the world’s poorest economies, 
this propels crime, corruption and tax evasion. Most of the money is lost 
through trade mis-invoicing – where trade invoices are manipulated to change 
the value to secretly move money across borders. Folks in the water and 
sanitation sector could help promote the importance of raising more domestic 
revenue by combating tax evasion and avoidance, and push for some of that money 
to go towards water and sanitation projects.Christine Clough, programme manager,
Global Financial Integrity <http://www.gfintegrity.org/>

2 | Increase public investment


The most important route towards financing sanitation and water is increased 
domestic government investment. For example, a recent estimate of the annual 
sanitation financing gap in Ghana is $93m [£71m].Ghana’s GDP 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana> is around $38bn [£28bn] and its 
total tax revenues amount to about 21% of GDP – a pretty good percentage for a 
low- to middle-income country. But the Ghanaian government currently invests 
only $7m [£5m] yearly in sanitation: a tiny, trivial amount. If it were instead 
to invest 0.5% of GDP in sanitation, we’d be looking at about $190m [£145m] – 
more than enough to cover the country’s financing gap. The bottom line is that 
countries need to use equitable taxation to support the provision of basic 
services for poorer citizens.Guy Norman, director of research & evaluation, WSUP
 <http://www.wsup.com/>

The ATMs bringing cheap, safe water to Nairobi's slums
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/16/atms-cheap-safe-water-nairobis-slums>
3 | Consider development impact bonds

Development impact bonds (DIBs) for water and sanitation have huge potential; 
they open up interesting revenue streams from private investors and allow 
public entities to transfer the risk of failure to private investors. Another 
benefit is that they force people in the sector to better understand and 
measure the benefits of interventions.Carlos Hurtado Aguilar, sustainable 
development manager,Femsa Foundation <http://fundacionfemsa.org/>

DIBs need clear outcome metrics, and problems may arise if there’s a focus on 
easily measurable quick wins. For example, using DIBs to build one million 
toilets sounds great and is easily measurable, but those toilets won’t make 
much difference if they’re not part of a sustainable locally-led sanitation 
system.Guy Norman

And, currently, there is a lack of measurable outputs to use as universal 
indicators in water and sanitation – this makes the sector tricky for DIBs. 
There needs to be a universally accepted, quantifiable and indicative metric – 
such as CO2 emissions in climate change – by which to measure results. The 
potential for DIBs to be used for water and sanitation has also become more 
complicated by the move towards water as a service rather than a project; the 
number of toilets built is no longer a sensible indicator as it does not 
reflect behaviour change.Duncan Goose, founder, Global Investment Fund for Water
 <http://giffwater.org/> & One Water <http://onedifference.org/>


4 | Invest in services, not just infrastructure


Most approaches to services in the sector are wrong, based on “drill and leave 
for the community to manage”. A couple of countries are hitting 80% coverage 
but despite massive injections of funds, they are not moving towards the SDG of 
universal and equitable access because the systems are not there to do the 
monitoring, the fixing, the training of technicians, or to support the markets 
to develop for the technicians to be there in the first place. Service 
provision needs people.Catarina Fonseca, head of international department, IRC 
<http://www.ircwash.org/>

Can microfinance help boost sanitation coverage?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/17/can-microfinance-help-boost-sanitation-coverage>
5 | Support water financing facilities

The Dutch government is working to set up Water Financing Facilities 
<http://climatefinancelab.org/idea/water-finance/> (WFF) – facilities at the 
national level that can provide long-term, lower-cost loans to public or 
private water utilities with little to no access to finance in the market. The 
loans are linked to specific water infrastructure investments that are designed 
to enhance climate resilience and mitigation. Incomes generated by water 
utilities are ringfenced to provide creditworthiness beyond the utilities’ own 
balance sheet for the loans.Dick van Ginhoven, senior adviser – water & 
sanitation,Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
<http://www.rijksoverheid.nl/ministeries/bz>

6 | Put a levy on bottled water

After running One Water <http://www.onedifference.org/> for a little over a 
decade, I realised that we needed to be much more ambitious. The idea behind the
Global Investment Fund for Water <http://giffwater.org/> is to generate a one 
cent per litre micro levy from the global bottled water sector. We have a 
feasibility study underway with the support of the Rockefeller Foundation and 
the idea seems to be gaining traction. Hypothetically, the fund could raise 
$4bn [£3bn] if it was applied across the entire global bottled water sector. We 
think a realistic target to aim for is around $200m [£153m] in the first few 
years, and use that to spur investments and test different kinds of funding 
mechanisms.Duncan Goose

7 | Support microfinance, where suitable

Microfinance <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/microfinance> 
works where a service is already being provided that can be accessed, for 
example piped schemes and on-site sanitation. It seems to have been most 
effective in urban areas, small towns and densely rural populated areas in 
Asia. But for the large number of unserved people in sub-Saharan countries, 
there is no service provider to get connected to or buy toilets from, even if 
access to financial services is becoming easier.Catarina Fonseca

Microfinance can work when it is focused on a specific market failure. For 
example,Water.org <http://water.org/> has a great model which provides 
microfinance to households so they can pay for the last stage connection from 
standpipe to house. People want it and can afford to pay the subsidised 
finance. When it is poorly targeted, though, microfinance can lead to terrible 
debt problems.Duncan Goose

Can $15m worth of toilets finally clean up the Ganges?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/11/india-amma-15-million-dollars-toilets-open-defecation-clean-ganges>
8 | Spend money more wisely

While it is important to strengthen countries’ tax systems and improve their 
incomes, making expenditures more efficient is a key first step. Several 
countries implement inadequate or inefficient water and sanitation programmes. 
No amount of money will be able to solve the problem with this kind of 
spending. Strengthening institutional capacities towards this end is key.Carlos 
Hurtado

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/08/live-qa-114bn-a-year-needed-for-water-and-toilets-where-will-it-come-from#comment-83324455>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 