
A once top-secret wartime thank you letter to Bletchley Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/29/bletchley-park-codebreakers-first-world-war-exhibition>
, which spent several years hanging on the office wall of the chief of MI6, has 
gone on public display for the first time.

Dwight D Eisenhower wrote to Sir Stewart Menzies, wartime chief of the Secret 
Intelligence Service, thanking him for the organisation’s code-breaking work.

The letter quickly disappeared into secret archives before becoming public in 
2010,when an authorised history of MI6 was published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/02/mi6-secret-service-jeffery-review>
. Before that it hung for several years on the office wall of C, the code name 
given to whoever is in charge of MI6.

One of those men was Sir John Scarlett, who led the service from 2004-09. As 
the letter went on public display on Tuesday, he said: “I was, of course, proud 
of the letter. Gen Eisenhower is one of the great names of the 20th century.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Feisenhower-letter-uk-code-breakers-display-bletchley-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5669cde38784cf207083f4d81bba86c2b2f7ec5%2F0_0_2982_3841%2F2982.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eisenhower%20letter%20praising%20UK%20code%20breakers%20goes%20on%20display&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Feisenhower-letter-uk-code-breakers-display-bletchley-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eisenhower%20letter%20praising%20UK%20code%20breakers%20goes%20on%20display&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Feisenhower-letter-uk-code-breakers-display-bletchley-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5669cde38784cf207083f4d81bba86c2b2f7ec5%2F0_0_2982_3841%2F2982.jpg>
 The letter from Eisenhower. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
In the letter, dated 12 July 1945, Eisenhower, then supreme commander of the 
Allied Expeditionary Force, writes that he had hoped to pay a visit to 
Bletchley Park to express his gratitude personally.

He continues: “I am very well aware of the immense amount of work and effort 
which has been involved in the production of the material with which you have 
supplied us. I fully realize also the numerous setbacks and difficulties with 
which you have had to contend and how you have always, by your supreme efforts, 
overcome them.

“The intelligence which has emanated from you before and during this campaign 
has been of priceless value to me. It has simplified my task as commander 
enormously. It has saved thousands of of British and American lives and, in no 
small way, contributed to the speed with which the enemy was routed and 
eventually forced to surrender.”

David Hatch, a historian of America’s National Security Agency, said the 
letter was historically significant. Five years after he sent the letter, 
Eisenhower became the first commanding general of Nato. Two years later, he was 
president. “He used intelligence well … made improvements. It all traces back 
to the time of Bletchley Park that this letter represents,” Hatch said.

The letter will be one of the first things visitors see at Bletchley Park, 
said the park’s research historian.

“Visitors come here and you can talk a lot about process and how Enigma 
machines work, how many code breakers there were, what they did, but the 
question always asked is, so what? Did it matter? How much difference did it 
make?” David Kenyon said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Feisenhower-letter-uk-code-breakers-display-bletchley-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75f670e7cce1a5f108063e818e6ff77e701a74a3%2F0_235_3323_4155%2F3323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eisenhower%20letter%20praising%20UK%20code%20breakers%20goes%20on%20display&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Feisenhower-letter-uk-code-breakers-display-bletchley-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eisenhower%20letter%20praising%20UK%20code%20breakers%20goes%20on%20display&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Feisenhower-letter-uk-code-breakers-display-bletchley-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75f670e7cce1a5f108063e818e6ff77e701a74a3%2F0_235_3323_4155%2F3323.jpg>
 Eisenhower in Geneva in 1955. Photograph: Magnum Photos 
“You can make historical judgments about that, how much it shortened the war … 
but this is a document from a man who was there at the time saying this stuff 
really mattered, it was of priceless importance and that is a very powerful 
statement.”

In 1939, about 200 people worked at Bletchley Park. By 1945, more than 8,000 
worked there, including the mathematician Alan Turing, who played a leading 
role in breaking theEnigma code 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/19/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-posthumous-pardon>
.

Kenyon said there were many documents and letters from Bletchley Park that 
would remain secret.

The Enigma technology was obsolete, he said, but “the wider techniques that we 
used for studying German communications are, broadly speaking, the same 
techniques that are used against terrorism now, so there is no reason why that 
side of things should be made public It is all still operationally useful.”

The letter’s emergence gives Kenyon hope that there is other material in 
archives yet to be discovered. “The joy of it is you don’t know until you find 
it,” he said.
 