
When a government official first came to Hotasar in western India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, the villagers shooed him away. He 
had come to tell them an engineer was on his way and the village would get its 
first electric light bulb within months. “Bring light? To Hotasar? It’s 
impossible,” they told him. Others had promised the same, but plans to 
electrify the village had repeatedly failed.

Hotasar, a small village of about 200 people in the Rajasthani desert, is very 
difficult to reach. In April last year, it was one of 18,452 Indian villages 
without electricity. In the past few months, that number has fallen to 12,100 
under a flagship programme launched by the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi.

Despite protests from environmentalists, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/03/indias-climate-pledge-critically-important-says-un-climate-chief>
 who say extending coal-powered electricity to India’s 400 million energy-poor 
people will cause enormous environmental damage, the ministry of power has 
pressed on with Modi’s ambitious plan. Last week, India’s state-owned oil 
companiespurchased major stakes in Russian oil and gas fields 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/rosneft-sells-stake-oil-fields-indian-companies-amid-debt-low-oil-prices-2338160>
, amid fears that the electrification plan could trigger more energy shortages 
as demand explodes.

The last census, in 2011, showed that 75 million households in India were 
still living by candlelight. Under the country’s new electrification plan, 
every village will have 24-hour access to electricity.

Running on empty: Nepal's fuel smugglers defy border blockades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/nepals-fuel-smugglers-border-blockades>
Akbar Pardeshi bought a television two weeks before electricity was due to 
come to his village. “It’s been sitting in my house for the last 15 days,” he 
says. “All the villagers put their money together so we could buy one 
second-hand.”

I arrive at the Pardeshis’ home just as the sun dips below the horizon, the 
night before the power company switches on their lights. Villagers walked for 
miles to greet me. Hotasar has never experienced electricity before. Some 
people have visited nearby towns and seen light bulbs and appliances, but few 
seem to grasp how exactly it works.

A rumour seems to have spread that the light will come when the lady from the 
city arrives. “We heard you were bringing light to the village,” one villager 
says to me. “Have you got it with you in your bag?” asks another.

Hussein, Akbar’s younger brother, tells me he dropped out of school after 
reaching year 5 because there was no light at home. “I failed two, maybe three 
times, because I would come home and there was no light to read the books. 
Then, eventually, my dad said, ‘What’s the point of going to school if you keep 
failing?’”

Going to the bathroom is a particular challenge, 10-year-old Katubai tells me 
as she shows me my bed. “We have to go in the open,” she says. “It’s scary. 
Sometimes there are animals, like snakes or dogs.” Female villagers in India 
are vulnerable to attacks and sexual violence in such circumstances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f68e8f02ddb798a6c1e856c95c348d49eef20cb%2F0_236_4180_2509%2F4180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Electrifying%20India%3A%20the%20day%20rural%20Hotasar%20finally%20saw%20the%20light%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Electrifying%20India%3A%20the%20day%20rural%20Hotasar%20finally%20saw%20the%20light%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f68e8f02ddb798a6c1e856c95c348d49eef20cb%2F0_236_4180_2509%2F4180.jpg>
 A girl studies by candlelight in Phillaur. The government wants all India’s 
villages to have electricity within two years. Photograph: Shammi 
Mehra/AFP/Getty Images 
The Pardeshis’ first mobile phone came in 2010. The villagers gathered in the 
courtyard of the family’s home; pressing buttons, turning it over, they tried 
to understand how it worked.Now almost everyone in the village has one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/activate/mobile-phone-indian-farmers-hope>, though 
sometimes the signal is so bad, they have to climb trees to hear a voice.

Hussein shows me how the family charge their phones. He doesn’t know quite how 
it works, but he knows that it stops working if there are clouds in the sky. 
“Our mobile phones get energy from the sun,” he explains.

All the villagers have similar solar panels in their homes. They were handed 
out by the government, but can’t do much more than charge a phone or a small 
torch battery.

Despite India’s economic boom, a succession of governments have failed to 
develop basic infrastructure and welfare programmes. It means thatwhile many 
people can afford phones and cars, they still don’t have basic facilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/16/amartya-sen-india-dirty-fighter> 
such as toilets or electricity. Previous governments have attempted 12 
electrification programmes in rural India; none has succeeded in lighting up 
Hotasar or similar villages.

Vishal Singh, a government official responsible for overseeing the 
electrification programme in 126 villages in the wider Jaisalmer district, 
says: “There were no maps, landmarks or boundaries here. We went out into the 
field ourselves and marked out the areas that needed electrifying.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55089e99813592ace8bc53def74e5d79a2402a3%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Electrifying%20India%3A%20the%20day%20rural%20Hotasar%20finally%20saw%20the%20light%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Electrifying%20India%3A%20the%20day%20rural%20Hotasar%20finally%20saw%20the%20light%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55089e99813592ace8bc53def74e5d79a2402a3%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
 A man and child sit beneath a light powered by energy from a solar power 
microgrid in Dharnai, Bihar. Photograph: Prashanth Vishwanathan/Bloomberg via 
Getty Images 
He takes me to a household a few kilometres off the road, in the desert. 
“There are only a handful of people living here,” he says, “and we’ve gone out 
of our way to make sure that no corner of the country is left without power.”

On the day the electricity is scheduled to start, the Pardeshis talk about 
what they’ll purchase for their house. “We’ve got to buy a fridge and an air 
conditioner,” says Hussein.

“We should build a proper house,” volunteers Akbar, his brother.

Indian grape farmers take a byte out of the online market | Zeeshan Shaikh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/may/15/indian-grape-farmers-online-market-internet-business>
The Pardeshis’ grandfathers and great-grandfathers grew up in this house made 
of sand and straw. As with many of Hotasar’s villagers, the family are nomads 
and rotate between homes as the climate changes. With electrification, however, 
aspirations to stay in one place could finally become reality, transforming 
their way of life. Some villagers have already started building brick and 
concrete homes in anticipation of electric power. “In 10 years this whole 
village is going to look like a city,” Hussein says.

Vinod Sharma, a project manager from the electricity company that has the 
contract for the Jaisalmer region, says: “The government is backing us properly 
this time. Other plans got delayed in the past because there wasn’t real will 
or commitment. Now, if I make one phone call for materials, they’ll arrive here 
the next day. They’ve set targets and if we don’t meet them, the company pays a 
fine. So we’re working as fast as we can.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5c834e066b45f0e030113c59bea608afc6f336%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Electrifying%20India%3A%20the%20day%20rural%20Hotasar%20finally%20saw%20the%20light%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Electrifying%20India%3A%20the%20day%20rural%20Hotasar%20finally%20saw%20the%20light%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Felectrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5c834e066b45f0e030113c59bea608afc6f336%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
 A village near Jaisalmer, Rajasthan, India. Photograph: Alamy 
As the sun sets, the waiting finally comes to an end. The electrical engineer, 
Mojeem Khan, turns on the first light bulb. A small cheer erupts from the small 
crowd, and sweets are distributed. A set of Christmas lights comes, changing 
from green to blue to white. The boys run to the sockets to charge their phones.

The TV comes on and men gather around, flicking from channel to channel: a 
Punjabi comedy, a Bollywood film from the 90s, the news. “We’re going to sit 
here and watch TV all night,” one of the neighbours says.

Lalibai, in her early 20s, stays outside her bedroom staring at the light. 
“I’m feeling scared of the light bulb,” she says. “I’ve never seen it before.”

Singh says many villagers have similar reactions. “Before we set up any 
electricity poles, our first job is telling people how electricity will help 
them. Many of them think the bulbs will electrocute them or start fires. They 
used to tell us to go away – they thought the electricity would destroy their 
homes.”

Taiji, the oldest member of the household, who can’t see in the dark, happily 
touches the faces of the girls sat at her feet in the courtyard. “I can see you 
all now,” she says.

Khan, the electrical engineer, stands outside the courtyard of the house. “I 
love my job,” he says, watching the villagers celebrate.



 * This article was amended on 22 March 2016. Mojeem Khan is an electrical 
engineer, not an electrician.
 