
Brands are experimenting with immersive technology to create electronic 
empathy – blending digital and experiential marketing to bring shared 
experiences to a wider audience.


This year, virtual reality (VR) headsets including Oculus Rift and HTC Vive 
hit the consumer gaming market, while Google Cardboard offers a limited VR 
experience via the smartphone.Augmented reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/augmented-reality> (AR) adds a virtual 
digital layer to our smartphone screens and mixed reality blends physical and 
digital elements.

Immersive technology creates empathy by putting the individual at the centre 
of every experience, and it has broadened its reach from gaming and 
entertainment to news, documentaries, education and healthcare. Jane Gauntlett’s
In my shoes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fA54wqpyQSo> project used VR to 
make a first-person perspective short film about her experience of epilepsy. 
And now it is giving brands new ways to foster electronic empathy by linking 
virtual, physical and emotional realities.

The viral AR game Pokémon Go uses smartphone geolocation to present digital 
creatures on our screens as if they are interacting with our physical 
environment. Although the game appears as an extra layer on top of our 
environment from the personal perspective of our phones, the location element 
helps Pokémon Go create electronic empathy in the physical world, as shops and 
restaurants set up in-game location-based features to attract players.

Virtual reality: are you ready for surreal estate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jul/19/surreal-estate-virtual-reality-marketing>
“This ‘real world’ AR opens new brand opportunities, not only for sponsorship, 
real world retail gamification and foot traffic, but for the creation of 
segmentation tools to interpret the massive datasets of user preferences and 
behaviours which Pokémon Go encourages,” says Martin Hollywood, lead creative 
technologist at Razorfish London.

From sci-fi to VR

Ernest Cline’s 2011 novel Ready Player One 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/ready-player-one.html> is played out in a 
future virtual universe, where brands have their own planets. Cline sees this 
happening for real as VR hardware becomes mainstream. “We should think about 
what happened with the internet. Suddenly companies had to have a website,” he 
says. “It may be that brands will have a virtual space where you can try on 
clothes or test drive a car,” he says. This is already happening, with in-store 
retail experiences incorporating mixed reality.



“Experiential marketing is about intimacy at scale,” says Jason Alan Snyder, 
chief technology officer atMomentum Worldwide <http://www.momentumww.co.uk/>. 
“The danger for brands is that the algorithms we increasingly use are pushing 
us into ever-narrowing information silos and connecting us with tribes of 
people we agree with. Empathy is about understanding different perspectives and 
VR can alter perceptions. My hope is to leverage VR into a connective tissue by 
creating empathetic groups.” Snyder and his team created the blended reality
American Express fan experience at this year’s US Open 
<http://newyork.cbslocal.com/2016/08/31/american-express-fan-experience-us-open/>
 which includes the Pro Walk, a holographic replica of the locker room and walk 
on to the centre court, as well as a shared VR experience where groups/families 
can play tennis like the pros.

Mixed reality

The smartphone is the centre of our digital world; it’s how we communicate and 
shop. How long will it be before we can touch what we see in AR in the same way 
as we can in VR with a headset andhaptic gloves 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wired_glove>? 

Facial recognition – a powerful ad tool or privacy nightmare?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/aug/17/facial-recognition-a-powerful-ad-tool-or-privacy-nightmare>
The answer may be semi-immersive mixed reality. At MIT, Abe Davis’ research 
into interactive dynamic simulation blurs the boundary between augmented and 
physical reality so that instead of layering over the real environment, the AR 
appears to be interacting with it. Davis uses video to virtualise physical 
content so that itcan interact with virtual content 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9f1fCCb3hVg>, so that when you see – on your 
smartphone – a Pokémon interact with a flexible object, you also see that 
object react.

“While VR brings you closer to people who are far away and separates you from 
people who are close, AR makes you part of the environment and helps you 
discover your own version of the content. The fact that everyone has their own 
perspective on it brings people together,” says Davis.

However, although the potential is far reaching, there are significant 
challenges around building Davis’ research into a robust product that works on 
a smartphone. “We are still some way from producing real-time dynamic AR, which 
conveys reactions and behaviours as well as experiences and interactions.”

Mark Brill, mobile strategist and senior lecturer in future media at 
Birmingham City University, recognises how touching an object virtually could 
engage customers with brands “We already augment mobile communication with 
emojis and filters,” he says. However, there are challenges. “People will only 
use it if it fits their lives or adds something useful or desirable. So brands 
need to highlight what it brings that’s new and different, otherwise it is just 
a gimmick.”

One reason to electronically break the fourth wall is to convey product 
information. Victoria Buchanan, executive creative director at Tribal Worldwide 
London created the Volkswagen PassatInvisible made Visible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/apr/08/volkswagen-passat-invisible-technology-advertising>
 campaign using VR and AR to project the car’s invisible data and sensors on to 
a film showing how its advanced features (like assisted parking and braking) 
worked. “Rather than layering AR on to our world, we effectively stepped into 
the VR, usingLIDAR <http://www.lidar-uk.com/> scans to recreate different 
environments to showcase the car’s invisible features.” she explains.

Immersive technology needs to focus on connecting humans to humans in a 
profound way
Jason Alan Snyder 
Another example of shared VR/AR experience is the hyper-real Lockheed Martin 
Mars experience 
<http://www.adweek.com/adfreak/lockheed-martin-rigged-school-bus-group-vr-take-kids-tour-mars-170968>
 bus, in which the windows of a school bus were replaced by screens to create 
an immersive field trip to Mars.

A recent Virtual Futures Salon <http://www.virtualfutures.co.uk/> highlighted 
that electronic empathy is about emotional involvement and does not require 
hyper-realism. “The key is to establish an emotional connection between the 
consumer and the experience – it is not about the technology,” says Los Angeles 
based digital content adviser Scott Nocas, adding that Tamagotchi has sold over 
76m units. “Brands need to make themselves into Tamagotchi – or Pokémon – so 
that we keep them alive.”

Ultimately, electronic empathy comes down to the human factor – the emotional 
engagement that has always been at the heart of successful branding.

Immersive technology that engages multiple senses is expanding the creative 
space, providing more intense and personal experiences that can bring people 
together in multiple dimensions, sometimes simultaneously. But, it will only be 
effective commercially if it is widely accessible and focuses on shared human 
experience, rather than reinforcing a particular perspective.

“Empathy is about discovering things that we share and engage with 
emotionally,” says Snyder. “Immersive technology needs to focus on connecting 
humans to humans in a profound way. It can change people’s perceptions, and if 
used properly it has the potential to change the world.”

Joanna Goodman is a writer and editor. Follow her on Twitter @JoannaMG22 
<https://twitter.com/JoannaMG22>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 