
In Division, the ninth track from her debut album Intra, Elizabeth Rose 
<https://www.facebook.com/elizabethrosesydney/> sings “why hold onto something 
that only separates?”Accompanied by a clip 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdO-MV7mT-4> that portrays a gay couple’s 
struggle to find acceptance from family members, the song, she says, is a call 
to arms to make marriage equality in Australia a reality.

New faces: meet Elizabeth Rose
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2015/feb/07/new-faces-meet-elizabeth-rose-interview>
The Sydney singer-songwriter, who is touring in June 
<https://www.facebook.com/elizabethrosesydney/>, says before this album she had 
“never written about political issues”. That changed after she heardMy People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/04/presets-my-people-australian-anthems>
 by Sydney band the Presets, which critiques Australia’s response to asylum 
seekers.

“Everyone has a voice but with music you have a voice and a megaphone,” she 
says. “You have a captive audience who wants to hear what you have to say as an 
artist and who follows your music. It’s very powerful.”

Intra’s offering of slinky electro-pop opens with Shoulda Coulda Woulda, which 
Rose says she wrote with the Grammy award-winning producer M-Phazes in Bali, 
back in 2014. “We pumped this [song] out in almost two hours, it just poured 
out of me.”

Among the programmed hi-hats and buzzing synths are also injections of 
analogue charm, like the soft tones of an upright piano. “I grew up learning 
piano, was classically trained and not a lot of people know this. I actually 
wrote and played a fair bit of piano [on the album] in about half of the 
tracks.”

The title Intra, Rose says, encapsulates a period of multifaceted 
self-reflection for the young artist. “I feel like I’m making strong statements 
with this album.”
 Intra by Elizabeth Rose. 
 * Intra <http://www.elizabethrose.com.au/> is out 4 March. Elizabeth Rose 
<https://www.facebook.com/elizabethrosesydney/> is touring Australia 4-25 June  