
A pioneering grassroots emergency service targeting frail older people who 
have fallen takes the hospital to the home in a money-saving solution that 
could help slash A&E admissions and offer a new model of community care.

“It’s almost like bringing to the home, services that patients would typically 
get in hospital,” explains Lea Agambar, a nurse practitioner for the new 
project in east London.

NHS Five Year Forward View: the pressure’s on to test new models of care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/oct/30/nhs-five-year-forward-view-test-new-models-care>
The service, a joint project between the London Ambulance Service 
<http://www.londonambulance.nhs.uk/> (LAS) and North East London NHS foundation 
trust <http://www.nelft.nhs.uk/>(NELFT), goes out to nearly 30 people each week 
and keeps most of them – an average of 77% – out of emergency departments. And 
according to NELFT, in the 12 months following its launch in October 2014 the 
scheme saved the health service £188,000.

After starting as a pilot scheme, it is now an ongoing service funded by 
Barking and Dagenham, Havering and Redbridge clinical commissioning group 
which, like other commissioners, is under pressure to cut A&E admissions. The 
target was set at a 15% reduction by the coalition government.

This is not one of NHS England’s vanguard models 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/mar/13/nhs-vanguard-areas-new-models-care>
, but a relatively small-scale grassroots project conceived by staff from the 
two organisations.

“Our local emergency department was known to have some challenges and we were 
looking at the patients who come to A&E, what they present with, how they are 
conveyed and whether their admission was avoidable,” says NELFT service manager 
Caroline O’Haire.

“We’d already started some work with the LAS through our community treatment 
team, which works with people who are experiencing a health crisis in their own 
homes. So this was a further step.”

Agambar talks about how the idea emerged from a “frailty academy”, a forum for 
representatives from a range of services to meet and discuss the challenges 
that they and patients face, as well as possible solutions.

“We were asked to come up with an idea to help improve services for frail and 
elderly people within our boroughs,” she says. “So that’s when we decided about 
the emergency response scheme.”

The service uses a standard LAS emergency response car. But what’s different 
is, first, that it is equipped with devices for elderly people, such as walking 
aids and commodes. And, second, a paramedic is paired with a community nurse 
experienced in wound closure, urinalysis, blood sampling and more, and who 
attend to and assess the patients. People who have fallen receive a full falls 
assessment.

Has Alaska found holy grail of cutting costs and improving healthcare?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/nov/25/alaska-healthcare-quality-cutting-costs>
“We had basic and advanced life-support training, training from a geriatrician 
around falls and in physiotherapy and occupational therapy, as well as moving 
and handling techniques,” says Agambar.

At the outset of the service, the age criteria was 75 years and older, but 
that was reduced to 70 and now it is available for people aged upwards of 60. 
The patient profile has changed in other ways, too, as nurse practitioner 
Joanne Webb explains: “Initially it was for elderly fallers, but it was opened 
up to other elderly people who we can try and keep at home. So now we go to 
people who may have a chest or urinary infection, for example.”

Debbie Richmond, group station manager at the LAS, says staff working on the 
local dispatch desk in the emergency operations centre have been briefed about 
the type of people the car should, and should not, be dispatched to.

“For example, if you’re going out to an older faller, there is realistically 
no reason to send this car if a patient is complaining of hip pain, because 
that patient will need to go to an emergency department for an x-ray,” she 
explains

“Also the dispatch staff have a contact number for the car, so if they’re not 
sure, they can contact the clinicians and decide what’s appropriate. The car 
has access to incoming calls via a computer. So the paramedic and the nurse can 
scan the calls themselves and if they feel a call is appropriate for them, they 
can self-dispatch.”

The King’s Fund has reported that people aged over 65 account for nearly 70% 
of emergency bed days in England 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/field/field_publication_file/transforming-the-delivery-of-health-and-social-care-the-kings-fund-sep-2012.pdf>
 (pdf) and, as O’Haire says: “The type of patients we are dealing with here are 
usually frail and have potentially a level of cognitive impairment.

“What we know is that when those patients hit an A&E department they become 
more confused, their presentation will worsen very quickly. If they get to A&E 
it’s highly likely they’ll be there for a very long time.

Car park chemo: how one hospital brings cancer treatment to communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/oct/23/car-park-chemo-how-one-hospital-brings-cancer-treatment-to-communities>
“Something as simple as going around, picking someone up, making sure they’re 
safe, will make them recover much quicker.”

So is it feasible for this service to be replicated? Carol White, a deputy 
director for integrated care at NELFT, says the service has been underpinned by 
a broader shift from a bed-based model to community care which has been taking 
place across the trust over the past three years.

She says: “I guess fundamental to this is a sea change in the whole system, 
and an understanding within this health economy that community health services 
had not been invested in sufficiently.”

She says the service could not operate without NELFT’s community treatment 
team, which provides follow-up care if that’s needed. And she believes it 
benefits from regular adjustments: “They are changing it all the time based on 
patient, carer or professional feedback, and I think that’s one of the keys to 
this success.”

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 