 If there is something instantly familiar about the setting of Ian McEwan's 
London home, it is because many of us have seen it before: the BT tower also 
looms over the chimneypots on the cover of his last novel, Saturday. Inside, 
the living room is dominated by a painting in which the M40 sweeps up above a 
tiny pale figure's head, widening and darkening into an exhilaration of pure 
black. The room is high, book-piled, quiet - except when the life of the square 
intrudes. Teenagers show off in the shadows, men shout their hearts out on 
mobile phones. The city feels very near.
Saturday was longlisted for the Booker prize in 2005; last week McEwan, who 
has been shortlisted three times and won the prize once, was longlisted again, 
for his most recent book, On Chesil Beach. I congratulate him. He shrugs, hands 
briefly spread. "I didn't do a thing." It's a deflection nearly on a par with 
the British chemist who won two Nobel prizes and was recently quoted saying: "I 
was just a chap who messed about in a lab."

On September 6, McEwan will find out whether On Chesil Beach has made it to 
the prize shortlist. A few days laterAtonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement>, the latest of his books to be 
filmed, is released. He has seen the film, and says that in a spectrum that 
goes from The Innocent ("the only real dud") to The Cement Garden ("beautifully 
done"), Joe Wright's adaptation, starring Keira Knightley and James McAvoy, 
comes pretty near the top. McEwan has written film scripts himself and knows 
very well that "if you sell the rights, you have to stand back - you can't hang 
around as a bad conscience". Nevertheless, he finds it difficult not to be 
involved. In two years of notes to screenwriter Christopher Hampton, he found 
himself insisting, again and again, that they should not forget that the 
narrator Briony Tallis was a writer, with an overactive imagination; it is, 
after all, her melodramatic assumptions that take a love story and tip it into 
tragedy.

There are good reasons why McEwan is attractive to filmmakers, and they are 
some of the same reasons why he has achieved a popular success that has eluded 
many of his contemporaries. As his publisher pointed out, when he first 
submitted the manuscript for Atonement: "It's got a country house, it's got a 
love story and it's got a war." He has never underestimated the importance of 
plot, of suspense and dread, and the novel's first section, a breathtaking 
origami of overhearings and misunderstandings and transgressive desires, is in 
many ways a gift to the cameras.

But popular success comes at a price: McEwan is news, and never more so than 
in the past few months. Last winter the Mail on Sunday alleged that the parts 
of Atonement set in London hospitals receiving wounded from Dunkirk owed their 
verisimilitude to a memoir by wartime nurse Lucilla Andrews. This debt was not 
something he had hidden - she is thanked at the end of the book, and when he 
submitted his manuscript he says he also submitted a copy of No Time for 
Romance, with the pages he had relied on clearly marked - but, he says wearily, 
"a plagiarism story is always dynamite, whether it's true or not".

In January it was discovered that he had a long-lost brother, David Sharp. His 
mother had taken a lover when her husband was away fighting; the baby born of 
that union was hurriedly given away, via an ad in the local paper: "Wanted, 
home for baby boy, age 1 month, complete surrender." That baby's search for his 
birth parents, 60 years later, led to McEwan's door. The news was actually 
reported "five years after the event, although you wouldn't know it. I remain 
innocently baffled that it should be a matter of such planetary concern. I was 
away - I was in California when the story broke - my brother took the story to 
the Oxford Mail." Does he resent that? "I sort of wished he'd spoken to me 
first. And my other brother and sister, who'd never been written about, never 
wanted to be written about, suddenly found themselves doorstepped by the Sunday 
Times and the Mail. So it was explosive for a day or two - and then of course 
the whole thing just sweeps on and there's something else and it's all fine."

Then, a couple of months later, McEwan mentioned on Radio 4's Start the Week 
that he had taken a few pebbles from Chesil beach and kept them on his desk 
while writing; the beach is protected and such a public figure obviously had to 
be made an example of, so Weymouth and Portland Borough Council threatened him 
with a Â£2,000 fine unless he returned them.

"I don't like those press storms," he says now. "They're like a gale blowing 
through the house. I mean, some of it's farcical and you can sort of laugh 
about it, but it seems at odds with what being a novelist is about." In the 
past, it has exacerbated already painful experiences such as his divorce from 
his first wife, and each time it is, for a while, at odds with being a novelist 
at all: "When it gets stormy it stops you doing anything."

This interest in him does of course also confer a kind of power, in that 
people really want to know what he thinks. He attends scientific conferences 
and earlier this year was to be found on a stage discussing climate change with 
Angela Merkel's chief scientific adviser. Generally, though, "I think that 
delicious as it sometimes might be to pontificate on how many gunships are 
required to quell a rebellion in some remote part of the world, you have to 
resist the temptation." Successful fiction (in terms of fiction, rather than in 
terms of sales) depends on long periods of thought and silence and emotional 
risk-taking, so "I think you've got to keep a big chunk of yourself to 
yourself. Otherwise you'd go nuts."

Having said which, McEwan reacts sharply when he feels his views have been 
misrepresented or misunderstood. A review of On Chesil Beach by Natasha Walter 
in this paper recently drew a sharp letter of riposte, for what he saw as a 
conflation of his characters' politics with his own. He had already been stung 
by another piece, reprinted from the New Statesman, "making out Salman 
[Rushdie], Martin [Amis] and myself to be some kind of wing of American foreign 
policy. I mean, it was incredibly stupid. And it felt to me like Natasha Walter 
had decided I was on the political right, and she was virtuous and I wasn't, 
and that she was good and I was bad."

In the background was the Iraq war. Saturday is set on the day that a million 
protesters marched in London, and not everyone in the novel agrees with them. 
"I mean, I had great ambivalences about the invasion of Iraq, I was terribly 
torn about it. The left-winger in me made it difficult to protest against the 
removal of a fascist dictator. But the deep suspicions I had about the 
Americans being able to occupy a country made me very, very fearful.

"There's always been a part of the left whose dominant impulse is 
anti-imperialism. And that's where a lot of the energy I think came from in the 
anti-war protest here. And there's another part of the left whose driving force 
is anti-totalitarianism. And the anti-totalitarians were, I think, a minority, 
and among themselves and within themselves, deeply split. I mean, by the week 
before the invasion I really was in a sweat, thinking this is a TERRIBLE 
mistake." Now, he thinks the whole adventure has been "a disaster. An absolute 
disaster. It would have been a lot better to have done nothing than to do it 
badly." In fictional terms, however, he found his conflicting feelings useful. 
So, when he wrote an argument between his main character, Henry Perowne, and 
Perowne's daughter, "I was able to draw on everything that I felt - everything 
she said I could believe, and everything he said - almost everything - I could 
at least understand. And I also knew that the more popular thing would be to 
write a novel in which Henry Perowne was really against the war, would be a 
right-on guy, and not take private patients [he is a neurosurgeon] - but why do 
that? I wanted him to be a little more awkward to the reader. But I mean, a lot 
of readers, they just thought Henry Perowne was me."

It's an elementary error for a novelist who believes that being able to enter 
the minds of others, seeking understanding rather than judgement, is a moral 
act. "If the hijackers had been able to imagine themselves into the thoughts 
and feelings of the passengers," he wrote, in a piece published four days after 
September 11, "they would have been unable to proceed. It is hard to be cruel 
once you permit yourself to enter the mind of your victim." In Atonement, the 
2001 novel which many believe to be his best, Briony becomes an adult, and a 
mature writer, in direct relation to the degree to which she realises that 
"other minds were equally alive".

Having assumed Perowne was McEwan, many readers were outraged - but, somewhat 
surprisingly, it was Perowne's character rather than his politics which aroused 
the fiercest emotions. "It's very odd - but quite amusing to me - people were 
infuriated by his happiness. I spent all those years writing incredibly 
distressed, fucked-up people, and people saying how dare you. But the outrage 
of writing someone happy is even greater."

I suggest that it was envy, of his success, of his own happy second marriage 
and beautiful home, a reaction against something that might be read as smug. 
But although he agrees that "you can never underestimate the spite of a certain 
section of the English middle class", McEwan believes something deeper's going 
on. "People felt very uncomfortable because I painted this exaggerated version 
of themselves, really. Henry is really the fat contented western man, they 
themselves are fat contented western people. And it was a mirror, in a sense, 
like Caliban's mirror, and it made people feel enraged. So I'm completely 
unapologetic about that - that was always the premise - I mean, I've had 
fantastic unhappiness in my private life, as the clippings will tell you - 
Henry does not. This is not me. Yes, the house is mine - but it was always the 
premise to give him all the privileges of the metropolitan west, it could be 
Manhattan, Paris, London - and the benefits of technical expertise - and then 
pile it on with a man who happened to still be in love with his wife."

McEwan was the only big name to make it on to this year's Booker longlist, so 
he seems to be doing something right. "Maybe novelists are like politicians," 
he says. "They just continue to write - and they'll never know what their best 
novel was. There's bound to be a decline - neurally, you'll start to decline - 
but you'll never accept that. Just like politicians always stay on longer than 
they should. Because it's hard to tell when that high point is - also, there 
might be another, higher point. But that's not really the motivating matter - 
it's the notion that there's still some shadowy thing to be realised that would 
be perfect, that would just be exhilarating to achieve, and you haven't 
achieved it yet."

McEwan on ... 

Celebrity

Some of it's farcical and you can sort of laugh about it, but it seems at odds 
with what being a novelist is about.

His long-lost brother

I remain innocently baffled that it should be a matter of such planetary 
concern. I was away when the story broke.

Saturday

People felt uncomfortable because I painted this exaggerated version of 
themselves. Henry is really the fat contented western man.

The Iraq war

I had great ambivalences. The left-winger in me made it difficult to protest 
against the removal of a fascist dictator.
 