
Christmas is approaching but six cards did not make for a festive encounter. 
England had at least a one-man disadvantage from the fifth-minute following 
Elliot Daly’s dismissal for a dangerous tackle and were down to 13 players when 
Argentina scored their two tries either side of the interval, but such is the 
collective assurance and belief coursing through a side that a year ago was 
wallowing in World Cup shame that adversity is now an irritant rather than a 
distraction.

The loss of Daly, a central figure in England’s multi-angled and layered 
attacking game, would a year ago have prompted a retreat into the trenches to 
survive until the interval when the coaches would come up with a modified 
gameplan, but here England got on with it, 16 points up and in total control 
until the No8, Billy Vunipola, went off with a knee injury that left the 
Saracen wincing in pain just before the interval.

Eddie Jones sets his sights on Australia after ‘outstanding performance’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/eddie-jones-australia-outstanding-performance-england-argentina>
England unravelled all too easily in the World Cup against Wales and 
Australia, mute when the game went off script, but here they found their voice. 
Chris Robshaw, vilified a year ago to the point where he found a holiday 
retreat to lie doggo, led by example even though the armband has passed to 
Dylan Hartley, increasing his already high workrate to help compensate for the 
loss of Daly. He was not alone and, while Argentina had most of the ball and 
territory, the home side’s line speed in defence and force in contact induced 
mistakes.

Argentina’s players were at the end of their longest year having competed in 
Super Rugby for the first time. They have spent nearly half of it in foreign 
lands, sitting on planes or in hotels, and here they showed signs of weariness, 
even if they could not use it as an excuse given Daly’s dismissal. Their 
refusal to consider players based in Europe this tour has cost them, but as 
they lose and learn their focus is on the 2019 World Cup.

There was only one point when England looked vulnerable. Dan Cole’s yellow 
card at the end of the first-half, following a series of scrum penalties 
awarded against England under their posts, led to Facundo Isa, the replacement 
for Leonardo Senatore who failed a head injury assessment after Daly’s 
challenge, forcing his way over. When Santiago Cordero finished a 
length-of-the-field move one minute after the restart, the one time the Pumas 
passed with the precision and pace they showed during the World Cup, the 
prospect of a second victory over England here flickered.

Cole’s return snuffed it out. Had Daly, showing his inexperience of playing on 
the wing by getting into difficulty competing with Senatore for a kick he had 
no chance of reclaiming, remained on the field, England would probably have won 
with no more inconvenience than they had sufferedthe week before against Fiji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, fitter and hungrier than opponents who were below strength behind the scrum.

Daly became the first England back to be sent off in an international, 11 
years to the day afterLewis Moody had received the side’s last red card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/nov/28/rugbyunion.sport>. His action 
was untimely, coming a few days after World Rugby had announced a crackdown on 
challenges that involved contact with an opponent’s head. The crowd demanded 
another red card when, on 18 minutes, the Argentina wing Juan Pablo Estelles 
took out Jonny May in the air, but the England wing landed foot first and a 
penalty was the outcome.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fengland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6532de7a9c4c78ec093ad0caf556f3870c1b3bf4%2F0_379_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20and%20Owen%20Farrell%20dig%20deep%20to%20win%2014-man%20battle%20with%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fengland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20and%20Owen%20Farrell%20dig%20deep%20to%20win%2014-man%20battle%20with%20Argentina&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fengland-argentina-autumn-internationals-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6532de7a9c4c78ec093ad0caf556f3870c1b3bf4%2F0_379_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Elliot Daly tackles Leonardo Sentore in the air to become the first England 
back ever to be sent off in an international. Photograph: Matthew 
Impey/Rex/Shutterstock/Matthew Impey/REX/Shutterstock 
Argentina’s indiscipline presented Owen Farrell with four kicks at goal in 
each half. He landed his first three to give England a cushion at the time they 
were readjusting. The Pumas may have been billed by Eddie Jones as the second 
best team in the Rugby Championship after New Zealand, but two of their four 
wins this year are over Italy and Japan. For all their enterprise and verve, 
they have a self-destructive capacity that again exposed itself on 27 minutes 
when Juan Martín Hernández’s low kick near his own 22 was blocked by Farrell.

Billy Vunipola and George Ford took advantage to take play to Argentina’s line 
and when Robshaw tried to give Tom Wood what would very probably have been a 
scoring pass, Matías Orlando deliberately knocked the ball away, earning 
himself a yellow card and England a penalty try.

It put England 16-0 up and, like Ireland in the first Test against South 
Africa in Cape Town in June when CJ Stander was dismissed for a dangerous 
tackle, they were not discomfited by their disadvantage. It was different in 
the days when the game contained more set pieces, but England’s speed around 
the field masked their handicap.

Two Farrell penalties restored England’s cushion before they secured victory 
with a neatly worked try. Ford’s delayed pass to Wood created the space for May 
to cross in the left corner at a time when the numbers were even with the 
flanker Pablo Matera in the sin-bin. Argentina kept trying to break out of 
their own half, but their passing and kicking lacked accuracy for most of the 
afternoon and they could not match England’s desire.

England 27-14 Argentina: rugby union international – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/26/england-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-international-live>
They ended the match with 14 men when their replacement prop Enrique Pieretto 
reacted to having his left foot grabbed by a supine Joe Marler that he stamped 
on the loose-head’s chest with his right. He was sent off while Marler went 
into the sin-bin, an appropriate end to a game that too often verged on the 
reckless.

England have not lost since they faced Australia in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, 13 matches ago. Their year ends against the Wallabies on Saturday, an 
unbeaten 2016 less significant to Jones than reminding his former employers 
what they no longer have; that England, never mind the loss of an Elliot, are a 
rugby wasteland no more.
 