
England’s players have been warned to keep their discipline against Argentina 
amid rising scrutiny on those who commit dangerous tackles. Having already had
Joe Launchbury banned for a reckless kick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/joe-launchbury-banned-two-weeks-england-fiji>
 at a ruck against Fiji, the home coaches will be reminding the squad to behave 
themselves against at Twickenham on Saturday.

With World Rugby having announced a specific crackdown on illegal hits 
entering this month’s Test matches, England’s assistant coach Paul Gustard says 
all players should be aware of their responsibilities following the
incident-packed Test between Ireland and New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/ireland-new-zealand-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 in Dublin last Saturday in which two All Blacks were cited andMalakai Fekitoa 
was subsequently banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/malakai-fekitoa-all-blacks-ireland-france-one-week-ban>
. “Every coach in the land is aware of the consequences if you have contact 
with the head,” Gustard said. “There has been a specific focus brought to this 
aspect of the game but I don’t think anyone has ever coached tackling around 
the head. We’re certainly not doing that.

George Kruis earns quick reward from England after rapid return to fitness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/23/george-kruis-reward-england-return-argentina>
“During our camp in Portugal we had a referee with us and we went through, 
with every single player, the specific areas of the game World Rugby are 
looking at. We had a meeting about it and players have had meetings at their 
clubs.

“Our focus in the tackle is to put people to the floor. We’re not coaching 
foul play or illegal play. We try to coach good technique that will stand up 
under duress and fatigue.”

Launchbury was suspended for two weeks after the lock inadvertently made 
contact with the head of Fiji’s Asaeli Tikoirotuma, an incident a three-man 
disciplinary panel ruled should have prompted a red card. With a run of 12 
successive victories behind them, England do not want to run the risk of losing 
a key player against the Pumas or getting on the wrong side of the French 
referee, Pascal Gaüzère.

England’s Joe Launchbury banned for two weeks for kicking Fiji centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/joe-launchbury-banned-two-weeks-england-fiji>
Both teams will confirm their lineups on Thursday with Saracens’ George Kruis 
likely to return to England’s second row for the first time this autumn and Tom 
Wood set to be restored to the back row.

Elliot Daly is also primed for another starting role, having impressed both as 
a centre and a wing this month. “The one thing he has got is pace,” said 
Gustard, adding England remained open-minded about the Wasps player’s best 
position. “He’s frighteningly quick … we want to try to utilise that wherever 
he is on the pitch.”

England recall Jonny May for Argentina match in place of Semesa Rokoduguni
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/england-recall-jonny-may-argentina-team>
Along with Ben Te’o and Henry Slade, both pushing hard for more game-time in 
England’s midfield, Daly’s stock is on the rise.

England have defended the decision to release last week’s man of the match, 
Semesa Rokoduguni,with Jonny May back having missed the Fiji encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/22/england-recall-jonny-may-argentina-team>
. Gustard said: “On a game-by-game-by-game basis we have to pick a team we 
think is most appropriate for the threats we are going to face and for the 
opportunities we want to exploit.”

England have conceded five tries in their past two games, some described by 
Gustard as “unbelievably soft”, and are determined to give Argentina no easy 
points. “We’ve spoken as a group of the need to raise our level again,” Gustard 
said. “Our set piece let us down at times at the weekend. We know there’s a big 
threat there with Argentina … they will be coming for us because frailties were 
exposed and it’s an area of strength for them.”
 