
There is a lot of time for thinking and for netting but none for playing 
before England start their Test series against India in Rajkot on 9 November.

England’s management team has learned a fair amount from the two Tests in 
Bangladesh, which provided a gripping spectacle way beyond our expectation, but 
this does not include the identity of the 11 players that constitute their best 
team on the subcontinent.

On the credit side they know more about their Bens. Stokes can be a formidable 
presence out here, especially with the ball but also with the bat, provided he 
does not overheat; Duckett played one innings, which offers hope and no little 
excitement.

These pluses are outweighed by the confirmation of England’s frailties. In the 
thick of it all is England’s coach,Trevor Bayliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss>. He is no Malcolm Tucker; he 
does not really do political spin so he acknowledges that picking the best 
England XI at the moment “might cause a bit of a headache. Alastair Cook and I 
will sit down and have a good chat about the lineup”.

That meeting will have rather prosaic items on the agenda: the batting, the 
bowling. They might include the fielding after a poor morning session on the
calamitous third day of the second Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bangladesh-beat-england-draw-test-series>
 but Bayliss will just hit a lot more catches at training rather than wasting 
energy talking.

In his post-match interview Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> gave a neat insight into the 
challenges of batting on the subcontinent, as demonstrated by the events of 
Sunday afternoon. “We showed our inexperience in those conditions, even though 
I was out there experiencing it [no false modesty here: Cook has scored more 
runs in Asia than any Englishman].

“It was amazing the difference before and after tea. You lose a couple of 
wickets, then men come around the bat and the crowd gets into it. It takes 
something to deal with that. You know it does not last for ever but that 
half-hour, 40 minutes is crucial and we just weren’t good enough to get through 
it.”

Trevor Bayliss: do not write off England in India despite Bangladesh loss and 
drawn series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/31/trevor-bayliss-not-write-off-england-cricket-india-tour-bangladesh>
Bayliss, having coached so long in Asia with Sri Lanka, is familiar with the 
challenge and does not pretend there are any quick fixes. “In those conditions 
you have to try to score and put pressure on the opposition. Before tea Duckett 
was proactive. You have to back yourself. That’s the way to go.” This is not 
just Aussie bravado. There is logic to this approach.

So much depends on the playing surface. If the pitch is essentially flat 
before encouraging more turn late in the match – which used to be the likeliest 
scenario on the subcontinent – then there are benefits in cautious crease 
occupation. There are few unplayable deliveries lurking around the corner and 
the long haul is justified. The bowlers can be worn down.

If the pitch offers extravagant movement from the start – as in Chittagong and 
Dhaka – such a passive approach is less likely to be successful. That killer 
delivery is around the corner however solid the batsman’s defensive technique. 
The bowlers must be challenged; they must be forced to bowl badly, which can 
easily happen even to those good enough to be selected for Test cricket.

That is the theory. Next comes the question of personnel. Gary Ballance, at 
No4, must now feel as insecure as a comedian. It would be a major surprise 
after 24 runs in four innings against Bangladesh if he plays in Rajkot. Bayliss 
said opening with Haseeb Hameed and batting Duckett at four is an option. So 
too is bringing Jos Buttler into the team, albeit in a very unfamiliar role. 
Both options require a considerable leap of faith in India, where Bayliss said 
“it could be even more difficult”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fengland-spin-india-tests-bangladesh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08e8dfdff56aecd9d599f57f7bdb0f05e66e879e%2F0_67_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=England%20in%20a%20spin%20as%20they%20contemplate%20India%20after%20Bangladesh%20struggles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fengland-spin-india-tests-bangladesh%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=England%20in%20a%20spin%20as%20they%20contemplate%20India%20after%20Bangladesh%20struggles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fengland-spin-india-tests-bangladesh%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08e8dfdff56aecd9d599f57f7bdb0f05e66e879e%2F0_67_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Moeen Ali would appear to be the only certainty for England’s slow bowling 
arsenal ahead of next week’s first Test against India. Photograph: A.M. Ahad/AP 
Item 2b: Bowling (slow). Here Bayliss came as close to spinning as he ever 
does. He said England’s spinners bowled “OK” in the series. He added Bangladesh 
“outplayed us” in this department and there were “concerns about the 
consistency of length” among England’s spinners. In old Aussie speak I think 
this means they bowled far too much garbage.

This must be the most worrying item on the agenda. It is possible to argue 
there is the raw material there among the batsmen; it is hard to believe that 
applies to the spinners. The only two to come out in credit after the Dhaka 
match were Moeen Ali and Gareth Batty (because he was not playing).

It feels as if the selectors have done Bayliss no favours here. They had a 
tricky task because the cupboard is bare but not many county players would 
reckon Zafar Ansari is a better left-arm spinner than Jack Leach of Somerset. 
It is true Leach, who is still a novice, took many of his 68 wickets last 
summer on turning pitches at Taunton, but what are England playing on out here?

But those decisions have been taken. England rarely swerve having selected 
their squads – though they did change their minds about Ian Salisbury in 
between the winter tours of 2000–01. They decided it was not going to work so 
they changed their tour party for Sri Lanka by replacing Salisbury with Robert 
Croft.

Here late additions to the tour party are not on the agenda as far as we know 
and it remains fiendishly difficult to decide which spinner(s) should accompany 
Moeen in the Test team in Rajkot. There is plenty of time for everyone to mull 
it over.
 