
England’s cricketers will now depart for a rare mid-tour break following the 
eight-wicket defeat in Mohali with their captain,Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook>, imploring the batsmen to 
deliver when they return for the final two Tests if the series with India is to 
be saved.

The squad have permission to spend five days away from the tour with most, 
including Cook, heading to Dubai with their families. Three back-to-back Tests 
have left the team 2-0 down with two to play and looking bereft, chiefly 
through an inability to post first-innings totals when pitches are at their 
best.

India beat England by eight wickets in third Test to take 2-0 lead in series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/india-england-third-test-day-four-match-report-cricket>
While the batting fired during the drawn opener in Rajkot – four batsmen 
recorded centuries – the defeats in Visakhapatnam and Mohali featured top-order 
collapses in the first innings. They got first use of the pitch in the latter 
too, having won the toss, but mustered only 283, having been 87 for four on the 
first morning.

“It’s just frustrating. We had an opportunity to get ahead of the game but we 
weren’t good enough to take it,” said Cook, who scored 27 and 12. “In this part 
of the world you need a big score on a wicket like that. It wasn’t too 
different from Rajkot, to be brutally honest, maybe slightly harder to score 
on, but 400 was par. You don’t just win the toss and get 400. You have to play 
well but we just weren’t good enough to do that.

“There were not any magic balls either. Maybe Jonny [Bairstow]was the only one 
that was a good piece of bowling but apart from that there wasn’t a huge amount 
of misbehaving from the pitch. It was good accurate bowling as you expect from 
India in these conditions but not unplayable. You can talk all you want but the 
top order have to go and deliver.”

Cook spoke before the drawn series in Bangladesh of the risk of the side’s 
seven-Test schedule before Christmas spiralling out of control and he now hopes 
time off before the fourth Test in Mumbai from 8 December can apply the 
handbrake.

“The break has come at a good time after three back-to-back Test matches. 
Going to Dubai will mentally give us a break from cricket and we can come back 
more refreshed,” he said. “The challenge now is to put in that performance 
consistently over five days, we have done it one game [in Rajkot] but we 
haven’t done it in the last two.”

While the batting was his primary grumble, Cook admitted to misreading the 
pitch before he andTrevor Bayliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss>, the head coach, opted for 
three spinners and three seamers in the belief it would turn significantly. 
While Adil Rashid continued his fine series with five wickets, his third slow 
bowling option, Gareth Batty was a spare part in the main, with the greatest 
control offered by his pace bowlers.

“If we had known what we do now we would have gone four seamers, two spinners. 
The seamers were always in the game with reverse, plus the way we bash length 
we can control the scoring rate very well,” added Cook. “In hindsight we would 
have played four but I am happy with my decision as I thought it was right at 
the time. We will have a look at that for Mumbai but it will probably bounce 
and turn. It usually does.”

Virat Kohli, the Indian captain, credited his side’s crushing victory to their 
lower order in the first innings, with half-centuries from Ravi Ashwin, Ravi 
Jadeja and Jayant Yadav turning 204 for six on the second evening into their 
eventual 417 all out, a position from which the trio could then attack with the 
ball.

He said: “It makes a massive difference, especially in Test cricket, to 
stretch the game longer for a session or a session and a half and then come out 
with the confidence in the field as well. Ashwin is the No1 all-rounder in the 
world, he scores lots of runs and comes out more confident with the ball.”

On his running battle with Ben Stokes, who was reprimanded following an 
exchange of words on the first day, Kohli added: “He’s a competitive player and 
so am I. I wouldn’t like to explain or elaborate what happened on the field. 
It’s better left to officials to know what happened. These things have only 
motivated me in the past and continue to do so. So I don’t mind it.”
 