
And so it ends with a record-breaking whimper. No Test team have ever lost by 
an innings having scored as many as 477 in their first knock but England 
managed that with room to spare. The game was lost with 10 overs to spare and 
the margin was monumental, a humiliating innings and 75 runs.

Ravindra Jadeja, the more straightforward of India’s spinners, finished with 
career-best figures of seven for 48, a reward for skilful persistence and a 
consequence of some wanton, brain-dead batting. Jadeja settled proceedings with 
preposterous ease though Karun Nair, the triple centurion, was declared the man 
of a match that should have been consigned to the record books as a quirky 
run-fest. Instead it will be remembered for a spineless capitulation triggered 
not by a batting lineup who do not care but one drained by the demands of an 
exhausting tour and overwhelmed by the constant excellence of an India side who 
have ruthlessly exploited their frailties. The result was a procession of 
batsmen, all with accomplishments at this level, performed like callow novices.

Alastair Cook refuses to discuss future of England captaincy after India loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/alastair-cook-refuses-discuss-future-england-captain-fifth-test-india>
There was a nasty parallel with the Test match in Dhaka many moons ago. It is 
only eight weeks since the England openers,Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> and Ben Duckett (remember 
him?) finished one session on 100 for no wicket against Bangladesh, whereupon 
England went from dominance to dominoes. Just a gentle nudge was required and 
they all fell over for 164.

This was probably a more incomprehensible collapse, in which England lost 
their last six wickets for 15 runs. The bowlers in Chennai may have been of 
higher quality but the pitch was so much more benign than in Dhaka, as the 
scorecard hints. One difference was the England dressing room had nothing left 
to give in Chennai; their bodies may still ripple with muscles but their minds 
are exhausted. No matter how reliable the surface they found a way to get out.

Cook and Keaton Jennings took England safely to lunch with deceptive ease. The 
two lean left-handers had taken the score to 97 for no wicket and at times it 
was hard to tell one from the other – except when the reverse sweep was 
employed. That was a cast-iron indication Jennings was on strike.

There were some alarms. Cook on four was dropped behind the stumps off Ravi 
Ashwin, who beat the bat on numerous occasions in pursuit of his second wicket 
of the match, which, amazingly, he never found. Jennings was composed against 
the spinners, the likes of which he has seldom encountered at Chester-le-Street.

It was curious Virat Kohli took so long – 70 minutes – to introduce Jadeja 
since the left-arm spinner has tormented Cook throughout the series, dismissing 
him six times. Jadeja’s first ball elicited an lbw appeal and a review but an 
unsuccessful one.

Lunchtime represented the zenith of England’s innings. After the break Cook 
was caught at leg slip off Jadeja glancing what was an apparently innocuous 
delivery that was missing leg stump by nine inches. This was not just bad luck. 
The England captain has been out this way before; India knew that; so did Cook, 
therefore this can be construed as poor shot selection. At his alert best Cook 
would have ignored the delivery.

Three more wickets fell in swift succession and Jadeja was always involved. 
Jennings was caught and bowled; Joe Root swept as he has done frequently in 
this series and India’s review was successful this time. Soon after Jonny 
Bairstow somehow managed to chip a leg-side delivery from Ishant Sharma over 
midwicket, where Jadeja sprinted back to take a brilliant catch, which was a 
testament to his athleticism.

For almost 20 overs Moeen Ali and Ben Stokes stayed together, with the former 
in no mood to restrict his strokeplay. They guided England to tea and through 
the next 25 minutes after the interval. A safe haven after a tortuous winter 
journey was in sight. Moeen then fell to Jadeja in a manner that will haunt him 
and which must have exasperated his colleagues. Down the wicket he came and his 
attempt to hit the ball over mid on failed wretchedly; Ashwin took the catch. 
In this match Moeen has scored 190 runs, a startling achievement, and he has 
been dismissed playing two of the most horrendous shots imaginable. Square that 
circle if you can.

That aberration may have been forgotten if England had managed to save the 
game but now the dressing room was fearing the worst and then experiencing it. 
India closed in on their prey expertly and without mercy; Kohli had the right 
bowler for every batsman. Usually it was Jadeja, who soon induced an 
emasculated Stokes to chip to midwicket.

India beat England by innings and 75 runs to seal 4-0 series win – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/dec/20/india-v-england-fifth-test-day-five-live>
Now the dominoes were falling fast. Liam Dawson went for a duck, duped by a 
perfect, undetected googly from Amit Mishra. Yadav was the man for Adil Rashid; 
the first delivery with the second new ball finished with a gentle catch to 
cover (Jadeja, of course) and then the left-arm spinner polished off the tail. 
By now Jadeja seemed capable of turning the ball on glass so Stuart Broad and 
Jake Ball could at least claim to be the recipients of good balls, a luxury 
denied most of their superiors.

So England head home, a disconsolate bunch, utterly outplayed, numbed by their 
capitulation and burdened by the gnawing realisation they crumpled in the 
fourth and fifth Tests after their R&R excursion to Dubai.

In some quarters Cook will be held responsible for every shortcoming, for that 
is the way of the world. Some of that criticism will be intemperate but the 
firm expectation is Cook will be at Lord’s in July for the first Test against 
South Africa as an experienced opening batsman who will be glancing over at his 
captain at the toss to see whether he should put on his pads.
 