
The executive of the pharmaceutical company that hiked the prices of two dozen 
drugs, including EpiPen, received a 671% pay increase over the past nine years.

Heather Bresch, chief executive officer of Mylan, came under public scrutiny 
this week after reports that since acquiring rights to EpiPen in 2007, the 
company had implemented a series of gradual price increases inflating the price 
of the drug from $56.64 to $317.82, a 461% increase in cost . During that same 
time, Bresch went from being Mylan’s chief operating officer to president to 
chief executive and saw her pay rise $2,453,456to $18,931,068 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/mylan-execs-gave-themselves-raises-they-hiked-epipen-prices-n636591?cid=sm_fb>
, a 671% increase.

When Mylan first acquired Merck KGaA in 2007, Bresch oversaw the integration 
of its 400 products. Among those products was EpiPen, which is used to quickly 
deliver a proper dose of epinephrine to those suffering from anaphylaxis. 
Anaphylaxis is when an allergic reaction causes one’s airways to swell and 
close. Ina 2015 interview 
<http://fortune.com/2015/09/11/mylan-ceo-heather-bresch/> with Fortune, Bresch 
described EpiPen as “my baby”. Under her management, EpiPen went from bringing 
in $200m a year in sales to becoming Mylan’s first billion-dollar product.

Following the outcry over the increase in EpiPen’s prices, Bresch, who is the 
daughter of West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, could be called on to justify 
Mylan’s pricing before the US Congress. Her father does not sit on the Senate 
judiciary committee, which would most likely hear her testimony.

Mylan has hiked prices of other products as well, according to a June report 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/06/10/mylan-shares-slide-after-analysts-raise-concerns-over-pricing-strategies.html>
 by a Wells Fargo senior analyst David Maris.

“Mylan has raised the prices more than 20% on 24 products, and more than 100% 
on seven products,”he wrote 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/epipen-maker-also-hiked-prices-slew-other-medications-n636981>
.


Among the products whose prices were hiked over the past six months were: 

 * Ursodiol, a drug used to treat gallstones, saw its price increase by 542% 
 * Dicyclomine, a drug used to treat irritable bowel syndrome, saw its price 
increase by 400%

 * Tolterodine, a drug used to treat overactive bladders, saw its price 
increase by 56%

The Guardian has reached out to Mylan to confirm these hikes. 

In his report, Maris noted that the price hikes could draw “greater regulatory 
scrutiny and headline risk”.

“Mylan’s business model is not today, nor has it ever been, premised on price 
hikes,” Nina Devlin, Mylan’s spokeswoman,said in June 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/06/10/mylan-shares-slide-after-analysts-raise-concerns-over-pricing-strategies.html>
. She described Maris’s analysis as “flawed” and said it focused on a small 
selection of the company’s 1,400-plus products.

The fact that EpiPen is a household item for those suffering from severe 
allergies is perhaps why this price increase is drawing so much public ire.

“One reason I think the EpiPen situation is getting so much attention compared 
to other cases is a lot of the high-cost drugs are used by patients who are 
very sick, cancer patients, multiple sclerosis. These are patients that 
actually don’t end up paying a lot of these costs out of pocket because they 
hit their out of pocket maximums and deductibles pretty quickly,” explained 
David H Howard, a health economist at the department of health policy and 
management at Emory University.

“But for EpiPen, a lot of people who are using this, or might use it, are 
pretty healthy. They don’t have a lot of other health conditions or health 
needs so this is their major expense and they end up paying for a lot of of it 
out their own pocket,” Howard told the Guardian.

Since the price hike was reported, a number of lawmakers have called on the 
company to make its products affordable.

“Due to Mylan’s virtual monopoly of the epinephrine auto-injector market and 
its unique life-saving attribute, it is crucial that your product remains 
affordable for all Americans,” Connecticut senator Richard Blumenthalwrote in a 
letter 
<https://www.blumenthal.senate.gov/newsroom/press/release/blumenthal-demands-mylan-lower-price-for-life-saving-epipen>
 to Mylan. “Therefore, I demand that Mylan take immediate action to lower the 
price of EpiPens for all Americans that rely on this product for their health 
and safety.”

Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton put out a statement on 
Wednesday calling on Mylan to reduce the price of EpiPen, saying: “It’s wrong 
when drug companies put profits ahead of patients.”

According to Citigroup analysts 
<http://blogs.barrons.com/stockstowatchtoday/2016/08/23/mylan-in-epipen-controversy-shades-of-valeant/>
 Liav Abraham and Eugene Kim, there is “little regulatory action that can be 
implemented to compel Mylan to lower the price of EpiPen”. However, increased 
scrutiny and an appearance before the Senate judiciary committee could lead to 
“self-regulation”, they wrote in a note to investors. They noted that over the 
past 12 months, EpiPen underwent two 15% price increases.

Earlier this year, another pharmaceutical executive was in the hot seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/04/martin-shkreli-refuses-to-testify-congress-drug-daraprim>
 in front of the US Congress: Martin Shkreli, former chief executive of Turing 
Pharmaceuticals. Shkreli became notorious after Turing increased prices of its 
HIV medicine Daraprim by 5,000%. The price of the drug went from $13.50 to $750 
overnight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmartin-shkreli-congress-daraprim-hearing-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454609745409%2FKP_1711356_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Former%20drug%20executive%20Martin%20Shkreli%20calls%20Congress%20%E2%80%98imbeciles%E2%80%99%20after%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmartin-shkreli-congress-daraprim-hearing-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Former%20drug%20executive%20Martin%20Shkreli%20calls%20Congress%20%E2%80%98imbeciles%E2%80%99%20after%20hearing%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmartin-shkreli-congress-daraprim-hearing-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F4%2F1454609745409%2FKP_1711356_crop_640x360.jpg>
Former drug executive Martin Shkreli calls Congress ‘imbeciles’ after hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/feb/04/martin-shkreli-congress-daraprim-hearing-video>
In a recent interview with NBC 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/martin-shkreli-weighs-epipen-scandal-calls-drug-makers-vultures-n634451>
, Shkreli said that he too considered gradual hikes in price – akin to how 
Mylan proceeded – but had instead decided “to come out and say: ‘This is our 
desired price’”.

Prior to being acquired by Mylan in 2007, the price of EpiPen went up 3%-4% on 
several occasions. Price increases under Mylan ranged from 5% in 2008 to 20% in 
2009.

Shkreli went on to describe Mylan as “vultures” and asked: “What drives this 
company’s moral compass?”

Profit seems to be the answer. 

According to Mylan’s second quarter earnings report, its total revenue so far 
this year was $2.56bn, up 8% compared to last year. Its net sales in the 
“specialty third party” category, which includes Mylan’s EpiPen, increased by 
$100.6m or 33% during the three months ending in June 2016, compared to the 
same period last year. Some of that increase was due to higher EpiPen sales, 
the company said in itsearnings report 
<http://apps.shareholder.com/sec/viewerContent.aspx?companyid=ABEA-2LQZGT&docid=11535413>
.
 