
In the jet age, the period of time when technology could be heroic, Eric 
“Winkle” Brown, who has died aged 97, was the archetypal test pilot. He never 
achieved the celebrity status that was afforded some of his friends and 
contemporaries in the 1940s and 50s. Indeed, he was not the first pilot to 
survive the sound barrier, or be a martyr to high-speed flight, nor be a holder 
of the world air speed record. But Brown was a flier of extraordinary skill and 
versatility, one of those people whose attention to detail, powers of 
improvisation and raw courage transformed aviation.

Between the late 30s and the 80s, Brown flew 487 types of aircraft, more than 
any other pilot has flown, or is likely to fly, in history. He made a record 
2,407 aircraft carrier landings and was the most decorated pilot in the Fleet 
Air Arm (FAA).

In 1940 he took part in the Battle of Britain in a 250mph Gladiator biplane. 
During and after the second world war, he evaluated and tested the majority of 
the allied and axis warplanes and some Soviet planes as well – including the 
MiG-15. In April 1945, Brown, who was fluent in German, interrogated Josef 
Kramer, commandant of Belsen concentration camp; two months later he was 
interrogatingHermann Göring 
<http://www.history.co.uk/biographies/hermann-goering>.

Brown was the first FAA pilot to fly a jet, in December 1945, and the first 
person to land one – a de Havilland Vampire – on an aircraft carrier. In the 
50s he passed Mach 1 (the speed of sound at any height) in American Sabre and 
British Hunter jets. In the 60s, he flew Chinook helicopters, Buccaneer nuclear 
bombers, Mach 2 Lightning and Phantom fighters – and was adviser to theRoyal 
Navy <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-navy> on a (cancelled) aircraft 
carrier project.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Feric-winkle-brown-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ddf29df4d8f551d4981307abd8c9e31cce0ae3%2F0_0_7035_4220%2F7035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20%E2%80%98Winkle%E2%80%99%20Brown%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Feric-winkle-brown-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20%E2%80%98Winkle%E2%80%99%20Brown%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Feric-winkle-brown-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ddf29df4d8f551d4981307abd8c9e31cce0ae3%2F0_0_7035_4220%2F7035.jpg>
 Eric ‘Winkle’ Brown, second right, with other pilots at Farnborough, 
Hampshire. Photograph: BBC/Eric Brown 
His naval combat flying effectively began in 1941 with 802 Squadron in a 
Grumman Martlet – in his bookWings on My Sleeve 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Wings-My-Sleeve-Worlds-Greatest/dp/0753822091> (1961), 
he called it “a tough, fiery, beautiful little airplane” – from HMS Audacity, 
the world’s first “auxiliary carrier” (a converted German banana boat) on 
Clydeside-Gibraltar convoys. Brown shot down two four-engined Focke-Wulf Kurier 
bomber-cum-reconnaissance planes in head-on attacks, but, in December 1941, the 
Audacity was torpedoed. There would be a later stint with two Royal Canadian 
Air Force squadrons, taking in fighter sweeps over France, but his subsequent 
war service focused on testing – catapult launchers, deck landings but, most of 
all, aircraft themselves. In 1942, he received his first posting to the Royal 
Aircraft Establishment (RAE) at Farnborough, and in January 1944, he joined the 
flight division of its aerodynamics department, where, as chief naval test 
pilot (1944-49), he flew seven aircraft a day.

The RAE was then a key centre researching flight at speeds approaching Mach 1. 
Thus did Brown dive a propeller-engined Spitfire at a staggering Mach reading 
of 0.86 (more than 600mph). Later, with the German surrender, he assessed that 
generation of jets that the Nazis had begun deploying during the last year of 
the war and became the only non-German to fly – as opposed to glide – the 
Messerschmitt 163. The rocket-powered 163 was sensational, but, he wrote, 
“there was so much to get wrong and virtually no escape route”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Feric-winkle-brown-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca78ed58538f4301afc7347714dd3ead7224e7e%2F126_42_3451_2071%2F3451.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eric%20%E2%80%98Winkle%E2%80%99%20Brown%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Feric-winkle-brown-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eric%20%E2%80%98Winkle%E2%80%99%20Brown%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Feric-winkle-brown-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca78ed58538f4301afc7347714dd3ead7224e7e%2F126_42_3451_2071%2F3451.jpg>
 Eric ‘Winkle’ Brown talking to the Queen during her visit to the site of 
Belsen, Germany, in June last year. In April 1945, Brown, who was fluent in 
German, had interrogated Josef Kramer, the concentration camp commandant. 
Photograph: Julian Stratenschulte/EPA 
One enduringly controversial project could have made Brown world-famous. In 
August 1944, he was briefed on RAE collaboration with the Miles company on the 
revolutionary M52 jet. In spring 1945, he wrote, the company was instructed by 
the government to hand over the M52 plans to the US. In February 1946, the 
Ministry of Supply cancelled the M52 when it was 82% completed. The M52 
resembled the Bell X-1, in which, on 14 October 1947, Chuck Yeager of the 
United States Army Air Force became the first man to break the sound barrier, 
reaching Mach 1.07. On 10 October 1948, over the Scilly Isles, a pilotless, 
scaled-down M52 achieved Mach 1.52. “A fantastic opportunity had been missed,” 
wrote Brown.

He was born in Edinburgh. His parents came from the Scottish borders and his 
father, Robert, had served in the first world war as an infantryman and as a 
Royal Flying Corps (RFC) balloon unit battlefront observer and pilot. His 
mother, Euphemia (nee Melrose), died while he was at school. Brown won a 
scholarship to the city’s Royal high school, where he excelled academically, 
and in gymnastics and rugby. While at school, Brown accompanied his father to 
the 1936 Berlin Olympics. His father’s RFC background led to them meeting the 
aviatorHanna Reitsch 
<http://www.historynet.com/hanna-reitsch-hitlers-female-test-pilot.htm> and the 
first world war ace and senior Luftwaffe officerErnst Udet 
<http://www.historynet.com/ernst-udet-the-rise-and-fall-of-a-german-world-war-i-ace.htm>
 who, taking Brown for a flight, ignited his interest in flying.

Brown read modern languages at Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>, specialising in German, joined the 
university air squadron, and spent a year as an exchange teacher in France and 
in Germany, where he renewed his aquaintanceship with Udet and Reitsch. Meeting 
the latter after the war, Brown found that her fanatical loyalty to Hitler 
“made my blood run cold”.

He was still teaching at the outbreak of war, and was deported into 
Switzerland, complete with his MG sports car. Back in Britain, and having been 
told by the RAF that “there was no rush for my services”, Brown enlisted in the 
FAA. He was posted for fighter training to Belfast, where he met his future 
wife, Evelyn. He then moved on to Yeovilton, in Somerset, theGloster Gladiator 
<http://www.battleofbritain1940.net/0008.html> and his first encounters with 
the Luftwaffe.

From 1951 to 1952 Brown was resident British test pilot at the US Navy’s air 
test centre at Patuxent River in Maryland. In the late 50s he helped 
re-establish the West German navy’s air arm and he concluded his service as 
commanding officer of the RN station at Lossiemouth, in Morayshire (1967-70). 
His many honours included a DSC (1942), MBE (1944), OBE (1945) and an Edinburgh 
University honorary PhD (2007). His nine books include Duels in the Sky (1989) 
and Testing for Combat (1994). The vice-president of the European Helicopter 
Association – he had first seen Reitsch flying one in 1938 – Brown continued to 
lecture and write into his 90s.

“In an era of outstanding test pilots,” said the one-time Hawker chief test 
pilot Bill Humble, “‘Winkle’ was simply the best.” He was 5ft 7in – short for a 
pilot – which earned him his nickname and helped save his life when in 1949 he 
was flying the De Havilland 108, which he called “a killer”. This was the plane 
in which the test pilot Geoffrey de Havilland had died three years earlier 
when, at Mach 0.88; the plane slipped out of control. Propelled upwards, De 
Havilland had broken his neck on the canopy. “He was a big man. I was short,” 
wrote Brown. “… This was the moment of truth.”

Evelyn, “Lynn”, whom he married in 1942, died in 1998. He is survived by their 
son, Glenn, and by his partner, Jean.

• Eric Melrose “Winkle” Brown, test pilot, born 21 January 1919; died 21 
February 2016
 