
The heroic exploits of the polar explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton are among the 
historic figures and events that will be honoured by Royal Mail’s special stamp 
programme next year.

Although now privatised, the company will continue its tradition of 
highlighting British national symbols on stamps, with January’s set a memorial 
to Shackleton’s epic Antarctic voyage 100 years ago to get help for his 
stranded crew.

Other themes will include the Great Fire of London, William Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/shakespeare>, Agatha Christie, the Queen’s 
90th birthday and the first world war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fernest-shackletons-polar-voyage-feature-royal-mail-stamps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7df0ea91b9880b1051a5a5bf4a4b775281c15071%2F0_0_6600_6600%2F6600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ernest%20Shackleton's%20polar%20voyage%20to%20feature%20on%20Royal%20Mail%20stamps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fernest-shackletons-polar-voyage-feature-royal-mail-stamps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ernest%20Shackleton%27s%20polar%20voyage%20to%20feature%20on%20Royal%20Mail%20stamps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fernest-shackletons-polar-voyage-feature-royal-mail-stamps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7df0ea91b9880b1051a5a5bf4a4b775281c15071%2F0_0_6600_6600%2F6600.jpg>
 The 400th anniversary of Shakespeare’s death will be marked by a set of stamps 
in April. Photograph: Royal Mail/PA 
The special stamp programme <http://rmspecialstamps.com/> has commemorated and 
celebrated events and anniversaries of significance to UK heritage and life for 
50 years. The Queen approves every issue before it is printed.

Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> estimates there 
are 2.5 million stamp collectors and gifters in the UK and millions more 
worldwide.

Shackleton has become a model for British leadership largely because of his 
achievement in keeping his team together during a near two-year ordeal in the 
Antarctic after their mission to traverse the continent went awry.

The expedition began in August 1914, but by January 1915 their ship, 
Endurance, had become stuck in sea ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/dec/30/shackleton-endurance-antarctica-pack-ice-photography>
 and eventually sank, leaving the crew stranded for months until they were able 
to reach the uninhabited Elephant Island.

Along with six companions, Shackleton then braved a voyage of 720 nautical 
miles in an open boat to the whaling stations of South Georgia to get help for 
his crew. They were finally rescued in August 1916.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fernest-shackletons-polar-voyage-feature-royal-mail-stamps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c08dbda5491518e5f4acbb580a6ff07c8d12a8%2F0_0_1323_1323%2F1323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ernest%20Shackleton's%20polar%20voyage%20to%20feature%20on%20Royal%20Mail%20stamps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fernest-shackletons-polar-voyage-feature-royal-mail-stamps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ernest%20Shackleton%27s%20polar%20voyage%20to%20feature%20on%20Royal%20Mail%20stamps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2Fernest-shackletons-polar-voyage-feature-royal-mail-stamps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c08dbda5491518e5f4acbb580a6ff07c8d12a8%2F0_0_1323_1323%2F1323.jpg>
 One of a set of stamps commemorating the first world war, which is the third 
issue in a five-year series. Photograph: Royal Mail/PA 
In March, Royal Mail will return to honouring those who have devoted their 
energy to helping and protecting others with a British humanitarians issue. One 
of the stamps will commemorate Sir Nicholas Winton,who died in July aged 106 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/01/sir-nicholas-winton>. He 
organised the rescue of 669 children from what was then Czechoslovakia on the 
eve of the second world war.

Other sets planned for 2016 include the Queen’s 90th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/09/queen-to-throw-birthday-street-party-for-10000-guests-in-londons-mall>
 in April, the 150th anniversary of Beatrix Potter’s birth in September and the 
500th anniversary of the founding of Royal Mail itself in February.

Henry VIII established a master of the posts in 1516, but the service remained 
for the crown’s exclusive use until 1635, when Charles I made it available to 
the public. It was run as a private monopoly by royal favourites until 1655, 
when Oliver Cromwell put it under government control.

Royal Mail returned entirely into private hands last year, when the government 
sold its last 30% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/10/government-begins-sale-remaining-stake-royal-mail>
 to comply with an EU directive that postal services be liberalised.
 