
Ethan Hawke <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ethan-hawke> cannot get Boyhood 
out of his system. He will not let it go. Richard Linklater’s sublime 
meditation on growing up, starring Hawke and Patricia Arquette as separated 
parents and Ellar Coltrane as their son, was shot every summer from 2002 to 
2013. This year it was released to universal acclaim and became even more a 
part of his life. “For years I tried to talk to people about it and nobody had 
any context of it,” he says. “You try to explain to somebody: ‘Hey, I just did 
this great week of shooting in Austin.’ ‘Oh yeah, what is it?’ ‘Story about a 
kid.’ ‘When’s it gonna come out?’ ‘Nine years.’ Oh. So I think what will be 
lonely and sad is the feeling next year, when it really is over. I really felt 
like we stumbled on to something really new. And I know I can’t return to this 
moment.”

Over the course of 12 years, Boyhood became an intrinsic, inseparable part of 
Hawke, and he of it. Today, we’re ostensibly discussingPredestination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/predestination>, a new time-travel 
transgender thriller, which I tenuously link to both Boyhood and Linklater’s 
18-year-spanning Before trilogy (charting Hawke’s character Jesse’s ongoing 
relationship with Julie Delpy’s Celine). All of these films, I suggest, are 
about how much we change while fundamentally remaining the same. “Yeah,” he 
says. “I don’t know if it’s because everything is refracted through Boyhood 
right now for me, but... what I love about Boyhood is that spanning these 12 
years, you see that the characters at the end of the movie are so obviously 
different than they were at the beginning, and yet they’re still clearly the 
same people. It gets at that essential question of what part of ourself is 
continuing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DajwJiex_4i8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DajwJiex_4i8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DajwJiex_4i8&media=>
Hawke has changed a lot over the decades, and he has remained the same. At 18, 
he was the wide-eyed new kid on the block in 1989’s Dead Poets Society; at 24, 
via 1994’s Reality Bites, he became the poster boy for Generation X. He’s 
played heavyweight, gritty roles in 2001’sTraining Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/feb/01/culture.peterbradshaw> and 2007’s 
Before The Devil Knows You’re Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jan/11/drama.thriller>, and more 
recently has been showing up in obscenely profitable multiplex fare such as 
2012’sSinister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/07/sinister-film-review> and 2013’s 
The Purge <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/02/purge-review>. Yet his 
youthful sincerity and the pensiveness he exudes have remained throughout.

Now 44, he shows no sign of an ego during our hour-long conversation and is 
constantly reflective. His latest project is Born To Be Blue, a drama about 
jazz trumpeter Chet Baker. It’s set in 1969, when Baker was 40, ravaged by 
drugs, and had lost the ability to play after having most of his teeth punched 
out. The film centres on the one restorative element of Baker’s life at the 
time, his relationship with girlfriend Diane Vavra. “It’s extremely bittersweet 
because it’s the last period he was ever sober,” says Hawke. “He temporarily 
could have salvaged some part of his life. But no sooner did he learn to play 
again than he took on all the same habits.”

Personal experiences have drawn Hawke to the story. “He was just a really 
beautiful, soulful person who wasn’t in control of his habit,” he says of 
Baker. “And for me, personally... I’ve lost two of the great heroes of my life 
to heroin.Philip Seymour Hoffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/philipseymourhoffman> [with whom he acted in 
Before The Devil Knows You’re Dead] and River Phoenix [co-star of Hawke’s debut 
film Explorers] are two of the greatest actors of my generation. It’s very rare 
that you really would think of an actor as an artist, but River, even though he 
lived such a short period of time... he was a poet, you know. He was the real 
thing. And so was Phil. Both of these guys were real inspirations to me, and 
it’s really sad... I’m just trying to understand all that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Fethan-hawke-boyhood-before-midnight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417016944884%2F1cfaf660-b756-43c0-8564-d5589457c537-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethan%20Hawke%3A%20%E2%80%98Mining%20your%20life%20is%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stumble%20on%20anything%20real'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Fethan-hawke-boyhood-before-midnight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethan%20Hawke%3A%20%E2%80%98Mining%20your%20life%20is%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stumble%20on%20anything%20real%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Fethan-hawke-boyhood-before-midnight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417016944884%2F1cfaf660-b756-43c0-8564-d5589457c537-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hawke with co-star Philip Seymour Hoffman in Before The Devil Knows You’re 
Dead. Photograph: Allstar 
Hawke, it appears, has never found himself in big trouble. He attributes his 
level-headedness to his early experience on Dead Poets Society, with director 
Peter Weir and co-stars who prized acting over partying. After the film, Hawke 
formed a theatre company with some of them. Also, of course, there wasRobin 
Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robin-williams> who, after Dead 
Poets, got Hawke his first agent, and would come along to his theatre 
productions to support and encourage.

“One of the things that was hard for Robin was...” Hawke says, before pausing 
to think. “He wasn’t ‘normal’. He was a comic genius, and I don’t use the word 
lightly, he really was. I was 18, but you couldn’t spend a tremendous amount of 
time with him and not know that life was difficult for him. Every outburst... 
every up has a down, right? You see it. It’s so hard for people like Robin who 
have these explosive highs and all this joy, but no balance in their life. And 
I’d hoped that he had beaten it. But he was such a beautiful person to all of 
us young guys.”

Hawke met Richard Linklater through his theatre company. Linklater came to a 
play, collared Hawke and told him aboutBefore Sunrise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/16/before-sunrise-sunset-romance>. 
Although Hawke was fresh from the success of Reality Bites, he admits he was 
still learning to act. By 2005 and sequel Before Sunset, however, he’d gone 
toe-to-toe with Denzel Washington in cop drama Training Day, for which he 
received an Oscar nomination.

Of late, Hawke, a lifelong genre fan, has wanted to mix things up further, 
hence the increasing amount of sci-fi and horror on his CV. In 2009 he starred 
inDaybreakers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/07/daybreakers-review>
, a lurid vampire thriller by Australian twins The Spierig Brothers. Their 
follow-up, Predestination, adapted from sci-fi author Robert A Heinlein’s 1959 
short story All You Zombies, is an even bigger bowl of madness. It concerns 
fate, free will, time-travel, a forced sex-change operation and a serial-killer 
manhunt. It’s impressively insane and a lot of fun.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F25%2Fboyhood-trailer-richard-linklater-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F4%2F25%2F1398442255978%2FBoyhood-Image-010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boyhood%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Richard%20Linklater's%20new%20film%2C%20shot%20over%2012%20years%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F25%2Fboyhood-trailer-richard-linklater-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boyhood%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20Richard%20Linklater%27s%20new%20film%2C%20shot%20over%2012%20years%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fapr%2F25%2Fboyhood-trailer-richard-linklater-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F4%2F25%2F1398442255978%2FBoyhood-Image-010.jpg>
“It’s absolutely out of its mind,” says Hawke, who plays a “temporal agent” 
flitting through time. “I love science-fiction that’s not oriented around 
action or effects. Whether it’s Robert Heinlein, Kurt Vonnegut, Philip K Dick, 
HG Wells or whoever... that kind of mind-bendy science-fiction where you can 
really attack themes in a new way. And when I read Predestination it was like: 
‘What the fuck did I just read?!’” He particularly likes the fact that although 
the lead character is transgender, the film is not explicitly about transgender 
issues, it’s about all of us. “There’s something about Predestination that 
actually does get at identity, for me,” he says.

Talk of time and identity moves back to Linklater, and to the overlaps between 
Hawke himself and his characters. “The kind of ethos Rick and I were going for 
in the Before trilogy was absolute pulverisation of the line between character 
and actor,” he says. As a child of separated parents, and then a divorced 
father himself, how much did he draw on his own familial experiences for 
Boyhood andBefore Midnight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/before-midnight> 
(in which Jesse has kids by different partners)?

“I don’t know...” He pauses. “It’s a little less intellectual than that. 
There’s that great Mark Twain line about the point of art being to alleviate 
shame. The more you can be telling the truth and the less you facilitate all 
the stupid lies...” For a couple of minutes, he talks about how Linklater’s 
films make us feel, as opposed to more fantastical movies that make us feel our 
lives are boring. “The thing about Rick’s movies is they make you feel like 
your life is really exciting, compared to these motherfuckers,” he laughs. “My 
point is that I have always, especially in the safe hands of Linklater, tried 
to mine the material that’s been interesting to me. I was a child of a divorce 
and I’m a parent of divorce. And it’s been a giant roaring dragon of my psyche, 
so it feels good to write about it. And it makes me feel good to see a crowded 
theatre of people watching a divorced family and to see that be part of a 
narrative where there’s nothing wrong. The goal of Before Midnight was: can you 
make a romantic movie about a couple of 40-year-olds who have been together a 
decade, and have it be romantic, and not tell one lie? Can you do it? To do 
those kind of exercises you have to mine your own life. It’s just the only way 
you’re gonna stumble on anything real.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Fethan-hawke-boyhood-before-midnight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417017105164%2F45f74fae-ed75-42e5-9b90-c2ed3a12cd34-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ethan%20Hawke%3A%20%E2%80%98Mining%20your%20life%20is%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stumble%20on%20anything%20real'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Fethan-hawke-boyhood-before-midnight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ethan%20Hawke%3A%20%E2%80%98Mining%20your%20life%20is%20the%20only%20way%20to%20stumble%20on%20anything%20real%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Fethan-hawke-boyhood-before-midnight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417017105164%2F45f74fae-ed75-42e5-9b90-c2ed3a12cd34-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hawke with co-star Julie Delpy in Before Midnight. Photograph: Allstar 
Whether or not they make a fourth Before film is in the hands of time. They 
may get the urge again in another few years (they film them every nine), and 
they may not; Linklater has said Before Midnight feels like a satisfying 
conclusion. It would be a shame if they didn’t return for 2022, though, when 
Hawke will be 51. What’s it like to have these characters always subconsciously 
percolating at the back of his mind? “I’ll give you an example. The other day I 
had to go to the doctor because I can’t see any more. So I was getting fitted 
for glasses and I thought: ‘OK, we’ll do another Jesse and Celine; Jesse’s got 
glasses! It’ll be a great little touch to put in. Any time I have a 
life-changing thing, however subtle it might be, I see it through the context 
of how it might affect Jesse and Celine.”

Whatever the future holds, Hawke is enjoying a huge career peak right now. Has 
he taken stock of this critical high? “You never really know where you are,” he 
says, countering the question by discussing perceptions of success, and how 
those we think are succeeding are often failing, and vice versa. “So I’ve never 
had that feeling of security. No sooner does something go well than I think: 
‘Well, are the best days behind me? Is it over now?’”

He laughs: “I just try not to think that way.”

Predestination is in cinemas from 13 Feb
 