
The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has lifted most 
sanctions against Belarus despite concerns about political repression and human 
rights abuses.


EU foreign ministers meeting in Brussels agreed unanimously to end asset 
freezes and travel bans against 170 individuals including the president,
Alexander Lukashenko <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko>, 
citing “improving EU-Belarus relations”.

Sanctions were also lifted against three defence companies with close ties to 
the government in Minsk: Beltech Holding, Beltechexport and Spetspriborservice.

The ministers retained sanctions against four members of Lukashenko’s security 
service suspected of involvement in the disappearance of four political 
opponents in 1999-2000. An arms embargo also remains in place.


Lukashenko, dubbed Europe’s last dictator by the George W Bush administration, 
swept toa fifth term as president last October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/alexander-lukashenko-expected-to-remain-as-belarusian-president>
 following elections independent observers said were marred by significant 
flaws.


Following the poll, the EU suspended sanctions for four months because the 
elections passed without a repeat of 2010’s violent crackdown against 
opposition forces. As well as the relatively peaceful aftermath of the poll, EU 
diplomats wanted to ease sanctions in response to Lukashenko’s decision to 
release six political prisoners last August, including Nikolai Statkevich, a 
presidential candidate in 2010.

The EU first imposed sanctions against Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> in 2004, steadily extending them to 
more individuals and organisations following a series of flawed elections that 
returned Lukashenko and his parliamentary supporters to power in successive 
landslides.


On Monday EU ministers decided to lift most sanctions permanently, although 
they said they remained “concerned with the situation of human rights in 
Belarus”. Ministers also called on Minsk to abolish the death penalty and 
implement Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe’s 
recommendations on democracy before this year’s parliamentary elections.

A recent OSCE report 
<http://www.osce.org/odihr/elections/belarus/218981?download=true> said 
October’s election showed Belarus had a “considerable way go to” on democratic 
standards, noting the absence of safeguards against multiple voting, limited 
choice available to voters and the uneven playing field between Lukashenko and 
his rivals.

The EU’s view of progress in Minsk stands in stark contrast to the UN’s 
special rapporteur on Belarus, whosaid last week he had seen no changes in “the 
dismal human rights situation” in the country 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53191#.VsIDYmThBdA> since the 
presidential election.


“Despite the partial suspension of EU and US sanctions, decided in 
anticipation of further advancement of human rights, the authorities have not 
ceased systematic harassment of those who attempted to practise their 
individual, civil, political and other rights,” Miklós Haraszti said. The 
authorities have not shown “any willingness to reform the entrenched, highly 
oppressive legal system”.


Haraszti, a leading light of Hungary’s democracy movement during the 1970s, 
cited “numerous cases” of violations of basic rights since the presidential 
election. During a court hearing in late January, two youth activists on trial 
and a journalist reporting on proceedings were beaten by riot police.

The journalist, Pavel Dubravolski, of the independent site Tut.by, was later 
charged with hooliganism and fined by the court. Earlier that month 30 people 
were charged with an administrative offence for attending a rally in Minsk. All 
public meetings in Belarus require official permission. Last October four 
opposition leaders, including Statkevich, were fined for organising a small 
rally outside the KGB headquarters in Minsk to remember the victims of Joseph 
Stalin’s repression.

Belarus has been ruled by Lukashenko since 1994 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-belarus-remains-revolution-behind>
; the KGB is still in business and there is no opposition in parliament. But he 
has been making overtures to the west following Russia’s seizure of Crimea and 
the crumbling of Belarus’s economy amid wider turmoil in eastern Europe. In a 
likely nod to Minsk’s role inhosting four-party peace talks on Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/12/ukraine-crisis-minsk-ceasefire-agreement-details>
, the EU said it valued “Belarus’s constructive role in the region”.

Joerg Forbrig, a fellow at the German Marshall Fund thinktank, said the EU was 
likely to have been motivated by geopolitical arguments, as well as wider 
fatigue with sanctions.


At a time when Russia was trying to extend its sphere of influence, supporting 
Lukashenko was seen “as the lesser evil”, Forbrig said, although added there 
was no evidence this was an effective policy.


The decision to lift sanctions “sends a very wrong signal to Mr Lukashenko”, 
he said. “It says to him: ‘We accept you don’t have to make any political 
reforms.’”


The EU foreign policy chief Federica Mogherini denied that geopolitical 
concerns had played a role, saying that decisions were always based on content 
and merit. “This is clearly not a rosy or perfect picture … but when we see 
significant, even if limited steps, in what we feel is the right direction, we 
feel it is right to encourage them,” she said.

Belarusian opposition leader Andrei Sannikov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/23/andrei-sannikov-world-complacent-belarus>
 said the EU had made a very unfortunate decision that would have negative 
consequences for the Belarusian people, civil society and independent media.


 “It is a very clear signal to the dictatorship that it can continue with its 
practices,” he said, speaking from exile in Warsaw. “We know when sanctions are 
lifted or the policy is softened we face more repression.”


Sannikov, who was beaten by riot police, after running for president in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/23/andrei-sannikov-world-complacent-belarus>
, said the EU had a lot of leverage and could have taken a different approach. 
He suggested the EU should have imposed conditions on lifting sanctions, such 
as reducing spending on the police and the KGB.


“Sanctions are lifted from people that were defined as criminals by the 
European Union because they were guilty of falsifying elections, or persecuting 
and harassing opposition, of torturing opposition. All of a sudden these people 
are being pardoned by Brussels, although nothing has changed,” he said.


“The gross and systematic violation of human rights are still there in 
Belarus, so [the EU] is just blessing these practices.”

 