
“Don’t go by sea. Stay in Syria, however hard it is.” So said Ali Alsaho, a 
Syrian man whosewife and seven children drowned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/migration-not-worth-risk-syrian-man-family-drowned>
 last week while making the crossing to Greece. It seems children must die to 
remind the world of the shocking death toll the sea takes.

Migration is not worth the risk, says Syrian man whose family drowned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/migration-not-worth-risk-syrian-man-family-drowned>
As I write, official estimates put the number of migrants and asylum seekers 
who died in the Mediterranean this year at 3,671. The real figure is likely to 
be higher, as hundreds more deaths remain unaccounted for, but they were all 
just statistics until the public saw the limp corpse of three-year-oldAlan Kurdi
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/04/aylan-kurdi-refugee-crisis>
, who drowned along with his five-year-old brother, Galip, and their mother, 
Rehan, trying to cross to Europe from Turkey on a raft.

Moas, the Migrant Offshore Aid Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charity-appeal-2015-blog/2015/dec/11/migrant-offshore-aid-station-charity-appeal-refugees-sea>
 – our charitable search and rescue organisation – received aglobal outpouring 
of support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/charity-behind-migrant-rescue-boats-sees-15-fold-rise-in-donations-in-24-hours>
 and donations within 48 hours of that sad event, and it emboldened us to 
expand our operation into south-east Asia and the Aegean sea during the hostile 
winter months.

The drowning of men, women and children fleeing war, poverty and oppression at 
sea remains a daily occurrence. Since August 2014 Moas has rescued almost 
12,000 people from the water. The EU is predicting that 3 million refugees and 
migrants will have reached its territory by 2017. This will have a positive 
impact that will stimulate the economy. Ultimately that is why people are 
coming, will continue to come and cannot be stopped from coming toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. They seek the same thing we 
all want: something better. The reality is that these people will contribute 
to, not take away from, our economy. Yes, it will be rough in the beginning, 
but they are becoming part of Europe’s future, whether we like it or not.

Following the terror attacks in Paris and political scaremongering that 
followed, we have started putting these people at risk again. The human tragedy 
of people fleeing by sea to escape terrorism is being diminished by vitriolic 
accusations, the building of walls, and a fear that these refugees are coming 
to kill us. Most are just escaping war in the Middle East. But even when 
trapped between European anger and the violence that drove them out of their 
country, refugees still brave the worsening seas.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftroubled-waters-working-save-migrants-mediterranean-moas-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436298128674%2FKP_344868_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20troubled%20waters%3A%20the%20rescue%20crew%20saving%20migrants%20in%20the%20Mediterranean%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftroubled-waters-working-save-migrants-mediterranean-moas-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20troubled%20waters%3A%20the%20rescue%20crew%20saving%20migrants%20in%20the%20Mediterranean%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftroubled-waters-working-save-migrants-mediterranean-moas-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F7%2F1436298128674%2FKP_344868_crop_640x480.jpg>
 In troubled waters: the rescue crew saving migrants in the Mediterranean – 
video. 
There are no words that could comfort Ali Alsaho. And maybe he is right about 
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. His family might have lived 
longer had they stayed put. But what else do you do if you see no future for 
your children? If you can’t send them to school and you can no longer earn a 
living? What do you do when you know there is no end in sight and you could 
soon be targeted by arguably the most inhumane terrorist group the world has 
ever seen?

Moas has a team on the ground in Turkey. We know that refugees will continue 
to seek out smugglers. They will still be sold lifejackets that absorb water 
and be put on boats designed for swimming pools. Far from home, and with no way 
to go back, they will still pay the smugglers handsomely as they hide from the 
authorities and wait to make the short but often deadly crossing.

There is one thing they will all take with them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/sep/04/syrian-refugees-pack-for-the-crossing-to-europe-crisis>
: hope. Hope that they will be among the lucky ones to reach shore alive. Hope 
that they will find work. Hope that one day they will have a family that is not 
missing loved ones.

Our motto, “No one deserves to die at sea”, has become a simple way for caring 
people to show that the world has not lost its humanity. If you look around you 
this winter and see a world full of fear, anger, suspicion, and hatred, just 
remember that Moas,with your help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/guardian-and-observer-refugee-appeal-2015-the-charities>
, will be out there rescuing people at sea.
 