
Right on time, Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> are 
playing like European champions again, and after the shakiest of starts to the 
season, they fly to France this week with five consecutive and impressive wins 
under their belts. They have most of their World Cup players back in harness, 
and in command is a 20-year-old widely predicted to become Jonny Wilkinson's 
replacement as England's No10.

If you believe those former internationals already in the Danny Cipriani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-cipriani> fan club, it is not a 
question of whether the fly-half takes over from Wilkinson, but when. Even 
Wilkinson is impressed.

The two players went head-to-head for the first time on Saturday and if the 
gale and hail blunted their talents, Wilkinson still saw enough to pass a 
favourable verdict on a pretender eight years his junior.

"He did well - he did what needed to be done," said Wilkinson, who chose the 
worst possible day to play his first game since the World Cup final. Not only 
did the wind howl through Adams Park but theNewcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/newcastlefalcons> pack were also blown away. 
Not even Wilkinson in his pomp could have won the tactical battle on the back 
of such a disadvantage.

He came off marginally second best in a more measurable competition; in the 
battle of the big left boots. Wilkinson scored all his side's points, missing 
once, an opening effort from 40 metres, into the teeth of the storm, which fell 
just short. Cipriani missed two from seven - kicking 14 points in all - but 
eased over a second-half shot from the same spot that had been beyond the boot 
that guided England to the World Cup final.

"He kicked the goals well and did the right things," said Wilkinson, remarking 
on the Wasps No10's precocious talent for managing the considerable ability and 
experience around him. "He has the ability to control the game and has years 
ahead of him to develop. It's great for Wasps and great for the country. He's a 
guy who wants to learn who already has a great deal of talent."

However if Cipriani's performances have put him at the head of a growing queue 
to replace the current England fly-half, a more immediate concern is that in 
seven days, starting this Saturday, Wasps play Clermont Auvergne twice in games 
which should decide who makes it to the last eight of the Heineken Cup.

Wasps have the pedigree, having won the competition twice, but Clermont are 
one of the big spenders of the French league, and in addition to buying a 
galaxy of Test stars, including the South Africa captain, John Smit, they have 
acquired the experience of Alex King, a veteran of all Wasps previous European 
campaigns. His departure helped precipitate Cipriani's move from full-back to 
fly-half.

The No8, Lawrence Dallaglio, has no doubts about Cipriani's ability to replace 
the 32-year-old King. "He has a maturity beyond his years," said the Wasps 
captain. "In the last four weeks he has played against the Irish fly-half, 
Ronan O'Gara, Wales's Stephen Jones, down at Llanelli, and Jonny today. Every 
week is a real benchmark for him. His education is growing with every game he 
plays and he's at one of the right clubs, where he won't get ahead of himself."

Wasps are going to need repeat performances from those forwards and backs who 
had put Saturday's game beyond Newcastle's reach by half-time. When Newcastle 
finally found relief from the rain in their faces they were 18 points down and 
Wasps were on their way to a the EDF semi-finals at the Millennium Stadium in 
March. Phil Vickery, playing for the first time since Paris, helped make a mess 
of Newcastle's scrum, Simon Shaw towered in the loose and Eoin Reddan chipped 
and chased for the first try. Another delicate kick from the Irish scrum-half 
led to the chaos which preceded a yellow card for the prop Jon Golding and the 
penalty try awarded by Malcolm Changleng when Newcastle dropped four successive 
scrums.

Newcastle's forwards were outmuscled until their new tight-head Carl Hayman 
arrived. But even the stability afforded by a Â£1m, 19st All Black could not 
provide the platform needed to ruffle a team beginning to believe that a 
Heineken Cup double is possible. Dallaglio summed it up: "We've won five on the 
bounce and that's the sort of level you need to go further in tournaments and 
win trophies."

Wasps Van Gisbergen; Sackey (Lewsey, 70), Waters, Flutey, Voyce; Cipriani, 
Redden (Amor, 74); Payne, Ward (Webber, 74), Vickey, Shaw (Birkett, 70), 
Skivington, Hart (Leo, 78), Haskell, Dallaglio (capt).

Tries Reddan, Penalty try. Con Cipriani. Pens Cipriani 4.

Newcastle Falcons Tait; May, Noon, Flood, Rudd (Visser, 64); Wilkinson, 
Grindal (Dickson, 60); Golding (McDonnell, 54), Thompson (Long, 46), D Wilson 
(Hayman, 40), Perry (B Wilson, 64), Sorenson, Parling, Woods, Dowson (capt).

Pens Wilkinson 2.

Sin-bin Golding 32.

Referee M Changleng (Scotland). Attendance 7,490.
 