
And so the brilliant Andrés Iniesta has been named the best player at Euro 2012
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/02/euro-2012-andres-iniesta-player-of-tournament>
, four years afterhis fellow Spain and Barcelona midfielder Xavi won the award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jun/30/spain.euro20082> in 
Switzerland and Austria. Uefa has been criticised for many things during this 
tournament –fining Nicklas Bendtner more for wearing a pair of sponsored briefs 
than it fined various football associations for the racist behaviour of their 
fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/jun/18/uefa-2012-bendtner-fine-racism>
,proposing that in 2020 the tournament could be hosted by 12 or 13 cities 
across the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/30/euro-2020-12-13-countries-michel-platini>
, to name just two – but it seems like we're all in agreement that it has 
judged this decision correctly.

Half of our very own writers have chosen Iniesta as their player of the 
tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/02/euro-2012-review-guardian>, 
with Italy's Andrea Pirlo a close second. Meanwhile you, the readers, have been 
voting with your fingers after every match,dishing out player ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/07/euro-2012-player-ratings> 
with rare abandon. It couldn't have been much closer for the best player 
verdict, but Iniesta (average rating 7.60) pipped Pirlo (7.50) by one tenth of 
a mark.

Pirlo shares the honour of best individual match performance with Cristiano 
Ronaldo, the former getting a mark of 8.80 for his exhibition of passing 
against England, the latter for his demolition job on Holland. But despite the 
sporadic brilliance of Ronaldo in Poland and Ukraine, he misses out on the 
readers' first XI because of his inept displays against Germany (5.50) and 
Denmark (3.90).

The readers' XI in full (4-3-2-1)

Iker Casillas (Spain) 7.28

Federico Balzaretti (Italy) 6.78

Mats Hummels (Germany) 7.26

Daniel Agger (Denmark) 7.49

Jordi Alba (Spain) 7.11

Andrea Pirlo (Italy) 7.50

Sami Khedira (Germany) 7.18

Luka Modric (Croatia) 7.13

Mesut Ozil (Germany) 7.06

Andrés Iniesta (Spain) 7.60

Zlatan Ibrahimovic (Sweden) 7.40

Right-back is the only position in which no player averaged above 7. 
Balzaretti is therefore selected despite being unable to make the Italy 
starting XI for the final, and emerging on the left when he was brought on in 
the second half againstSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain>. 
Indeed, Uefa's official 23-man squad for the tournament does not contain one 
right-back among the six defenders, opting for three left-backs instead – Jordi 
Alba, Fábio Coentrão and Philipp Lahm.

The two best centre-halves in the competition, according to our readers, were 
Mats Hummels and Daniel Agger, but they fail to receive recognition from Uefa, 
as does Luka Modric. Steven Gerrard is the lone Englishman in Uefa's squad, and 
the player ratings also make him the best player on display for Roy Hodgson's 
team.

Uefa's 23-man squad in full

(readers' average ratings follow the names)

Goalkeepers Buffon (Italy) 7.10, Casillas (Spain) 7.28, Neuer (Germany) 7.06.

Defenders Piqué (Spain) 6.55, Coentrão (Portugal) 7.06, Lahm (Germany) 6.80, 
Pepe (Portugal) 6.86, Ramos (Spain) 6.82, Alba (Spain) 7.11.

Midfielders De Rossi (Italy) 6.80, Gerrard (England) 6.80, Xavi (Spain) 6.98, 
Iniesta (Spain) 7.60, Khedira (Germany) 7.18, Busquets (Spain) 6.47, Ozil 
(Germany) 7.06, Pirlo (Italy) 7.50, Xabi Alonso (Spain) 6.90.

Forwards Balotelli (Italy) 6.60, Fábregas (Spain) 7.02, Ronaldo (Portugal) 
6.38, Ibrahimovic (Sweden) 7.40, Silva (Spain) 6.70.
 