
Sarah Sands, the editor of the Evening Standard, has criticised the 
government's "undefined bureaucratic" new press regulations, arguing that 
journalists may as well be put in public stocks as that is at least a clear 
form of punishment.

Sands, speaking at the Advertising Week Europe Conference, also revisited the 
Twitter leak of the Standard's front page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/mar/21/evening-standard-banned-briefings-budget>
 which scuppered George Osborne's budget announcement.

"If ever there was an example of tomorrow's news today, you saw it yesterday," 
she said.

Speaking to MediaGuardian.co.uk after the session she refused to elaborate on 
the potential fate of the young journalist suspended for tweeting the 
embargo-breaking front page, or whether there should also be repercussions for 
senior management.

"We are investigating at the moment," she said. "We've apologised. We clearly 
need to find out what happened and make sure it never, ever happens again."

Sands also expressed her concerns about the government's press regulator and 
regulations, whichthe Spectator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/mar/20/the-spectator-press-regulation>
 andNew Statesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/mar/21/new-statesman-press-regulation>
 have already said they will not join.

She said that there could be "unintended consequences" from the new 
regulations,.

Sands said that perhaps the UK should go back to a simple, clear form of 
punishment such as the use of public stocks "rather than a slightly undefined 
bureaucratic regulation that no one quite understands".

However she conceded that as a lifelong journalist it is difficult to face 
tighter regulation.

"It is quite difficult to be a journalist without a romantic attachment to 
unlicensed press," she said. "In your heart it is ingrained.

She also acknowledged that illegal practices in the press industry cannot go 
unpunished, but that some critics have pure self-interest at heart in wanting 
to shackle the media.

"The press is in a very weak position," she said. "Rogue elements have behaved 
badly and we have to suck it up. [But] the impulse to repress journalism is 
very strong. And lots of people who don't like it do [want to] because it 
irritates them. I'm sorry [but] newspapers are an irritant".

Gordon Smart, editor of the Sun's show business section Bizarre, made an 
impassioned defence of tabloid celebrity journalists arguing that the 
stereotype that they are "drunken idiots who start fights with celebs" is plain 
wrong.

"The attitude [that] we ruin people's lives and live every day to do that is 
not right," he said. "Something that is missed slightly is we do play a big 
part in promoting careers."

He pointed to the overlooked role showbiz journalists have in giving crucial 
profile and ticket sales to fledgling bands and helping aspiring celebrities 
launch their names to the wider public.

Sands added to this, alluding to helping the career of JK Rowling, author of 
the Harry Potter series, by acquiescing to do a profile of "an unheard of 
children's author writing about wizards – a single mum" as a favour.

"There is a time when newspapers can help people," she said.

Smart said that he felt he has always conducted journalism within the legal 
limits of the law, but that the fallout from the hacking scandal, which has 
primarily focused on parent company News International, has been harrowing at 
times.

"I sleep very comfortably and am proud of what I've done," he said. "I've made 
mistakes and I've held my hand up. The Leveson experience has been a stressful 
one, I've seen senior colleagues I've worked with for 10 years arrested. One 
colleague was arrested at 6am in front of his children and [the police] poured 
cereal out on the table looking for documents."

He added that his father, a GP, has referred to the negative impact of the 
phone-hacking debacle on newspapers being akin to the effect of Harold Shipman 
on the doctor profession.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 