
The London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> remained in the 
black for the third consecutive year, reporting a profit of £1.4m in 2014.

The title, which last year boosted circulation from 700,000 to 900,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jan/09/london-evening-standard-london>
 to match the broadcast range of stablemate London Live, reported an 8.7% boost 
in revenues to £62.9m for the year to the end of September.

The free sheet, which is owned by Evgeny Lebedev, saw trading profits fall 
from £2.5m to £1.4m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/30/independent-titles-losses-evgeny-lebedev-enening-standard>
 year-on-year due to planned investment in boosting circulation and building 
the newspaper’s digital capability.

The digital investment, which has included upping the amount of sport coverage 
and a drive to marry the newspaper and onlin output more closely, has seen 
Standard.co.uk’s average daily unique browser numbers surge by 75% year-on-year 
to 443,465.

“The Evening Standard has been at the centre of events – politically, 
economically and culturally. It is a vital part of the working day for 
Londoners,” said editor Sarah Sands. “The investment in digital and 
distribution has been big for us. What is very good is the trajectory, if you 
think about London’s population increasing and commuting. We will have more 
readers over time”.

The newspaper said that it expects to deliver an “improved profit” in its 
current financial year to the end of September, fuelled by a strong performance 
from the Homes & Property section which has boosted revenues by 30% 
year-on-year.

“The Evening Standard is an incredible brand and proof that print is very much 
alive,” said Steve Auckland, group chief executive of parent company ESI Media. 
“Three consecutive profitable years is something to be celebrated and testament 
to the success of the strategy to turn the paper free and revitalise the 
business. The latest investment in our website will help us further develop our 
brand, audiences and revenue”.

In January, the Evening Standard cut more than a dozen editorial roles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/09/london-evening-standard-cut-editorial-roles>
.

The Evening Standard was making losses of as much as £30m as a paid title 
prior to the Lebedevs’ acquisition in 2009.

Earlier this week, stablemate the Independent announced that it had cut its 
annual loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/30/the-independent-trading-losses-evgeny-lebedev>
 from £9.1m to £4.6m for the year to the end of September.

London Live, the local TV channel launched by ESI Media, reported a £12m loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/29/london-live-makes-12m-loss> in 
the year to the end of September.
 