

When the US supreme court ruled in favour of same-sex marriage last year, the 
White House welcomed it withrainbow-coloured lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/jun/27/white-house-lit-up-rainbow-colours-timelapse-gay-marriage-video>
 and many people celebrated by adding a rainbow tint to their Facebook profile.


For the authorities in Saudi Arabia, though, this was cause for alarm rather 
than celebration, alerting them to a previously unnoticed peril in their midst. 
The first casualty was the privately run Talaee Al-Noor school in Riyadh which
happened 
<http://observers.france24.com/en/20150724-saudi-police-rainbows-gay-school> to 
have a rooftop parapet painted with rainbow stripes. According to the kingdom’s 
religious police, the school was fined 100,000 riyals ($26,650) for displaying 
“the emblem of the homosexuals” on its building, one of its administrators was 
jailed and the offending parapet was swiftly repainted to match a blue 
rainbow-free sky.

The case of the gaily painted school shows how progress in one part of the 
world can have adverse effects elsewhere and serves as a reminder that there 
are places where the connection between rainbows andLGBT rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights> is either new or yet to be 
discovered.

In Afghanistan, only a few years ago, there was a craze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/24/gay-pride-afghanistan-rainbow-flags>
 for decorating cars with rainbow stickers – which Chinese factories were only 
too happy to supply. It wasn’t until the Afghan Pajhwok news agency explained 
how they might be misinterpreted that the craze came to a sudden halt.

Look on the internet and you will also find copies of the “Rainbow Qur’an 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=rainbow+quran&sa=N&espv=2&rlz=1C1CHFX_enGB509GB509&biw=1034&bih=536&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&ved=0ahUKEwjA77KNwqrNAhWHDMAKHdMoAysQsAQIKA>
” for sale – an unconsciously gay edition of the holy book with tinted pages of 
every hue and recommended on one website as “an ideal gift for Muslims”.

But there are two sides to this cross-cultural misunderstanding. Western 
visitors to Egypt are often struck by the sight of men – even soldiers in 
uniform – holding hands in the street. In Lebanon, you’ll find straight men who 
spend hours preening themselves and, inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, warriors who wear eye makeup.

It doesn’t mean what you might think it means, but it’s also less surprising 
than it might seem. Gender segregation, which goes to extreme lengths in the 
more conservative Muslim countries, encourages homosocial behaviour, creating a 
situation where men are often more comfortable in the presence of other men and 
where placing a hand on another man’s knee is a sign of friendship, not an 
invitation to sex. They hug and kiss a lot too – andaccording 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20040813191254/http://islamonline.net/fatwa/english/FatwaDisplay.asp?hFatwaID=105368>
 to a former head of Al-Azhar’s fatwa committee in Egypt, there’s nothing wrong 
with same-sex kissing so long as there is “no chance for any temptation”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ecf90f6361402fc0d90766fe8ff330ecefecbf%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ecf90f6361402fc0d90766fe8ff330ecefecbf%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 Moroccan activists participate in a vigil in Rabat to pay tribute to the 
victims of the Orlando gay club shooting. Photograph: Fadel Senna/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Muslim society is still, by and large, strongly patriarchal. Patriarchy, by 
its nature, extols masculinity. There’s no sin in appreciating male beauty, 
either. In the Qur’anic vision of Paradise, there are not only 72 female 
virgins in attendance but handsome young men who serve an endless supply of 
non-alcoholic drinks.

Of course, same-sex relationships don’t always stop at the platonic level. 
Historically, Muslim societies have often acknowledged this – tolerating it to 
some extent even if they disapproved.

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, men who had been persecuted for their 
sexuality in Europe often sought refuge inMorocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco> and, long before same-sex marriage 
was dreamed of in the west, male-on-male partnerships were recognised – and 
marked with a ceremony – in the remote Egyptian oasis of Siwa.

In some Muslim countries, whole towns have become the butt of jokes about the 
supposed homosexuality of their inhabitants. Idlib in Syria is one of them; 
Qazvin in Iran is another. An old joke in Afghanistan is that birds fly over 
Kandahar with one wing held under their tail – as a precaution.

At another level, though, it’s no joking matter. In Iran today, lavat (sodomy) 
is a capital offence and people are frequently executed for it. In Saudi 
Arabia, Sudan, Yemen and Mauritania, sodomy is also punishable by death – 
though no executions have been reported for at least a decade.

Among other Arab countries, the penalty in Algeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, Bahrain, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, 
Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Somalia, Tunisia and Syria is imprisonment – up to 10 
years in the case of Bahrain. In those that have no specific law against 
homosexuality, gay people may still be prosecuted under other laws. In Egypt, 
for example, an old law against “debauchery” is often used.

These laws have a catastrophic effect on the lives of people who are unlucky 
enough to get caught but, despite occasional crackdowns, the authorities don’t, 
on the whole, actively seek out gay people to arrest them. Statistics are 
scarce but the number of arrests is undoubtedly lower than it was during the 
British wave of homophobia in the 1950s. In England in 1952, there were 670 
prosecutions for sodomy, 3,087 for attempted sodomy or indecent assault, and 
1,686 for gross indecency.

The problem with such laws, even if not vigorously enforced, is that they 
signal official disapproval of homosexuality and, coupled with the fulminations 
of religious scholars, legitimise discrimination by individuals at an everyday 
level and may also provide an excuse for action by vigilantes. Years before 
Isis began throwing allegedly gay men off the top of buildings, other groups in 
Iraq wereattacking 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2009/08/17/they-want-us-exterminated/murder-torture-sexual-orientation-and-gender-iraq>
 “un-manly” men – sometimes killing them slowly by injecting glue into the anus.

One reason for the comparatively small number of prosecutions is the official 
fiction that gay people don’t exist to any great extent in Muslim countries; 
homosexuality is regarded primarily as a western phenomenon and large numbers 
of arrests would call that into question. Some of the most brutal Arab regimes 
(Iraq under Saddam Hussein and Syria under the Assads, for example) also showed 
little interest in attacking gay people – probably because they had other 
things to worry about.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba8fa307a541cb540951c89a5f7921a557d20d2f%2F0_213_3500_2226%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba8fa307a541cb540951c89a5f7921a557d20d2f%2F0_213_3500_2226%2F3500.jpg>
 Gay Syrian refugee Subhi Nahas with the US ambassador to the UN, Samantha 
Power, during an informal meeting on the persecution of LGBT people by Isis. 
Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters 
There are, however, periods of moral panic and times when it suits a 
government to blame the country’s ills on those least able to defend 
themselves. This is what the Sisi regime has been doing in Egypt recently – and 
its targeting of sexual minorities is documented in detail by rights activist
Scott Long <https://paper-bird.net/tag/scott-long/> on his blog. Gay people are 
not the only ones, though. The regime is also working on plans to “eradicate” 
atheism.

Arrests in the Arab countries often involve groups of men at parties 
(sometimes described as gay “weddings”) and occasionally athammams 
(bathhouses). Individuals or couples accused of having unlawful sex may be 
arrested for a variety of reasons, including some which initially are unrelated 
to homosexuality. There are also reported cases where people suspected of being 
gay have been arrested by police seeking to elicit bribes or turn the suspects 
into informers. For those caught, the effect on their lives is catastrophic but 
the law is not much of a deterrent and for those who are discreet about their 
sexuality the risk of arrest is small.

For the vast majority who identify as gay, lesbian or transgender the 
attitudes of family and society are a much bigger problem.

The one issue that affects all gay people – everywhere – at some point in 
their lives is coming out. For Muslims this can be an especially difficult 
decision. The pressure to marry is much greater in Muslim countries than in 
most western countries. Remaining single is usually equated with social 
disaster and once young people have completed their studies, organising their 
marriage becomes a priority for the family. The more traditional kinds of 
family take on the task of finding them a partner; arranged marriages are still 
very common.

For those who are not attracted to the opposite sex, this presents a major 
problem. Some manage to postpone the issue by prolonging their studies and/or 
going abroad. Some give in to the pressure and accept a marriage for which they 
are ill-suited. A few of the more fortunate ones find a gay or lesbian partner 
of the opposite sex and enter a pretend marriage. Some bite the bullet and 
decide to come out.

How families respond to a coming out depends on several factors, including 
social class and their level of education. In the more extreme cases, coming 
out results in the person being ostracised by their family or even physically 
attacked. A less harsh reaction is to seek a “cure” – either through religion 
or, in better-off families – through expensive but futile psychiatric treatment.

Blaming it on Islam? Not so fast

Following the Orlando massacre – perpetrated by a man from an Afghan family 
background – it has beennoted 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/06/13/here-are-the-10-countries-where-homosexuality-may-be-punished-by-death-2/>
 that all the countries where the death penalty for sodomy still applies 
justify it on the basis of Islamic law. But to blame this entirely on Islam is 
an oversimplification. In Egypt and Lebanon – predominantly Muslim countries 
with a large Christian population – attitudes towards homosexuality among 
Christians are not very different from those among Muslims.


Also, it’s clear that the prophet Muhammad never specified a punishment for 
homosexuality; it wasn’t until some years after his death that Muslims began 
discussing what a suitable punishment might be.

Muslim condemnations of homosexuality, like those in Christianity, are based 
mainly on the story aboutGod’s punishment of Sodom and Gomorrah 
<https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Genesis+19> which is recounted in 
the Qur’an as well as the Old Testament. In essence, the biblical and Qur’anic 
versions are very similar.

The difference is that over the last 60 years or so many Christians have taken 
a fresh look at the story and concluded that it’s about attempted male rape and 
the ill-treatment of strangers rather than consensual sex between males. So 
far, though, there have been onlya few Muslims 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Homosexuality-Islam-Critical-Reflection-Transgender/dp/1851687017>
 willing to reappraise it.

The key point here is that while the words of scripture are fixed and 
unchangeable they are always subject to human interpretation, and 
interpretations may vary according to time, place and social conditions. This, 
of course, is something that fundamentalists, whether Muslim or Christian, 
prefer to deny.

Although Muslim societies today can be described as generally homophobic, it’s 
a mistake to view homophobia as a self-contained problem: it’s part of a 
syndrome in which the rights of individuals are subsumed in the perceived 
interests of the community and – often – maintaining an “Islamic” ethos. The 
result is that society places a high value on conformity and expressions of 
individuality are frowned upon; there is a strong emphasis on upholding social 
“norms” and keeping up appearances – in public if not necessarily in private. 
The patriarchal system plays a major part in this too, with strongly defined 
roles for men and women. Gay men, especially those who show feminine traits, 
may thus be regarded as challenging the social order.

“Masculine” men who have sex with other men are a slightly different matter. 
Although state law and traditional Islamic law view the penetrator and 
penetrated in anal sex as equally culpable, popular opinions of the penetrator 
tend to be less hostile: he is still a man, doing what men naturally do, even 
if it’s not with a woman. The receptive (or passive) partner, on the other 
hand, is viewed with disgust. He is behaving like a woman and it’s assumed that 
he cannot be doing it for pleasure, so he must be a prostitute.

Meanwhile, lesbian activity goes largely unnoticed – probably because in a 
male-orientated society men don’t pay it much attention or don’t regard it as 
very significant.


How the Middle East views the entire gender spectrum

Traditional ideas about gender roles cause particular problems for transgender 
people, especially in places where segregation of the sexes is more strictly 
enforced and cross-dressing is criminalised.

In 2007, under pressure from Islamist members of parliament, Kuwait amended 
its penal code so that anyone “imitating the opposite sex in any way” could 
face up to a year in jail and/or a fine of 1,000 dinars ($3,500). Within a 
couple of weeks at least14 people 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2012/01/15/they-hunt-us-down-fun/discrimination-and-police-violence-against-transgender-women>
 were thrown into prison for the new offence.

Since there is no mechanism in Kuwaiti law to register a change of sex, even 
trans people who have had surgery are at risk of arrest for cross-dressing.

“Transgender” is a broad term which includes intersex people (whose biological 
sex is unclear or was wrongly assigned at birth), those with gender dysphoria 
(who feel like “a man trapped in a woman’s body”, or vice versa) and may also 
include others who simply get pleasure or satisfaction from cross-dressing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bd1d6147d50e3a7f94ec49f31387943756a5e8%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95bd1d6147d50e3a7f94ec49f31387943756a5e8%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Riot police use a water cannon to disperse LGBT rights activists before a Gay 
Pride parade in central Istanbul, Turkey. Photograph: Reuters 
As it happens, Islam has case histories in this area which make it 
accommodating in some ways, though not in others. Reports from the prophet’s 
lifetime show he wasfamiliar 
<http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic1094745.files/Rowson_The%20Effeminates%20of%20Early%20Medina%20-%201991.pdf>
 with three types of gender diversity beyond the usual male-female binary.

There were eunuchs (castrated men) and mukhannathun (effeminate men) to whom 
the rules of gender segregation did not apply: they were allowed access to the 
women’s quarters, presumably because there was thought to be no likelihood of 
sexual misbehaviour.

Eunuchs often acquired influential positions administering wealthy Muslim 
households. Themukhannathun were less respectable, with a reputation for 
frivolity and loucheness, though they seem to have been broadly tolerated 
during the earliest years ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>. 
They appear not to have been associated with homosexuality during the prophet’s 
lifetime, though later they were.

A third type – the khuntha, who today would be called intersex – proved more 
complex theologically. A statement in the Qur’an that God “created everything 
in pairs <http://www.multimediaquran.com/quran/051/051-049.htm>” forms the 
basis of an Islamic doctrine that everyone is either male of female – there can 
be no halfway house. The question this raised was what to do about children 
born with ambiguous genitalia since, according to the doctrine, they could not 
be sex-neutral.

Islamic jurists resolved it by concluding that such children must have an 
underlying “hidden” sex which was waiting to be discovered. The issue then was 
how to discover it, and the juristsdevised 
<https://controversycourse.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/sanders-ungendered.pdf> 
elaborate rules for doing so. In that connection, a remark attributed to the 
prophet about urine and the differing inheritance rules for men and women 
proved especially helpful. He is reported to have said that inheritance is 
determined by “the place of urination” (mabal in Arabic). Thus the 11th-century 
Hanafi scholar al-Sarakhsi explained that a person who urinated “from themabal 
of men” should be considered male and one who urinated “from themabal of women” 
would be female.

The importance of these rulings today is that they provide an Islamic 
dispensation for sex reassignment surgery – so long as the purpose of the 
surgery is to uncover the person’s “hidden” sex. On that basis, operations have 
been carried out in Sunni Muslim countries, including Saudi Arabia and Egypt.

But although the rulings can easily justify surgery in intersex cases, it’s 
more difficult to apply them to gender dysphoria. Acontroversy 
<http://www.al-bab.com/blog/2016/feb/trans-middle-east-3.htm> in Egypt during 
the 1980s involved a 19-year-old student who had been diagnosed with gender 
dysphoria (or “psychological hermaphroditism” as the doctors called it at the 
time) and underwent male-to-female reassignment surgery.

The case became public when Al-Azhar University refused to readmit her either 
as a male student or a female student. There were also many who found the 
concept of gender dysphoria difficult to grasp and some characterised her as a 
gay man who was trying to game the system.

The affair resulted in a fatwa from Muhammad Tantawi, Egypt’s grand mufti, 
which is still cited in cases across the region today. In line with Islamic 
orthodoxy, Tantawi said surgery was permissible “in order to reveal what was 
hidden of male or female organs” but added that surgery was not permissible “at 
the mere wish to change sex from woman to man, or vice versa”.

Basically, this left the question of surgery for gender dysphoria unresolved, 
allowing both supporters and opponents to interpret the fatwa as they chose. In 
practice, however, obtaining surgery is not necessarily the biggest hurdle – 
those who can afford it often go abroad. Gaining social acceptance and official 
recognition of a change of sex subsequently can be more difficult.

Theologically, Shia Iran seems to have fewer problems with gender dysphoria 
than the Sunni Arab states. There have been repeated claims that Iran now 
performs more reassignment operations than any country other than Thailand.

Although at first sight the Iranian approach to transgender might look 
remarkably liberal, it does have a darker side. One concern is that people may 
be pressurised into operations they do not actually want. There are plenty of 
trans people who simply wish to be accepted as they are – without surgery – and 
the Iranian system doesn’t really provide for that.

Also, the difference between being transgender and gay is not well understood 
in Iran, even within the medical profession, and there have been reports of gay 
men being pressured into surgery as a way of “regularising” their legal 
position and avoiding the risk of execution.


The tireless work of activists

Organised activism for gay rights began to develop in the Middle East in the 
early 2000s. In 2002 a group of Palestinian women formed Aswat (“Voices”) which 
was later joined by another Palestinian group, al-Qaws (“The Rainbow”). Both of 
those are based in Israel but have connections in the Palestinian territories. 
Around 2004 a group of Lebanese activists established Helem – the first LGBT 
organisation to function openly in an Arab country.

These are not the only activist groups. Others have sprung up in various 
places – often disappearing again fairly quickly. There are also Arab LGBT 
websites and blogs which, again, tend to come and go. My Kali, a Jordanian 
magazine which aims “to address homophobia and transphobia and empower the 
youth to defy mainstream gender binaries in the Arab world” has been published 
regularly since 2007.

So far, no one has attempted to hold a Pride parade in an Arab country, though 
there have been parades in the Turkish city of Istanbul since 2003 (not without
opposition 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-security-transgender-idUSKCN0Z50R4>). 
However, there have been activities in Lebanon and elsewhere linked to IDAHOT, 
the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia, which is viewed as 
less likely to arouse hostility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a4c1febdc20045ec3c6614c6c95b7fd45fd8e81%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20being%20gay%20in%20Muslim%20countries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fgay-lgbt-muslim-countries-middle-east%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a4c1febdc20045ec3c6614c6c95b7fd45fd8e81%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Relatives of 26 men who were arrested in a televised raid by police looking 
for gay people at a Cairo public bathhouse celebrate after the court acquitted 
them. Photograph: Amr Nabil/AP 
Non-governmental organisations working in Arab countries often face government 
restrictions, and those working for LGBT rights face the additional problem of 
social stigma. Some groups therefore approach the issue more obliquely, for 
example by focusing on sexual health and HIV prevention, or campaigning for 
“personal rights” in general.

The development of social media has also created space for a more informal 
kind of activism which seems to have proved successful in a couple of instances 
recently.

One came in 2014 when police and a TV channel collaborated in a raid on a 
Cairo bathhouse. Far from winning praise for exposing “the secret behind the 
spreading of Aids in Egypt”, the programme’s presenter wasresoundingly condemned
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/09/egypt-police-raid-cairo-bath-house>
 and later ran intolegal problems 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/mona-iraqi-sentenced-six-months-prison-ramses-bathhouse-case>
.

Last April, the authorities in Amman, Jordan, cancelled a concert by Mashrou’ 
Leila, a popular Lebanese rock band with an openly gay singer, just a few days 
before it was due to take place. Such was the outcry on social media that the 
authorities rescinded their decision 24 hours later – though too late to 
reorganise the concert as originally planned.

On the religious front, prevailing Islamic views of homosexuality have been 
challenged here and there, but not on a scale that is likely to make much 
difference. There are a handful of gay-friendly mosques and a few openly gay 
imams – including Muhsin Hendricks in South Africa, Daayiee Abdullah in the US, 
and Ludovic-Mohamed Zahed, a French-Algerian imam.

These, very noticeably, are in the diaspora rather than the Muslim heartlands, 
but the diaspora is where Islam is forced to confront reality – not in the 
countries where it is protected and privileged.

An illustration of where this can lead came in Britain in 2007 over the Sexual 
Orientation Regulations – a measure mainly intended to prevent businesses from 
discriminating against gay people. The Muslim Council of Britain reluctantly 
found itself on the same side as LGBT rights advocates insupporting 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20071130183128/http://www.mcb.org.uk/media/presstext.php?ann_id=250>
 the new law, since British Muslims are also at risk of discrimination.

These are all small developments, but 15 years ago none of them were 
happening. They haven’t produced tangible results in the sense of persuading 
governments to change their laws, and on that score there’s obviously a very 
long way to go.

But one thing they have done is make it difficult to claim that LGBT Muslims 
don’t exist. They have established a degree of visibility which, though still 
limited, is important because visibility is the first step towards achieving 
rights and without it there is no hope of doing so.


Brian Whitaker is a former Middle East editor of the Guardian. He is the 
author of several books about the region, most recentlyArabs Without God: 
Atheism and Freedom of Belief in the Middle East 
<http://www.al-bab.com/arabswithoutgod/>
 