
Apichatpong Weerasethakul is an artist

A few years ago, a career retrospective of Louise Bourgeois displayed her 
enormous statues of spiders alongside smaller artefacts such as her woven 
figures. Her parents were weavers by trade and the spider is a weaver of webs: 
the whole exhibition uncovered fascinating connections in her work but also 
showed her constantly busying herself with the act of creation. TheApichatpong 
Weerasethakul <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apichatpong-weerasethakul> 
all-nighter did this, too: presenting him as a true artist with a rich and 
varied body of work, whose short films and experimental commissions return to 
and refine the same themes as in his feature films. The event reinforced a 
sense of him as a tireless creator.

Apichatpong Weerasethakul: I won't censor my work for Thailand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/16/apichatpong-weerasethakul-cemetery-of-splendour-cannes>
Weerasethakul is radical and political

Through the course of his work, Weerasethakul’s sly acts of political 
resistance start to feel more pointed. The theme of disease crops up in
Blissfully Yours <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0317171/> and his latest 
masterpiece,Cemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/cemetery-of-splendour-review-apichatpong-weerasethakul>
, which both show ailing bodies struggling to cope in hostile surroundings. 
Weerasethakul shows migrant workers in a playful skit, Mobile Men (2008), and 
prods at his country’s subservience in The Anthem (2006), a rhapsodic short 
film. His response to repression is to exalt powers of the imagination through 
storytelling, where everything is possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa432c6373405248b14a5bc0f9e793fadaa4fcf7b%2F173_2176_3571_2143%2F3571.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20is%20possible%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%20all-nighter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20is%20possible%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%20all-nighter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa432c6373405248b14a5bc0f9e793fadaa4fcf7b%2F173_2176_3571_2143%2F3571.jpg>
 Got it all ... Apichatpong Weerasethakul Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
Everything is possible

In Weerasethakul’s world, which can seem abstruse and wilful to a newcomer, a 
boy can become a tiger, a tattoo can scream, a clearing in a forest can be the 
ghost of a destroyed palace. Mysterious Object at Noon (2000), Haunted Houses 
(2001) and Ghost of Asia (2005) show him working collaboratively, using 
ordinary people to help him tell supernatural narratives, drawing on folk 
legend and pop culture. This aspect of Weerasethakul’s work is also properly 
queer, showing that identity is not decreed by the state or the body, but felt 
and lived.

Weerasethakul can do it all

The variety of the work in the retrospective showed someone with a startling 
talent, who is able to work on all levels, from the unapologetic 
experimentalism of Windows (1999) to the rich, classical black and white of 
Worldly Desires (2005), from the playful (M Hotel, 2011) to the magisterial 
(Cemetery of Splendour). He is deeply attuned to his era, and thrillingly 
modern in his eclecticism, but timeless in his freedom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F697edd751df5f80d4bb59156beb29ecff6b44a44%2F0_34_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20is%20possible%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%20all-nighter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20is%20possible%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20at%20the%20Apichatpong%20Weerasethakul%20all-nighter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Fapichatpong-weerasethakul-thai-director-all-nighter-tate-modern-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F697edd751df5f80d4bb59156beb29ecff6b44a44%2F0_34_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Collaborative ... Mysterious Object at Noon Photograph: Kick the Machine Films 
Cemetery of Splendour is the culmination of his work so far

A retrospective of Weerasethakul’s work shows how he has deepened and 
broadened his themes.Cemetery of Splendour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cemetery-of-splendour> shows him filming his 
country again with more grace than ever; it reveals him at his most politically 
fierce and blurs boundaries of identity, of fact and fiction. His work on 
colour is bolder than ever. At the same time, this can make you fear for what 
the future holds for him as an artist. If the situation in Thailand is too 
hostile for him to carry on working there, if he can’t talk about his people 
and the places that so clearly stimulate his wild imagination, what will he 
turn to next?
 