
One in five UK adults believes they have a significant food allergy. Most 
don’t –the best estimates suggest 
<https://www.food.gov.uk/sites/default/files/research-report-allergy-prevalence-incidence.pdf>
 that 1.5-3.8% of adults and 6-8% of children have food hypersensitivity (FHS) 
<http://www.bsaci.org/resources/food-allergy-and-food-intolerance> which is a 
food allergy or intolerance. But real food allergies can be severe and 
life-threatening, so expert diagnosis and advice are essential.

What is an allergy? 

Allergic reactions involve a response by the immune system: immediate 
responses involve IgE antibodies and occur within minutes of eating or even 
touching the substance you’re allergic to (the allergen).

A delayed response (4-28 hours) is called non-IgE mediated allergy 
<http://www.worldallergy.org/professional/allergic_diseases_center/foodallergy/>
. Allergic symptoms can range from mild to life-threateninganaphylaxis 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/anaphylaxis/basics/definition/con-20014324>
. Common symptoms are sneezing, itchy and runny eyes and nose, wheezing, chest 
tightness, cough, swollen lips, tongue, eyes and face. You may feel sick, get 
stomach pains or vomit.

Early introduction of peanuts and eggs cuts allergy risk, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/early-introduction-peanuts-eggs-cuts-allergy-risk-eat-study>
What is anaphylaxis?

Anaphylaxis is an extreme and severe allergic reaction 
<http://www.anaphylaxis.org.uk/living-with-anaphylaxis/strategies-for-living-with-allergy/>
 affecting the whole body. It usually starts within minutes of exposure; 
common culprits are tree nuts, peanuts, sesame, eggs and shellfish, while drugs 
such as penicillin, wasp and bee stings and latex are also dangerous for some.

If you have a significant reaction to a tiny amount of the allergen, 
react to skin contact with it or have had a severe allergic reaction in the 
past, you should see your GP and request referral to an allergy clinic or 
specialist testing. If you’re at risk, you should carry an auto adrenaline 
injector.There are around 20 deaths per year in the UK  
<http://www.anaphylaxis.eu/aboutallergy_1_2.htm>attributed to anaphylaxis, most 
of which are potentially preventable.

Food allergies and picky eaters: ‘I ran out for a bacon sandwich after the 
awful vegan dinner’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/01/food-allergies-picky-eaters-bacon-sandwich-vegan-dietary-requirements>
What’s the difference between a food allergy and intolerance?


“Intolerances are different to food allergies – they are not caused by the 
immune system and are not life threatening,” says Amena Warner, head of 
clinical services atAllergyUK <https://www.allergyuk.org/>. Intolerances 
usually affect adults, rarely infants, who are more likely to have an allergy. 
The most common symptoms are gastrointestinal – bloating, wind or loose stools.

Other symptoms may be rashes, joint pains and headaches. There are no 
validated tests for food intolerances other than lactose.

How can I find out if I have a food intolerance?

Food intolerances can be diagnosed with the help of a registered dietitian by 
cutting out the suspect food, waiting for symptoms to improve and then 
gradually reintroducing while monitoring the symptoms. A food diary, to 
correlate what you are eating with symptoms, is useful. If cutting out the food 
has no impact, there may be an alternative diagnosis such asirritable bowel 
syndrome 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/irritable-bowel-syndrome/basics/definition/con-20024578>
.Tests for lactose intolerance  
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/lactose-intolerance/pages/diagnosis.aspx>are not 
usually necessary and NHS provision of the tests is often limited to specialist 
centres.

I used to be able to drink pints of milk, but now I can’t. Why is that?

Many people have a partial lactose intolerance and find they can eat a certain 
amount of dairy but get stomach ache and bloating if they overdo it.Lactose 
<http://www.alpro.com/uk/lactose/what-is-lactose> is mostly found in dairy and 
is added to foods such as bread, cakes and dressings. The enzyme lactase breaks 
it down into two sugars that can be easily absorbed from the gut into the 
bloodstream.

In humans, lactase activity declines after the age of 35 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9481112>. If there isn’t enough lactase to 
digest the amount of lactose we eat, it sits in the bowel, fermenting. 
Significant lactase deficiency affects about 5% of the UK population and is 
usually genetic and lifelong. In parts of the world,such as China and Japan 
<http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/187249-overview#>, where adults haven’t 
eaten dairy products for many generations, lactase deficiency rates are much 
higher. Food poisoning or a tummy bug can cause a temporary lactase deficiency 
in anyone, especially in children, and can last up to six weeks.

When can I give my child peanuts?

Sooner rather than later. Israeli kids are 10 times less likely to develop 
peanut allergy <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19000582?dopt=Abstract> than 
comparable (Jewish) kids in the UK. This is almost certainly because many 
Israeli kids eat apeanut-based snack called Bamba 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bamba_(snack)>. A recent study confirms that 
early exposure to peanuts <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmoa1514209>
reduces the risk of developing an allergy in later childhood. Another study for 
the Food Standards Agency last week suggested thatgiving common allergenic 
foods to children from three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/04/early-introduction-peanuts-eggs-cuts-allergy-risk-eat-study>
 may dramatically reduce the risk of allergies to those items in later life.

A child may inherit a predisposition to allergic conditions (eczema, asthma, 
hayfever, specific allergies); a tendency known as atopy. If there is a strong 
family history of atopy,NHS advice is to breastfeed for six months if possible 
and introduce solids gradually 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/pregnancy-and-baby/pages/food-allergies-in-children.aspx>
. If the baby has an allergic reaction to a food, it must be avoided, of course.
 But avoiding potential allergens such as peanuts does not seem to be warranted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/22/could-peanut-studies-point-way-to-cure-for-allergies>
 and may even increase the risk of an allergy developing.

My baby cries incessantly. Could she have a cow’s milk allergy?

“Cow’s milk protein allergy 
<http://cks.nice.org.uk/cows-milk-protein-allergy-in-children#!diagnosissub> 
occurs in up to 5% of infants and toddlers, and usually disappears by the time 
they are around five,” says dietitian Tanya Haffner. “It is unusual for milk 
allergy to last into adulthood. It requires a completely dairy-free diet, which 
should be undertaken with advice from a medical professional.” Lactose 
intolerance in children is usually transient, after a tummy bug or as a 
consequence of an underlying disorder like coeliac disease, according to 
Haffner. But a report in the BMJ 
<http://www.bmj.com/rapid-response/2012/01/22/re-managing-infants-who-cry-excessively-first-few-months-life>
 says there has been a trend to “inappropriate diagnosis” of lactose 
intolerance in unsettled babies, resulting in treatment with lactase or a 
lactose-free formula milk. Mums who are breastfeeding and suspect cow’s milk 
allergy in their unsettled baby can try cutting out milk and dairy products to 
see whether it helps.

I’ve heard you can be treated for allergies by desensitising injections

“Desensitisation to food is not currently available and is only being tested 
and trialled under research conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/22/could-peanut-studies-point-way-to-cure-for-allergies>
 in specific allergy centres,” says Warner. Desensitisation (or immunotherapy) 
involves giving gradually increasing doses of extracts of the allergen as an 
injection or under the tongue. It can only be carried out in clinics with 
resuscitation equipment in case of life threatening anaphylaxis. Thebest 
approach to allergies 
<https://www.allergyuk.org/the-management-of-allergy/management-of-allergies> 
is to identify the culprit, avoid it and carry oral antihistamines for use in 
mild cases and injectable adrenaline for severe cases.Wearing a bracelet  
<https://www.medicalert.org.uk/>with details of your allergy may be helpful if 
you are at risk of anaphylactic shock.
 