
Each March South Australia claims its title as “the festival state”, with the 
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> festival, the 
fringe festival, writers’ week and – this year – the art biennial taking place 
across the city.

The state nickname – seen on number plates and car stickers – translates to 
more than50% 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-10-09/adelaide-crowned-international-festival-city/6839302>
 of all festival ticket sales in Australia; Adelaide festival alone exceeded 
its $2m target three weeks before opening night.

It’s tricky to wrap your head around, particularly if you’re visiting the city 
for the first time – so we’ve pulled out some of the program highlights.


Womadelaide

Adelaide’s festival of world music and dance – Australia’s branch of the 
global series – celebrates its 20th anniversary this year, welcoming artists 
from more than 20 countries. The French DJ and producerSt Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/08/st-germain-album-review-jazz-house>
 – who brings together electronic jazz and world music – is a headline act, 
along with the Bollywood queenAsha Bhosle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/14/asha-bhosle> and the US hip-hop 
trioDe La Soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/02/de-la-soul-shepherds-bush-empire-review>
.

They will be joined by the Grammy-award winning performer and political 
campaigner Angelique Kidjo; Britain’s Mercury prize-nominated and politically 
motivated Asian Dub Foundation; the Israeli-born Ethiopian singer-actor Ester 
Rada; and the Tex-Mex indie band Calexico.

The Planet Talks series will open with a talk from the Canadian science 
broadcaster and environmentalistDavid Suzuki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/24/environmental-activist-david-suzuki-on-tony-abbott-solar-panels-and-his-book>
. He’ll be joined by Indira Naidoo,Amelia Telford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/06/five-questions-to-amelia-telford-this-week-on-indigenousx>
 and Sir Tim Smit to discuss how we can have a sustainable relationship with 
the planet. Leading thinkers will add their perspective over the following two 
days – with talks from the tech entrepreneur Simon Hackett, the former diplomat 
Ross Garnaut, and Guardian Austalia’s Lenore Taylor and First Dog on the Moon.

• Womadelaide <https://www.womadelaide.com.au/> takes place at Adelaide’s 
Botanic Gardens from 11 to 14 March

Adelaide fringe

By the time Adelaide fringe finishes up it will have showcased more than 1,000 
events across theatre, dance, circus, comedy, art and more – making it the 
world’s second largest fringe festival. Led by Portlandia’s Carrie Brownstein, 
punk rock riot grrrl trioSleater-Kinney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/10/sleater-kinney-indie-trio-reunion-interview>
 are in Adelaide after an eight-year hiatus, singing songs from their 2015 album
No Cities to Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/11/no-cities-to-love-sleater-kinney-best-albums-of-2015>
. Circus acts from Barbu Electro to Fuego Carnal are on the bill too – and 
among the many theatre works is Henry Naylor’s nuanced pieceEchoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/12/echoes-at-edinburgh-festival-review-henry-naylor-isis>
, which, following its Edinburgh fringe season, tells the story of a modern-day 
British jihadi bride and two Australian teenagers.

• Adelaide fringe <https://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/> takes place across the 
city from 12 February to 14 March

Adelaide biennial
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Feverything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc29375e86d4ed483f6c13e58e9d9ca1020ea6c14%2F0_73_7091_4258%2F7091.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20happens%20in%20Adelaide%20in%20March%20%E2%80%93%20our%20picks%20of%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Feverything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20happens%20in%20Adelaide%20in%20March%20%E2%80%93%20our%20picks%20of%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Feverything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc29375e86d4ed483f6c13e58e9d9ca1020ea6c14%2F0_73_7091_4258%2F7091.jpg>
 Gareth Sansom exhibits at Art Gallery of South Australia as part of the 
Adelaide biennial: Magic Object in 2016. Photograph: Carl Warner 
The Adelaide biennial, the city’s most ambitious to date, will for the first 
time spill out of theArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery 
of South Australia across five Adelaide venues. The 2016 edition is titled 
Magic Object, taking its inspiration from the Wunderkammer – a German word for 
a cabinet of curiosities. The city’s galleries will showcase everything from 
the talismanic to cultural rituals in photography, painting, performance, 
sculpture and the moving image, featuring work by Glenn Barkley, Fiona 
McMonagle, Gareth Sansom, Danie Mellor, Tarryn Gill and Tom Moore.

• Adelaide biennale of Australian art 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home/Exhibitions/ComingSoon/2016_Adelaide_Biennial_of_Australian_Art>
 takes place across the city from 27 February to 15 May

Adelaide writers’ week

Adelaide’s Pioneer Women’s Memorial Gardens hosts six days of free literary 
conversations, panel discussions and book signings. The US neuroscientist and 
author Lisa Genova is up to discuss her self-published novelStill Alice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/12/still-alice-alzheimers-julianne-moore-alec-baldwin-film>
, which was made into the multi-award-winning 2014 film starring Julianne Moore.

Pacific: The Ocean of the Future by Simon Winchester review – does salvation 
lie in the world’s ‘dominant entity’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/01/pacific-ocean-of-future-simon-winchester-review>
Genova is joined by the French novelist and philosophy teacher Muriel Barbery, 
whose novel The Elegance of the Hedgehog stood atop France’s bestseller list 
for 30 consecutive weeks, plus the British novelist and journalist Simon 
Winchester and the Russian-American journalist, author and activistMasha Gessen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/30/tsarnaev-brothers-book-extract-masha-gessen>
, among others.

• Adelaide writers’ week 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/writers_week/Adelaide_Writers_Week_2016>
 takes place at the Pioneer Women’s Memorial Garden from 27 February to 3 March

Spirit festival

South Australia’s annual celebration of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
culture returns for its eighth iteration with language workshops, a community 
cook-up and a concert with Casey Donavan, the hip-hop act Philly and the 
electro-soul duo Electric Fields.

Among the highlights is Song: The Story of a Girl, a Bird and a Teapot – a 
gritty piece of theatre written and performed by Waiata Telfer in English and 
the Kaurna language. Telfer draws on her experience as a South Australian 
Narrunga-Kaurna woman of Burmese-British descent and tells her story with 
culturally distinctive humour, movement and music.

• Spirit festival <http://www.thespiritfestival.com/> takes place at Tandanya 
and Rymill Park from 16 to 21 February

Adelaide festival

The James Plays trilogy

The centrepiece of this year’s festival, the James Plays – Scottish writer 
Rona Munro’s historical trilogy – is co-produced by the National Theatre of 
Scotland and the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> of 
Great Britain. Over 11 hours and three plays (James I, James II and James II), 
the Australian premiere of the massive work traces three generations of Stewart 
kings who ruled Scotland in the tumultuous 15th century.

Edinburgh festival 2014 review: The James Plays – Munro's trilogy is full of 
topical resonance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/11/edinburgh-festival-review-the-james-plays-rona-munro-sofie-grabol>
At Edinburgh festival, the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/11/edinburgh-festival-review-the-james-plays-rona-munro-sofie-grabol>
’s Michael Billington remarked that while they narrate Scottish history in 
depth, they thrum with “the inescapable solitude of monarchy and the loneliness 
of power” – and are unequivocally plays for today.

• The James Plays 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/theatre/The_James_Plays_Trilogy> run 
at Adelaide Festival Theatre from 27 to 28 February

Unsound

The best in experimental music has been plucked from underground clubs across 
the world to resurface on the Adelaide stage. A series that began inKrakow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/20/unsound-festival-2015-surprises-king-midas-sound-fennesz-krakow>
’s underground cellar bars in 2003 has now been transported to more than five 
cities, and, in its fourth Adelaide edition, dark techno, post-punk, dubstep, 
strings and rave will take the spotlight as the conventional is twisted into 
something more unusual.

The Austrian-based guitarist Fennesz will join the video artist Lillevan to 
create a dark electronic audio-visual experimental piece. The Icelandic composer
Johann Johannsson <http://pitchfork.com/artists/2199-johann-johannsson/> and 
the Zephyr Quartet are also on the bill, along with BristolianVessel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/16/new-band-vessel>, Hot Shotz and 
Paula Temple, who is best known for her minimal electronic sets.

• Unsound Adelaide 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/music/Unsound_Adelaide> takes place at 
Thebarton Theatre from 26 to 27 February

Nelken
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Feverything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4521e9d42f1fdc8d10fe551b76d86eb9a9c069%2F0_239_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Everything%20happens%20in%20Adelaide%20in%20March%20%E2%80%93%20our%20picks%20of%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Feverything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Everything%20happens%20in%20Adelaide%20in%20March%20%E2%80%93%20our%20picks%20of%20the%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Feverything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4521e9d42f1fdc8d10fe551b76d86eb9a9c069%2F0_239_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Tanztheatre Wuppertal’s Nelken will be performed as part of Adelaide festival 
of the arts. Photograph: Oliver Look 
Tanztheatre Wuppertal return to Australia for the first time in 16 years to 
perform Nelken – also known as Carnations – by the German dance director and 
choreographer Pina Bausch. Described as one of themost beautiful images 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/01/pina-bausch-obituary-dance> in 
the dance canon, it is performed on a stage covered in thousands of silk pink 
carnations, and interweaves dance, theatre and humour. The seminal piece, which 
was created the year after her son’s birth, draws on Bausch’s youth in Germany.

• Nelken <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/dance/Nelken> will be 
performed at Adelaide festival centre from 9 to 12 March

Golem

Creepy tales: How theatre company 1927 use RP accents to conjure up horror
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/dec/10/theatre> 
Robert is a binary coder, determined to broaden his horizons at work. So he 
buys a Golem, known in Jewish folklore as a clay creature brought to life, but 
which in this theatre production operates as an obedient man-machine. Suddenly 
life goes from the quotidian knitting-and-Beethoven at home, to one that is 
little more complicated. Staged by the British theatre company 1927, Golem is a 
satirical dystopian fable about the dangers of the digital world and our 
unceasing urge to upgrade ourselves – but it’s also a family piece, combining 
animation, claymation, film, live music and comedy.



• Golem <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/theatre/Golem> is on at 
Adelaide festival centre from 8 to 13 March

Tectonics

The idea the behind Israeli conductor Ilan Volkov’s Tectonics festival is to 
collide two worlds – here, classical and experimental music – with one another, 
like the Earth’s tectonic plates. “For an audience it’s a really powerful 
experience when you’re confronted by very diverse things,” Volkov told the
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/ilan-volkov-classical-musics-super-collider>
.

In 2012 the then-conductor of the Iceland Symphony Orchestra founded the 
festival in Reykjavik, hoping to make the 19th-century ensemble more radical. 
After stints in Glasgow and Tel-Aviv, it made its way to Australia in 2014. In 
its second South Australian iteration, the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra will 
debut new works by the Neck’s Jim O’Rourke and Sydney’s electro-acoustic 
Splinter Orchestra.

The Events – Edinburgh festival 2013 review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/05/the-events-edinburgh-festival-review>
• Tectonics <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/music/Tectonics_Adelaide> 
is on at Adelaide town hall from 4 to 5 March

The Events

Written in response to the violence unleashed by the white supremacist Anders 
Breivik in Norway in 2011, the Scottish dramatistDavid Greig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/davidgreig>’s 2013 play The Events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/05/the-events-edinburgh-festival-review>
 looks at compassion, anger and our compulsion to understand why people do the 
things they do. It tells the story of Claire (played by Catherine McClements), 
the vicar of a small seaside village. After a boy walks into her community 
choir rehearsal and shoots several members dead, she’s eaten up with rage and 
the relentless question: what made him do it?

• The Events <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/theatre/the_events> is 
on at Her Majesty’s Theatre from 25 February to 5 March
 