
Aim

"To provide a quick and effective framework 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2003/en/ukpgaen_20030041_en_1> to extradite a 
person to the country where he is accused or has been convicted of a serious 
crime, provided that this does not breach his fundamental human rights."

Main provisions

• Establishes a two-tier system of extradition and creates a fast-track 
extradition process for member states of the European Union.
• Adopts the European arrest warrant 
<http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/criminal/extradition/fsj_criminal_extradition_en.htm>
 framework, meaning a person sought by a EU country can be extradited even if 
the extradition offence is not an offence in the United Kingdom, provided that 
it carries a prison term of more than 12 months in the issuing member state.
• Abolishes the requirement to provide prima facie evidence for EU countries, 
non-EU signatories to the European convention on extradition and some other 
category 2 countries.
• Creates a single avenue of appeal for all cases. 
• Allows retrospective applications of European arrest warrants, even if the 
alleged offence took place before 1 January 2004, when the act came into force.

Background

In June 2002 the European Union signed 
<http://europa.eu/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/l33167.htm> a framework to simplify 
extradition procedures. The agreement allows member states to seek the 
extradition of people from other EU countries for 32broad categories 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/5051532.stm> of crime such as fraud, 
racism and xenophobia, computer-related crime and sabotage.

The government introduced the extradition bill in November 2002 to recognise 
the EU framework in domestic law.

Britain currently has extradition arrangements with more than 100 countries, 
designated in the 2003 act as beingeither 
<http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/operational-policing/extradition-intro1> 
category 1 or category 2 territories.

Because the European arrest warrant abolishes the requirement to provide prima 
facie evidence, the government decided it could not "ask our closest  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200203/cmselect/cmhaff/475/47504.htm>
and most trusted international partners, countries such as Australia and 
Canada, to meet a higher evidential standard than we require from non–EU 
signatories to the European convention on extradition."

The list of category 2 countries who are not required to provide prima facie 
evidence in support of their request for extradition now numbers 25. These
countries are 
<http://police.homeoffice.gov.uk/operational-policing/extradition-intro1/extrad-part-2>
 (as of 1 January 2007): Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Australia, Azerbaijan, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Canada, Croatia, Georgia, Iceland, Israel, 
Liechtenstein, Macedonia FYR, Moldova, Montenegro, New Zealand, Norway, Russian 
Federation, Serbia, South Africa, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine and the United 
States of America.

Criticism

When he introduced the bill, John Denham, the home office minister, assured 
parliament that "no one will be extradited 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/global/main.jhtml?xml=/global/2003/01/09/nlaw09.xml>
 for conduct that takes place lawfully in this country". However the act does 
abolish the bar ofdual criminality 
<http://www.simmons-simmons.com/index.cfm?fuseaction=blogs.cat&page=2891>. 
Prior to this act coming into force Britain did not extradite someone to face 
trial on charges that were not offences in the United Kingdom.

In a letter to the Times, Frederick Forsyth, John Mortimer and others 
expressed concerns that Britain citizens "could face 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/letters/article832313.ece> 
deportation to foreign jurisdictions which permit prisoners to be detained for 
weeks, months and even longer, with no right to a public hearing or any 
obligation on the prosecution to exhibit evidence against them during this 
time".

Liberty questioned the act's presumption that all EU countries have fair and 
equal systems of justice, and the consequent removal of the UK's ability to 
scrutinise the fairness of extradition to EU member states. They felt the new 
law would increase "the risk of injustice in such cases by removing the power 
of the High Court and Secretary of State to scrutinise the merits in an 
individual case". In addition, they noted that the European convention on 
extradition has been signed by countries with "appalling human rights records 
whose judiciaries in many cases are neither independent nor impartial".

Lord Scott of Foscote, a law lord who once chaired the Lords sub-committee 
that scrutinises EU legislation, alsoexpressed fears 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1362956/Judge-condemns-EU-catch-all-arrest-warrant.html>
 that people arrested under the EU warrant scheme might not receive a fair 
trial in the country to which they were sent.
 