
The US air force has declared an initial squadron of F-35 fighters jets ready 
for combat, marking a major milestone for a program dogged by serious cost 
overruns and delays that have infuriated US lawmakers and governments around 
the world that are buying the planes.

The $379bn program is the Pentagon’s largest weapons project. The air force’s 
decision follows one by the US marines in July 2015 declaring a first squadron 
of the Lockheed Martin planes ready for combat.

The air force plans to buy a total of 1,763 F-35A conventional takeoff and 
landing jets in coming years, and to operate the largest F-35 fleet in the 
world.


Lockheed is building three models of the F-35 Lightning II for the US military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> and 10 countries that have 
ordered them: Britain, Australia, Norway, Italy, Turkey, Denmark, the 
Netherlands, Israel, South Korea and Japan.

But the program, launched in 2001, has been dogged by huge cost overruns and 
technical problems that blew out its budget by nearly 70%. Britainslashed its 
orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/12/defence-aircraft-jet-fighters-budget>
 and the decision of Australia’s Howard government in 2002 to buy the jet 
fighter has beenheavily criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/22/australias-f-35-jet-acquisition-has-hallmarks-of-ponzi-scheme-inquiry-told>
 as hasty and ill-judged as cost increases, delays and doubts about its 
capability have mounted up.


Problems with the fighter jet have included issues with the radar software 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/08/radar-glitch-requires-f-35-fighter-jet-pilots-to-turn-it-off-and-on-again>
 and increased risk of neck injury to lower-weight pilots when they ejected 
from the aircraft. The jet was also reportedly out-performed by theageing F-16 
fighter in a mock dogfight 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3148585/Pentagon-say-reason-expensive-fighter-jet-F35-lost-dogfight-F16-40-years-ago-did-not-special-coat-stealth-paint.html>
.

Radar glitch requires F-35 fighter jet pilots to turn it off and on again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/08/radar-glitch-requires-f-35-fighter-jet-pilots-to-turn-it-off-and-on-again>
Industry and US defence officials have said they are working hard to continue 
driving down the cost of the new warplanes to $85m per plane by 2019, as well 
as the cost of operating them.

“The U.S. Air Force decision to make the 15 F-35As ... combat-ready sends a 
simple and powerful message to America’s friends and foes alike – the F-35 can 
do its mission,” said the program’s chief, Lieutenant General Chris Bogdan.


But Dan Grazier, a fellow of the US-based Project On Government Oversight, 
said the declaration of combat readiness was “nothing but a public relations 
stunt”. He added that it would not be possible to know if the F-35 jets were 
ready for combat until after initial operational testing.

Todd Harrison, a defence analyst at the Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, said: “The program is not doing everything they wanted it to do ... 
But they’re at a point now where it is stabilising and so it is progress.”

What are these so-called minor technical issues with this extremely cool 
looking F-35 jet? | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/mar/07/what-are-these-so-called-minor-technical-issues-with-this-extremely-cool-looking-jet>
Air Force General Herbert Carlisle, commander of Air Combat Command, said work 
to upgrade the jet would continue in areas such as software, making the 
displays more intuitive and boosting the ability to share information between 
aircraft.


The aircraft could provide basic air support at this point but did not have 
everything the final version would, Carlisle said, adding that he would try to 
get the jets deployed to Europe and the Pacific within 18 months.

The Pentagon’s F-35 program office said it remained in negotiations with 
Lockheed over long-delayed contracts for the next two batches of F-35 jets – 
deals worth about $15bn.


“We’re seeking a fair deal for the F-35 enterprise and industry,” said F-35 
program spokesman Joe DellaVedova.

Senator John McCain, the Republican chairman of the armed services committee, 
said he welcomed the announcement but made clear he intended to keep a close 
eye on the hugely expensive program.


“The Senate Armed Services Committee will continue to exercise rigorous 
oversight of the Joint Strike Fighter program’s long-delayed system development 
and demonstration phase as well as the start of the operational test and 
evaluation phase,” McCain said.

With Reuters
 