
Nikolai Astrup (1880-1928) was the son of Christian Astrup, the Lutheran 
pastor of Alhus, a tiny community on the shores of beautiful Lake Jolster in 
western Norway. His childhood was marred by constant illness – the old 
parsonage was unhealthily damp – and by the religious strictness of his 
upbringing. Yet as an adult, his childhood memories were vivid and precious to 
him, informing much of his work.

One memory was particularly painful: of being prevented by his father from 
joining in the celebrations on Norway’s Midsummer Eve (23rd June). These 
consisted of enormous bonfires, lit at midnight, around which the local 
community let their hair down, dancing, drinking and courting. Christian knew a 
pagan survival when he saw it – and despite the attempted ‘christianisation’ of 
the festival, relating it to the feast of St John, there was more than a hint 
of fertility ritual to the bacchic goings-on. Nikolai and another child, a 
young girl from a neighbouring farm, were only allowed to stand and watch. 
Astrup made up for it later – it became one of his favourite motifs. He painted 
many versions; and produced innovative prints of the subject also. They are 
amongst his most famous and popular works in his native Norway, and there are 
ten of them in thecurrent exhibition at Dulwich Picture Gallery 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/2016/february/painting-norway-nikolai-astrup-%281880-1928%29/>
.

In this, the biggest and most elaborate version of the motif that he painted, 
the main bonfire is answered by two others on the far mountains, each reflected 
in the lake below. Astrup has recorded how the geography has affected the great 
billows of smoke – on the distant fires, the smoke streams upward and outward, 
while from the main bonfire, it spills down and spreads out along the lake. 
Couples in their Sunday best dance in the foreground to the music of the old 
fiddler in the centre of the picture. He is playing the local Hardanger fiddle, 
a marvellous instrument with extra strings that reverberate to provide an 
echoing counterpoint to the folk melody. In the distance a group of villagers 
have gathered together to watch; one of the men strikes a dramatic pose, and 
the light from the fire projects a disturbing troll-like shadow against the 
rock behind. The woman in the right foreground seems left out and melancholy – 
like Astrup’s childhood self.


And at the centre is the fire – a marvellous explosion of oranges, blues and 
greens, laid on thickly with the brush, a virtuoso display of painterly 
brilliance, burning itself on the memory and making the centuries drop away, 
way, way beyond Astrup’s childhood to a pagan, Viking past.

So this month’s challenge, as part of The A to Z of Reader’s Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/01/a-to-z-of-readers-art-new-project-share-your-art>
, is to create artworks that show your visions of fire.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

 * Nikolai Astrup: Painting Norway 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/2016/february/painting-norway-nikolai-astrup-(1880-1928)/>
 is on show at the Dulwich Picture Gallery between 5 Feb 2016 and 15 May 2016
 