
Social media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> isn't just for 
photos and status updates – it can also be used to help sixth-formers make an 
informed decision about where to go to university.

Many universities now have a greater focus on marketing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/18/universities-turn-to-ad-man>
, due toincreased competition 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140402142426/http://www.oft.gov.uk/OFTwork/markets-work/othermarketswork/higher-education-cfi/>
 in the higher education sector. So prospective students are cutting through 
the publicity by using social media alongside official guides.

Social media can also be particularly helpful for international students, who 
made up 18% of the UK student population in 2012-13 
<https://www.hesa.ac.uk/pr199>, and those who are unable to visit a university. 

If you contact people through sites like Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and Twitter you can get 
unfiltered views on a university or course, says Maria Suessmilch, who has just 
started a masters in neuroscience at King's College London. "It's a great way 
of researching courses and getting an honest opinion about them so I'd 
definitely recommend it," she says.

What sites are best and how should sixth-formers use them?

Facebook is one of the most popular sites, with 13% of students surveyed by the
National Centre for Universities and Business 
<http://www.ncub.co.uk/reports/sei14-2.html> this year saying they used it to 
choose a course.

Facebook is a useful way of getting honest opinions, says Loretta Colees, a 
third year student studying zoology at Bangor University.

"I joined the Facebook groups of courses I was hoping to apply for and could 
see what the course content might be like and what people really thought of the 
lectures."

Twitter is another good source of information and a way to ask questions not 
answered elsewhere. "Twitter is great for getting answers to any niggling 
questions you have, for clearing up any confusion with the application process 
and for getting quick snapshots of university life," says Sabrina Francis, 
social media officer at City University London.

University websites often provide information on the hashtags their students 
use, says Emily Dring, a fourth year student studying French at Oxford 
University. "At my university we have the hashtag#oxtweets 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/oxtweets>, where students tweet about their lives 
at Oxford."

Other social media channels prospective students can use include Instagram, 
Pinterest andYouTube <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube>. 
"Instagram was a hit," says Suessmilch. "I found a girl who posted a picture of 
her fresher's goodie bag, saying she had just started the course I was 
interested in.

"I left her a comment saying I would love to hear what she thought of the 
course. We wrote a few emails and what she said helped me to make a choice 
about whether to apply there."

Other useful websites include the Ucas website <http://www.ucas.com/>, WhatUni 
<http://www.whatuni.com/>, UniStats <http://unistats.direct.gov.uk/> and the 
Student Room <http://www.thestudentroom.co.uk/>. 

The Guardian University Guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityguide> ranks every course at 
UK universities, so you can see which institutions excel in which subject areas.

Forums and student blogs give sixth-formers the chance to find out what 
current students think. "Peer-to-peer forums like the Student Room are good for 
speaking to current students and getting their view on an institution," says 
Francis.

They also enable you to get answers to questions you don't feel like you can 
ask universities. "Students can ask questions that they wouldn't always feel 
comfortable asking the university directly," says David Roylance, head of 
undergraduate recruitment at Cardiff University.

And what should prospective students avoid doing?

"Avoid unofficial looking pages that are trying to sell you something, usually 
tickets to club nights, and don't give your details out publicly," says Francis.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> should remember that 
not all sites or social media platforms are verified or moderated, says 
Roylance. "Peer-led sites use anecdotal evidence and offer comparisons based on 
personal experiences – so remember opinions are subjective," he says.

"Students should always look for verified accounts on Twitter and Facebook and 
use the institution's website for the most accurate, up-to-date information 
relating to courses and fees."

How I found my course
 Photograph: Sam Atkins 
Emily Dring, 23, is going into her fourth year studying French at Oxford 
University

"I used social media because I wanted a more personal take on the university 
experience and I wanted to hear individual accounts.

"I spent a lot of time researching online – there's so much information. I 
started with YouTube and would type things into search that were related to 
what I wanted to find out about. I also used the Student Room, which has 
threads related to different colleges, campuses, and to accommodation.

"Watch out because in chat forums people can be anonymous and aren't always 
who they say they are. Often the people who go on those platforms either really 
loved their experience or really hated it, so take things they say with a pinch 
of salt.

"It's useful to talk to people who are already at university and you can use 
social media to get in touch. I'd say you should take on board family and 
friends' opinions, but the people who are already there are the people who know 
the most."

• Did you use social media to find out more about a university? Do you think 
it gave you a better understanding of what a place was like? Share any tips in 
the comment section below.
 