
How long does it take to get your product to market? Months, years maybe, of 
discussions, planning, development and testing. What if you could trim that 
down to just a few days?

Welcome to the world of startup sprints. To the uninitiated, this is the 
practice championed by the like of GV (formerlyGoogle Ventures 
<http://www.gv.com/sprint/>) of identifying a problem, developing a solution 
and testing it with real customers over five days.

Usually the domain of tech startups, sprints are in keeping with the Silicon 
Valley mantra: “fail fast, fail often, learn quickly”. Don’t worry about the 
prototype being perfect; once it’s out there for your customers to use, you’ll 
quickly see what works and what doesn’t.

“We have a little bit longer than a five-day sprint. We do weekly sprint 
planning but I think we have a deployment every two weeks,” says Charlotte 
Pearce, founder of hand-written direct marketing companyInkpact. 
<https://inkpact.com> “We do have [the fail fast] mentality and that is 
something that we use: quick turnaround, you test it, you measure it, and it’s 
ok if it didn’t work.”
 Charlotte Pearce, founder of hand-written direct marketing company Inkpact 
<https://inkpact.com/>, regular uses sprints to develop their products. 
Photograph: Inkpact 
Gearing up for Christmas, Pearce explains that Inkpact is reflecting on the 
lessons learnt from a test carried out during last year’s festive season. “We 
wanted to develop a very easy option for customers to send hand-written 
Christmas cards. It wasn’t part of our product development at the time, so we 
developed a site to test whether people wanted them.

“We built it in about 10 days. It was an e-commerce site so you had to pay on 
there and upload a database of your contacts. Parts of it worked – we knew that 
people did want personalised Christmas cards – and parts of it didn’t; we knew 
[the site] wasn’t enough and we didn’t have enough information.

“In theory we failed, but we did get loads of learning. We had to test it 
lean, we had to make mistakes, but we learned a lot about what the customer 
wanted.”

For a startup or SME with limited development funding, the sprint model is 
relatively inexpensive, and with fewer people in the chain of command, it’s 
easier to sign off on new ideas, interact with customers, and implement changes 
efficiently. In its younger days Facebook got ahead of the competition by 
pushing updates out quickly and worrying about glitches afterwards, however now,
Zuckerberg has said 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/mattlynley/facebooks-move-fast-break-things-era-is-over?utm_term=.qq7G0EjP0#.rcMq5N4b5>
, the company is too big to use that approach.

Alex Hanson-Smith, who co-founded his mobile recruitment startup inploi.me 
<https://www.inploi.me> in 2015 to connect employers in the hospitality 
industry with job seekers, says testing in this way has been key to developing 
the company’s products. “We are constantly building new evolutions of the 
product and we use rapid prototyping to do that,” he explains. “How can we make 
this experience better? What can we do to make it easier to build a profile, or 
provide employers with more information about job seekers? We build really 
quickly and then we test it on real users. That allows you to mitigate failing 
in a real life situation, you’re failing in a closed environment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Ffailing-forward-the-lower-risk-approach-to-innovating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51612a8c765a07326452f4f16ed34450e97e7568%2F0_0_1204_1058%2F1204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Failing%20forward%3A%20the%20low(er)%20risk%20approach%20to%20innovating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Ffailing-forward-the-lower-risk-approach-to-innovating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Failing%20forward%3A%20the%20low%28er%29%20risk%20approach%20to%20innovating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Ffailing-forward-the-lower-risk-approach-to-innovating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51612a8c765a07326452f4f16ed34450e97e7568%2F0_0_1204_1058%2F1204.jpg>
 Alex Hanson-Smith, co-founder of recruitment startupinploi.me 
<https://www.inploi.me/>. Photograph: inploi.me 
inploi embraces taking risks, which Hanson-Smith believes is key to success as 
a startup, but the length of his “sprints” depend on whatever it is he’s 
testing. A simple tweak could take a matter of hours, “but if we’re testing an 
on-boarding flow or something like that, we’ll probably test it for a good few 
weeks because you need to get a very varied group of people.”

Part of failing fast is creating prototypes that are fairly rudimentary to 
test the idea on customers. When trialling an idea for software to allow small 
businesses to update their websites effectively via an automated artificial 
intelligence system, Chris John, director at website providerSmart Little Web 
<http://www.smartlittleweb.com/>, built a simple landing page asking interested 
parties to enter an email address.

Building the kind of algorithmic solution he had in mind – something that 
would scrape data and redesign a website that was both highly functional and 
looked great – would have taken about a year. As it turns out, no one was 
interested. “We could have done it the old way – built a complete magic system 
that did all this stuff, but even giving it away for free we couldn’t get 
anything, so that would have been a complete waste of time,” he says.

Spotting an unsuccessful project and knowing when to cut your losses is one of 
the crucial lessons for a startup, Hanson-Smith says. “Time is your most 
valuable resource. Being decisive has proved to be really helpful for us. In 
the early days we were working with [a developer] who wasn’t really right for 
our company. It became very clear early on that it wasn’t working as well as it 
should, so we were very decisive. Even though it meant basically we lost two 
months of time developing, we said ‘let’s start again’.

“You have to make a decision and stick to it. And if it is wrong, it’s how 
pick yourself up after that and say ‘ok why was that the wrong decision?’ 
That’s where you’re learning.”

The lessons learned in sprints often go beyond whatever it is that’s being 
tested. John says rapid testing can show how effective a marketing strategy is, 
for example, or let you test different advertising platforms. “Beyond the 
actual product, there’s all the stuff that sits around it. Have you optimised 
your Facebook adverts so they don’t cost you too much? Have you tried 
alternative marketing tactics? Each time you learn something,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Ffailing-forward-the-lower-risk-approach-to-innovating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d6635e0b69660ad7b6c59ff7c693285f9b51e5b%2F0_171_1200_1029%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Failing%20forward%3A%20the%20low(er)%20risk%20approach%20to%20innovating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Ffailing-forward-the-lower-risk-approach-to-innovating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Failing%20forward%3A%20the%20low%28er%29%20risk%20approach%20to%20innovating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Ffailing-forward-the-lower-risk-approach-to-innovating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d6635e0b69660ad7b6c59ff7c693285f9b51e5b%2F0_171_1200_1029%2F1200.jpg>
 Chris John, director at website providerSmart Little Web 
<http://www.smartlittleweb.com/>. Photograph: Smart Little Web 
Of course, you might not get the clear answer you’d hoped for. “When you’re 
building something, there are often times when literally 50% of people say they 
love it, and 50% hate it,” Hanson-Smith says. “And it’s then really important 
and sometimes painstaking to dig down into what they like about it and don’t 
like about it.”

However helpful the sprint model and fail fast mantra can be to growth, the 
Silicon Valley mentality should be embraced with a pinch of salt. Pearce says 
that while sprint tests have helped her company to grow, it’s important to keep 
perspective on the bigger picture. She believes that focusing solely on sprints 
can be discouraging to team members who prefer to take ownership of projects, 
and it means other things that are crucial to running a successful business, 
like team culture, get ignored.

“[It] can be detrimental if it’s not managed and not reflected on in the right 
way. I think as a company it’s just making sure you’ve got a balance of 
everything,” she says. “ ‘Failure’ is quite a negative word ... But I think the 
underlying assumptions of learning from everything you do should always be 
there.”

For Hanson-Smith, the sprint model and “failing fast” is inevitable as a 
startup. “The very nature of a startup is you’re trying to push the boundaries, 
and the incumbent risks require you to try stuff that no-one else has tried 
before,” he says. “A lot of the time that results in failure, and it’s how you 
deal with those failures that defines you as an organisation.”

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Hiscox 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/>, sponsor of the Adventures in Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/adventures-in-business>
 hub on the Guardian Small Business Network.
 