
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> has given €150,000 to 
three UK organisations working on fact-checking projects to help journalists 
and the public avoid falling for fake stories and bogus claims.

The funding announcement comes amid heated debate about the role of companies 
such as Facebook and Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
 in spreading fake stories that some claim influenced theresults of the US 
election <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>. 

The money is part of a €24m (£20.5m) round of funding from Google’s digital 
news initiative, which backs innovative projects in news across Europe.

UK fact-checking charity Full Fact is being given €50,000 to work on an 
automated tool aimed primarily at journalists, called Factchecking Automation 
and Claim Tracking System (Facts).

Full Fact says the system will be “the first fully automated fact-checking 
tool” which will “recognise claims in political debates and online media and 
immediately alert journalists if they are inaccurate”.

Will Moy, Full Fact’s director, said growing unease around fake news was 
creating more interest in ways to verify information.

“We have been going six years,” he said. “It used to be the case that you had 
to explain why there was harm done by bad information. People now accept that 
bad information can be damaging.”

Facebook’s failure: did fake news and polarized politics get Trump elected?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
Another €50,000 is being given to a project called Factmata, developed at 
University College London and University of Sheffield.

In its pitch to Google, Factmata’s founder, Dhruv Ghulati, said it would use 
machine intelligence “to empower people to question the digital content they 
read on a daily basis, and not take anything for granted”.

He adds: “By putting advanced fact-checking tools in the hands of the people, 
we want to make fact checking fun, engaging, and empowering.”

Scottish investigative news site the Ferret is also getting a €50,000 grant, 
which will be used to develop a more traditional approach to fact checking to 
meet the “urgent need for a respected fact-checking organisation inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> in light of the many falsehoods and 
distortions prevalent in the run-up to the vote on Britain’s future in Europe”.

The chair of the Ferret, Rob Edwards, said: “This grant will help the Ferret 
bring its trademark independence and transparent analysis to the debate over 
Brexit and Scotland’s future place in the world.”

The digital news initiative grants are the second set of handouts from 
Google’s €150m fund. Another fact-checking project in Italy was also funded, 
receiving €47,000.

Though most of the debate around fake news has focused on the role of 
Facebook, Google has also been criticised. Following the US election, people 
searching for “final election results” were presented with a false story 
claiming Donald Trump received more votes than Hillary Clinton at the top of 
the news results 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/14/googles-top-news-link-for-final-election-results-goes-to-a-fake-news-site-with-false-numbers/>
.
 