
The eurozone crisis never went away; it was just overlooked in the Brexit 
upheaval. But you can rely on Italy to triggerthoughts of catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/italy-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered>
 and, sure enough, the arrival of this weekend’s referendum on constitutional 
reform has spooked markets.

The yield on 10-year Italian debt has doubled from 1% to 2% since August, 
outpacing the rise in yields on most other eurozone sovereign debt. The euro 
has even weakened against the supposedly down-and-out pound. A euro cost 90p a 
month ago but now fetches 84p.

In the grand scheme, these are not enormous moves. Back in 2011-12, when the 
Greek debt crisis was in full swing, Italian 10-year yields hit 7%; and the 
euro is still 10% stronger against sterling since the UK referendum. But 
Italian risks – for the short, medium and long-term – are real.

The immediate danger will arrive if PM Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> loses the referendum and then 
honours his pledge to resign. His departure would make it harder to resolve a 
crisis in the Italian banking system that should have been addressed half a 
decade ago and is now intense. It even got a special mention in the Bank of 
England’s UK financial stability report this week. The detail is extraordinary: 
bad, or non-performing, loans in Italy exceed the total provision for losses 
and the banks’ core capital.

The only solid cure is a combination of fresh capital and the infliction of 
financial pain on some classes of bondholders. The latter is politically 
explosive – because so many bank bonds are held by pensioners – but demanded by 
new eurozone restrictions on state-sponsored bailouts. As for injections of 
capital, the private sector will not volunteer if the country is without a 
prime minister for the next two months.

The medium-term risk is that the vacuum is filled by the anti-euro Five Star 
Movement led by comedian Beppe Grillo, currently riding high in the polls in 
the run-up to a general election that must be held by February 2018. Note, too, 
that planned electoral changes inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>
 will give the largest party extra parliamentary clout in future. The overhaul 
is intended to prevent so many wobbly coalitions. But if Five Star is the first 
beneficiary, the eurozone will have a proper political crisis on its hands.

With its deal on barrel quotas, Opec is back on the radar – for now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/30/with-its-deal-on-barrel-quotas-opec-is-back-on-the-radar-for-now>
The long-term risk remains the same: Italy is stuck in an economic rut. Growth 
has improved slightly with Renzi’s market-friendly reforms – 0.8% is predicted 
for this year – but the Italian economy is still basically sluggish. Meanwhile, 
public debt is 130% of GDP and unemployment stands at 11.6%, above the eurozone 
average of 9.8%. The employment rate is just 57.2%; the UK’s is 74.4%.

It is too simple to say defeat for Renzi in the referendum will unleash a 
fresh eurozone crisis because one should never underestimate the power of the 
European Central Bank to buy time by suppressing bond yields. But the ECB’s 
powers are not unlimited and the quantitative easing programme cannot continue 
indefinitely.

The Bank of England’s stability report summed up the overall picture: “Risks 
associated with the euro area remain elevated.” You bet. And the Italian risks 
look acute.

Glencore’s dance with debt has hurt its chief
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ef33406d2c9f1a77e38c59db16f57e4d0a6dd48%2F0_2_3044_1826%2F3044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fallout%20from%20Italy's%20referendum%20will%20be%20both%20financial%20and%20political&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fallout%20from%20Italy%27s%20referendum%20will%20be%20both%20financial%20and%20political&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ef33406d2c9f1a77e38c59db16f57e4d0a6dd48%2F0_2_3044_1826%2F3044.jpg>
 Glencore CEO Ivan Glasenberg, who has dipped into his pocket to help the 
ailing firm. Photograph: Arnd Wiegmann/Reuters 
Ivan Glasenberg has hauled Glencore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> out of its debt hole, a task 
that looked daunting 18 months ago. Borrowings have been reduced from $30bn to 
$17.5bn by selling $6bn of assets, cutting expenditure and raising $2.5bn of 
fresh capital at 125p a share. Glasenberg, the chief executive, dipped into his 
back pocket to contribute $211m to the fundraising and has made a handsome 
turn. The share price is now 283p. It has been an impressive act of escapology, 
with dividends set to resume next year.

But Glasenberg’s status as the all-seeing sage of the mining world is surely 
ruined. Glencore’s dance with debt was absurdly aggressive in an industry where 
the next big downturn is never far away. The company has recovered through its 
own efforts but also through good fortune, in the form of a rapid rebound in 
the prices of copper, coal and zinc. Those commodities will have to keep 
humming along if Glencore is ever to return to its 2011 flotation price of 
530p, which is a truer benchmark for success. Only an 87% improvement in share 
price to go, then.

Asos’s spirit of openness has its limits
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ec0486d600cb86c969a1ae518b458fcec24d892%2F0_60_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fallout%20from%20Italy's%20referendum%20will%20be%20both%20financial%20and%20political&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fallout%20from%20Italy%27s%20referendum%20will%20be%20both%20financial%20and%20political&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ec0486d600cb86c969a1ae518b458fcec24d892%2F0_60_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Protesters stage a ‘catwalk of shame’ demonstration outside the Asos 
headquarters in London about the conditions in the firm’s Barnsley warehouse. 
Photograph: Hannah McKay/PA 
“We have nothing to hide and much to be proud of,” declared Nick Beighton, 
chief executive of online clothing retailerAsos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos>, in October when working conditions 
in the firm’s warehouse in Barnsley came under the spotlight. The spirit of 
openness has its limits, however. Beighton initially welcomed our reporter to 
Asos’s annual shareholder meeting on Thursday but then changed his mind and 
turfed him out before proceedings started.

Note to Beighton: if you want promote the idea that your working conditions 
are splendid, don’t adopt a bunker mentality.
 