
Just outside of Philadelphia’s 30th Street station, Amtrak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> Northeast Regional train 188 
careened off the tracks on Tuesday night after speeding through a bend at more 
than 100mph. Eight people were killed in the crash and more than 200 injured.


JAMES MARSHALL GAINES III

James Marshall Gaines III was a 48-year-old Associated Press journalist 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/news/amtrak-crash-ap-staffer-navy-midshipman-killed>
 on his way home to Plainsboro, New Jersey, from meetings in Washington DC 
while aboard train 188, the Associated Press reported.

Gaines leaves behind a 16-year-old son, Oliver, an 11-year-old daughter, 
Anushka, and his wife Jacqueline.

Amtrak crash: safety mechanism to slow speeding trains was close to operational
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/amtrak-crash-positive-train-control-nearly-operational>
Gaines worked as a staffer with the news agency for 17 years, his colleagues 
fondly referring to him as a “geek’s geek”, in the wire’s announcement of his 
death. In 2012, Gaines won the Geek of the Month award for his “tireless 
dedication and contagious passion”. He worked as a video architect for the 
agency.

“[Gaines] leaves behind a legacy of professionalism and critical 
accomplishment, kindness and humor,” AP president and CEO Gary Pruitt told 
employees in an email, theAP reported 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/news/amtrak-crash-ap-staffer-navy-midshipman-killed>
. “He will be missed.”

JUSTIN ZEMSER

Justin Zemser, 20, was a US naval academy midshipman living in Annapolis, 
Maryland, when he was killed in the crash. The recruit from Far Rockaway, New 
York, was the valedictorian of his high school, described as “only a child” by 
his parents.

“He was a loving son, nephew and cousin, who was very community minded,” his 
parents said in a statement toYeshiva World News 
<http://www.theyeshivaworld.com/news/headlines-breaking-stories/311440/statement-by-the-parents-of-justin-zemser-jewish-victim-killed-in-amtrak-train-crash.html#sthash.KwzZkEO1.dpuf>
. “This tragedy has shocked us in the worst way and we wish to spend this time 
grieving with our close family and friends.”

Zemser was on his way home to Far Rockaway on leave when he was killed. His 
funeral on Friday included full military honors and was attended by 150 
classmates.

RACHEL JACOBS
 Rachel Jacobs Photograph: AP 
Rachel Jacobs, 39, was the chief executive of ApprenNet 
<http://info.apprennet.com/>, an education company that focused on addressing a 
shortage of highly skilled workers using technology and apprentice-style 
learning.

Jacobs’s family described her as a “wonderful” mother, daughter, sister and 
wife in a statement to theWashington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/missing-ceo-in-amtrak-crash-is-a-dynamo-and-mother-of-2-year-old/2015/05/13/697c9264-f9a7-11e4-a13c-193b1241d51a_story.html>
.

“She was devoted to her family, her community and the pursuit of social 
justice. We cannot imagine life without her,” her family said in astatement to 
the Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/missing-ceo-in-amtrak-crash-is-a-dynamo-and-mother-of-2-year-old/2015/05/13/697c9264-f9a7-11e4-a13c-193b1241d51a_story.html>
.

Jacobs is the daughter of the former Michigan senator Gilda Jacobs. She grew 
up in the Detroit suburb of Huntington Woods, according to theJewish 
Telegraphic Agency 
<http://www.jta.org/2015/05/13/news-opinion/united-states/auto-draft-89>. She 
leaves behind a husband and two-year-old son in New York City.

DERRICK GRIFFITH

Derrick Griffith, 42, was dean of student affairs and enrollment management 
for Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn, New York. He was confirmed dead Wednesday 
night by a college spokeswoman.

The school called Griffith 
<https://www1.cuny.edu/mu/forum/2015/05/14/medgar-evers-college-mourns-the-tragic-loss-of-dean-derrick-griffith/>
 a “pillar of the community” and a “champion for the downtrodden”. He had 
worked in education for 10 years, the school said, including as a high school 
principal and founder of CUNY Preparatory transitional high school. He also 
served as the executive director of Groundwork Inc, a youth organization meant 
to empower young people living in high-poverty areas.

“Even as he was encouraging young people to reach for greater heights for 
themselves, he was working to attain his own educational goals,” the school 
said. One month ago, he Griffith was granted a PhD of of philosophy in urban 
education by the City University of New York.

ROBERT GILDERSLEEVE

Robert Gildersleeve was a Baltimore-based 45-year-old vice-president of 
Ecolab’s corporate accounts, a water sanitation company. He was a married 
father of two children,a 16-year-old daughter and a 13-year-old son 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/bs-md-amtrak-victim-20150514-story.html#page=1>
.

“Bob was an exceptional leader and was instrumental to our success,” said 
Ecolab CEO Doug Baker in a statement 
<http://www.ecolab.com/news/ecolab-statement-regarding-colleague-bob-gildersleeve/>
. “We will greatly miss him, and our thoughts go out to his beloved family 
members and friends.” Neighbors described Gildersleeve as an active man who 
often spent time working on his house,the Baltimore Sun reported 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/bs-md-amtrak-victim-20150514-story.html#page=1>
.

Gildersleeve worked for Ecolab for 22 years, and also had an office in St 
Paul, Minnesota, the company spokesman toldTwinCities.com 
<http://www.twincities.com/localnews/ci_28111513/ecolab-vice-president-missing-amtrak-crash-pennsylvania>
. Gildersleeve was the last victim to be found from the wreckage of train 188. 
His family had traveled to Philadelphia to look for him, before he was found by 
authorities.

ABID GILANI

Abid Gilani was a 55-year-old Wells Fargo executive who split his time between 
Washington DC and New York. Originally from Canada, the executive previously 
worked for Marriott and Scotia Capital at Scotiabank,according to CBC 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/abid-gilani-executive-from-canada-killed-in-amtrak-crash-1.3073685>
.

“It is with great sadness that Wells Fargo confirms that Abid Gilani, a valued 
member of our commercial real estate division, has passed away,” Elise 
Wilkinson said in a statementemailed to CBC 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/abid-gilani-executive-from-canada-killed-in-amtrak-crash-1.3073685>
.

Gilani was a married father of two, CBC reported 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/abid-gilani-executive-from-canada-killed-in-amtrak-crash-1.3073685>
 according to his wife.

“He’ll be sorely missed ... he was really a wonderful person,” she said. The 
Gilanis also spent time in San Francisco and Rockville, Maryland, according to 
the Associated Press.

LAURA FINAMORE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Ffamilies-eight-amtrak-crash-victims-mourn-loved-ones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49df5fc86e108ff02918bac55d5574f296bfe790%2F0_20_640_513%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20of%20eight%20Amtrak%20crash%20victims%20mourn%20loved%20ones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Ffamilies-eight-amtrak-crash-victims-mourn-loved-ones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20of%20eight%20Amtrak%20crash%20victims%20mourn%20loved%20ones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F15%2Ffamilies-eight-amtrak-crash-victims-mourn-loved-ones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49df5fc86e108ff02918bac55d5574f296bfe790%2F0_20_640_513%2F640.jpg>
 Laura Finamore Photograph: Curtesy of Finamore Family 
Laura Finamore was a 47-year-old Manhattan resident, returning to New York 
from a memorial service for a college friend’s mother, the Associated Press 
reported. She was a senior account director for the corporate real estate 
brokerage Cushman & Wakefield in Manhattan.

Her family called her a “tenacious deal maker” and a “competitor”.

“Laura’s smile could light up a room and her infectious laughter will be 
remembered by many for years to come,” herfamily said in a statement to Newsday 
<http://www.newsday.com/news/new-york/laura-finamore-queens-native-who-lives-in-manhattan-identified-as-amtrak-derailment-victim-1.10436354>
. Finamore was raised in the Douglastown neighborhood of Queens, the newspaper 
reported. “She was always there when you needed her – with a hug, encouraging 
words or a pat on the back.”

Finamore is survived by her parents, three brothers and seven nieces and 
nephews.

GIUSEPPE PIRAS

Giuseppe Piras was 41-year-old wine and olive oil executive from from the 
Sassari province in Italy, theItalian news outlet Repubblica reported 
<http://www.repubblica.it/esteri/2015/05/13/news/usa_deraglia_un_treno_a_philadelphia-114229169/>
. He was in the United States on business.

The Italian consulate in Philadelphia confirmed that Piras was among the 
victims, the Associated Press reported.

Piras, who hailed from the town of Ittiri on the Mediterranean island, 
co-founded an olive oil and wine cooperative and was tasked with marketing its 
goods for export, the AP reported according to Italian media.

Consul general Andrea Canepari said his family had contacted consulate 
officials in the US after they were unable to reach Piras by phone.
 