
The family of the codebreaker Alan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> will visit Downing Street on 
Monday to demand the government pardons 49,000 other men persecuted like him 
for their homosexuality.

Turing, whose work cracking the German military codes was vital to the British 
war effort against Nazi Germany, was convicted in 1952 of gross indecency with 
a 19-year-old man, was chemically castrated, and two years later died from 
cyanide poisoning in an apparent suicide.

Oscars 2015 - live! Red carpet, arrivals, ceremony... and winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/live/2015/feb/22/oscars-2015-live-red-carpet-and-arrivals-ceremony-and-winners>
He was given a posthumous royal pardon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
 in 2013 and campaigners want the government to pardon all the men convicted 
under the outdated law.

Turing’s great-nephew, Nevil Hunt, his great-niece, Rachel Barnes, and her 
son, Thomas, will hand over the petition,which attracted almost 500,000 
signatures 
<https://www.change.org/p/demand-justice-for-the-49-000-men-who-were-wrongfully-criminalized-for-being-gay>
, to 10 Downing Street.

Ms Barnes said: “I consider it to be fair and just that everybody who was 
convicted under the Gross Indecency law is given a pardon. It is illogical that 
my great uncle has been the only one to be pardoned when so many were convicted 
of the same crime. I feel sure that Alan Turing would have also wanted justice 
for everybody.”

Matthew Todd, the editor of Attitude Magazine, who will also visit Downing 
Street, said: “Generations of gay and bisexual men were forced to live their 
lives in a state of terror.

The Imitation Game director defends film's lack of gay sex scenes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/the-imitation-game-director-defends-lack-gay-scenes-alan-turing-benedict-cumberbatch>
“Men convicted of gross indecency were often considered to have brought huge 
shame on their families and many took their own lives. We still live with the 
legacy of this period today and it’s about time the country addressed this 
appalling part of our history.”

Benedict Cumberbatch’s Oscar-nominated portrayal of Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/16/the-imitation-game-review-engrossing-thriller-benedict-cumberbatch>
 has brought the pioneering scientist’s story to a wider audience. The film 
follows him from his days as a second world war code breaker at Bletchley Park 
to his work at Manchester University, which saw him hailed as the father of 
modern computing, and his tragic death.

Turing led a team decoding messages at Bletchley Park, whose work remained 
secret until many years after the end of the war, and also designed the Bombe 
machine which decrypted German messages. Their work helped shorten the conflict 
and saved many thousands of lives.
 