
At this month’s London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> fashion week, 
the brightest and the best of British designers have made room for visitors 
from all over the world. Mega-brands continue to flock to the capital for its 
cool factor. Versus, the younger line of Versace, brought a typical splash of 
glamour showing the spring/summer 2016 collection.

Louis Vuitton, the storied Parisian fashion house, has made a more permanent 
move. This weekend has seen the brand launch a free exhibition in central 
London, with the aim of bringing the environment of a fashion show to the 
public. It is open to visitors from tomorrow for a month’s run, after a lavish 
private view for the fashion crowd .

Called Series 3 and housed in a disused building on the Strand, this 
exhibition is an ambitious project. Overseen by set designerEs Devlin 
<http://esdevlin.com> in collaboration with Louis Vuitton’s creative director, 
Nicolas Ghesquière <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nicolas_Ghesqui%C3%A8re>, it 
focuses on the autumn/winter 2016 collection originally shown in Paris in March.

Devlin, who has worked with Ghesquière on sets since he started at the house, 
is a good choice to create the kind of experiential exhibition the public now 
expect. She has an impressive CV, working with the Royal Opera House and on the 
2012 Olympics closing ceremony, as well as Kanye West’s tours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffashion-makes-an-exhibition-of-itself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F20%2F1442756021737%2F479fbe11-1957-4226-a44f-ad803c527a9b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fashion%20makes%20an%20exhibition%20of%20itself%20to%20pull%20in%20the%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffashion-makes-an-exhibition-of-itself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fashion%20makes%20an%20exhibition%20of%20itself%20to%20pull%20in%20the%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffashion-makes-an-exhibition-of-itself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F20%2F1442756021737%2F479fbe11-1957-4226-a44f-ad803c527a9b-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Accessories Gallery at the Louis Vuitton Series 3 exhibition in the 
Strand, central London. 
Over two floors and 10 spaces, visitors can play at being fashion editor, 
watching footage of models walking in the show and sitting in a recreation of 
the Paris venue. One room is like an aspirational walk-in wardrobe, with the 
designs hung beautifully inside glass closets. There is also the opportunity to 
gain access to the inside of Ghesquière’s mind with a room that recreates a 
brand mood-board. Devlin describes the concept of the exhibition as “a way to 
share the goosebump bit of a fashion show with everyone, in a three- 
dimensional environment”.

Exhibitions such as this are not just a creative exercise, of course – they 
are great advertising. Thousands of visitors are expected over the month-long 
run. A brand with the global success of Louis Vuitton – whose parent company 
LVMH earned £22bn in 2014 – would no doubt have noticed the huge popularity of 
theAlexander McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen> 
exhibition, Savage Beauty, at the V&A, with nearly half a million people 
visiting. Exhibitions are now a way of reaching out to new consumers. Stickers 
of Vuitton designs and posters from the exhibition are being given away free.

The formula to plant the seed in their heads takes in Ghesquière’s modern 
vision for the house (he joined in 2013) and an emphasis on those classic party 
tricks of a heritage brand – history and craftsmanship. Vintage trunks are 
displayed alongside new designs, and in one room visitors can watch two 
artisans from the Louis Vuitton atelier putting together parts of the famous 
bags.

On a tour around the exhibition, Devlin said the idea behind it is “a dialogue 
between heritage and the future” and this is evident in the Instagram-friendly 
displays. There are tables visitors can sit at and watch the hands of artisans 
move on video screens in front of them.

Elsewhere, a dizzying round room has videos of models talking about the brand 
projected on the walls and a trunk in the centre of the display has a screen 
with images of inspirational figures for Ghesquière such as Catherine Deneuve. 
It makes visitors feel like the room is spinning. Devlin quipped: “If you’re 
not sure what’s happening and you feel slightly sick, we have done our job 
properly.”
 