
It may yet fall short of triumph at the 2016 Oscars, despite star Vin Diesel’s 
confident position on the matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/25/vin-diesel-furious-7-best-picture-oscar-2016>
, but blockbuster street-racing sequel Fast and Furious 7 nevertheless found 
itself in pole position at the annual Golden Trailer awards last night,taking 
the top Best in Show prize 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/furious-7-wins-at-golden-794014>.

How did Fast & Furious 7 become the fastest film to break the $1bn barrier?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2015/apr/20/fast-and-furious-7-fastest-film-break-1bn-barrier>
James Wan’s film, which also took the award for best action movie, was 
rewarded for a trailer titled Family that was released in February. The near 
three-minute promo highlights new villainJason Statham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jason-statham> and flags up the fact that 
Fast & Furious 7 is the late Paul Walker’s “final ride” as Brian O’Conner. It 
also showcases some of the film’s more radical stunts, such as a scene in which 
Diesel “pilots” a sports car through a skyscraper.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyISKeT6sDOg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyISKeT6sDOg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyISKeT6sDOg&media=>
Other big winners on the night included American Sniper and The Hunger Games: 
Mockingjay – Part 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hunger-games-mockingjay-part-1>, both of 
which took home five separate awards. More than 70 prizes were handed out 
during the ceremony at the Saban Theater in Beverly Hills, which has been 
running since 1999. Fast and Furious studio Universal emerged on top with 15 
awards overall, followed by Warner Bros/HBO with 11 prizes, Disney and 
Lionsgate with nine each and Twentieth Century Fox with six.

Fast and Furious 7 recently overtook Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: 
Part 2 to become thefourth highest-grossing movie of all time 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/> at the global box office, with 
$1.43bn on total receipts. The film has also benefited from positive reviews, 
and currently boasts an82% “fresh” rating on the review aggregator Rotten 
Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/furious_7/>. Starring series regulars 
Diesel, Walker and Dwayne Johnson with returning favourites Michelle Rodriguez, 
Jordana Brewster, Tyrese Gibson, Chris “Ludacris” Bridges, Elsa Pataky and 
Lucas Black, the new film sees the crew facing off against Statham’s British 
ex-special forces bad guy Deckard Shaw.

The full list of winners can be found here 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/furious-7-wins-at-golden-794014>.

 