
The last two people who were successfully prosecuted in Australia for 
receiving and disclosing an “official secret” werea former intelligence officer 
and the prostitute 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/act/ACTCA/2003/21.html> he 
gave classified documents to for the purposes of selling them on to a foreign 
government.

But now, for the first time in decades, the Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> has 
dusted off this rarely used law. There are no prostitutes this time, and no 
sordid allegations of espionage or intrigue.

Instead, there’s a Labor staffer who is under investigation for allegedly 
receiving documents tantamount to an “official secret” from an anonymous 
source. The documents, according to Labor, are nothing to do with national 
security but do show failings and cost blowouts in the construction of 
Australia’s highly politicised national broadband network.

Stephen Conroy talks to Katharine Murphy about the 'humiliating' NBN documents 
– Australian politics live podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/aug/25/stephen-conroy-talks-to-katharine-murphy-about-the-humiliating-nbn-documents-australian-politics-live-podcast>
Labor argues the Coalition is particularly sensitive about the leaks because 
they show that despite Malcolm Turnbull’s promise the Coalition could deliver a 
cheaper NBN in less time than Labor’s plan, it is now over budget and behind 
schedule.

The execution of a second series of search warrants this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/police-to-raid-parliament-house-department-over-nbn-leak-says-stephen-conroy>
 by the AFP at Parliament House in the course of this investigation made for 
plenty of dramatic stock video footage as police officers scurried through 
parliament. And it’s provoked a political tit for tat between Labor senator 
Stephen Conroy and the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, over the AFP’s 
decision to take up the case and their independence. To add to the complicated 
legal issues at play, Laborhas also made a claim of parliamentary privilege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/cory-bernardi-signals-he-may-back-labor-over-controversial-nbn-raids>
 over some of the documents that have been seized by the AFP.

But if you peer beyond the back and forth there are some urgent and pressing 
issues the raids throw up that go to the heart of Australia’s political system. 
And they raise vital concerns for all journalists in Australia.

We know that the federal police have been quite active in pursuing 
journalists’ sources 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/22/journalists-reporting-on-asylum-seekers-referred-to-australian-police>
 with a view to prosecuting them. This often occurs in politically sensitive 
areas such as immigration. Whistleblowers from the detention system have had 
their phone records accessed. My own email and phone recordswere obtained by 
the AFP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/federal-police-admit-seeking-access-to-reporters-metadata-without-warrant>
 as part of an investigation into my sources from the detention system. All of 
this has been done under the still quite serious offence under s70 of the 
Crimes Act which specifically prohibits disclosures made by commonwealth 
officials. This offence targets the source, not the journalist.

Federal police raid Parliament House over alleged NBN leak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/police-to-raid-parliament-house-department-over-nbn-leak-says-stephen-conroy>
But what’s unusual about the NBN raids is that the even more serious “official 
secrets” offenceunder s79 of the Crimes Act 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ca191482/s79.html> is now 
being invoked to seek to investigate – and potentially prosecute – the Labor 
staffer Andrew Byrne himself for allegedly receiving the documents as well as 
the unnamed source for disclosing them,according to the warrants issued. 
<https://twitter.com/davidlipson/status/768263181718302720>

No charges have been brought against Byrne but the investigation is obviously 
active.

There are two early conclusions that could be drawn from the AFP’s decision to 
investigate Byrne for allegedly receiving an official secret. The first is that 
the offence is being used as a way to get their search warrants over the line, 
in order to work out the source of the NBN leaks. If this were true then it 
could be seen as a serious abuse of process.

The second is that the AFP really are serious about throwing the book at 
Byrne. And if that’s the case then it would be probably the first time in 
Australia’s history that the official secrets offence has been used to target 
someone for anything short of serious espionage.

The AFP’s argument will no doubt be that the NBN is a core part of national 
infrastructure – and that the documents disclosed are a matter of national 
security capable of reaching the threshold of an official secret.

That’s not how official secrets have traditionally been considered though. And 
the use of the offence is even more bizarre given the controversy over whether 
NBN employees could even be considered “commonwealth officers” – a point quite 
rightly flagged by Conroy. As Conroy has repeatedly highlighted, the NBN Co has 
anexpress statutory clause 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/num_act/nbnca2011336/s95.html> 
outlining that it is not a public authority. How then can the officers the AFP 
are investigating as the sources of the alleged leak be considered commonwealth 
officers?

This entire process has obviously alarmed Labor, but it should be alarming 
journalists as well. The worrying prospect for journalists in Australia is that 
the same offence could be used to justify not only executing search warrants of 
a news organisation, but even the prosecution of a journalist who has received 
a bundle of leaked documents that embarrass the commonwealth government.

If the AFP can seriously mount the case that disclosing documents about the 
NBN is matter of national security serious enough to invoke the official 
secrets offence, then the case could equally be made in many other areas. 
Immigration springs to mind as one area where the AFP has already been active 
in seeking to investigate and prosecute sources. But why not housing? Why not 
finance and banking? That most nebulous idea of national security could be 
twisted to suit the politics of the day.

There would be nothing to stop the federal police investigating a journalist 
as the alleged perpetrator of the official secrets offence by simply doing 
their job: being in receipt of documents that show wrongdoing by commonwealth 
officials.

Labor’s battle against the federal police raids should be seen as a threat to 
every journalist and news organisation in the country. If the federal police 
investigation is ultimately successful, it sets a most dangerous precedent over 
the reach of the official secrets offence. And it may embolden them to one day 
pursue a journalist in the same way.

 