
The Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> 
commissioner, Andrew Colvin, has warned federal parliamentarians that words 
matter, emphasising that police rely on good relationships with the Muslim 
community to keep Australians safe.

Colvin was asked during an appearance on Sky News on Monday about whether he 
had any concerns about the newly elected One Nation MPs calling for a ban on 
Muslim immigration, or a royal commission intoIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>.

The police commissioner was reminded about previous interventions by the 
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (Asio) warning Coalition MPs to 
tone down florid rhetoric about Islam because the contributions were considered 
unhelpful to agencies trying to maintain public safety.

Colvin said he didn’t want to intervene in any political debates but he 
emphasised that people needed to be careful about their public interventions. 
“What I have been on the record saying and I will say it again, words do 
matter,” Colvin said on Monday.

Sexual harassment and bullying rife in Australian federal police, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/22/sexual-harassment-and-bullying-rife-in-australian-federal-police-says-report>
He emphasised the police needed to maintain a good working relationship with 
the community, and he said successful disruption efforts to combat terrorism 
threats were a direct consequence of working constructively with the community.

“It’s very important to me that I maintain good relationships with the 
community. Words do matter. They listen very carefully to what’s said,” Colvin 
said.

Newly elected senators will come to Canberra on Tuesday for orientation ahead 
of the resumption of parliament next week. One Nation emerged from the recent 
poll with a Senate bloc of four.

One Nation’s policy on Islam <http://www.onenation.com.au/policies/islam> 
states that the religion sees itself “as a theocracy, not a democracy.”

“Islam does not believe in democracy, freedom of speech, freedom of the press 
or freedom or assembly,” the policy says.

“It does not separate religion and politics. Many believe that it is solely a 
religion, but the reality is that it is much more, for it has a political 
agenda that goes far outside the realm of religion.”

“Its religious aspect is fraud; it is rather a totalitarian political system, 
including legal, economic, social and military components, masquerading as a 
religion.”
 