
On July 3, 2006, the mezzo-soprano Lorraine Hunt Lieberson died of 
complications from breast cancer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/jul/06/guardianobituaries.usa?INTCMP=SRCH>
. She was fifty-two years old. News of her passing aroused little interest 
outside the classical-music world: the singer was hardly a household name, 
lacking even the intermittent, Sunday-morning-television stardom achieved by 
the likes of Renée Fleming and Yo-Yo Ma. She recorded infrequently in later 
years;she was shy about being interviewed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2003/aug/08/proms2003.proms>; she had no press 
agent. Her fame consisted of an ever-widening swath of ardor and awe that she 
left in her wake whenever she sang. Among those who had been strongly affected 
by her work, there was a peculiarly deep kind of grief.

I was one of those people. In her last years, I found it difficult to assume a 
pose of critical distance, even though I never got closer to her than Row H. In 
the days after she died, I tried to write about her and failed. It felt wrong 
to call her "great" and "extraordinary," or to throw around diva-worship words 
like "goddess" and "immortal," because those words placed her on a pedestal, 
whereas the warmth in her voice always brought her close. My attempts at 
chronicling her career—I saw her some twelve times—were an exercise in running 
out of words. When I first heard her sing, in Berlioz's Beatrice and Benedict 
at Boston Lyric Opera, in 1993, I described her as "brilliant" and "intense." 
When she appeared in Xerxes at New York CityOpera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>, in 1997, I compared her to Maria 
Callas. In 2001, when she sang Bach cantatas at a Lincoln Center presentation, 
I reported that she had "sent the audience into a trance." In 2003, I claimed 
that her recording of the cantatas, on the Nonesuch label, was "beautiful 
enough to stop a war, if anyone thought to try." And, in 2005, I called her 
Handel disc, on Avie, "pull-down-the-blinds, unplug- the-telephone, 
can't-talk-right-now beautiful." To the extent that music can be captured in 
speech, she had gone beyond it. Nevertheless, empty superlatives will have to 
do. She was the most remarkable singer I ever heard.

I saw her for the last time in November 2005, when she came to Carnegie Hall 
with the Boston Symphony to perform Neruda Songs, composed by her husband, 
Peter Lieberson. She came onstage wearing a bright- red, free-flowing dress. 
Although her hair was shorter than in previous years and she looked a little 
thin, she appeared healthy. She sang that night with such undiminished power 
that it seemed as though she would be around forever. Then she was gone, 
leaving the apex vacant.

She was born Lorraine Hunt, in San Francisco, the daughter of two exacting Bay 
Area music teachers. She grew up studying piano, violin, and viola, settling on 
the viola as her instrument. She gave relatively few performances as a singer 
in her youth, but when she did she caught people's attention. At a concert by 
the Oakland Youth Orchestra, in 1972, she stepped forward to deliver an aria 
from Saint-Saëns's Samson and Delilah, and Charles Shere, in a perceptive 
review for the Oakland Tribune, described a now familiar spell being cast for 
perhaps the first time: "She simply stood there and sang, hardly even opening 
her mouth, with an even range, secure high notes, and marvelous control of 
dynamics in the swells."

By 1979, she was the principal violist of the Berkeley Symphony. When the 
orchestra decided to mount a production of Hansel and Gretel at San Quentin 
State Prison, she volunteered for the role of Hansel. Under these fittingly 
unconventional circumstances she made her operatic debut. She took up singing 
full-time while studying in Boston in the early eighties, drawing notice first 
for her precisely expressive accounts of Bach cantatas at Emmanuel Church, 
under the direction of Craig Smith. In an interview with Charles Michener, for 
a 2004 New Yorker profile, Smith related her singing to her playing: "A viola 
is a middle voice—it has to be alert to everything around it. There's something 
viola-like about the rich graininess of her singing, about her ability to sound 
a tone from nothing—there's no sudden switching on of the voice, no click. And, 
like most violists, she is also self-effacing: without vanity as a singer. When 
we first performed the Bach cantatas, she just disappeared as a person."

Her work at Emmanuel caught the attention of the young director Peter Sellars, 
who, in 1985, cast her as Sesto, Pompey's son, ina modern-dress production of 
Handel's Giulio Cesare in Egitto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=95V1LzNfIXI>. 
The character of Sesto became a wild-eyed young radical, swearing vengeance 
with an Uzi in his hands. The singer was revealed not only as a supremely 
musical artist but also as a keenly dramatic one. "She started singing, and you 
were in the middle of this raging forest fire," Sellars recalled. "Certain 
things were a little out of control, but what you got was sheer power, sheer 
concentrated energy."

She went on to sing in a series of Handel performances and recordings with the 
Philharmonia Baroque, also of Berkeley, and appeared in Mark Morris's 
celebrated choreographic stagings of Handel's L'Allegro, il Penseroso ed il 
Moderato and Purcell's Dido and Aeneas. She decided to devote herself to 
singing full-time only after her viola was stolen. In the 1990s, she finally 
began to find wider fame, mainly on the strength ofan instantly legendary 
performance in Sellars's production of Handel's Theodora at the Glyndebourne 
Festival, in 1996 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/aug/27/how-we-made-theodora>. She made 
a belated Metropolitan Opera debut in 1999, in John Harbison's The Great 
Gatsby. The ovations that greeted her Dido in Les Troyens at the Met, in 2003, 
signified her assumption of diva status.

Yet she fit uneasily into the classical mainstream. "Lorraine's a bit of a 
nut," people in the music business used to say. They were referring to her 
Northern California nature—her spiritual pursuits, her interest in astrology, 
her enthusiasm for alternative medicine. She sometimes rattled her colleagues 
with her raucous sense of humor and her braying laugh. She loved all kinds of 
music; in private settings, she'd give scorching renditions of jazz and blues 
standards, and she declared herself a fan of Joni Mitchell and Stevie Wonder, 
among others.

In retrospect, her extracurricular interests and supposed eccentricities were 
essential to the evolution of her art. She broke through the façade of cool 
professionalism that too often prevails in the classical world, showing the 
kind of unchecked fervor that is more often associated with the greatest pop, 
jazz, and gospel singers. I compared her to Callas, but she might have been 
closer to Mahalia Jackson. One of her favorite encores was the spiritual "Deep 
River <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQWmYWhxnG0>," and there was something 
uncannily natural about her recitation of the text: "Deep river, my home is 
over Jordan / Deep river, Lord, I wanna cross over into camp ground."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIQlt1UxjvWU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIQlt1UxjvWU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIQlt1UxjvWU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

The voice was rich in tone and true in pitch. There was something calming and 
consoling about the fact of the sound. "Time itself stopped to listen,"Richard 
Dyer wrote in his obituary for The Boston Globe 
<http://www.boston.com/news/globe/obituaries/articles/2006/07/05/lorraine_hunt_lieberson_her_luminous_voice_transported_listener/>
. Central to the singer's repertory was a group of arias that I think of as her 
benedictions, her laying on of hands: "Ombra mai fù," from Xerxes, a purely 
sensuous experience; "As with rosy steps the morn," from Theodora 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IQlt1UxjvWU>, which she made into an anthem of 
beatitude; Bach's "Schlummert ein, ihr matten Augen," which, in the 
uncomfortably haunting Sellars staging, she sang while attired in a hospital 
gown.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU9Jh7DF1nxY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU9Jh7DF1nxY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FU9Jh7DF1nxY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Such performances were the product not of intuition but of conscious craft. I 
asked the young mezzo Rebecca Ringle to analyze how Lieberson's voice worked. 
"Her primary gift was for phrasing," Ringle told me. "It's a good instrument, 
but she has great technique, and superstar, beautiful-human-being phrasing." 
The vowels are very pure, Ringle observed, meaning that they sound much as they 
do in everyday speech, instead of being stretched out and distorted, as often 
happens in classical singing ("I am" becoming "ah ahm," and so on). "When I saw 
the SellarsBach cantatas <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I9BbWneSWQE> in 
Boston," Ringle said, "I was floored by one section that she sang quieter than 
I thought it would be humanly possible to understand, and yet I got every word."

Loveliness was just the point of departure. She could also communicate passion 
and pain and a fearsome kind of anger. At City Opera, her Xerxes, so bewitching 
at first appearance, whipped around to deliver an up-against-the-wall tirade in 
"You are spiteful, perverse, and insulting." There was a prophet-in- the- 
wilderness quality to her rendition of "La Anunciación," her centerpiece aria 
in John Adams's Christmas oratorio, El Niño. When she sangBenjamin Britten's 
cantata Phaedra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yz3NvWrGcew> at the New York 
Philharmonic, she froze listeners in their seats with her high monotone chant 
of the words "I stand alone." And as Irene, a leader of the martyrdom-bound 
Christians in Theodora, she made her voice into a kind of moral weapon. There 
is a DVD of the Glyndebourne Theodora, and the pivotal moment comes in the air 
"Bane of virtue, nurse of passions . . . Such is, prosperity, thy name." In 
other words, money kills the soul. The phrase "thy name" is sung eighteen 
times, and by the end the voice is seared around the edges, raised up like a 
flaming sword.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMYYY6QGzEJY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMYYY6QGzEJY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMYYY6QGzEJY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
No modern singer rivaled her in Dido's Lament. On a recording with Nicholas 
McGegan and the Philharmonia Baroque, she begins in a mood of unearthly 
tranquility, joining notes in a liquid legato. The first iterations of the 
phrase "Remember me" are gentle, almost quiescent. But when the cry recurs, at 
the top of the range, her voice frays a bit, in a way that ratchets up the 
emotion of the scene. When the sequence is repeated, the first "Remember me" 
has a slightly weaker, more tremulous quality, while the last is suddenly 
bolder, more operatic. With utmost economy, she traces out the stages of Dido's 
grief, ending on tones of radiant defiance.

Having run the gamut from angelic serenity to angelic wrath, this most 
complete of singers concluded her career with a very human demonstration of 
love. She met Peter Lieberson in the summer of 1997, on the occasion of the 
premiere of his opera Ashoka's Dream, at the Santa Fe Opera.

They fell in love and eventually married, and Lieberson began to write with 
his wife's voice in mind. By reputation an expert practitioner of twelve-tone 
technique, Lieberson had always had a secret yen for sensuous, late-Romantic 
harmony. I attended one of his classes in college, and I remember that at one 
session he spent an hour or more delving into the Adagietto movement of 
Mahler's Fifth Symphony, savoring each bitter-sweet suspension and enriched 
triad. When Lorraine Hunt entered his life, that pursuit of harmonic pleasure 
came to the forefront of his work, although the music remained scrupulous in 
method.
 'Courageously personal music' ... Lorraine Hunt Lieberson with the Boston 
Symphony Orchestra for the US east coast premiere of Neruda Songs, composed by 
her husband, Peter Lieberson. Photograph: Boston Globe/Getty Images 
Neruda Songs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2007/jan/19/classicalmusicandopera.shopping1> 
contains some of the most unabashedly lyrical music that any American composer 
has produced since Gershwin. It is also courageously personal music, the choice 
of Neruda poems seeming to acknowledge the fragility of Lorraine's health. The 
final song, "Sonnet XCII," begins, heartbreakingly, with the words "My love, if 
I die and you don't—" The music is centered on a lullaby-like melody in G 
major, and it has the atmosphere of a motionless summer day. The vocal line 
ends on a B, and afterward the same note is held for two slow beats by the 
violas, as if they were holding the hand of the singer who came from their 
ranks. The composer is holding her hand, too. The last word is "Amor."

* The Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment's Tribute to Lorraine Hunt 
Lieberson is at the Royal Festival Hall, London on 3 June 2013 
<http://www.oae.co.uk/event/queens-heroines-and-ladykillers-a-tribute-to-lorraine-hunt-lieberson/>
. Tickets: 0844 847 9922

Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers Ltd, © 2010 Alex Ross
 