
Staging a festival on 1 January might be seen as a bold move, but not 
everybody wants – or needs – to spend the first day of the new year whimpering 
and clutching their forehead on the sofa. Certainly not the 20,000 music fans 
pouring into the beautiful Domain park in central Sydney to enjoy a banquet of 
hip-hop,trap 
<http://www.beatport.com/charts/epic-trap-music-the-best-trap-tracks-of-2013/206410>
 music, house, bass, breaks ... even electroclash gets an airing.

The crowd was young, glammed-up and – if male – generally topless (or in tight 
vests), and the atmosphere was goodnatured, notwithstanding the 140-odd arrests 
for drug offences on the day. (It still seemed considerably less wild than this 
party happening elsewhere in the country 
<http://www.bendigoadvertiser.com.au/story/2002055/illegal-rave-party-ranger-fury-as-800-turn-out/?cs=164>
.) Having been warmed up by young Sydney synth maestroElizabeth Rose 
<http://www.triplejunearthed.com.au/ElizabethRose> and the city's five-piece 
purveyors of house-inflected pop Panama,who had a good show judging from their 
Instagram account <http://instagram.com/p/ipEW2tSdgF/>, the second stage was 
stormed byCrystal Fighters <https://www.theguardian.com/music/crystal-fighters>
, the nearest thing to a guitar band on the bill (well, if you ignore theWombats
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-wombats> topping the second stage bill 
later on).

The Anglo-Spanish Crystal Fighters have been building an international 
reputation thanks to their live show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/24/crystal-fighters-review>, now a 
non-stop carnival which meshes ukelele, Balearic house and call-and-response 
vocals. Wearing sequins and kaftans rather than the orange tans and big hair in 
evidence in the crowd, they successfully create an atmosphere of euphoria.
 Crystal fighters 
A$AP Rocky arrives on the Centre Field stage with his much grittier but no 
less charismatic take on psychedelia. Dressed in white, with gold grills and 
rock star charisma, the Harlem rapper is a fiery, funny and confident 
representative ofhip-hop's imperial 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/dec/30/2013-golden-year-for-hip-hop>
.

In classic festival style, a three-way bill clash then ensues between him, 
London Grammar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/05/london-grammar-if-you-wait-interview>
 on the Island stage and the deeper delights of Jacques Greene at the Left 
Field. The mysterious Montreal DJ may not be the biggest name, but it's the one 
that entices Team Guardian. Not surprisingly given the competition, the crowd 
is sparse but his warm and fuzzy take on house seduces a growing band of 
curious hedonists from all over the site.

Despite the delights on offer elsewhere – including Wiz Khalifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/26/new-band-wiz-khalifa>, whose 
rambunctious hip hop and shout-outs to weed fire up a raucous main stage crowd 
– as the sun goes down the Left Field seems to be where it's at.Dusky 
<https://www.facebook.com/Duskymusic> are bassy and crisp, purveying a 
retro-tinged mix of dubstep, garage and deep house which is the sound of modern 
London, their home. The fact that they are wearing baggy T-shirts rather than 
pec-displaying wifebeaters is also strangely endearing and makes them seem even 
more British.

Over on the Island stage, a waist-long-weave wearing Solange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/solange-knowles> is playing a seven-song set 
to a somewhat bijou-sized crowd, though her big tune Losing You provides 
lift-off. Back at the Left Field, DJJulio Bashmore <http://juliobashmore.com/> 
(real name Matthew Walker, a shy ginger man from Bristol in the UK) plays an 
all-enveloping and uplifting set whose twin highlights are the irresistible 
singles Au Sève and Battle For Middle You.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaLqWjUWGYFA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaLqWjUWGYFA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaLqWjUWGYFA&media=>
It's Flume who tears us away, on paper the perfect main stage headliner. His 
journey from bedroom DJ to multiple Aria-winning superstar wasone of the big 
Australian music stories of 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/nov/21/flume-i-prefer-to-be-mainstream-because-more-people-will-hear-it>
. Yet while Flume has the tunes, pitching himself almost as a pop Burial rather 
than the blaring EDM which propels most electronic musicians overground, his 
performance struggles to reach the back of the field, essentially being a 
variation on the well-worn "man peering into laptop".

Having conquered Australia, Flume is being launched on the global stage: his 
yearhe is rumoured to play the Coachella festival in California 
<http://www.travelgrom.com/travel-blog/coachella-2014-lineup>. He's going to 
need more than film projections, nice lighting and a laptop to go global. 
However, there are some encouraging signs: his triumphant performance ofDrop 
the Game, his collaboration with Chet Faker 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vopR3ys8Kw>, and a final DJ three-way with 
Emoh Instead <http://www.inthemix.com.au/allabout/artist/109173/Emoh_Instead> 
and his special guest Skrillex, an impressive display of the 22-year-old's 
current clout.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtESAO4NvMnk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtESAO4NvMnk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtESAO4NvMnk&media=> 