
The sight of police being called to arrest people or intervene in public 
meetings because someone has taken along a mobile phone or camera should now be 
a thing of the past as town halls find themselves at the receiving end of a new 
law which empowers residents and journalists alike.

With this month’s signatures on the Local Audit and Accountability Act 2014 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2013-14/localauditandaccountability.html>, 
local government secretary Eric Pickles put the seal on new rules designed to 
open up local decision making and bring more scrutiny to bear on everything 
from planning applications to policing policy.

With his trademark forthrightness, Pickles put his government department on a 
familiar collision course with some reluctant local councils in parts of the 
country where friction over the issue has resulted in arrests and the 
disruption of public meetings.

As he said: “There is now no excuse for any council not to allow these new 
rights. Parliament has changed the law, to allow a robust and healthy local 
democracy. This will change the way people see local government, and allow them 
to view close up the good work that councillors do.”

In some cases, getting to this point has been a long and fractious fight.

There’s been the well publicised flashpoints with evictions and arrests such as
Keighley 
<http://www.thetelegraphandargus.co.uk/news/11389559.Keighley_case_cited_as_new_law_is_passed_allowing_filming_in_council_meetings/>
,Carmarthenshire 
<http://carmarthenplanning.blogspot.co.uk/2011/06/caebrwyn-arrested-part-two.html>
 andWirral 
<http://www.wirralglobe.co.uk/news/11389911.Wirral_Council_criticised_by_Eric_Pickles_as_new_law_allows_press_and_public_to_video_and_blog_from_meetings/?ref=var_0>
. But there’s also been the quieter plodding persistence of campaigns such as 
the coming together of thecity’s journalism schools and a local blogger in Leeds
 
<http://www.prolificnorth.co.uk/2014/03/leeds-press-public-film-council-meetings/>
 and even my own steady months oflobbying of William Hague’s constituency in 
Richmond, North Yorkshire <http://talkaboutlocal.org.uk/category/campaigning/>.

Having won the right to film, what happens now? Will the rules translate into 
a boom time for reporters transmitting town hall decision-making to an eager 
engaged, informed local electorate?

Some publishers have certainly been quick off the mark to take advantage of 
the new rights.

Johnston Press’s The Hartlepool Mail 
<http://www.hartlepoolmail.co.uk/news/local/19m-school-plans-backed-1-6771424> 
had someone down at a planning committee meeting as the ink on Pickles’ 
signature was still drying – and found the video attracted more than 3,000 
views from interested local readers in just a few days.

The Salford Star <http://www.salfordstar.com/article.asp?id=2359>, an 
independent publisher, started recruiting for filmmakers the same day, 
promising to start “a new YouTube channel called Salford Council Inaction”, in 
tribute to the “old and esteemed Granada TV production World In Action”.

And Made TV 
<http://www.prolificnorth.co.uk/2014/08/made-tv-broadcast-council-meetings/>, 
the station that won five local TV licences earlier this year, confirmed that 
it will be putting cameras into town halls to track local decision making as 
part of its local news remit.

Made was awarded TV licences for Leeds, Newcastle, Middlesbrough, Cardiff and 
Bristol. CEO Jamie Conway said the company “would undoubtedly be taking 
advantage of this change in the law”.

He said: “Where this new legislation will really make a difference, is being 
able to report instantly on decisions made by councillors and city elected 
mayors, rather than wait until meetings are over, and being able to show the 
moment in video, when local politicians vote through controversial projects, 
which will cause upset among residents – for instance a rise in council tax, 
decisions to allow planning applications for large supermarkets to build in 
independent shopping areas, and the introduction of schemes like residents 
parking zones.”

So far so good then, but while bloggers and news organisations busily prepare 
for broadcast, one of those at the forefront of campaigning for the changes 
warns there could be an unintended consequence from the apparent new openness.

Richard Taylor, a prolific producer of video and Twitter live content from his 
local council chamber thinks the new law could, in fact, reduce transparency.

Posting on his blog <http://www.rtaylor.co.uk/localgov-filming-law.html> he 
explained: “There is still much further to go; in Cambridgeshire I’ve noticed 
increasingly ‘informal’ meetings of public bodies are being held in private, or 
‘pre-meetings’ to which the public are not admitted and don’t feature on 
published calendars take place. I suspect often the real decisions take place 
at such meetings and the public meetings are just showpieces.”

Sarah Hartley is a journalist and trainer at Talk About Local 
<http://talkaboutlocal.org.uk/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 