

Wide angle... The Redcar set of Atonement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement>. Photograph: Owen Humphreys/PA

What's the best single shot in British cinema? It's not something you ponder 
too often when watching the often visually unadventurous output from the UK but 
there's a stunning moment in Joe Wright'sAtonement 
<http://www.workingtitlefilms.com/film.php?filmID=104> when you realise the 
sheer ambition and scale of the scene before you. Can you think of any other UK 
film moments like this?

It's a beach scene at Dunkirk, when the dazed James McAvoy 
<http://www.jamesmcavoy.com/> makes it back from his mission in France only to 
stumble into the chaos of the British army in disarray. Wright introduces us to 
the carnage with a magnificent tracking shot that winds its way through a 
minefield of devastation.

It's one of those shots you only understand as it nears its end, when you 
start to feel its breathless, unbroken gaze. It reminded me ofBarry Davies' 
famous commentary <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barry_Davies> about Gazza's 
free kick <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Gascoigne> for Spurs against 
Arsenal in the 1991 FA Cup semi-final: "He's surely not having a go from there? 
He is you know..." and the ball fizzes into the top corner.

Wright's achievement in that shot, with his cinematographer Seamus McGarvey 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0568974/>, sums up the whole film: brilliantly, 
elegantly simple. Atonement, which will openVenice 
<http://www.labiennale.org/en/cinema/> on Aug 29 and roll out across the UK on 
Sept 7, will be one of the films of the year. I think evenIan McEwan 
<http://www.ianmcewan.com> fans will like it. Keira Knightley is sensational in 
it, too.

I talk to Joe about constructing that shot (he compares it to the one Alfonso 
Cuaron makes at the end of Children of Men), working with Keira again, and 
being picked for Venice. He's a charming chat, and a confident, stylish 
directing talent - my betting is: he'll get an Oscar nomination. You heard it 
here first, folks.

In 1983, I got five copies of Hey You, The Rock Steady Crew 
<http://www.rocksteadycrew.com> 12" for my birthday. Five. That's how hot they 
were. For that week, at least. But the welcome return ofWild Style 
<http://www.wildstylethemovie.com>, from 1982, ushers in memories like so many 
headspinning break dancers. I talk to director Charlie Ahearn, who ventured 
into the Bronx to make the first narrative film about the nascent graffiti and 
rap scene. Its wild styles have stood the test of time remarkably well and the 
break dancing here is as good as it ever got.

I also talk to Edinburgh film festival <http://www.edfilmfest.org.uk> director 
Hannah McGill 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/film/2007/08/why_were_moving_the_edinburgh_film_festival_to_june.html>
 as she prepares for her first year in charge and the last in the current 
August slot following the announcement of a seismic shift to June for next 
year. She also helps preview next week's event.

Film Weekly will be there, of course. Happy listening and happy viewing.

· Listen to this edition of Film Weekly on your computer (MP3) 
<http://download.theguardian.com/sys-audio/Film/Film/2007/08/09/FilmWeekly_09.08.07.mp3>

· Subscribe free to Film Weekly, via iTunes 
<http://phobos.apple.com/WebObjects/MZStore.woa/wa/viewPodcast?id=181371817>

· The Film Weekly podcast feed URL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/podcast/0,,329548943,00.xml>
 