
"This History of the War aims at being a plain and simple narrative of fact," 
starts the preface to the first volume of the Manchester Guardian History of 
the War published at the end of 1914. The writer acknowledges that the 
generation that makes history rarely writes it but believes the work "may have 
a permanent as well as current value, since it will display, as no narrative 
can, the impression made by events as they occurred on contemporary observers, 
and the hopes and fears of those who lived through the conflict".

In September 1914, just weeks after war had been declared, editor CP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott> and his 
editorial team at the Manchester Guardian made the decision to produce a 
history of the war it as it unfolded. Facing staffing pressures, asmen 
volunteered to fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/first-world-war-memorial-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
, this was a major undertaking. What started as a fortnightly series available 
by subscription resulted in a nine volume series of books. Beginning with the 
origins and declaration of war in 1914 and ending with an analysis of peace in 
1920.

Herbert Sidebotham <http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/36084> planned, 
edited and was the major contributor to the Manchester Guardian History of the 
War. He had joined the newspaper straight from Oxford University in 1895 and 
had built up a reputation for military coverage particularly through his 
writing on theBoer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-january-2012>
 andRusso-Japanese 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/514017/Russo-Japanese-War> wars. He 
became the foreign editor and principal foreign leader writer. When the war 
began he wrote a twice-weekly column on the military situation entitled 'A 
Student of War'. Guardian historian David Ayerst notes that the aim of the 
History of the War was not to rewrite existing articles - it was planned from 
the outset to be a fortnightly series written in chapters, published separately 
from the paper.

The GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> has a carbon copy of 
the publishing and advertising agreement made withJohn Heywood publishers 
<http://cosgb.blogspot.co.uk/2012/10/john-heywood-ltd.html>, who would print 
the instalments of the history, dated 22 September 1914 (and stamped with the 
company seal on 14 October). This gives great insight into how quickly the 
commerical process was set up. Various terms and responsibilities are laid out. 
Each instalment would consist of 32 inside pages plus four side pages.
 Agreement between The Manchester Guardian and John Heywood publishers on 
terms and advertising of the History of the War 22 September 1914. Photograph: 
Robin Christian for the Guardian 
A fascinating annotated page of the document shows the extent of the 
undertaking of the History of the War project. It lists newspapers where 
adverts were to be placed for the first edition from nationals such as theDaily 
Chronicle <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daily_Chronicle> and Daily News 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Daily_News_(UK)> as well as more local papers 
from theDundee Advertiser 
<http://www.nls.uk/collections/newspapers/indexes/details.cfm?id=117> to the 
Westminster Gazette <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Westminster_Gazette>. The 
size of the adverts placed can be seen due to the column width as well as 
contra deals with theLondon Evening Standard <http://www.standard.co.uk> and 
New Statesman <http://www.newstatesman.com>. A member of staff has annotated 
the page in red to indicate when the adverts were placed and has ticked off 
that they were completed.

A link to the original advert, as it appeared on 25 September in the 
Manchester Guardian advertising part one available on 30 September, is below. 
It highlights the contents of the first three chapters from the outbreak of the 
war to the attack onLiége <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Liège> and 
points out that it will include illustrations and maps so "readers may easily 
follow the narrative of the events". It will cost seven pence (the Manchester 
Guardian at the time cost a penny). To ensure prompt delivery intended 
subscribers are urged to place an order with their newsagent.

Advert for Manchester Guardian History of the War - Manchester Guardian, 25 
September 1914 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2014/8/22/1408704666625/AdvertforManchesterGuardian.jpg>

The first volume published at the end of 1914 runs to 38 chapters covering 
from the origins and outbreak of the war, the opening up of various fronts in 
Europe and Africa, the war at sea to the German naval bombardment  
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/local/york/hi/people_and_places/history/newsid_8123000/8123846.stm>
of the east coast of England. It is highly illustrated with full-page maps, 
diagrams and photographs. One curious graphic is the hand diagram below. It 
appears in chapter 12 entitled the Defences of France. It remarks that the 
eastern section of the frontier in France at first sight appears very 
complicated but "for those who like mnemonics, a fair idea of the defences of 
this frontier may be had from the hand extended flat". It then goes on to 
describe the situation using this example so the reader can get a sense of the 
geography.
 Hand mnemonic of the eastern section of the front in France, 1914, page 128 
the Guardian History of the War, vol 1. Photograph: Robin Christian for the 
Guardian 
Chapter 31 gives the reader a vivid picture of what trench warfare was like in 
the first four months of the war. The digging of trenches by both sides began 
after the German retreat following the battle of the Marne 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwone/battle_marne.shtml> in mid 
September. Whilst this has been accepted as part of previous wars when no 
natural cover was available, the author points out that the new weapons of war 
such as the modern rifle and machine gun have significantly changed the nature 
of fighting. He quotes a German military manual of the time that says that 
trenches should be used with circumspection as they paralyse the desire to 
advance and "kill the spirit of offensive." Yet both sides dug in as no armies 
"had been dug in before".

The chapter goes on to discuss in detail the digging of the maze of trenches 
and how in some areas the German and Allies' trenches were so close that "the 
barbed wire met in the middle". A diagram is supplied so the reader can 
envisage the possible layout. Such "mole warfare" meant that attack was only 
through the use of siege craft. If a charge was undertaken, the author states, 
it had to be proceeded by a prolonged and successful bombardment of the enemy's 
trench. As a result other methods of attack were also planned such assapping 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/FWWsapping.htm>. There were some periodic 
attacks under darkness, using short-range weapons such as grenades and trench 
mortars. Most of the casualties on "uneventful days" were men killed by sniper 
fire who accidentally raised their head above the level of the trench.

The life of the soldier in the trench is considered – the chapter briefly 
alludes to wet conditions particularly in the ones inFlanders 
<http://www.ww1battlefields.co.uk/flanders.html>, which regularly flooded. It 
mentions that to have a wash was "a luxury" and that the British HQ had a 
"rest–house" that could house up to 1,000 men returning from a spell in the 
trenches where they could be treated for what were termed "minor ailments". The 
author notes that supply of food was generally good except for the difficulty 
of getting it to those in advance trenches and focuses on the generosity of 
public donations of foodstuffs, clothing and tobacco that were greatly 
appreciated by the troops.

Some of the Allies and German trenches were so close that communication was 
established - sometimes by messages on placards, the occasional shooting 
competition and jokes played. French soldiers told Germans in an opposing 
trench thatPresident Poincaré  
<http://spartacus-educational.com/FWWpoincare.htm>was due to visit the 
following day. At noon the next day the French national anthem was sung and a 
hat on a stick was paraded just above the parapet. The author notes: "The 
ammunition which was expended on that top hat must have added quite appreciably 
to Germany's war bill". Examples of kindness were shown by soldiers on both 
sides by bringing in the enemy's dead and burying them.

A truce at Christmas, although not universal, was observed in some of the 
trenches on the Western front. On Christmas day, British and German soldiers 
exchanged cigars, cigarettes and chocolate, and posed for photographs. The 
author goes on to comment "the simple humanity of brave men in a common and 
desperate plight had temporarily triumphed over even the greatest war in 
history".
 Chapter 31 - The War of the Trench, volume 1, The Manchester Guardian History 
of the War. Photograph: Robin Christian for the Guardian 
The retrospective at the end of the first volume gives a summary of the war to 
date and expresses the opinion that Germany is "unlikely to win". It notes that 
there is deadlock on bothWestern  
<http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/pathways/firstworldwar/military_conflict/western_front.htm>
andEastern 
<http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/pathways/firstworldwar/document_packs/eastern.htm>
 fronts in Europe and "people began to resign themselves with all patience that 
they could command until new forces could be brought into the field in the 
spring". In the case of Britain, these soldiers were to be those who had 
enlisted in August 1914 who would then be expected to go to the front after 
sixth months training.

The History of the War and Sidebotham's work did much to establish the 
reputation of the Manchester Guardian for military coverage.David Lloyd George, 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/PRgeorge.htm> Admiral John Fisher 
<http://www.royalnavalmuseum.org/info_sheets_john_fisher.htm> and Hilaire Belloc
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilaire_Belloc>were among those who praised his 
writing. Ayerst estimates that Herbert Sidebotham's share of the writing of the 
History of the War ran to half a million words in four years.

In June 1918 he left the paper as he was offered a position at the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/>. CP Scott regretted not holding onto 
Sidebotham. Writing to him in 1932 he stated: "I recall in particular what 
magnificent work you did during the war, but indeed this was only one of the 
ways in which you added so much to the reputation of the paper. May I say, even 
at this late day, that the greatest fault I am conscious of ever having 
committed in the conduct of the paper was in not holding on to you by main 
force when the critical moment came".WP Crozier  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmexhibitions/wp-crozier-life-legacy>finished the 
History of the War. He went on to become editor of the newspaper in 1932.

The GNM Archive  <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>holds a complete set 
of the nine volumes of the Manchester Guardian History of the War along with 
the carbon copy of the agreement made with John Heywood publishers in September 
1914. These items can be viewed by appointment in the GNM Archive reading room 
in King's Cross, London. Further information on the archive collections and how 
to access them is available on theGNM Archive website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
 