
Researchers in New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> say 
they have restored the first recording of computer-generated music, created in 
1951 on a gigantic contraption built by the British computer scientist Alan 
Turing.

The aural artefact, which paved the way for everything from synthesisers to 
modern electronica, opens with a staunchly conservative tune – the British 
national anthem.

Researchers at the University of Canterbury (UC) in Christchurch said it 
showed Turing – best known as the father of computing who broke the Nazis’ 
second world war Enigma code – was also a musical innovator.

“Alan Turing’s pioneering work in the late 1940s on transforming the computer 
into a musical instrument has been largely overlooked,” they said.

The recording was made 65 years ago by a BBC outside-broadcast unit at the 
Computing Machine Laboratory in Manchester, England.

GCHQ chief apologises for 'horrifying' treatment of Alan Turing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/gchq-chief-apologises-for-horrifying-treatment-of-alan-turing>
The machine, which filled much of the lab’s ground floor, was used to generate 
three melodies; God Save the King, Baa, Baa Black Sheep, and Glenn Miller’s 
swing classic In the Mood.

But when UC professor Jack Copeland and composer Jason Long examined the 
12-inch (30.5cm) acetate disc containing the music, they found the audio was 
distorted.

“The frequencies in the recording were not accurate. The recording gave at 
best only a rough impression of how the computer sounded,” they said. They 
fixed it with electronic detective work, tweaking the speed of the audio, 
compensating for a “wobble” in the recording and filtering out extraneous noise.

“It was a beautiful moment when we first heard the true sound of Turing’s 
computer,” Copeland and Long saidin a blogpost on the British Library website 
<http://blogs.bl.uk/sound-and-vision/2016/09/restoring-the-first-recording-of-computer-music.html>
.

It features short snippets of the tunes rendered in a slightly grating drone, 
like electronic bagpipes. There are also a number of glitches and when the 
music halts during the Glenn Miller number, a presenter comments: “The 
machine’s obviously not in the mood.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffirst-recording-computer-generated-music-created-alan-turing-restored-enigma-code%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d063051875aa97b3061f03360b8714a0ca3639f%2F0_1947_9536_5719%2F9536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20recording%20of%20computer-generated%20music%20%E2%80%93%20created%20by%20Alan%20Turing%20%E2%80%93%20restored&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffirst-recording-computer-generated-music-created-alan-turing-restored-enigma-code%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20recording%20of%20computer-generated%20music%20%E2%80%93%20created%20by%20Alan%20Turing%20%E2%80%93%20restored&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ffirst-recording-computer-generated-music-created-alan-turing-restored-enigma-code%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d063051875aa97b3061f03360b8714a0ca3639f%2F0_1947_9536_5719%2F9536.jpg>
 Alan Turing was a computer scientist, philosopher and cryptologist who played 
a crucial role in breaking the Nazis’ Enigma code. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
While Turing programmed the first musical notes into a computer, he had little 
interest in stringing them together into tunes.

That work was carried out by a school teacher named Christopher Strachey, who 
went on to become a renowned computer scientist in his own right. Strachey 
recalled that Turing’s taciturn response upon hearing his machine play music 
was: “Good show.”

Turing was a computer scientist, philosopher and cryptologist who played a 
crucial role in breaking the Nazis’ Enigma code. As depicted in the 
Oscar-winning movie The Imitation Game, he was prosecuted for homosexuality and 
forced to undergo chemical castration. He killed himself in 1954 at the age of 
41.

He was officially pardoned by Queen Elizabeth II in 2013.
 