
Fitbit has announced that months after the company went public in June, its 
revenue is up 168% year on year, according to its third-quarter earnings report.

Despite the better than expected revenue – rising to $409.3m from $152.9m a 
year ago – the stock for the company dropped by as much as 9% in early 
after-hours trading on Monday. This was due to the company’s announcement that 
it will be selling additional 7m shares and some of its shareholders will be 
selling 14m shares. That means more than 20m more shares will flood the market.


“Fitbit’s third-quarter results demonstrated the continued rapid growth of the 
Fitbit platform and our team’s ability to execute on the tremendous opportunity 
we see globally, as we help people reach their health and fitness goals,” James 
Park, Fitbit co-founder and chief executive, said in a statement.

On a conference call with investors, Park said that the rollout of other smart 
watches, which often come with a step-tracker similar to Fitbit’s main 
function, did not have an impact on the company’s growth. When asked about 
Apple’s new watch specifically, he said it had “no material impact”. He added 
thatApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> and Fitbit cater to 
“two very different segments in the market” in terms of price point and use.

The price range for Fitbit devices, most often worn as a wristband, is $60 to 
$250.Apple Watch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch> starts at 
$349 and can cost more than $1,000.

With the release of Apple Watch in April, some observers had expected the 
sales of Fitbit to slow down, but the figures released on Monday seem to show 
the exact opposite.According to Monday’s report 
<https://investor.fitbit.com/press/press-releases/press-release-details/2015/Fitbit-Intends-to-File-Registration-Statement-for-Proposed-Follow-On-Offering/default.aspx>
, Fitbit sold 4.8m devices in the third quarter of 2015, up from 4.5m sold in 
the second quarter.


Between September 2009 and March of this year, the company sold 20.8m Fitbit 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-06-29/the-apple-watch-hasn-t-killed-fitbit>
 devices. More than half of them, at 10.9m, were sold in 2014.

Prior to the company’s IPO, Park told CNBC 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/06/22/fitbit-stock-opens-up-more-than-10.html> that 
the company can remain competitive, despite the new players such as Apple Watch.

“There’s over $200bn of consumer spending on health and fitness. This is a 
massive market. There’s room for more than one dominant player,” he said. “The 
brand Fitbit is really synonymous with health and fitness tracking, so we feel 
that we have really significant competitive differentiators in the market.”

Fitbit filed a patent infringement case against Jawbone in September of this 
year. On Monday, just hours before the Fitbit released its earning’s report, 
Jawbone filed a counterclaim case against Fitbit in California’s district court.

“Fitbit is knowingly and willfully misusing its patents as part of its efforts 
to protect its market power,” Jawbone stated in its counterclaim suit. “Both in 
this case and in a concurrently filed case in Delaware, Fitbit alleges that 
Jawbone infringes three of its patents. The infringement allegations in both 
lawsuits are plainly meritless, and Fitbit had no reasonable basis for bringing 
either case.”

Fitbit dismissed Jawbone’s counterclaim suit as a “misguided attempt for 
publicity”.

“We have been able to successfully compete in a competitive market by 
providing consumers with products they want at price points they find 
attractive,” aFitbit spokesperson told Tech Crunch. 
<http://techcrunch.com/2015/11/02/jawbone-files-countersuit-against-fitbit-in-frivolous-patent-infringement-case/>
 “These allegations are unfounded, and yet another misguided attempt for 
publicity in order to deflect attention from Jawbone’s own lack of performance. 
Fitbit’s primary focus is and continues to be on delivering innovative products 
and services that empower people around the world to reach their health and 
fitness goals.”
 