
Who would win in a fight between the greatest theatre theorists of the 20th 
century? A slightly geeky pub question, perhaps, but I offer it nonetheless. 
And now maybe we have an answer:Katie Mitchell's new video installation 
<http://59productions.co.uk/project/va_five_stages_of_truth>, created with 59 
Productions for London's V&A Museum, is the theatrical equivalent of aRoyal 
Rumble <http://www.wwe.com/shows/royalrumble/>.

Five Truths <http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/f/five-truths/> presents 
the same 10-minute scene – Ophelia's mad ramblings and subsequent death, all 
featuring the same actor – in the styles ofStanislavski 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/dna/h2g2/A5133151>, Brecht, Peter Brook 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/theatreblog/2010/feb/12/theatre-workshop-peter-brook?intcmp=239>
, Antonin Artaud andJerzy Grotowski 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerzy_Grotowski>. Housed in a darkened cube lined 
with 10 screens of different sizes (two per practitioner) playing 
simultaneously, it is a lot to take in: a hall of ravingMichelle Terrys 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/43279/company-members/michelle-terry.html>, 
singing and screaming at you from all sides. Mitchell uses similar designs 
across each video – floral dress, daisies, writing desk and pocketfuls of 
knick-knacks such as rings, keys and passport photos – but offers crucial, if 
subtle, changes. It's like the same film has been put through a mixing desk 
five times.

Of course, it's hard to avoid playing spot the difference. Brecht is easiest 
to identify <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Epic_theatre>, featuring Terry 
addressing the audience directly, illuminated by clinical strip lighting. In a 
not-so-subtle Brechtian touch,Terry wears £20 notes as a garland 
<http://www.jstor.org/pss/3208250>. For the Stanislavski scene, she sucks on a 
cigarette mournfully, deep – perhaps too deep – in thought; while, in the Brook 
version, she lays out the objects in her pockets tenderly and ritualistically. 
Curiously, Mitchell seems most cynical about Brook's approach; the scene has a 
kind of sentimentality, as if her heart isn't quite in it. Her versions ofArtaud
 <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/144642/Theatre-of-Cruelty> and 
Grotowski, however, reward attention. The first is all distortion: shot through 
a goldfish bowl, Terry's face stretches and blurs; the objects in her 
possession become sinking shapes. Grotowski, by contrast, is a wailing, shaking 
tremor of physicalised emotion. In a stark, arctic light, Terry rolls on the 
floor, clasping her chest and yelling.

Given the set-up, which looks like an art gallery, I found myself thinking of 
each practitioner in terms of painters. Mitchell offers a direct echo ofSir 
John Everett Millais's famous painting Ophelia 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ViewWork?workid=9506> throughout, but it is 
most pronounced in the Brook. There are also shades of Francis Bacon and 
Kandinsky in the Artaud, of Van Gogh's candid self-portraits in the Brecht and, 
in Grotowski, Picasso's cubism.

Where Five Truths really comes alive, however, is taken as a whole. Beyond the 
educational compare-and-contrast, it's a visceral, immersive experience. Stood 
in the middle of the screens, surrounded by a jumble of sounds and images, we 
get a sense of Ophelia's madness. There's too much to take in at once. Your 
head starts to swirl.

Though it's disorienting, there are plenty of smart touches, and the different 
styles seem to talk to one another. Watch the Stanislavskian naturalism and you 
hear the screams from the Grotowskian version. The effect is of amplified 
thoughts beneath a calm exterior. On one side, she's strident and forceful; on 
the other melancholy and reflective. Like reflections caught by a shattered 
mirror, Five Truths shows Ophelia from every possible angle at once.
 