
Australian films have had a rockin’ good year at the box office, chalking up 
nothing shy of the biggest collective haul (not adjusted for inflation) from 
local cinemas in history. To bastardise/paraphrase the Beatles and Scarface: we 
get by with a little help from our little friends.

Which is to say that youngsters in the audience have been instrumental in 
putting bums on seats. While the biggest box office performer this year by a 
country mile wasMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, viewers not old enough to 
properly appreciate unfettered carnage and a feminist role model with an 
amputated arm went elsewhere. Kids flicks such asBlinky Bill: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/blinky-bill-the-movie-review-a-cranked-up-embrace-of-australianisms>
,Paper Planes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/14/paper-planes-review-a-heart-on-sleeve-tournament-movie-just-for-the-kids>
 andOddball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/19/oddball-review-tale-of-a-penguin-guarding-sheepdog-makes-for-fluffy-fun>
 have proved immensely popular (the second two taking around $10m apiece).

Here’s a look back at five of the best Australian movies for children:

Babe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/17/babe-rewatched-the-smash-hit-story-of-the-little-pig-that-could-20-years-on>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmyyb4FUUMwI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmyyb4FUUMwI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmyyb4FUUMwI&media=>
This little piggy went to the market, this little piggy went to town, this 
little piggy got a ticket to the Oscars. Seven in fact, if you count each of 
Babe’s nominations. The success of director Chris Noonan’s 1995 heart-warmer 
about a pipsqueak piece of pork who becomes an expert cattle-controlling “Sheep 
Pig” blew everybody away.

Australian cinema's lost wave: the renaissance nobody's noticed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/20/australias-lost-wave-of-film-or-the-renaissance-nobodys-noticed>
The little pig gobbled up about a quarter of a billion dollars from the global 
box office and is regularly (and justly) cited as one of the finest family 
films ever made. The special effects and animatronics from Jim Henson’s 
Creature Shop still look amazing today – like watching the original Yoda (not 
the soulless-looking CGI-animated one), they just don’t age.

Babe’s storybook appearance conceals plenty of meatier undertones for adults 
and the film set a new standard for talking animal movies.


BMX Bandits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/22/bmx-bandits-rewatched-nicole-kidman>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvwPbdYE9tZY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvwPbdYE9tZY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvwPbdYE9tZY&media=>
For children living in Australia in the 1980s, nothing was cooler than owning 
a BMX bike. Director Brian Trenchard-Smith’s action-packed “would have got away 
with it if it wasn’t for you meddling kids” tale about fast-pedalling 
youngsters taking down a criminal syndicate was a big reason why.

To this day the film has a strong presence on the big screen, often on the 
bill in repertory movie programs. A pop-synth soundtrack, gloriously Day-Glo 
outfits and inventive cinematography from John Seale (who won an Oscar a 
decade-and-a-half later for The English Patient) are among BMX Bandits’s most 
memorable indulgences. It also featured the first feature film performance from 
a then 16-year-old, fuzzy-haired whippersnapper – someone by the name of Nicole 
Kidman.

Dot and the Kangaroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/06/dot-and-the-kangaroo-rewatched-tear-jerking-australian-animation-trailblazer>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhqdi3LSBZ0s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhqdi3LSBZ0s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhqdi3LSBZ0s&media=>
Many viewers will never forget the wonderfully sweet sounds of cute creatures 
in Dot and the Kangaroo singing jovial songs such as “oh what fun you have when 
you’re a frog on a log”. But it’s the poignant moments in legendary animator 
(and writer-director-producer) Yoram Gross’s 1977 classic – especially its 
unforgettably bittersweet ending – that resonate so strongly.

When young Dot (voiced by Barbara Frawley) confronts the realisation that 
kangaroos belong in the bush and that she must part ways with her beloved new 
friend, tears roll down her cheeks. Adults rewatching it can be excused for 
getting a little blubbery too.


Storm Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/storm-boy-rewatched-heartfelt-portrait-of-a-boy-and-his-pelican>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk7bkqGvpb4A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk7bkqGvpb4A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk7bkqGvpb4A&media=>
Another soul-enriching film about loving something and learning to let it go, 
1976’s Storm Boy is a rare heart-tugger: so beautifully made, so wonderfully 
peppered with big messages and small details. It is a profound coming of age 
film, a sweet story about the relationship between a boy and his father and – 
most memorably – a loving portrait of a kid’s relationship with a charismatic 
water bird.

If there was an award for the finest performance by a pelican in motion 
picture history, it would have to go to the inimitable Mr Percival, the 
long-beaked performer who flapped his way to stardom by performing opposite 
Greg Rowe (the title character) and co-star David Gulpilil. The latter delivers 
the film’s best, and most tear-jerking line: “Bird like him, never die”.


The Dressmaker and Mad Max: Fury Road dominate Aactas, the Aussie Oscars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/29/the-dressmaker-and-mad-max-fury-road-dominate-aactas-the-aussie-oscars>
Red Dog <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/23/red-dog-review>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcnWQIOegOrY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcnWQIOegOrY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcnWQIOegOrY&media=>
In the tradition of Australian family movies that combine light and dark in 
ways that don’t patronise adults nor those whose shoe size still exceeds their 
age, film-maker Kriv Stenders was an unlikely choice to direct this real-life 
inspired tale about a pooch in Western Australia who finally finds, but 
tragically loses, his one true master. Stenders came to the project after 
directing three hard-hitting dramas in a row, including 2007’s terrificBoxing 
Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/26/boxing-day-rewatched-stirring-one-take-drama-about-a-reformed-criminal>
.

This slickly produced but mature family movie embraces themes familiar to 
Australian cinema – carefree subjects such as drinking, violence and death – 
but does so in unpretentious and extremely accessible ways. Red Dog was a big 
hit with audiences (it’s currently the ninth most successfulAustralian film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia> of all time at the local box 
office). Even grey-haired critics, embracing their inner child, gushed about it.

 * Do you agree with Luke Buckmaster’s selection? Which other Aussie kids 
films do you get nostalgic over? Share in the comments below  