
If the main McQueen headlines this week will go to the V&A’s Savage Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/mar/08/alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty>
, opening on Saturday, Tate Britain has a quieter story in the shape of Nick 
Waplington/Alexander McQueen:Working Process 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/nick-waplingtonalexander-mcqueen-working-process>
. The exhibition displays Waplington’s photographs documenting McQueen in the 
run-up to his last autumn/winter collection, The Horn of Plenty, shown in March 
2009. Originally published in a book, it’s an insight into the designer’s 
frenetic, intense and collaborative creative process. Here are five things we 
learned.

Sarah Burton <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/sarah-burton> was definitely 
McQueen’s righthand woman

Now the creative director of the brand, Burton appears in loads of these 
images, present as McQueen fits a dress on a model, trying on a hat with 
milliner Philip Treacy. She looks very stylish, too – wearing a leopardprint 
cardigan and high heels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-things-we-learned-about-the-other-alexander-mcqueen-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1425985761768%2Fea499c89-05b3-4191-8338-57da655351b6-1374x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20about%20the%20other%20Alexander%20McQueen%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-things-we-learned-about-the-other-alexander-mcqueen-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20about%20the%20other%20Alexander%20McQueen%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-things-we-learned-about-the-other-alexander-mcqueen-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1425985761768%2Fea499c89-05b3-4191-8338-57da655351b6-1374x2040.jpeg>
 Untitled photograph from the series Nick Waplington/Alexander McQueen: Working 
Process showing McQueen fitting a model in the studio. Photograph: Nick 
Waplington/Alexander McQueen: Working Process/© Nick Waplington 
McQueen took inspiration from everywhere

The moodboards are shown here and are interesting scrapbooks of references. 
They include everything from the film ofMy Fair Lady 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EzAufG9zFSk> to multiple images of swans, and 
swatches of houndstooth, a pattern that dominated this collection.

Recycling, in McQueen’s hands, was about more than sorting out your plastics

A major starting point here was recycling – partly due to a photograph 
Waplington had taken of a landfill site near where McQueen had lived as a 
child. Rather than make couture out of cast-offs, though, McQueen used the 
theme to recycle elements of past collections, and references to designers 
ranging from Valentino to Chanel, into one unholy mix. McQueen called the 
collection “a sackable offence … a punked-up McQueen It Girl parody of a 
certain ideal”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-things-we-learned-about-the-other-alexander-mcqueen-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1425985846541%2Fc1bc7086-48e4-4c4e-88bf-2dda2b596bf7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20about%20the%20other%20Alexander%20McQueen%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-things-we-learned-about-the-other-alexander-mcqueen-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20things%20we%20learned%20about%20the%20other%20Alexander%20McQueen%20exhibition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F10%2Ffive-things-we-learned-about-the-other-alexander-mcqueen-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1425985846541%2Fc1bc7086-48e4-4c4e-88bf-2dda2b596bf7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A photograph from Nick Waplington/Alexander McQueen: Working Process. 
Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
The McQueen studio played host to many fashion faces

Some of them already well-known – Anna Wintour is spotted amongst samples on a 
rail – some on the way up, including Agi Mdumulla, who is now behind London 
menswear labelAgi & Sam. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/may/14/agi-and-sam-menswear-topman> 
He’s pictured with tape measure round neck, blanket on lap, in a candid snap of 
a studio in the process of making a catwalk collection.

McQueen was anything but the hands-off grand designer

Throughout these images, he’s seen with all the paraphernalia of a seamstress 
– pins, measuring tape and scissors – fitting models and cutting fabric. The 
designer clearly feels right at home in a studio context – he’s often shoeless, 
working in just his stocking feet. It’s those kind of endearing, revealing 
details that this exhibition is full of.
 