
Florence and the Machine – How Big, How Blue, How Beautiful (Island) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/florence-and-the-machine-how-big-how-blue-how-beautiful-review>

Why you should listen: Florence and the Machine’s third album extends 
voluminously like the imagined sky of its title, sweeping together Florence 
Welch’s multitrack vocals, the odd orchestral arrangement and toned-down 
versions of the echoey drums that have thundered on past singles.

It might not be for you if … You’re of the opinion that Florence Welch sings 
like a banshee in the middle of a bikini wax.

What we said: “[How Big, How Blue, How Beautiful] wobbles precariously along 
the line that separates the enjoyably OTT from the faintly exhausting”,wrote 
Alexis Petridis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/florence-and-the-machine-how-big-how-blue-how-beautiful-review>
 in his Guardian lead review. In the Observer, Kitty Empire noted the album’s 
“big, flouncy references to 70s Fleetwood Mac and quieter nods to Laurel 
Canyon, the call-and-response of Motown … and the feeling of driving around 
with the top down” inher lead review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/31/florence-machine-how-big-how-blue-how-beautiful-review-observer>
.

Score: 3/5

Jamie xx – In Colour (Young Turks) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/24/jamie-xx-in-colour-review-larging-it-for-introverts>

Why you should listen: Jamie Smith, one-third of band the xx, fills his 
gorgeously produced debut full-length with crackling textures, his signature 
steel drums and a general nod to 90s dance culture in the UK.

It might not be for you if … You don’t understand why people in their 20s wax 
nostalgic about an era they never experienced – you’d rather hear electronic 
music that looks to the future and not the past.

What we said: “[In Colour] is also about the pleasure of being alone, 
enveloped in bass, in a sea of many; of refracting what can often be a 
superficial experience – London clubbing – into something more existential, 
more nuanced, more unified”,wrote Kitty Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/24/jamie-xx-in-colour-review-larging-it-for-introverts>
, in her lead review for the Observer the week before last. Tim Jonze alsogave 
the album four stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/jamie-xx-in-colour-review> in 
the Guardian.

Score: 4/5

A$AP Rocky – At. Long. Last. A$AP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/asap-rocky-at-long-last-asap-review>

Why you should listen: The Harlem rapper goes back to his spaced-out and 
woozy-sounding roots (see 2012’s Live Love Purple mixtape), singing almost as 
much as he raps and incorporating psychedelia and floor-wobbling bass.


It might not be for you if … You can’t look past the tiresome misogyny in his 
lyrics. Surely, if he believes he’s so talented, he can do better.

What we said: “He’s snide and bad-natured – particularly in a gross 
kiss’n’tell about Rita Ora. But the sheer equilibrium of his bars elevates him 
to near-greatness,”wrote Ben Beaumont-Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/asap-rocky-at-long-last-asap-review>
 in the Guardian.

Score: 4/5

Slaves – Are You Satisfied? (Virgin EMI) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/31/slaves-are-you-satisfied-review-hey-sockets-punk-rock-blues-the-hunter-feed-the-mantaray>

Why you should listen: The Kent duo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/23/slaves-the-hunter-feed-the-mantaray>
 deploy shouty choruses, punchy guitar riffs and a tongue-in-cheek sense of 
humour on this thrashing, major label debut.

It might not be for you if … You don’t think they’ve managed to add anything 
remarkable or notable to the noisy, punk canon.

What we said: “Laurie Vincent’s heavy but simple guitar riffs underpin the 13 
songs here, and there’s plenty of vibrant imagery to enjoy,”wrote Phil 
Mongredien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/31/slaves-are-you-satisfied-review-hey-sockets-punk-rock-blues-the-hunter-feed-the-mantaray>
 in the Observer. Michael Hann offered up athree-star review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/slaves-are-you-satisfied-review> 
in the Guardian.

Score: 4/5

Soak – Before We Forgot How to Dream (Rough Trade) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/soak-before-we-forget-how-to-dream-review>

Why you should listen: Nineteen-year-old Bridie Monds-Watson uses the breaks 
in her creaking, emotive voice and a combination of acoustic guitar and gentle 
piano lines to tell intimate stories from her life so far.

It might not be for you if … You quickly tire of self-reflective, midtempo 
material.

What we said: “There is a certain amount of teenage hand-wringing here, but 
some other less wide-eyed insight, too,”ran the Guardian’s review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/soak-before-we-forget-how-to-dream-review>
. The album picked upthree stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/31/soak-before-we-forget-how-to-dream-review-self-assured-ebut>
 from Corinne Jones in the Observer.

Score: 3/5

This week also sees the surprise release of Chance the Rapper’s Donnie Trumpet 
and the Social Experiment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/29/donnie-trumpet-and-the-social-experiment-surf-first-listen-review-chance-the-rapper-goes-psych>
 project’s first album (on US iTunes, so far) and new material fromSun Kil Moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/sun-kil-moon-universal-themes-review>
,Simply Red 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/simply-red-big-love-review-mick-hucknall>
 andMajor Lazer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/28/major-lazer-peace-is-the-mission-review-diplo>
. What are you looking forward to hearing?
 