
I like Murder, She Wrote. A lot. Not enough to run an episode-by-episode 
<http://murdersheblogged1.wordpress.com/> blog, but I had worked my way through 
nearly the entire 12-season series on Netflix before the streaming service 
yanked it last month. There's something comforting about coming home after 
work, firing up the TV and listening to retired-teacher-turned-crime-solver 
Jessica Fletcher run circles around the police officers tasked with solving the 
many murders that happened to take place when she was nearby. 

The show, a former CBS property which NBC is considering relaunching with 
Octavia Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/oct/24/nbc-murder-she-wrote-reboot-octavia-spencer>
, is an artefact of an earlier age. It can feel horribly dated: Lansbury's 
clothing choices scream mid-1980s in all the worst ways, the children of Cabot 
Cove seem content to ride their bikes outside and skip rope rather than play 
videogames. It is unambiguous in its storytelling: villains are always bad, 
good guys always triumph and the plot is nearly always tidied up in under an 
hour. But the show had good enough ratings to see it through 12 years of 
renewals, and Angela Lansbury's acting was good enough to see her nominated for 
an Emmy award for each of the show's 12 seasons (she never won).

In 2013, the most critically acclaimed series on TV also featured a former 
teacher who's found a lucrative new line of work, but the gap between JB 
Fletcher and Walter White is littered with 20 years of increasingly complex 
television dramas. Her contemporaries in 1984 were Cagney & Lacey, Magnum PI 
and Dallas. By the time she went off the air (cause of death: time-slot 
competition from upstart Friends), the tide had turned toward darker, more 
complex dramas, with flawed characters who sometimes took whole seasons to 
puzzle over life's mysteries: Homicide, NYPD Blue, X-Files, ER. Murder, She 
Wrote went off the air in 1996; three very short but complicated years later, 
The Sopranos premiered. 

My love of Murder, She Wrote is equal parts nostalgia and a rebellion against 
a Netflix queue overflowing with series that require a commitment. Before 
Netflix took it down shortly before theNBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> announcement last month, I could dip in 
and out of the show, skip around, ignore it for months on end, and still, when 
the need arose, it would be there: well-written, well-acted, never requiring me 
to remember the previous four seasons of complex character arcs. 

As the Guardian's foremost expert on Murder, She Wrote, I offer these words of 
advice to NBC on how to make sure its reboot succeeds: 

1. Keep it in a small town

The original series was set in Cabot Cove, Maine, a short train ride from 
Boston. Episodes were about evenly split between Cabot Cove and the far-flung 
locations where Jessica's book tours took her: London, Los Angeles, Russia, 
Athens, even New York for a season when she taught writing at a university.

The mix worked out very well for the storytelling: one week Jessica is 
investigating a case of food poisoning at the Cabot Cove diner, the next she's 
being spirited away from Washington's Watergate Hotel by a sexy MI6 agent when 
she is appointed to serve out the term of a Maine senator who died in office.

NBC, we have enough shows set in major east coast cities, and, frankly, you 
always fail to film them accurately anyway. Make up a nice New England town, 
situate it close to a major airport, and give Octavia's character a good 
traveling schedule. 

2. Octavia's character must be single

Jessica took up writing only after the death of her husband, Frank. Her single 
status led to unspoken flirtations with several men in Cabot Cove – why DID Tom 
Bosley's sheriff have a key? Why was Dr Hazlett always so protective? The most 
dashing of her suitors was Michael Hagarty, an MI6 agent who showed up from 
time to time to give Jessica's mysteries an air of dangerous international 
intrigue. A Hagarty-like character is a must, NBC, preferably one with an 
accent. 

In place of children of her own, Jessica and Frank had many, many nieces and 
nephews – several of whom repeatedly ran into trouble with the law as they 
matured into adulthood. Grady, a nerdy lothario with a different love interest 
and new career every time he appeared on the show, was one of the show's low 
points. NBC, do not bring back Grady. 

3. The clothes

The 80s were unkind to 50-plus women looking to dress themselves. Jessica's 
every day wardrobe is heavy on the cardigans and other sweaters (Maine gets 
cold), but it's the dress-up clothes that really shone: shoulder pads, plaid 
blazers, ankle-length skirts and those weird poofs that stood in place of a 
collar. 

There is, in fact, an entire blog devoted to Mrs Fletcher's clothes 
<http://mrsfletcherscloset.wordpress.com/>, which is:

For all those women out there who would like to be able to survive an 
attempted murder twice a week and yet still look fabulous (without breaking the 
bank), here are some of my suggestions, inspired by JF’s closet. 

Dear yet-to-be-hired costume designer who will be tasked with dressing Octavia 
Spencer: you have some fabulously big and fashionable shoes to fill. Godspeed.

4. Careful casting of guest stars

The show's casting wasn't particularly complex. Is there a special guest star? 
Then great, they're probably the murderer – or the victim, but that'll get 
sorted in the first act. What made revisiting the show so much fun was the 
revolving door of actors 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Murder,_She_Wrote_guest_stars> who had 
once been famous before the mid-80s – your Abe Vigodas, your John Astins, Jerry 
Orbach – and those young actors who piqued the interest of a casting director 
because they were about to become much more famous – George Clooney, Bryan 
Cranston, Joaquin Phoenix (credited as "Leaf"), Neil Patrick Harris, Megan 
Mullally. 

Let's see plenty of that, NBC. Extra bonus points for every original guest 
star you get to come back. Here'sWikipedia's full list of them 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Murder,_She_Wrote_guest_stars>.
erin mccann (@mccanner) 
You know who THAT is, kids? That's Lucille Bluth aka Malory Archer on Murder, 
She Wrote! cc@maraithe <https://twitter.com/maraithe> pic.twitter.com/Mrvqh6F1 
<http://t.co/Mrvqh6F1>
 <https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/232605386753073152> August 6, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/232605386753073152> erin mccann 
(@mccanner) 
ABE VIGODA (I have done other things tonight, promise) 
pic.twitter.com/UeDn9f3aok <http://t.co/UeDn9f3aok>
 <https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/309488254477008896> March 7, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/309488254477008896> erin mccann 
(@mccanner) 
Murder, She Write guest-star gold. God I hope she blames her evil twin. 
pic.twitter.com/gtfid8QM <http://t.co/gtfid8QM>
 <https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/241592683452305408> August 31, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/241592683452305408> erin mccann 
(@mccanner) 
WALTER WHITE ON MURDER, SHE WROTE. I have won. I am done. cc @vitaminc4 
<https://twitter.com/vitaminc4> pic.twitter.com/IibOtqJh <http://t.co/IibOtqJh>
 <https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/237728557185507330> August 21, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/mccanner/statuses/237728557185507330> 
5. Cool it with the tech

The opening credits memorably featured a typewriter, and it was only in later 
seasons that Jessica Fletcher even tried to write her popular novels on a 
computer, which never worked and was always failing to save her projects 
because ugh these new machines. That mirrored the general adoption of personal 
computers in American life, but in this age of CSI 
whiz-bang-computers-solve-all-crimes, the very last thing TV viewers need or 
want is to spend another 60 minutes watching characters stare at screens. 

Spencer's crimesolver will surely use her cellphone, but is it too much to ask 
that she rely primarily on the same shoeleather and wry intuition that made 
Jessica Fletcher so popular? 
 