
It is around this time of year when many young people are looking to consider 
their next steps, whether that be in education or employment. However, despite 
online communities helping to spread awareness of alternative routes, there 
still remains a cloud of uncertainty about apprenticeships as an alternative to 
university. There are a number of myths which continue to deter young people 
from considering apprenticeships as a career option. But what is the truth?

Apprenticeships are not for top students

Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/education/apprenticeships> or 
school-leaver programmes are purely an alternative to the university route to 
employment, not a second rate option. Many students are accepted onto 
school-leaver programmes or apprenticeships because they have demonstrated that 
they are career focused and want to enter straight into the world of work. Many 
schemes also have their own Ucas point entry requirements for students to meet.

University isn't always the right choice for young people and apprenticeships 
and school-leaver programmes offer an important and valuable alternative to 
those who might feel this way. There are a variety of different programmes 
available to school leavers â€“ it is not a one-size-fits-all approach.

Apprentices are at a disadvantage because they do not have a degree

Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/apprenticeships> and 
school-leaver programmes actually offer young people a wealth of different 
qualifications and training. Many schemes offer foundation degrees and degrees 
as part of the programme, so young people can get the same qualification as 
their university peers while working at the company and applying the skills 
learned. The three levels of apprenticeships offer varying levels of 
qualifications and information on each is given by companies during recruitment.

Another benefit of apprenticeships and school-leaver programmes is that young 
people can learn the soft skills that employers are increasingly looking for. 
For instance, the management consultancy and IT organisation, Capgemini, offers 
apprentices 16 weeks of training at the beginning of the programme, to train 
young people in soft skills such as time management and networking.

Apprenticeships are only available for traditional, blue collar jobs

While there are careers that are limited to those with a traditional 
university degree, for example medicine, there are now more than 250 different 
types of apprenticeships available offering over 1,400 job roles. These range 
from accountancy to textiles, engineering to veterinary nursing, and business 
administration to construction.

University students have better career prospects

Despite recent reports, the average retention rate for apprentices and school 
leavers among top employers currently sits at 91%. Apprentices report that many 
of their peer equivalents are struggling to get jobs, and with competition 
among graduates increasing, it does not look likely that this will be resolved 
soon. In fact, the success rate for getting on an apprenticeship is currently 
higher than a graduate position.

University grads earn more money than former apprentices

Although graduates typically start work after university at a higher wage, 
this doesn't take into account the debt they have to repay. Apprentices begin 
earning the moment they step through the door of the programme and are entitled 
to at least the national minimum wage but are often paid more than this. 
Apprenticeships and school-leaver programmes must also be seen as an investment 
in future career opportunities and earnings. As skills develop, many employers 
tend to increase wages.

Top tips

Don't focus your career around other people: University might well be the most 
popular entry option but that doesn't mean it is right for everyone. Consider 
your strengths, weaknesses, ambitions and goals and then weigh out your options.

Do your research: There are plenty of resources at your fingertips that can 
help you to make this crucial decision. Checking out student ratings and 
reviews of employers online is a good indicator of how well schemes match up to 
expectations. Government websites also contain lots of detailed information on 
what employers are obligated to provide young people, such as wages and 
training, so this is also a good place to look to gain a greater understanding 
of what to expect or what to look for.

Don't take careers advice as gospel: Careers advisors are there to help you 
make these big decisions and to highlight the options available. However, just 
because they recommend a certain route doesn't mean you have to take it. Take 
your time to think about your options and talk to parents and teachers to 
discuss your future and what route might be best. Ask your older peers about 
their experiences, they're bound to have some words of wisdom up their sleeves.

Ollie Sidwell is co-founder of RateMyApprenticeship 
<http://www.ratemyapprenticeship.co.uk/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 