
Once again, people up and down the land are laughing at those of us who have a 
West Midlands accent, this time becauseBirmingham City Council's automated 
phone line does not understand the curdled vowel sounds of its own kind 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/birmingham-councils-voice-recognition-phone-software-doesnt-understand-brummie-8281941.html>
. Enough! Let a proud Black Countryman explain why the Midlands accent is a 
blessing …

People automatically assume you are stupid

The sing-song style of the Brummie has become synonymous with slack-jawed 
stupidity and a certain slowness of wit. For those West Midlanders who pride 
ourselves on our intelligence and speed of humour, the simple application of 
our native accent gives us an immediate advantage over other people of similar 
intelligence, because when we say something smart, people look at us in 
admiring amazement, as if witnessing a chimp that can paint attractive water 
colours.

It's useful in flushing out idiocy in others

A quick rule of thumb – if you ask someone with a West Midlands accent where 
they are from, and they tell you that they are fromBirmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> or Wolverhampton, and your 
immediate reaction is to repeat the place name back to that person in a 
cod-Lenny Henry accent, you have just revealed yourself to be an utter buffoon. 
"BURRRMEEENGHURRRM!" Just like that.

It's attractive to women of a certain age

And there's one man you can thank for this: Adrian Chiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles>, whose peculiar brand of 
hangdog, browbeaten masculinity seemed to strike a chord among women over 35 – 
maybe it's to do with the recession and women downsizing their romantic 
aspirations or something. Well, I have to tell you, ladies, that I am all for 
that.

It is delightfully suited to the gastronomical delicacies of the area

Adopt your best Black Country burr (which won't be as good as mine, but try it 
anyway) and let the following terms roll off your tongue: faggots and peas. 
Pint of Banks's. Tray of chips and gravy. Lamb tikka balti with keema naan. 
Fillbelly puddin'. It's like Nigella crossed with Ozzy Osbourne!

You are automatically mates with Noddy Holder should you ever actually meet him

And you simply cannot put a price on that.

Twitter.com/TweetCashmore <https://twitter.com/TweetCashmore>
 