
You won’t find the word “Autonomy” anywhere in Micro Focus’ 27-page 
announcement ofits $8.8bn (£6.6bn) deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/uk-micro-focus-hewlett-packard-software-deal>
 to take control of Hewlett Packard Enterprise’s software division. The UK’s
newest technology champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/uk-independent-tech-firm-to-buy-part-of-hewlett-packard-micro-focus>
 isn’t exactly crowing about reclaiming for the nation bits and pieces of a 
former famous member of the FTSE 100 index.

The omission was wise. First, Hewlett-Packard’s $11bn purchase of 
Cambridge-basedAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> in 2011 was the deal 
that precipitated crises and write-offs at the US firm. The litigation 
continues, so best for Micro Focus to ensure it has the right legal protections 
in place and skirt around the contested claims.

Second, old Autonomy is unrecognisable today. Many of its products for 
searching unstructured data have been incorporated into HPE’s software 
offering. The Autonomy-related stuff represents only about a fifth of HPE’s 
software division.

Third, it would be misleading for Micro Focus to invoke the thrills and spills 
of the Autonomy era. Its own style is as dull as its name. Micro Focus occupies 
the unglamorous end of the technology industry, where the money is made by 
managing and updating legacy infrastructure. It is a fix-it merchant rather 
than a pioneer.

There’s no shame in that, of course, especially when your recent record is as 
impressive as Micro Focus’s: the share price was 300p in 2011 and is £22 now, 
up 15% on Thursday as investors applauded the swoop on a chunk of HPE.

Enthusiasm is the right reaction if you believe scrutiny under the Micro Focus 
lens can turn profit margins at the business from 21% to 46% within three 
years. That’s the promise from executive chairman Kevin Loosemore, who can 
point to similar surgery performed on past acquisitions.

The difference this time is size. Micro Focus is grabbing control of a 
business bigger than itself. It is a £5bn ($7bn) company making a $8.8bn deal. 
The complexities will inevitably be greater, but let’s not knock the ambition. 
Loosemore and co have earned the right to play on a global stage and,after the 
dispiriting sale of ARM Holdings to SoftBank for £24bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/arm-shareholders-softbank-takeover-tech-lord-myners>
, it’s good that a UK tech company can step up. A dull, but very worthy, deal.

Osborne’s grand folly HS2 could be hitting the skids 

“Often it is modest, rapidly deliverable investments that can have the most 
immediate impact, particularly on the road network, but also in some places on 
the rail network,”said Philip Hammond on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/philip-hammond-announces-autumn-budget-statement-for-23-november>
.

Was the chancellor hinting that HS2 will be ditched? Let’s hope so. The 
economics of the proposed high-speed railway look more grotesque every time the 
sums are totted up. Nigel Wilson, chief executive of Legal & General, one of 
the UK’s biggest investors in infrastructure, said the other day that he 
wouldn’t dispatch a penny toHS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> because it 
is of “little economic benefit”.

In reply to a follow-up question from the former Labour chancellor Alistair 
Darling, Hammond said he is a great believer in the “Eddington principle” that 
modest, easily deliverable projects are often the most worthwhile.

Sir Rod Eddington, former boss of British Airways, wrote a report in 2006 for 
Darling, transport secretary at the time.Simon Jenkins’ long read on HS2 in 
this paper in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/07/hs2-the-zombie-train-that-refuses-to-die>
 reminded us what it said: transport policy “needs to avoid wasting time and 
money pursuing alluring new super high-speed motorway or rail networks or 
pursuinggrands projets with speculative returns.”

Go for it, chancellor: ditch George Osborne’s grand folly.

Time for Sports Direct to spread the profits 

One reason why Mike Ashley burns with resentment about the exposure of pay and 
working practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 in Sports Direct’s Shirebrook warehouse may be that, in another corner of the 
business, his bonus arrangements for a couple of thousand permanent staff has 
been remarkably generous over the years.

A few years ago Sports Direct was being lauded for a scheme whereby some 
employees, mostly in the stores and head office, were scooping tens of 
thousands of pounds. In 2013, a lucky – or hard-working –2,000 staff shared a 
£100m payout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/18/sports-direct-staff-bonus-profits>
 in the form of Sports Direct stock. In total, £250m has been distributed this 
way, as Ashley often likes to point out.

The contrast between the treatment of permanent staff and those on zero-hours 
and agency contracts is stark. But, if Ashley is serious about reform, one idea 
should be obvious: distribute the spoils more evenly.

Ashley used to say he wanted Sports Direct to be more like John Lewis (before 
alighting on Selfridges this week) and the bonus system at the employee-owned 
department store is worth studying: payments are declared annually as a 
percentage of salary.

To work in practice at Sports Direct, many zero-hours and agency workers would 
have to join the regular payroll; at the moment, only 5,000 out of 27,000 staff 
are permanent full- or part-time employees. But, since Ashley says wants to 
boost the ratio of permanent employees, the stars could align.

If Sports Direct was regularly distributing equally, say, 10% of its profits 
to, say, 20,000 staff, public perceptions might alter. The governance grumbles 
would still have to addressed, of course. But a fairer company-wide bonus 
scheme would be a start. Ashley, if he wanted to be outrageously cheeky, could 
even describe it as the logical extension of his original thinking.
 