
Q The first floor of our 25-year-old house is tongue-and-grooved sheet 
chipboard. Over the years we have had to lift pieces of the chipboard when 
installing electrical connections, since then the floor has creaked. Screwing 
these sections back down has not remedied the problem. We are now considering 
having new wiring, and we would like to replace the flooring. Can you suggest a 
better type?
Kind regards, Hugh Holiday

A It sounds like your chipboard has reached the end of its useful life. 
Instead of replacing it with unwieldy 8ft by 4ft sheets, consider more 
manageable sheet sizes, such as 4ft by 2ft - it'll be cheaper to fit as it can 
be managed by just one person. You may then want to fit a floating floor (ie, 
not screwed down) that uses a click system (such as a Kahrs floor) - making it 
easier to take up. A great tip from my brother Ben (a font of great practical 
advice) is to mark the location and direction of any pipes and electrical 
cables on to the chipboard before it is covered over. Who thought chipboard 
could be so exciting?

Q Our house was built in 1908 and has a beautiful front door and frame, both 
with stained glass panels. Unfortunately, both need replacing as the wood is 
rotten. Where might we look for a professional to replace them, using the 
existing glass in the new door and frame?
Hope you can help, thanks, Annie Minihan

A The threshold is an important symbolic area for any home and I commend you 
for trying to restore the original door. The bad news is that this can be 
difficult and expensive, as it's likely that the old door and frame have 
warped. Your best bet is to find a local joiner, who will have to work with a 
glazier and possibly a stained glass expert. Contact the institute of 
carpenters atwww.central-office.co.uk <http://www.central-office.co.uk> for 
help on finding a recommended local tradesperson. An alternative may be to 
scour a local reclaim yard for similar doors and frames. Go armed with the 
dimensions of your door and look for a replacement that's just slightly too 
big, which can then be cut to size.

Â· If you have an interiors question, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 