
And really we live in dark times when “to talk about trees is almost a crime/ 
because it involves being silent about so many atrocities!” ThusBertolt Brecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bertolt-brecht> in the 1930s and thus Europe 
today. Berlin now joins Madrid, Paris, London and Nice on the memorial roll of 
major terrorist attacks on European soil this century.

The name of Breitscheidplatz <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Breitscheidplatz>, 
a somewhat dreary, elongated square in the strangely centreless centre of the 
old West Berlin, will now become asynecdoche for terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/berlin-truck-crash-terrorism-fears-darken-germanys-mini-utopias>
, joining theBataclan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> in 
Paris, theAtocha station in Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/11/madrid-bombings-guernica-conspiracy-islamists-eta>
 and thePromenade des Anglais in Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bastille-day-truck-attack>. At the end of 
one of the worst years in living memory, disgraced as 2016 has been by the 
massive atrocity ofAleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>, there 
stands “Berlin”.

Could 2017 see Merkel going the way of David Cameron? And what then?

At least, I hope it’s the end, for the devil who has been writing history this 
year may yet have one last horror to throw at us, before we stagger like 
wounded soldiers into the trenches of 2017.

It’s too soon to say what exactly was behind the Berlin attack, but it’s not 
too soon to describe the challenge it poses. Put very simply, it is this: can 
the centre hold? As the flood waters ofpopulism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/populists-us> have risen 
in Britain, Poland and the United States, and are now rising in the Netherlands 
and France, we have looked ever more to Germany as the stable, liberal centre 
of Europe – and even of the west. Germany is the centre geographically, 
economically, politically and even socially, and the centre of this centre is
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>.

The hope has been, and must still be, that by fighting Germany’s general 
election next autumn from the centre, Merkel will be returned to office, 
perhaps in a new coalition with the Greens and the Free Democrats 
(black-green-yellow, hence aka “Jamaica”).

But what if Breitscheidplatz turns out to be what so many analysts have always 
feared: a major terrorist attack perpetrated by someone who enteredGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> as a refugee after Merkel “opened 
the door” last year, whether or not he was inspired or even instructed by 
so-called Islamic State? Could 2017 see her going the way of David Cameron? And 
what then?

An already notorious comment tweeted by the Alternative for Germany (AfD) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/anti-refugee-party-makes-big-gains-in-german-state-elections>
 politician Marcus Pretzell – “these are Merkel’s dead” – is so disgusting that 
there must be an initial revulsion against that rightwing, anti-immigrant and 
anti-euro party. But will this send voters to the AfD in the months to come?

As serious and revealing is the instant reaction of Horst Seehofer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Horst_Seehofer>, leader of the Christian Social 
Union (CSU), the Bavarian sister party of Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union: 
“We owe it to the victims, those directly affected and the whole population to 
rethink our whole immigration and security policy.” The CSU is now doing 
everything it can to keep its voters in Bavaria from defecting to the AfD, 
which may even be useful to Merkel, but this certainly increases the pressure 
to harden her line.

Some hardening is inevitable, and indeed desirable. The not legendarily 
effective German intelligence and security agencies need to work better. 
Probably, and as a liberal I say this with great reluctance, Germany needs some 
more surveillance – although not half as much as the British have blithely 
conceded, with barely a murmur.

Like America, France and Britain, Germany could certainly use more skilful 
anti-radicalisation strategies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/academics-criticise-prevent-anti-radicalisation-strategy-open-letter>
, including online counter-speech. That will involve working with Facebook, 
Google and Twitter, rather than simply pillorying them, in the now customary 
German fashion, as big bad American corporate wolves. (Yes, they are part of 
the problem, but they can also be part of the solution.)

It will also mean, in Germany as elsewhere, getting used to living with a 
slightly higher level of risk, as Britain did through decades of IRA terrorism, 
without losing its liberal bearings. So the deeper challenge is whether German 
society has the strength to live up to the liberal ideal that Merkel evoked in 
her initial, restrained and dignified remarks, defending “the life that we want 
to live in Germany: free, together and open”.

Germany’s previous record on the integration of migrants is not one of the 
best in the west. Things were already hanging in the balance as a result of the 
refugee crisis; even more so now.

So what earthly reason have we to believe that Germany will be immune to the 
disease whose outward blisters are Donald Trump,Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> and Geert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/geert-wilders>? Well, several reasons 
actually. Germany is one of the few western democracies to be doing well 
economically. I have lost count of the number of times Germans have said to me, 
“We’re a rich country and we can afford to integrate 1 million refugees.” There 
are not many countries in the world where you would hear that.

Unlike Britain, Germany also has a relatively responsible popular press. While 
Bild, its counterpart of the Sun, has blasted away against the euro, the German 
tabloid has been remarkably restrained in its treatment of the refugee issue.

And that brings us to probably the most important reason of all: Adolf Hitler. 
Precisely because Germany once had the diabolic epitome of populist xenophobia, 
it is now most resistant to it. Pray God that taboo holds.

Berlin truck attack: first suspect released as driver thought to still be at 
large – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/20/berlin-christmas-market-attack-suspect-pakistan-live-coverage>
So far, the treacherous hyperbole has been kept at bay. In stark contrast to 
George W Bush and Tony Blair, the liberal Süddeutsche Zeitung had a powerful 
first response headed “Germany is not at war”. Be resolute, but keep it in 
proportion.

The Bild headline, however, was one word that all readers will instantly 
understand: “Angst!” I think Merkel instinctively homed in on the deepest 
mental danger for her compatriots when she said, “We don’t want to live 
paralysed by the fear of evil.” A Berlin daily responded to the atrocity with a 
front-page picture of a Christmas tree in front of the Brandenburg gate, and 
three words from the Gospel according to Saint Luke: “Be not afraid!”

The Polish lorry driver who seems to have been the first victim of this 
murderer will surely have known that this was the message tirelessly repeated 
by Pope John Paul II, who added another simple injunction: “Defeat evil by 
good.”

It’s a tall order, but if Germany can even get close to this ideal, it will be 
leadingEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> by its example.
 