
Yesterday, Forbes released its annual list of the top-earning female actors in 
the world 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2015/08/20/the-worlds-highest-paid-actresses-2015-jennifer-lawrence-leads-with-52-million/>
 (it was updated this year to include stars beyond Hollywood). The good news: 
two female titans of the US film industry, Jennifer Lawrence and Scarlett 
Johansson, would have made it into a combined male and female list of 
top-earning Hollywood stars. The bad news: Forbes does not actually compile a 
list for all genders, and every other female actor in the world would have 
failed to make the top 20.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fforbes-top-paid-actors-we-need-one-list-for-all-genders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440154559448%2F89773f8a-015a-404c-a1aa-d2d050abffc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Forbes%20to%20compile%20a%20genderless%20list%20of%20top-paid%20actors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fforbes-top-paid-actors-we-need-one-list-for-all-genders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Forbes%20to%20compile%20a%20genderless%20list%20of%20top-paid%20actors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fforbes-top-paid-actors-we-need-one-list-for-all-genders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440154559448%2F89773f8a-015a-404c-a1aa-d2d050abffc1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Patricia Arquette accepts the Oscar for actress in a supporting role for 
Boyhood – and highlighted gender pay disparity in her speech. Photograph: Matt 
Petit/Ampas/EPA 
Is it any wonder that Boyhood’s Patricia Arquette highlighted gender pay 
disparity in her acceptance speech for best supporting actress at this year’s 
Oscars?She told the audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
 at the Dolby theatre in Los Angeles: “It’s time to have wage equality once and 
for all.” The actor’s comments followedrevelations in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
 that male stars Christian Bale and Bradley Cooper were paid 9% of the profits 
from David O Russell’s American Hustle, while co-stars Amy Adams and Jennifer 
Lawrence received 7% each, despite the fact that Lawrence is an Oscar winner.

Jennifer Lawrence is Hollywood's newly crowned best-paid female star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/21/jennifer-lawrence-best-paid-female-star-forbes>
Looking at Forbes’s male 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/04/robert-downey-jr-best-paid-actor-forbes-jackie-chan-amitabh-bachchan>
 andfemale 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2015/08/20/the-worlds-highest-paid-actresses-2015-jennifer-lawrence-leads-with-52-million/>
 lists, it’s clear the problem isn’t going away any time soon. And yet, if the 
financial magazine wants to highlight the issue, it might consider dispensing 
altogether with a gender-based division that seems archaic and fails to make 
clear the appalling disparities in pay.

Forbes points out that a single list would include very few women, and says it 
publishes a separateGlobal Celebrity 100 list, which is not divided by gender 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/natalierobehmed/2015/06/29/why-there-are-so-few-women-on-the-global-celebrity-100-list/>
 and also takes in musicians and television stars. “We divide the highest-paid 
thespians into actors and actresses because a single list would be nearly 
completely male, and very long,” says the magazine’s entertainment staff writer 
Natalie Robehmed. “Only four actresses made north of $20m, while 21 [male] 
actors banked $20m-plus. In order to justly highlight the women who are at the 
top of their industry, we split the lists.”

It should be pointed out that Forbes does a great job compiling this data for 
the rest of us to wade through. A movie star list incorporating all genders 
would also presumably make for fewer headlines surrounding popular stars such as
Angelina Jolie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> (top of the 
women’s list in 2013) and Sandra Bullock (top last year, following Gravity’s 
success). But isn’t this exactly the point?

A combined top 30, with only a handful of the high-profile female stars who 
take up column inches in newspapers and magazines across the world, would 
spotlight Hollywood and the wider global film industry’s attitudes towards 
women. Is Jolie, who certainly gets more attention from the media than Brad 
Pitt, really worth only half her partner’s estimated $16m? CanAdam Sandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler>, with earnings of $41m between 
June 2014 and June 2015, really be worth more than Cameron Diaz ($11m), Gwyneth 
Paltrow ($9m), Meryl Streep ($8m) and Sandra Bullock ($8m) combined?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fforbes-top-paid-actors-we-need-one-list-for-all-genders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440153610667%2F05b18626-72fc-416b-8593-ecb8f1cb701f-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20for%20Forbes%20to%20compile%20a%20genderless%20list%20of%20top-paid%20actors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fforbes-top-paid-actors-we-need-one-list-for-all-genders%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20for%20Forbes%20to%20compile%20a%20genderless%20list%20of%20top-paid%20actors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fforbes-top-paid-actors-we-need-one-list-for-all-genders%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440153610667%2F05b18626-72fc-416b-8593-ecb8f1cb701f-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Adam Sandler is paid more than Emma Stone, Natalie Portman and Anne Hathaway 
combined. Photograph: Jason Merritt/Getty Images 
Experts say the pay disparity has its roots in the low number of lead roles 
for women in Hollywood fare.A recent study found that women are given less than 
one-third of speaking parts in top movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/06/hollywood-bias-women-speechless-with-less-than-a-third-of-speaking-parts-in-top-films>
, with only 21% featuring a female lead or co-lead.

And yet a combined Forbes list, showing just how badly female Hollywood stars 
struggle in comparison to their male counterparts, might just help. After all, 
which Hollywood executive would double down on the latest Sandler sausage fest, 
when they could most probably affordScarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson>, (almost) two Melissa 
McCarthys or an ensemble cast of Emma Stones, Natalie Portmans and Anne 
Hathaways for the same price?

 