
“If a man has a strong social conscience and is keen on ‘causes,’ most of them 
to be won even if occasionally one appears to be lost, there is a good deal to 
be said for newspaper work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418037373671%2F13fba290-8e4f-4091-83bd-4b0749c75c1e-1671x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418037373671%2F13fba290-8e4f-4091-83bd-4b0749c75c1e-1671x2040.jpeg>
 Letter from WP Crozier to Harold Wilson, 4 August 1937. Photograph: Guardian 
News and Media Archive 
This was the advice given by William Percival Crozier, former editor of the 
Manchester Guardian, to Harold Wilson in 1937 following the future prime 
minister’s decision to decline a three-week trial at the newspaper. This 
statement reflects Crozier’s dedication to journalism, evidenced by his 41-year 
career at the newspaper. It also reflects a commitment to exposing truth 
through the pages of the newspaper which came to characterise his term as 
editor.

WP Crozier was born in Stanhope, County Durham in 1879. The son of a minister, 
he joined the Manchester Guardian in September 1903, rising through the ranks 
to be become editor in April 1932.


In the interwar period Crozier sought to increase foreign news coverage in the 
newspaper. A network of full-time correspondents based in major European cities 
including Paris, Berlin and Vienna was subsequently established. Each 
correspondent developed their own sources, which enabled them to write informed 
articles on the foreign affairs of the day. These were usually published in the 
newspaper under the anonymous byline ‘our own correspondent.’ Crozier himself 
kept abreast of the latest issues by maintaining a voluminous and detailed 
direct correspondence with his foreign writers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418056665453%2F6e6b1759-ed33-4f37-a5af-3b2cfd986bf6-1445x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418056665453%2F6e6b1759-ed33-4f37-a5af-3b2cfd986bf6-1445x2040.jpeg>
 WP Crozier, c1940 Photograph: The Guardian 
The Manchester Guardian’s approach to gathering and reporting foreign news was 
to prove particularly invaluable in the 1930s as theNational Socialist German 
Worker’s Party <http://spartacus-educational.com/GERnazi.htm>began to increase 
in power and influence. In January 1933, just seven months after Crozier’s 
appointment as editor, Adolf Hitler became the German chancellor.

For much of the next decade UK government policy towards Hitler was focused on 
appeasement <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appeasement>. However, informed of a 
rising ‘terror’ in Europe by his foreign correspondents, Crozier saw it as his 
duty to expose the actions of the Nazi party through the Manchester Guardian. 
By now the paper had an international reputation and a small but loyal 
following in Germany itself. Though extensive coverage in both the news columns 
and leading articles Guardian historian David Ayerst notes that Crozier and his 
team sought in this period to “serve Europe when it was covered by a darkness 
which many, even in England, took for light.”

As editor of the newspaper, Crozier’s initial advice to his foreign 
correspondents was to “stick to the facts and avoid strong judgments.” He 
continued to try and ensure that the paper did not come across as one-sided, 
but inevitably many disturbing stories were published during this time. For 
example the paper was banned in Germany shortly after the publication ofan 
article on 25 March 1933 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1418039769338/Nazi-terror-reports-not-exa.pdf> by 
then Berlin correspondentFrederick Augustus Voigt 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1418040683694/Mr-F.A.Voigt-obituary_Manch.pdf>. 
The article details the persecution of communists and social democrats by the
Sturmabteilung <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sturmabteilung> (SA), the 
parliamentary arm of the Nazi party.

Reports of antisemitism by the Nazi party were given prominence by the 
Manchester Guardian before other news agencies. Crozier’s belief inZionism 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zionism> and long-standing support for Jewish 
causes closer to home is likely to have contributed to the depth in which the 
newspaper addressed this subject.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418059208015%2F8b70e3e2-2a8b-4594-af95-9f62447c786e-1633x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418059208015%2F8b70e3e2-2a8b-4594-af95-9f62447c786e-1633x2040.jpeg>
 First page of a letter from FA Voigt to WP Crozier, 2 November 1937. The full 
letter is available to viewhere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2015/jan/02/gnm-archive-letter-voigt-crozier-hitler-mussolini-1937>
. Photograph: Guardian News and Media Archive 
One letter held by the GNM archive provides a particularly interesting insight 
into how the newspaper’s foreign correspondents gathered information and fed it 
back to Manchester at this time. The letter is from Voigt, who had been 
withdrawn to London in 1934 and was now the newspaper’s diplomatic 
correspondent. On 2 November 1937 he wrote to Crozier relaying information he 
gathered on a range of European issues following a trip to Paris.

In the first part of the letter Voigt conveys the observations of one of his 
informants, an Italian diplomat named Antinori who acted as a liaison officer 
between Hitler and Mussolini on a number of occasions. The letter highlights a 
marked change in Mussolini’s attitude to Hitler during the 1930s. After a 
meeting in Venice in 1934 Mussolini is quoted as telling Antinori that Hitler 
is an “imbecile”, but by 1937 Nazi ideology appears to have had an impact on 
the Italian premier as Antinori tells Voigt: “the influence of ‘the new 
Germany’ on Mussolini in particular and on Facist Italy in general is 
prodigious.”

Voigt also describes a meeting with Camille Chautemps, then the prime minister 
of France, in which they discussed France’s supply of arms to Barcelona in theS 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanish_Civil_War>panish civil war 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/Spanish-Civil-War.htm> which is argued by 
some historians to have been a dress rehearsal for the second world war. Voigt 
goes on to describe in some detail the prospects of the loyalists based on 
various sources.

The seven-page letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2015/jan/02/gnm-archive-letter-voigt-crozier-hitler-mussolini-1937>
 ends with Voigt commenting on Germany’s military strength and the “initial 
lightning offensive” which became known as theBlitzkrieg 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blitzkrieg> and in the early stages of the second 
world war proved devastatingly successful. Crozier forwarded the letter to 
Manchester Guardian Managing Director John Scott. With the benefit of 
hindsight, Scott’s reply about Hitler seems particularly insightful: “Most 
interesting and disturbing, the course of History can seldom have depended so 
largely upon the personality of one man.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418037995739%2F12fe4bcf-5b8c-4842-b529-3d7aa32f92cf-1639x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Foreign%20news%20coverage%20in%20the%201930s%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20January%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjan%2F02%2Fforeign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F8%2F1418037995739%2F12fe4bcf-5b8c-4842-b529-3d7aa32f92cf-1639x2040.jpeg>
 Letter from senior staff to WP Crozier, 30 December 1938. Photograph: Guardian 
News and Media Archive 
The Manchester Guardian’s foreign correspondents continued to report from 
Europe as the decade wore on and thoughts increasingly turned away from 
appeasement and towards impending war. The unexpected signing of theMunich 
Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/05/chamberlain-munich-appeasement-second-world-war>
 on 30 September 1938 was met withskepticism by Crozier and his foreign writers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/25/guardian-190-chamberlain-returns-from-munich>
. At the end of that turbulent year the senior staff of the Manchester Guardian 
sent a signed letter to Crozier thanking him for his leadership. The signatures 
“by telephone” include those of foreign correspondents Alexander Werth and 
Charles Lambert.

The country was officially at war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/paper-rationing-second-world-war-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 less than a year later. Crozier continued to edit the paper but his health was 
beginning to fail.He died on 16 April 1944. 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1418039574221/WP-Crozier-obituary.pdf>

 A sample of Crozier’s correspondence is held in the GNM Archive. Further 
examples can be found at theJohn Ryland’s Library at the University of 
Manchester 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/searchresources/guidetospecialcollections/atoz/guardianarchive/>
.

Further reading

WP Crozier: Collection in focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2014/nov/20/wp-crozier-collection-in-focus>

WP Crozier: His Life and Legacy - online exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmexhibitions/wp-crozier-life-legacy>

WP Crozier: Obituary 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1418039574221/WP-Crozier-obituary.pdf>


Frederick August Voigt: Obituary 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1418040683694/Mr-F.A.Voigt-obituary_Manch.pdf>

Neville Chamberlain and Appeasement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/05/chamberlain-munich-appeasement-second-world-war>

From the Archive: 1 October 1938: Chamberlain returns from Munich and declares 
“Peace for our time” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/25/guardian-190-chamberlain-returns-from-munich>

Second world war and paper rationing: teaching resource from the GNM Archive 
September 2103 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/paper-rationing-second-world-war-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>

Manchester Guardian Archive at the University of Manchester 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/searchresources/guidetospecialcollections/atoz/guardianarchive/>
 