
The avocado’s ubiquity in 2015  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/avocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked>
was pretty strange, when you think about it, since there is evidence of avocado 
use dating from 10,000 BC in a cave in Coaxcatlan, Puebla, in Mexico.

But try telling that to someone trying to Instagram their brunch without 
getting egg yolk all over their phone. The avocado has been done to death this 
year – along witharticles about the avocado being done to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/05/the-avocado-is-overcado-how-culture-caught-up-with-fashion>
. An irony I am well aware of. This torrent of publicity for what is basically 
a delicious thing to eat, followed by a fierce backlash, is inexplicable if 
you’ve been quietly eating avocados for years.

Ripe and ready: how ‘evil geniuses’ got us hooked on avocados
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/avocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked>
Let’s look at the positives. In many ways, the rise of the avocado in 2015 has 
been a welcome development. There are more of them around, for a start, and 
some of them are even ripe. You can get avocado on toast in places that aren’t 
London. I know, because I live somewhere that is not London. And when it comes 
to food trends, you know something’s gone mainstream when it rocks up in my 
town.

But there are drawbacks too. Apparently, avocados were the most pinned food on 
Pinterest this year. Just writing that sentence makes me hate humanity. The 
ludicrous idea that they’re a butter substitute emerged. See“brownies” made 
from avocados 
<http://www.thehealthymaven.com/2015/08/healthy-avocado-brownies.html>, apple 
sauce and coconut flour. And we saw theadvent of avocado tattoos 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/gyanyankovich/arty-avocado-alert#.jtNK3mRyp>. You 
really have seen it all when you’ve seen someone sporting a tattoo of a haunted 
avocado.

All these things and, of course, the final straw – Nigella Lawson’s 
championing of avocado on toast on Simply Nigella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/02/last-nights-tv-simply-nigella-review->
. I love Nigella. I love avocados. But although her avocado on toast contains 
dill (no), lime, chilli flakes and radish, avocado on toast is most definitely 
not a recipe. Even Nigella had to admit this. But unfortunately she added that 
avocado on toast was “part of the fabric of my life”.

There are plenty of contenders for trendy foods we can all become incredibly 
annoyed by in 2016

People just sick to death of the whole thing (the whole enchilada, if you will 
– a dish, of course, that is perfect with avocado) have suggested that the smug 
and ubiquitous avocado should be left behind in 2015. But rather than turn our 
backs on this delectable food, how about we simply enjoy avocados and stop 
plastering pictures of them all over social media? After all, there are plenty 
of contenders for trendy foods we can all become incredibly annoyed by in 2016:

1. Shrub

Drinking vinegars with a venerable history. Shrubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/28/plum-shrub-recipe-claire-thomson>
 are more delicious than they sound, but have inexplicably started appearing in 
hipster hangouts in New York and London – see theShrub and Shutter 
<http://www.theshrubandshutter.com/> restaurant in Brixton.

2. Nut butters

Homemade of course. And peanuts simply won’t do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/oct/22/how-to-make-perfect-peanut-butter-recipe>
. Almonds. Cashews. Pecans. The more expensive the better. You will fall into 
ruinous penury and break your blender trying to make this at home. And then you 
will go to the supermarket and buy a jar of Sun-Pat.

3. Seaweed

Slimy in its raw state, brittle in its packaged, dried form, quickly turning 
limp. Umami. Already inMarks & Spencer biscuits 
<https://www.pressandjournal.co.uk/fp/business/north-of-scotland/550912/not-just-seaweed-biscuit/>
. What do you do with it? No one knows. But you’ll buy it anyway.

4. Kombucha
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Favocado-foods-love-hate-2016-seaweed-kombucha%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74d474590151e12c2884ed49ceddfb5684e74dad%2F0_0_1728_1037%2F1728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20avocado%2C%20here%20are%20the%20foods%20we%E2%80%99ll%20love%20to%20hate%20in%202016%20%7C%20Fay%20Schopen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Favocado-foods-love-hate-2016-seaweed-kombucha%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20avocado%2C%20here%20are%20the%20foods%20we%E2%80%99ll%20love%20to%20hate%20in%202016%20%7C%20Fay%20Schopen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Favocado-foods-love-hate-2016-seaweed-kombucha%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74d474590151e12c2884ed49ceddfb5684e74dad%2F0_0_1728_1037%2F1728.jpg>
 ‘Kombucha: a fermented tea drink people say tastes fantastic. They are lying.’ 
Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
Fermented tea drink people say tastes fantastic. They are lying. Health 
benefits, apparently.Kombucha 
<http://www.foodrenegade.com/kombucha-health-benefits/> tea bars are “popping 
up” at places such asMick’s Garage in Hackney 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/restaurants/mick-s-garage-to-bring-fermented-tea-and-a-middle-eastern-smokehouse-to-hackney-a3110036.html>
, London, says the trendiest food blogger in the world,Clerkenwell Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/13/who-is-clerkenwell-boy-london-foodie-superhero>
. I’m so untrendy I thought that might be an actual garage. So I Googled it. 
Then I had a little cry. The good news is that said bar offers it as a mixer 
for spirits. And if there’s one thing that’s comfortingly impervious to 
aggravating food trends, it’s good old hard liquor. Cheers.
 