
The winner

Improved news for our slightly shopworn fresh prince, as Will Smith and 
Warner’s con caperFocus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/focus-review> jumps to the global 
top spot, expanding from 32 to 50 territories. A flush of No 1 openings – in 
Mexico, Italy, Australia and Argentina – bolster the theory that Smith’s 
primary constituency these days is overseas. More specifically, it’s developing 
economies that are clinging, as with many an ageing A-lister, to the Men in 
Black star: openings are up from 2005’s romcomHitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hitch> (the comparison point used last week) 
in Argentina (Focus: $641K; Hitch: $154K), Czech Republic (Focus: $58K; Hitch: 
$34K) and Slovakia (Focus: $53K; Hitch: $10K); Russia, in its second week, was 
also ahead of the pace set by Hitch (Focus: $6.3m; Hitch: $2m). Contrast those 
with the Italian (Focus: $2.2m; Hitch: $2.5m) and Australian (Focus: $2.1m; 
Hitch: $2.7m) openings, and the UK running total (Focus: $6.5m; Hitch: $15.5m). 
Will’s going to be clocking up a lot of unfamiliar passport stamps in the 
coming years, if those figures are anything to go by.

Focus review – Will Smith and Margot Robbie in the perfect con movie, almost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/focus-will-smith-margot-robbie-first-look-review>
No disassemble

Neill Blomkamp’s lobbying campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/11/neill-blomkamp-my-alien-film-is-ready-to-go>
 for the directorship of the next Alien film has made his current work-in-play, 
Johannesburg-set robot parableChappie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chappie>
, feel like a bit of an afterthought. And a wan $13.3m US opening – well behind 
$29.8m for Blomkamp’sElysium <https://www.theguardian.com/film/elysium> and 
$37.3m forDistrict 9 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/district-9> – and $27m 
overall on a global rollout much more front-loaded than either of those two 
films is the pay-off. What did the real damage is the fact that, choosing to 
release post-Oscars but before blockbuster season begins proper, distributor 
Sony hasn’t really backed the film. Flavourless trailers put antagonist Hugh 
Jackman – whose solo box-office appeal is debatable – high up the mix, amid a 
general splurge of techno-carnage. But they failed to showcase the film’s 
distinctive elements: its South African“zef” <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zef> 
swagger, as represented in the persons of rappersDie Antwoord 
<http://www.dieantwoord.com/>, and its thin but tangy lacquer of satire. It was 
partly the sense of a novel proposition coming from unfamiliar climes (in 
blockbuster terms at least) that pushed Blomkamp’s debut, District 9, to a 
superb $210.8m on a $30m budget.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fchappie-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425571981073%2Fcrop_KP_112759_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chappie%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fchappie-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chappie%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fchappie-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425571981073%2Fcrop_KP_112759_640x360.jpeg>
 Chappie - video review 
Films with robotic protagonists, surprisingly, have never done fantastically 
in the US, with just Wall-E taking over $100m. Given its opening weekend, it’s 
unlikely Chappie will match either the new ($58m) or old ($109m, 
inflation-corrected)Robocop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90791/robocop>, or Short Circuit 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBtRVjAMbVo> ($86.8m, inflation-corrected), 
its obvious progenitors. Internationally, it seems to be doing slightly better 
in Asia, with No 1 openings in Malaysia ($1.1m), Taiwan ($814K), Indonesia 
($757K) and Thailand ($701K) auguring better for appearances in tech-centric 
South Korea (19 March) and Japan (23 May). And of course home turf South Africa 
(13 March) should be strong. Elysium lent on overseas markets – 67.5% of its 
$286.1m gross – to make up for a so-so US performance; Chappie is in danger 
already of being a write-off, or at least on a reasonable $50m budget, a 
writedown.


Space wreckage
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fjupiter-ascending-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423135662032%2Fcrop_KP_86534_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jupiter%20Ascending%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fjupiter-ascending-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jupiter%20Ascending%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fjupiter-ascending-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423135662032%2Fcrop_KP_86534_640x360.jpeg>
 Jupiter Ascending - video review 
Andy and Lana Wachowski’s cosmic misfire, Jupiter Ascending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jupiter-ascending>, got a desperately needed 
turbo-boost a month after its day-and-date rollout: a belated $24.3m Chinese 
debut made it the week’s biggest overseas earner. That’s Warner Brother’s 
fifth-biggest opening in the territory and gives it a fighting chance, like the 
studio’sPacific Rim <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pacific-rim>, of joining 
that burgeoning fellowship: films that made more in China than the US (where 
Jupiter Ascending has taken $45m so far). Which will be the only accolade on 
the mantelpiece. With the film now up to $152m worldwide, profit remains light 
years away, with Deadline Hollywood quoting a true budget in excess of $200m 
plus $100m of marketing costs. With only Japan to come in terms of major 
markets, even $200m gross is an outside bet, making it a financial catastrophe 
of the order of Disney’sJohn Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142787/john-carter-review>, which took 
$284.1m on a $250m budget.Deadline’s piece speculates interestingly 
<http://deadline.com/2015/02/jupiter-ascending-wachowskis-channing-tatum-mila-kunis-box-office-bomb-1201369053/>
 on the Wachowskis being left unsupervised home alone after Jeff Robinov, the 
executive with whom they had the closest relationship, left Warner in 2013. 
With such a large financial burden, the casting also looks suspect, with Mila 
Kunis totally unproven as a lead and hot-right-now Channing Tatum possessing a 
stronger record in comedies and comedy-dramas. The sad thing is that a few more 
fiscal restrictions could have prevented a debacle that looks likely to end the 
big-budget career of a pair of creative mavericks.The Fifth Element 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/69354/fifth-element>’s $263.9m in 1997 
- $384.2 inflation-corrected – against $90m of outlay is the kind of 
space-opera business model Warner should have been aiming for.


Kill shot
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Famerican-sniper-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421410513658%2Fcrop_KP-69693_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Sniper%3A%20'Clean%20Harry.%20Like%20Dirty%20Harry%2C%20but%20boring'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Famerican-sniper-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Sniper%3A%20%27Clean%20Harry.%20Like%20Dirty%20Harry%2C%20but%20boring%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F16%2Famerican-sniper-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421410513658%2Fcrop_KP-69693_640.jpeg>
 American Sniper - video review 
American Sniper set to become biggest film of 2014 at US box office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/american-sniper-biggest-film-of-2014-us-box-office>
Two milestones for American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, still lurking in the brush 
of the top 10 this week: it has now passed the $500m worldwide mark; and, with 
$337.2m of that in domestic gross at time of writing, has become theNo 1 US 
film for 2014 <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=2014&p=.htm>, 
passing the latest Hunger Games. It’s the only non-franchised work on the list. 
Wherever you stand on the film’s politics, that has to be a good thing. Italy 
($23.1m), the UK ($20.5m), France ($16.8m – where it’s holding strongly at No 
1), Australia ($15.1m) and Japan ($12.2m) are the top overseas markets;
currently at 14th on the global chart for 2014 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2014>, it should 
pass Godzilla ($528.7m) and stick one place higher. In the upper echelons, only
The Lego Movie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-lego-movie> (55%) and 
Divergent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/divergent> (52.3%), and 22 Jump 
Street <https://www.theguardian.com/film/22-jump-street> (58%) – 
franchise-openers and comedies never being the greatest travellers – come close 
to being as Yank-centric as Clint’s film. The clue’s in the title.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlt5r9GNTQmc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlt5r9GNTQmc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlt5r9GNTQmc&media=>
The rest of the world

The Chinese new-year blockbusters were still hanging around the global top 10 
for a third weekend, but a rare Russian film made an appearance this week.
Dukhless 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lt5r9GNTQmc>, a sequel to Roman 
Prygunov’s 2012 film about a new-Muscovite playboy who realises the error of 
his capitalist ways when he meets a comely revolutionary, took $3.7m, top spot 
there, and 19th globally. Lead actorDanila Kozlovsky 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1572716/>, in the ensemble for the Weinstein 
Company’s Vampire Academy last year, has one foot in the Hollywood door. Not 
included on the Rentrak list wasDoraemon: Nobita’s Space Heroes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R2c11R3hN34> $5.3m bow in Japan – an amazing 
36th big-screen outing for the time-travelling robot cat and anime icon.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA9icNqWlylw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA9icNqWlylw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA9icNqWlylw&media=>
The future

Disney tries to maintain its princess chokehold with Kenneth Branagh’s version 
ofCinderella <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=20DF6U1HcGQ> dropping in about 30 
countries – accompanied by a new Frozen short. That includes an unusual 
face-off opening weekend for the US and China, with fantasy material an 
increasingly strong performer in the latter. Liam Neeson tries to maintain a 
different sort of chokehold – one administered by a gruff yet buff father 
figure – as he reteams withNon-Stop <https://www.theguardian.com/film/non-stop> 
director Jaume Collet-Saura for crinkly action-festRun All Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7uDuFh-nC-c>, which gets a 10-country first 
weekend. Chappie and Focus add more sporadic territories. And in India, Anushka 
Sharma looks to build towards what – after playing second fiddle in 
international record-breaker PK – could be a big 2015. She produces and stars 
in road-trip thrillerNH10 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A9icNqWlylw>, which 
looks more harrowing than the Bollywood average and could benefit from the 
debate around violence against women in the country generated by the ban on BBC 
filmIndia’s Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/01/indias-daughter-documentary-rape-delhi-women-indian-men-attitudes>
.


Top 10 global box office, 6-8 March

1. Focus <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/focus-review>, $27.6m 
from 50 territories. $72m cumulative – 51.8% int; 48.2% US
2. (New) Chappie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chappie>, $27m from 54 
territories – 50.7% int; 49.3% US
3. Jupiter Ascending <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jupiter-ascending>, 
$26.4m from 54 territories. $152.1m cum – 70.4% int; 29.6% US
4. Kingsman: The Secret Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kingsman-the-secret-service>, $25.3m from 68 
territories. $248.8m cum – 60.6% int; 39.4% US
5. Fifty Shades of Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey>
, $23.3m from 60 territories. $527.7m cum – 70.4% int; 29.6% US
6. Big Hero 6 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/big-hero-6>, $19.9m from 26 
territories. $604.8m cum – 63.4% int; 36.6% US
7. American Sniper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, $19.1m 
from 58 territories. $500.2m cum – 32.6% int; 67.4% US
8. Spongebob Squarepants: Sponge Out of Water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/03/spongebob-movie-sponge-out-of-water-first-look-review>
, $16.6m from 52 territories. $259.4m cum – 42.6% int; 57.4% US
9. Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-second-best-exotic-marigold-hotel>, 
$14.2m from 10 territories. $29.6m cum – 70.9% int; 29.1% US
10. From Vegas to Macau II, $10m from 5 territories. $133m cum – 100% int


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. Some of this week’s figures are 
based on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

 