Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUSX6tKZxK_o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUSX6tKZxK_o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUSX6tKZxK_o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Former Big Brother winner Brian Belo is suing ITV and The Only Way is Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-only-way-is-essex> producer Lime 
Pictures, claiming they lifted the idea for the show from an idea he developed.

Belo claims that he developed a programme idea called Totally Essex, along 
with Sassy Films and Massive TV, andhas a teaser video promoting a show that 
features many of the stars of the ITV2 reality programme 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=USX6tKZxK_o&feature=player_embedded>.

The four-minute video, which is available on YouTube, features future stars of 
TOWIE including Amy Childs, Mark Wright, Kirk Norcross and Sam Faiers.

The joint high court claim by Belo and the TV companies, filed on 16 March 
against Lime Pictures and ITV, alleges that TOWIE infringes copyright and a 
breach of confidence.

Belo, who won Big Brother in 2007, claims that he has emails and texts proving 
that he approached Lime Pictures with the idea.

ITV and Lime said in a joint statement: "The Only Way is Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex> is an original concept created and 
developed by an award-winning team at Lime Pictures. Brian Belo's claim against 
Lime and ITV is totally without foundation and will be vigorously defended.

"The creative team at Lime Pictures is very proud of TOWIE and the notion that 
it was not entirely their own work is a serious allegation which is completely 
refuted.

TOWIE has picked up a number of awards and several cast members have gone on 
to develop TV careers including Wright, who appeared on I'm a Celebrity... Get 
Me Out of Here! and The Batchelor, and Childs, who has gone on to star in her 
own Channel 5 show.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 