
Get ready to answer why you left your last job


 If you are currently unemployed, prepare to be asked about it at interviews. 
“Write out a response and internalise it so it sounds natural. There is nothing 
to be ashamed of with redundancy or leaving a job, but you don’t want to invite 
questions. Something like: ‘My last position was eliminated. I am looking for 
X.’ Turn the conversation away from being made redundant, which you can’t 
control, to what you want,” says Katherine Burik, founder ofThe Interview Doctor
 <http://www.jobinterviewcoaching.org/>. “Say it confidently and no one will 
inquire. Say it with fear and the interviewers will ask more questions that you 
don’t want to – and shouldn’t have to – answer. So write out your response and 
practice out loud until it sounds natural. The more confidence the better.”

 Jon Gregory, a job search, application and interview specialist 
<http://www.win-that-job.com/>, agrees that you need to state your job move 
with confidence. “You should definitely not feel defensive about leaving or 
being made redundant from a past employer.” And under no circumstance should 
you apologise for leaving a role or being made redundant. “If you apologise for 
your situation, it will create a negative impression of you.”

 Don’t mention your reason for leaving in your cover letter

On the flipside, there’s no reason to explain why you left your last job in 
your cover letter. “I wouldn’t mention your reasons in your cover letter as it 
will only draw attention to why you left or were made redundant,” says Andrew 
Fennell, director ofStandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/blogs/cv-writing-advice-blog/41315012-7-easy-cv-formatting-tips-that-will-get-you-more-interviews>
.

 Victoria McLean, founder and chief executive of CityCV.co.uk 
<http://citycv.co.uk/>, adds that it’s important to focus on the positives in 
your CV. “Show off your strengths and what you have achieved. Don’t say why you 
left your most recent role, mention instead what you can bring and why the 
prospective job is so attractive.”

Mentioning why you left your previous role is best left for interviews. “You 
only need to expand on your reasons for leaving your current role at an 
interview, rather than in your application,” agrees Julie Taylor, careers 
adviser and partnerships coordinator for theNational Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/>.

What to do after redundancy: how I stayed motivated in my job hunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/how-to-stay-motivated-redundant-job-loss>
Take a broader approach in your job hunt

When job hunting, you may try to match your skills with new job roles. 
However, psychologist and careers coach Denise Taylor says don’t limit yourself 
to just looking for jobs in your skillset. “If you focus too much on skills, 
you may miss out on wider options. Why not spend time thinking about everything 
you enjoy – your interests, the things that fascinate you? Also consider your 
constraints. Is re-training an option? Can you take a drop in salary?” Once you 
have narrowed down your options, make a list of jobs to apply to.

“Start by having a clear idea of what you want,” says Burik. “Draw a line 
between your experiences and the job you want so potential employers understand 
how to use your experience in a new environment.”

Meanwhile Sarah Byrne, online editor at Careershifters 
<http://www.careershifters.org/>, says it’s worth looking into new sectors to 
see what would suit you best. “Speak with those in the sector, attend talks and 
meet ups, and ask to shadow work in different workplaces. You’ll get a feel for 
what’s out there and make connections that will help with your job hunt.”

Take this time to find your purpose

 When you’re unemployed, it can be easy to rush into the first job you’re 
offered, but Lis McGuire, founder ofGiraffe CVs <http://www.giraffecvs.co.uk/>, 
recommends giving yourself space to find your ideal job. “This can be tricky. 
Think what do you enjoy doing. What are you really good at? Is there a problem 
that drives you crazy, that you’d love to help solve? These questions may 
uncover some answers that help to inform your future career.”

 The key is deciding on what you want, and then staying motivated throughout 
your job hunt. “Barriers appear when an individual is unclear about where 
exactly they want to position themselves in the job market,” says George Brown, 
career services manager atLondon School of Business and Finance 
<http://www.lsbf.org.uk/>. “Stay focused, replace negative internal dialogue 
and keep trying to get on to your new path.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 