
Belarusian dissident Ales Bialliatski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/08/belarus-lukashenko-human-rights-trial>
, who was released at the weekend after three years in jail, has vowed to 
remain in Belarus and continue the fight for human rights. He spoke at a press 
conference in Minsk yesterday:

We must be a country without political prisoners

“I hope my release is only the beginning and that other political prisoners 
will also be free. I call on the Belarusian authorities not to stop with my 
release. This does not make the situation any better. We must be a country 
without political prisoners. And we are quite close to that.

"It is enough to release those seven people left and impose a moratorium, 
announce a goodwill towards civil society and people of alternative views.

“We are not in a free society and my release does not give me great pleasure. 
Three years have passed and I am back to where I started. What will happen 
tomorrow is unclear. The aims of human rights organisations stay the same.”

How do you feel about improving relations between Minsk and the EU?

"The first thing to demand is the release of political prisoners. Any talks 
about improving situation may come only after their release. We should not 
allow these double standards whereby we have political prisoners (while talking 
to the EU) – like it is in Azerbaijan, where opposition leaders are imprisoned 
while (President Ilham) Aliyev travels aroundEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> greeting everyone. We should 
make this a zone without political prisoners.

"When we get it, the authorities will realise that it is beneficial for them, 
both politically and economically, not to have political prisoners. Unless this 
happens, there can be no progress.

"If there is even one man behind bars, it means the scenario of 2010 (when 
there werewidespread protests against the re-election of Alexander Lukashenko  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-belarus-remains-revolution-behind>
amid claims that the polls were rigged) will be repeated. Another 100 people 
will end up behind bars. Then we'll have again another championship – and we'll 
have some misunderstandable detentions, ridiculous administrative reports for 
cursing. We should not go down the road of unlawfulness. We should try to build 
up something on legal grounds so as not to play into the hands of the 
authorities.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F24%2Fbelarusian-ales-bialiatski-release%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F24%2F1403605199107%2F4008b00e-25b1-46ef-95c4-8b4208d40438-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freed%20Belarusian%20campaigner%20vows%20to%20fight%20for%20release%20of%20all%20political%20prisoners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F24%2Fbelarusian-ales-bialiatski-release%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freed%20Belarusian%20campaigner%20vows%20to%20fight%20for%20release%20of%20all%20political%20prisoners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fjun%2F24%2Fbelarusian-ales-bialiatski-release%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F24%2F1403605199107%2F4008b00e-25b1-46ef-95c4-8b4208d40438-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ales Bialiatski with his wife, Natalya Pinchu Photograph: Dmitry Brushko/AP 
Are you going to stay in Belarus?

“I am not going to leave. I feel comfortable here. Even in the zone, I wrote 
about it in my letters, I felt quite comfortable because my people surrounded 
me. The atmosphere of the Belarusian society is important for me – the way it 
is.”

Are Ukraine-style protests possible in Belarus?

"Anything is possible here. Another thing is whether the society is ready for 
the changes that are necessary. A lot depends on whether the authorities are 
ready for such changes. To transform the situation and the society and keep up 
with the world around us.

"We do not live in an isolated island. The world is changing, and we should 
change too. We cannot be preserved in a can for 20-30 years.

I would like the changes to take place in a slow and evolutionary manner

"I would like the changes to take place in a slow and evolutionary manner. 
Because sharp changes and crisis are costly. As a human rights defender, I 
stick to the principle that we need a mass civil standing, peaceful civil 
resistance which would lead to changes in the society.

"And this is the way which makes changes irreversible. Then there can be no 
rollbacks. And for this purpose we all should work, and not one year, and 
pretty much.”

What were conditions like in prison?

If somebody greets you, or talks to you about football or weather, the next 
day he is taken away

"Conditions for political prisoners are clear; this is not only about me, but 
all the others. Political prisoners are held in isolation from other prisoners. 
Nobody talks to you. They keep 3m away from you. Because if somebody greets 
you, or talks to you about football or weather, the next day he is taken away. 
This situation of isolation from other prisoners lasted until the very last 
minute.”


What are you going to do next?

“I will keep doing human rights work to the extent that I can. Belarusian 
human rights defenders have limited possibilities, in particular for Viasna 
(his peace movement), which is still unregistered. The problem of being able to 
work legally is really acute.

"I am vice-president of the International Human Rights Federation, and I will 
keep on work at the international level both on the Belarusian issues and other 
issues existent in the region. We should not forget what's happening around us 
because it influences the situation inBelarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>. And this will be my major work. I 
will keep on my writing.”
 