
Ambulance “frequent fliers” who make several 999 calls a year are costing the 
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in England millions of pounds, 
with experts concerned that some patients develop an unhealthy pattern of 
dependent behaviour on the service.

Though most callers have genuine unmet medical needs – few are malicious or 
hoaxers – the scale of the problem becomes evident as  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/31/nhs-faces-worst-winter-accident-and-emergency-a-and-e>
hospitalA&E departments get to grips with 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/31/nhs-faces-worst-winter-accident-and-emergency-a-and-e>
 another winter of rising demands on services. Ambulance service leaders and 
local health commissioners are keen to focus increasingly tight budgets on 
patients at more imminent risk.

Mental health linked to one-fifth of emergency ambulance callouts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/10/mental-health-linked-to-one-fifth-of-emergency-ambulance-callouts>
Among more extreme cases reported by ambulance services are:

 * A patient who called 999 more than 700 times in two years. The estimated 
costs to the ambulance service over a year was more than £110,000.

 * A patient who cost NHS England £10,000 in a month. 
 * A patient who made 238 emergency calls over two months at a cost of nearly 
£40,000.

The London ambulance service says each patient costs on average £7.81 per 999 
call. To be further reviewed on the telephone by a clinician costs £64.59, to 
receive an ambulance and be treated at home is £155.30, and to receive an 
ambulance and be taken to hospital costs £254.57.

Frequent callers – a term preferred within 999 services to “fliers” – include 
people with chronic, often multiple conditions, mental health issues, high 
levels of anxiety, lack of confidence in managing their own problems, and 
people who feel socially isolated and may be seeking attention.

Frequent callers are defined nationally as people who make more than five 
calls in a month or 12 in three months, although figures provided by individual 
ambulance services are sometimes based on different definitions.



NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> clinical commissioning groups 
and ambulance services across England have embarked on a programme to change 
that behaviour. An experienced paramedic at the ambulance dispatch centre helps 
crews on the scene determine whether they should provide advice on the spot, 
refer the caller to other services or take them to hospital. This person also 
phones doctors at GP practices to discuss patients’ clinical conditions and 
support crews in considering alternatives to A&E.

What I'm really thinking: the 999 operator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/aug/24/what-really-thinking-999-operator>
Louise Lumby, a GP involved in the scheme, said some frequent callers were 
genuinely very ill. She said: “Telling somebody off doesn’t change behaviour. 
It is about finding the right service for that patient. I would like to think 
we have a much better patient journey to care on the back of the fact we have 
put support in.”

North West ambulance service identified 1,456 frequent callers in 2014-15. 
“Some patients are unaware of what else to do, or who to ring for help, and 
although we cannot always provide the care they require, patients know that we 
will respond”, it said. “Several patients have unmet care needs, are lonely and 
may have multiple complex needs that necessitate a multidisciplinary approach 
to support their health and social care needs appropriately.

“Collaborative working and involving the patient in decision making is vital 
to ensure that patients are involved, that care is personalised and that each 
care provider is aware of all input. Unfortunately, support offered is not 
always accepted, and some patients refuse to engage, and will continue to ring 
999.”

Rob Cole, consultant paramedic with the West Midlands ambulance service, said 
the problem was “getting worse in terms of numbers but that is offset by the 
fact we are considerably better at the management [of the problem]”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Ffrequent-999-callers-nhs-england-ambulance-emergency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11c1c22baefccf9a68b1acda6d897295ef8abea8%2F0_167_3599_2159%2F3599.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frequent%20999%20callers%20cost%20NHS%20millions%20of%20pounds%20a%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Ffrequent-999-callers-nhs-england-ambulance-emergency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frequent%20999%20callers%20cost%20NHS%20millions%20of%20pounds%20a%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fdec%2F25%2Ffrequent-999-callers-nhs-england-ambulance-emergency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11c1c22baefccf9a68b1acda6d897295ef8abea8%2F0_167_3599_2159%2F3599.jpg>
 Ambulance services want to focus tight budgets on patients at greater risk. 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
South Western ambulance service received 13,231 calls from frequent callers 
between June and August 2015. It said: “It is important to acknowledge the 
difference between inappropriate frequent callers and appropriate frequent 
callers. For example, a patient with unstable angina, end-stage COPD [chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease] or a terminal illness meets the definition of a 
frequent caller but will have regular contact with us for a genuine acute need.

“We work closely with other agencies, including our GP and hospital emergency 
department colleagues to jointly manage [them]. Since April 2013, we have only 
issued eight ‘restricted send’ letters to those frequent callers that we have 
identified as inappropriate callers that we cannot manage in other ways.”

London ambulance service put into special measures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/27/london-ambulance-service-special-measures-care-quality-commission>
“Restricted send” letters tell patients that the service would no longer send 
an ambulance in response to a 999 call “other than in exceptional circumstances 
where clinical staff believe that your life is in imminent danger”. They also 
say that having worked unsuccessfully with them and other agencies “we have no 
other option but to take steps to protect other members of the public who do 
require our service”.

Jason Scott, a research associate at Newcastle University’s Institute of Health
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Society, who previously 
chaired the frequent caller network, is preparing a case for NHS research into 
the issues. The number of people calling “to be a nuisance” was small and could 
be dealt with through the legal process, he said.

But work was needed to identify why others were frequently calling 999, said 
Scott. “The general agreement is that they are doing so because they have some 
form of perceived unmet health or social care need and the ambulance call is a 
fall-back position, the last resort,” he said.

Detailed research was needed on whether cutting the number of frequent 999 
callers caused problems elsewhere. Scott said: “Do we simply pass costs on to 
another part of healthcare, which doesn’t really solve the problem? That would 
be just passing the buck to someone else.”


 