
The arrest of Alexander Solzhenitsyn brought widespread worldwide protests 
yesterday.Graham Greene <https://www.theguardian.com/books/grahamgreene> said 
that in response to the move all novelists, poets, and scientists should refuse 
to let their works be published in the Soviet Union. "The time has come to make 
Moscow a literary ghetto," he said in a telephone interview from his home on 
the French Riviera.

The arrest, said the British novelist, "must be on the grounds of the 
copyright agreement. I'm afraid that was the object of Russia's signing the 
(copyright) convention."

In Cologne Heinrich Boell, president of the international PEN organisation, 
said:
"Every accused has the right to know the reason for which he is brought up for 
interrogation, and to seek the aid of a lawyer. The behaviour of the Soviet 
Writer's Union is increasingly less trustworthy as it takes part in the 
prosecution of Solzhenitsyn."

The Royal Swedish Academy, which awarded Solzhenitsyn the Nobel Prize for 
Literature in 1970, expressed deep concern at his detention.

Dr Karl-Ragnar Gierov, its secretary-general, said in Stockholm: "I find this 
news deeply tragic." He hoped Solzhenitsyn was simply being questioned and 
would not be held. The American branch of PEN calling for the writer's 
immediate release, said he was being "persecuted relentlessly by his 
Government" for publishing his work abroad.

"This action is in gross violation of international covenants, Soviet law, and 
the consensus of world opinion," it said in a statement.

In Oslo, the Norwegian Prime Minister, Trygve Bratteli said: "The concern felt 
by the Norwegian people regarding the treatment of Solzhenitsyn has been 
intensified by news of his arrest." Mr Bratteli is to visit the Soviet Union 
next month for talks with Government leaders.

In Washington Senator Henry Jackson, Democrat, said that the arrest raised 
doubts that the Soviet Union really wanted d√©tente with the West. He urged "the 
civilised world" to "speak out and redouble its efforts to support him in his 
courageous defence of human and artistic freedom."

Western delegates at the European security talks in Geneva said the arrest had 
set a fresh problem for the conference, at present in its intermediate stage. 
The subject could be raised at a plenary session tomorrow of its Human Contacts 
committee.

Western delegates have so far not raised the sensitive issue of Soviet 
dissidents, fearing it could spark off a damaging confrontation between East 
and West.
 