
I remember, as a student, being very struck by a poster arguing against an 
attempt byEdward Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
's government to bring in museum charges. It said: "We the undersigned oppose 
the introduction of admission charges" and carried the signatures of Van Gogh, 
Titian, Turner and some 50 other great artists. It made me realise a simple 
truth: that free admission is all about giving everyone, no matter what their 
means, the chance to see the greatest works of art, science and history that 
our nation has.

Over the following three decades, charges were indeed brought in. Some 
national collections valiantly held out against the tide; but most succumbed to 
charging, and in some cases the charges were high. To bring a family to the
Science Museum <http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/> or Natural History Museum 
became a substantial financial undertaking.

When I became Secretary of State in 1997 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/person/4833/chris-smith>, I was 
determined to change this. I believed passionately that these great treasure 
houses belonged to us all, and should be available for free, for ever. It took 
me four years to achieve that: convincing reluctant colleagues; securing 
additional funding; persuading some museum directors; achieving the removal of 
VAT. It was worth it, though; and the surge in visitor numbers – up by 150% 
over the last decade – has proved it.

On the day free admission began, 10 years ago, I was invited to cut the ribbon 
and throw open the doors at the Science Museum. About half an hour later, I was 
standing in the foyer, and a man approached me, carrying his daughter on his 
shoulders. He looked up at her and said, "I want you to say thank you to this 
man. It's because of him we're able to be here today." That, too, made it worth 
it.Chris Smith

Nicholas Serota <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nicholas-serota>, 
director, Tate

One of the great atrocities of the Spanish civil war was the bombing of the 
Basque town of Guernica by the German air force, lending their support to the 
Nationalist forces of General Franco. Picasso responded to the massacre by 
painting the vast muralGuernica 
<http://www.pbs.org/treasuresoftheworld/a_nav/guernica_nav/main_guerfrm.html>, 
and for months afterwards made subsidiary paintings based on one of the figures 
in the mural: a weeping woman holding her dead child.Weeping Woman 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ViewWork?workid=11871> in Tate's collection is 
the last and most elaborate of the series. A portrait of Picasso's mistress, 
Dora Maar, the painting is an extraordinary depiction of female grief and a 
metaphor for a Spanish tragedy.

The Sir John Soane's Museum <http://www.soane.org/> is one of my favourite 
small museums. The eight paintings in William Hogarth'sA Rake's Progress 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/exhibitions/hogarth/modernmorals/rakesprogress.shtm>
 series can rightly be described as one of the great masterpieces of British 
art. Created by Hogarth, the great 18th-century painter, engraver and satirist, 
they give us an acute glimpse into London life of the period, and the antics of 
its faded aristocracy and nouveau riche. The paintings were originally hung at 
Soane's country villa, but were moved back to Lincoln's Inn Fields (now the 
Soane museum) in 1810. They were hung in a new picture room at the rear of the 
house, where they remain today.

Joan Bakewell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/joanbakewell>, broadcaster



If they start charging for museums I will go spare with rage; it's been a 
great leap forward.The Cholmondeley Ladies 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/servlet/ViewWork?workid=1500> (1600-10) at Tate Britain 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/britain/> is one of my favourites to drop in and see. I 
take the grandchildren to visit them all the time. Everyone can relate to it: 
they're like reassuring family friends – "Let's go and visit the Cholmondeley 
sisters." It's so lovely how very different from each other they are, but how 
much the same. You get pleasure from them: they're women; they're siblings; 
they look beautiful; they're a reflection of an earlier time; they're all the 
very simple things you enjoy in a painting. And they must have their own 
stories: the painting is full of possibilities.

Nicholas Penny <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/mar/27/art>, 
director,National Gallery <http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/>

The painting most appropriate for this particular anniversary is Rubens's 
Peace and War 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/peter-paul-rubens-minerva-protects-pax-from-mars-peace-and-war>
, the proper title of which is Minerva Protects Pax from Mars – though I hate 
that title. It was a diplomatic gift from Rubens to Charles I, when the painter 
was acting as an envoy for Philip IV, but nevertheless seems to me a painting 
for everyone. It is allegory, it's portraiture, it's animal painting, it's 
fruit-and-vegetable painting, it's got quite a lot of landscape, it's got the 
female nude, it's got men in armour. It was a gift from the Duke of Sutherland 
to the newly founded National Gallery about 200 years after it was painted, an 
amazing gesture of support: the Duke was donating one of the most valuable 
paintings in London.

The work of art I always visit when I go to the Victoria and Albert 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/> museum is a white jade cup that is known to have been 
used by Shah Jahan 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/w/shah-jahans-jade-cup/>, one of the 
great Moghul rulers of India. Curiously, it's not that different in date from 
the Rubens: the middle of the 17th century. It reminds me of the game animal, 
vegetable or mineral. It shows the transparency as well as the hardness of 
jade, but at the same time incorporates animal and vegetable: the lotus flower 
at the foot, and the head of an ibex, which forms the handle. It epitomises the 
art of so many different cultures although it's a quintessential, high quality 
product of Islamic civilisation. This and the Rubens are two pieces of court 
culture completely accessible to the man in the street.

Lauren Laverne <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b017pszn>, broadcaster

At the V&A Museum of Childhood <http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/> in east London 
there is a Dutchdoll's house from the 1600s 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/moc/collections/toys/dolls_houses/nuremberg_house/index.html>
. It's very beautiful and the craftsmanship that went into it is mindblowing. 
It's also interesting because it shows how a house ran at that time, in that 
place. The idea behind it was to teach little girls how to become wives; it 
illustrates how much of our culture is indoctrinated into us through play and 
leisure.

Whenever I go into the British Museum, that ceiling in the atrium makes you 
look up, and as soon as you look up like that you're like a kid again. It puts 
you into an inquisitive, exploratory frame of mind. That's what I like about 
the Museum of Childhood, too: it's a lovely blend of history, mystery and fun.

Neil MacGregor 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/the_museum/management/directors/neil_macgregor.aspx>
, director,British Museum <http://www.britishmuseum.org/>

The Great God of War, a colossal statue of a lion 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/me/c/colossal_statue_of_a_lion.aspx>
, from Nimrud (northern Iraq), 883 – 859BC, would be my pick from the British 
museum. This figure acted as a guardian to the entrance of the temple of 
Ishtar. It is an example of the extraordinary achievement of creating in stone 
the noise of war as well as its savagery.
At the other end of the scale of human experience to the Assyrian tiger, Diego 
Velasquez'sAn Old Woman Cooking Eggs 
<http://www.nationalgalleries.org/collection/subjects/Fruit%20and%20vegetables/502983/artistName/Diego%20Vel%C3%A1zquez/recordId/5531>
 (1618) from the National Gallery of Scotland embodies the still mystery of 
domestic life. It's one of Velázquez's "bodegónes", a kitchen scene, and was 
painted when he was still a very young man, only 18 or 19.

John Leighton <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johnleighton>, director, 
National Galleries of Scotland <http://www.nationalgalleries.org/>

The portrait of Robert Burns by Alexander Nasmyth 
<http://www.nationalgalleries.org/whatson/exhibitions/the-face-of-scotland>, 
made in 1787, is probably the best-known portrait in our collection, which 
opens free to the public today. Like many people, I saw it first on a 
shortbread tin, but when you come face to face with the original it's 
astonishingly vivid, and you can feel that spirit of democracy and generosity 
Burns is famed for. The artist left it unfinished because he was afraid to lose 
what he said was a superb likeness. In among all the grand, eloquent portraits 
of powerful people in this gallery, this small, modest picture speaks very 
loudly indeed.

My favourite work in another gallery is from the National in London. It's 
another portrait, this time byJacques-Louis David of Jacobus Blauw 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/jacques-louis-david-portrait-of-jacobus-blauw>
, a young Dutch ambassador trying to negotiate a peace treaty with France. It's 
a very direct rendering of the clarity and youthful idealism people associated 
with the French revolution. If you imagine that this is 1795, with guillotines 
crashing all over the place, you'd have to be a particularly skilled diplomat 
to negotiate with the revolutionary government. The portrait gives no 
indication of that hardship – instead, you're drawn in by the rendering of the 
materials, the steely blue jacket with a hint of his hair powder on the collar, 
and this pink face that engages you so directly you feel you've come eye-to-eye 
with this young Dutchman.

AL Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alkennedy>, author

Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum in Glasgow 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/our-museums/kelvingrove/Pages/home.aspx> 
has a wonderful full-lengthstatue of Robert Louis Stevenson 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/98346459@N00/400576705/in/set-72157594556432822>. 
He's a writer I hugely admire, and the piece seems to catch something of his 
spirit in a way photographs of him don't. When I first moved to Glasgow and was 
very much a tyro writer, I would occasionally wander off to Kelvingrove and 
potter. The building was – and is – beautifully uplifting in itself, and much 
warmer than I could afford to keep my flat. I would always end up spending a 
while with the RLS statue. It's not idealised likehis memorial in Saint Giles 
<http://www.stgilescathedral.org.uk/history/architecture/rlsmemorial.html>, or 
the standard depictions of the great and good; he looks like someone who 
thought and travelled and had a lean kind of energy and efficiency about him. I 
find it inspirational.

Christopher Brown, director, Ashmolean Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ashmolean-museum>

I'm going to be a little opportunistic and choose an object from our new 
Egyptian galleries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/nov/23/ashmolean-returns-ancient-egyptian-mummies-public-view>
. I'm hugely moved bya remarkable mace head we have that dates from 3,000 BC 
<http://www.ashmolean.org/ash/faqs/q005/> and comes from Hierakonpolis. It's 
called the scorpion mace head and depicts an emperor. He's wearing the crown of 
Upper Egypt and he's hunting. I'm just enormously impressed by its 
sophistication as a piece of early sculpture: eat your heart out, Donatello.

I worked for many years at the National in London. I particularly love a late 
painting there by Giovanni Bellini, theMadonna of the Meadow 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/giovanni-bellini-madonna-of-the-meadow>
. It shows the virgin with Christ in her lap, but it's a premonition of thePietà
 <http://www.rome.info/michelangelo/pieta/>. It has a beautiful, desolate 
landscape on the left, and on the right a prosperous landscape with a beautiful 
view of the area north of Venice where Bellini was working. When I worked at 
the National, one of the great joys was that people would drop in to the 
gallery between trains at Charing Cross, to come in and see something. You 
don't feel: "Well, I've spent £5 – I've got to make it worth my while." You can 
just go and look at a single picture. That to me is the key to free admission.

Michael Dixon <http://www.nationalmuseums.org.uk/members/?member=nhm>, 
director,Natural History Museum <http://www.nhm.ac.uk/>

The Archaeopteryx lithographica 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/nature-online/species-of-the-day/evolution/archaeopteryx-lithographica/index.html>
 is the most valuable single fossil in our collection. It is a famous snapshot 
of evolution in action that demonstrates conclusively that modern birds are 
descended from dinosaurs. It has huge scientific, historical and financial 
value. Elsewhere, theRosetta Stone at the British Museum 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/highlights/highlight_objects/aes/t/the_rosetta_stone.aspx>
 is fundamentally important to our understanding of archaeology and ancient 
cultures.

Julia Peyton-Jones 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/julia-peytonjones-i-feel-impoverished-we-are-adrift-from-nature-2303226.html>
, co-director,Serpentine Gallery <http://www.serpentinegallery.org/>

We don't have a permanent collection, but the Serpentine Pavilion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/serpentine-pavilion> series, now in 
its 11th year, allows the public to enjoy the work of international architects 
who haven't yet completed a building in the UK, for three months over the 
summer. My favourite pavilion? I couldn't possibly say!

The Turbine Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern-turbine-hall> commissions 
at Tate Modern are an extraordinary rollcall of some of the greatest 
practitioners of today.Louise Bourgeois's spider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2010/jun/01/art-louise-bourgeois?intcmp=239>
, Maman, and I Do, I Undo, I Redo, launched the whole programme in the most 
remarkable way. It's wonderful to see how artists address that space.

Sandy Nairne 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/culture/fineart/article/252432/Interview-Sandy-Nairne.html>
, director,National Portrait Gallery <http://www.npg.org.uk/>

One of our most enigmatic portraits is the famous Chandos portrait of 
Shakespeare by John Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/mar/02/arts.books> of 1610. It's 
wonderfully mysterious. Taylor is not an artist we know a great deal about, and 
there's beenplenty of speculation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2009/mar/11/portraits-shakespeare-theatre>
 as to whether this was taken from life. For me, the idea of why we look at 
portraits of figures in history is embodied in this picture. I look at it at 
least two or three times a week. We refer to it as our No 1 because it is the 
first portrait that entered the collection in 1856, given by Lord Earlsmere.

I often go and look at Rembrandt's Self-Portrait at the Age of 34 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/rembrandt-self-portrait-at-the-age-of-34>
 next door in the National Gallery. It's not very different in date from the 
Shakespeare – it's 1640 – but is the absolute complement: whereas the Taylor is 
all about Shakespeare, this is about Rembrandt himself. Like all great 
self-portraits, it makes you question who you are and absolutely crosses time – 
that sense of self-examination. It's just the most brilliant painting, and to 
be able to just walk in and look at it is a fabulous thing.

Iwona Blazwick <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/aug/19/art.art>, 
director,Whitechapel Gallery <http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/>

One of my favourite exhibits currently on display here is the Bloomberg 
Commission:Josiah McElheny: The Past Was a Mirage I'd Left Far Behind 
<http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/exhibitions/the-bloomberg-commission-josiah-mcelheny-the-past-was-a-mirage-i-had-left-far-behind>
. Large-scale, mirrored sculptures are arranged as multiple reflective screens 
for the artist's interpretation of experimental abstract films. What is 
interesting is the way McElheny has responded to the site, which was previously 
the reading room of the former Whitechapel Library, a haven for early modernist 
thinkers such asIsaac Rosenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/nov/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview1>
. The library was built as a "lantern for learning"; McElheny has used the 
moving images and illumination as central motifs.

Elsewhere, the Sir John Soane's Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sir-john-soane-museum> is a delight, 
with important works from Hogarth to Canaletto set among drawings, historical 
architectural models and other fascinating antiquities.

Martin Roth, director, Victoria and Albert museum <http://www.vam.ac.uk/>

Our medieval and Renaissance galleries opened two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/30/victoria-and-albert-museum-galleries>
 to house one of the world's most remarkable collections of treasures from the 
period, marking the end of the first phase of our plan to modernise the museum. 
They host the greatest collection of Italian Renaissance sculpture outside 
Italy, with an exceptional group of sculptures by Donatello who was the 
greatest sculptor of his time. I particularly admire this pieceThe Ascension 
with Christ Giving the Keys to St Peter 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/images/image/20694-popup.html> (1428-30) which combines 
two different scenes from the Gospels – one of the finest surviving examples of 
his astonishing low-relief carving technique.

Gauguin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gauguin> was one of the most 
important artists of the 19th century, and his experimentations with new styles 
and radical expression continue to inspire people today.Vision after the Sermon 
<http://www.nationalgalleries.org/collection/artists-a-z/G/3374/artistName/Paul%20Gauguin/recordId/4940>
 is one of the masterpieces from the Scottish National Gallery collection and 
this dramatic work changed the course of the history of art. Gauguin travelled 
the world and it's fascinating to see the influence of many forms of art in his 
work, from Japanese prints to ceramics.
 