
Whatever your age, if you're a fan of video games, there will always be a few 
titles that carry the heavy scent of nostalgia. Just as one looks back at 
photos and reminisces about flared/stonewashed/cut-off jeans, the gamer, too, 
will fondly remember the consoles and games of their bubblegum years.

 Whether that be playing Pac-Man <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pac-Man> in the 
arcades; the introduction of theAtari 2600 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atari_2600>; whizzing through levels of Sonic the 
Hedgehog <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonic_the_Hedgehog> on the Sega Mega 
Drive <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sega_Mega_Drive>; the way the sucker-feet 
of a Quickshot joystick would pop unstuck at a critical point; or the 
helicopter hair ofRayman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rayman> on the original 
Playstation <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/playstation>, memories tend 
to be as hard to shake as an addiction toAngry Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/angry-birds>.


The games industry is currently in rude health. The global industry is on 
track to be worth$86bn by 2016 
<http://www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/esa_ef_2013.pdf>, according to the 
Entertainment Software Association, and the European market is worth over$20bn 
alone <http://www.theesa.com/facts/pdfs/esa_ef_2013.pdf>. 

 But however impressive the games of today, there's no buzz quite like 
revisiting the gentle classics, dusting off C90s to stick clunkily into a 
ghettoblaster, or unearthing a creaky VHS.

The internet, as ever, is here to help. Websites have cropped up allowing fans 
to play legal versions of 20- and 10-year-old games in-browser. So-calledeaster 
eggs <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Easter_egg_%28media%29> (hidden shortcuts 
and tricks) are turning different sites into gaming experiences, and players 
are uploading in-game videos of themselves playing on YouTube.

Here, we take a look at how the internet is taking classic games to the next 
level.

Playing online


There are entire cities of sites now dedicated to letting you play classic 
arcade games on your lunch break at work.

free80sarcade.com <http://www.free80sarcade.com/index.php> hosts Pac-Man 
<http://www.free80sarcade.com/pacman.php> (1980), Donkey Kong 
<http://www.free80sarcade.com/donkeykong.php> (1981), Street Fighter 
<http://www.free80sarcade.com/streetfighter.php> (1987), Zelda 
<http://www.free80sarcade.com/zelda.php> (1986), Super Mario Brothers 
<http://www.free80sarcade.com/supermariobros.php> (1985), Assault 
<http://get.adobe.com/flashplayer/> (1983) and hundreds of others, though you 
do needAdobe Flash Player <http://get.adobe.com/flashplayer/> installed. 

The Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/consolelivingroom> has also 
made a whole roster of games available to play for free, sorted by console. 
There aretons of games <https://archive.org/details/coleco_colecovision_library>
 for theColeco Colecovision <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ColecoVision>, the 
Entex Adventure Vision <https://archive.org/details/adventurevision_library>, 
theBandai Super Vision 8000 <https://archive.org/details/sv8000_library> and 
most consoles you can think of.

The above sites are legal, but be careful when browsing around the web as some 
siteswill fall foul of gaming emulator laws 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-25527786> (especially if you're after 
recent games). Play the original Pac-Man in the box below.


Easter eggs online


There are loads of 'easter eggs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Easter_egg_%28media%29>' or hidden treats on the 
web that provide great fun for old school gamers. For instance, if you land on 
any video page in YouTube (it must be a video page, not the home page), type in 
'1980'. Not, in the search bar, just in the page. You should now find you can 
playSpace Invaders <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Space_Invaders> above your 
video.

Another gaming easter egg from YouTube is when a video is playing or paused, 
hold down the left and up arrow keys – this should allow you to playSnake 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_%28game%29> across the screen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMpTTXgI52pY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMpTTXgI52pY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FMpTTXgI52pY&media=>
 Google's barrel roll and Atari Breakout easter eggs in action. 
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, of course, is famous 
for its interactiveGoogle doodles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-doodle>. But the search engine 
also has a few tricks up its sleeve. Have a go at typing the following terms 
into the search box.

 * 'Do a barrel roll' 
 * 'Atari breakout' (and then click on Images) 
 * 'zerg rush' (and play the game by clicking on the falling Os) 
In-game videos


YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/> has always been a home for gaming 
aficionados to upload their game play tricks and tips – most football fans know 
the frustration of searching for live action footage and stumbling upon the 
second half of someone'sFIFA tutorial 
<https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=fifa+tutorial>. What's relatively 
new though, is people hooking up their old consoles and sharing the game play 
from classic titles, sparking nostalgia across the net.

And then there's the oldclassicgame 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/oldclassicgame> channel on YouTube that allows 
you to watch game play of vintage video games, as far back as 1971.Classic 
Video Games 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL0sBhCMFBvPmq1ZKNth3fKO7FVyEaKLmk>, 
(below) features a number of old games from Game Boy, Atari 2600 and 
Playstation 2.


Just make sure your boss doesn't see...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbGlpqZsoLcM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbGlpqZsoLcM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbGlpqZsoLcM&media=>
• All hail Guildford - the Hollywood of the games industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/04/guildford-uk-video-game-industry-ubisoft-little-big-planet-hollywood>

• What every parent needs to know about video games: a crash course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/02/parents-guide-video-games-playstation-xbox-wii-apps-children>

• Guardian Games Week - check out our dedicated week of coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/series/games-week>
 