
In 1928, women were granted equal voting rights with men: it had been a full 
10 years since the Representation of the People Act first enabled them to take 
their place at the ballot box, but during those years, while men over 21 could 
vote, women had to wait until they were 30 before they could be entrusted with 
something so precious. On July 2 1928 that all changed when royal assent was 
given to theEqual Franchise Act 
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_publications_and_archives/parliamentary_archives/archives___the_first_women_in_parliament_1919_1945.cfm>
, and the dreams of the suffragettes were finally realised. To mark this 
important anniversary, and to celebrate 80 years of universal suffrage,Comment 
is Free <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/awomansplace> is this week 
running a series of articles examining the impact of the vote on women's lives, 
and looking at how women have, in all sorts of ways, all over the world, moved 
into the public realm; an area that was once a strictly male preserve.

When I first became involved in politics at the grand old age of 14, and for 
many years afterwards, political activism for women meant endless meetings in 
smoke-filled rooms, sexist jibes on the picket line, and being roped in to help 
out with the creche when there were important issues on the agenda. Men still 
dominated the political discourse, while women were expected to make the tea 
and sandwiches. If women wanted to participate in the debates, we had to do it 
on men's terms: we had to learn to be as vocal as them, to speak up instead of 
waiting to be asked for our opinions, and then we had to be prepared to fight 
our corner along with the best of them. For a bit of respite from all that 
testosterone, and to help ensure that women's issues were kept on the agenda, 
we organised ourselves into women's groups – safe, women-only spaces where we 
could plan strategies to increase women's involvement in political life, and 
discuss our own experiences, and where those who weren't yet comfortable with 
speaking out in public meetings could air their opinions.

This grounding in such a male-dominated environment stood me in good stead for 
my later involvement in the trade union movement, where even today there are 
plenty of men who continue totreat women activists 
<http://www.unionhistory.info/web/objects/nofdigi/tuc/imagedisplay.php?irn=7000051&reftable=ecatalogue&refirn=7000050>
 with a level of tokenism that would have incensed our suffragist foremothers. 
Women are welcome in trade unions of course, but it has been an uphill struggle 
for us to get our issues taken seriously, or for women's equality to be paid 
much more than lip service. And in the same way that women's groups have helped 
women find a place in party politics, women's self-organisation in the trade 
unions is proving crucial to our increased participation in the wider labour 
movement.

The internet is also helping with this change. Where we once had a very real 
fight on our hands to get our voices heard above the masculine fray, women have 
now created a space where we not only can be heard, but if we choose, we can 
shut out the brouhaha coming from some of the more unreconstructed men on the 
net. As attendees at the recentBlog Nation 
<http://www.liberalconspiracy.org/2008/06/26/pictures-from-blog-nation/> debate 
discovered, not only is the feminist blogosphere enjoying rude health, but 
women bloggers and writers are a growing force on the web. There are those, 
like me, who have opted to engage in some of the more male-dominated corners of 
the blogosphere, and there are others who have chosen to create more 
women-friendly spaces – virtual sanctuaries where women are free to debate 
their issues without having to worry about being shouted down by men, and where 
any would-be trolls and harassers are swiftly and mercilessly dealt with.

In Nattering on the Net, Australian feminist Dale Spender writes: "In the real 
world men dominate communication. Men talk more often, they talk for longer 
periods, they adopt 'centering positions' (forcing females to hover around); 
men define the topic, assume the legitimacy of their own view, and override 
women who do not see the world in their terms. Much of this dominant status is 
achieved by interrupting and correcting." She goes on: "Women are being kept 
out of cyber-communication with an electronic version of interruption and 
intimidation ... women are being silenced on the net."

That may well have been the case in 1995, when the book was written, but I'm 
delighted to say that it's most certainly not the case now. Despite some men's 
best efforts, recent studies have shown that women are now spending more time 
online than men; and while ourinternet usage 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4555370.stm> may be different, with men 
tending to use the net more for information gathering, news and sports, and 
women preferring to use it for communicating with friends through email 
exchanges andsocial networking sites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/aug/23/digitalmedia.radio>, there's 
growing evidence that there are nowmore women blogging 
<http://tech.blorge.com/Structure:%20/2007/08/30/survey-more-women-blogging-than-men-as-blogs-hit-mainstream/>
 than men. That does not surprise me at all.

At Blog Nation <http://www.thefword.org.uk/blog/2008/06/mainstream_left> and 
at an earlier discussion on thefuture of journalism 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/digitalcontent/2008/06/_future_of_journalism_is_comme.html>
 here at the Guardian, there was intense debate aboutwomen's participation on 
the net 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/digitalcontent/2008/06/_future_of_journalism_women_on.html>
. There are some writers who feel that because of thesexist abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/nov/28/speakingtruthtopower> 
that gets hurled at many women bloggers, we shouldn't bother getting involved 
with some of the more political blogs and instead should limit our engagement 
to feminist or women-friendly spaces on the net. But I don't agree. In the same 
way that women have had to jump in to other male-dominated arenas in order to 
get our message across and to ensure our involvement in public and political 
life, we can't afford to ignore the enormous potential the blogosphere affords 
us for both communicating our experience and making our voices count. And while 
there will always be a place for women-only spaces online, spaces which I 
cherish when I need to take some air after the cut and thrust of my threads, 
what we can't afford to do is isolate ourselves completely, and shut ourselves 
away in a virtual world where all we're doing is preaching to the converted.

The blogosphere is the biggest public space we've ever had; we owe it to the 
women who fought so hard <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/3153024.stm> to 
secure us the vote 80 years ago to make the most of the opportunities a forum 
like this gives us, and to ensure that women are and always will be playing an 
equal role with men in the political and public life of this country, in all 
its manifestations.
 