
Last week, the poet laureate joined the three judges of the Ted Hughes award 
to hand this year’s winner a cheque for £5,000. They then posed together for 
photographs:Ali Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith>, Jackie Kay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackie-kay>, Andrew McMillan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/25/guardian-first-book-award-2015-andrew-mcmillan-poet>
, along withCarol Ann Duffy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carol-ann-duffy> 
herself, who funds the prize. As someone with more than a passing interest in 
lesbian and gay culture, my attention was drawn to the potential for bias in 
this cheerful scene … But hang on a moment, something was not quite right. They 
had given the money toDavid Morley 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2016/04/david-morley-wins-ted-hughes-award-for-new-work-in-poetry/>
, a straight man.

What kind of racket did they think they were running? How could this decision 
possibly benefit the international gay conspiracy that has been so flagrantly 
running the arts for so long? Why, they might just as well have been straight 
themselves! And so, just when you thought the Twittersphere might be about to 
explode with homophobic abuse about misplaced special interests, there was 
nothing to complain about.

From Proust to Ellen DeGeneres, 10 gay works that changed the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/08/ten-gay-influences-cultural-world-philip-hensher>
Of course, by highlighting the sexualities of these writers, I’m engaging in 
much the same impertinence. The individuals in question were not there to 
represent a sexual minority, even if they were representatives of it. The 
matter was, and is, an irrelevance. And it would have been no less irrelevant 
if they had decided to give the prize to the short-listed poetChris Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/01/chris-beckett-wins-arthur-c-clarke-award>
, who happens to be a gay man. However, I feel comfortable with having raised 
the issue, since it prompts interesting questions about the nature and 
influence of gay culture – whether it is a stagnant oxbow or a strong current 
at the centre of the mainstream.

It could be that official recognition is a relevant indicator here. Skim down 
the lists of the higher national honours and you’ll find, among the Companions 
of Honour,David Hockney <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney>, Sir 
Ian McKellen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ian-mckellen>, Sir Howard 
Hodgkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/27/howard-hodgkin-lifetime-achievement-interview>
 and the lateSir Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies>. The Order of Merit 
includesNeil MacGregor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/08/british-museum-director-step-down-neil-macgregor>
and Hockney again. (Not many lesbians, though, at this stratospheric level.) 
Had the Ted Hughes panel been formally dressed, they might have come festooned 
with their medals: Kay with the MBE, Smith the CBE, and Duffy the OBE, CBE and 
DBE. Only two weeks previously, Jackie Kay had beennamed as the new makar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/18/nicola-sturgeon-on-the-new-scottish-makar-jackie-kay>
, the national poet for Scotland. But let’s not get too excited: you have to 
run down the lists quite a long way before coming toAlan Hollinghurst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alanhollinghurst>, who won the Man Booker 
prize in 2004 and Marlon James last year, and toThom Gunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/27/featuresreviews.guardianreview13>
 and Duffy, who won the first and second Forward prizes in 1992 and 1993 
respectively. Today, lesbians and gay men maintain a cultural visibility that 
is not new: it has been built up over a century and more.

But the question of gay influence is not entirely gratuitous. That it was a 
hot issue in the 1920s and 1930s accounts for the invention of the idea of the 
Homintern. Lenin had established the Comintern (Communist International) in 
1919. Homintern was the name various people jokingly coined to describe a 
sprawling, informal network of contacts that occupied a prominent site near the 
centre of modern life. It may have started as a joke, but it was taken all too 
seriously by those whom it infuriated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb82383be14b25e7495bb3833792559aaf51650e6%2F0_0_3410_5117%2F3410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb82383be14b25e7495bb3833792559aaf51650e6%2F0_0_3410_5117%2F3410.jpg>
 A costume design for a Ballets Russes production of Alexander Tcherepnin’s
Narcisse, 1911. Photograph: Print Collector/Getty Images 
What exactly was the Homintern? Was it any more than a loose web of similar 
vested interests? Were parts of it ever distinct communities or subcultures? To 
what extent was influence used by homosexual powerbrokers (Diaghilev in the 
Ballets Russes, Hugh Beaumont in London’s West End theatres, David Geffen in 
Hollywood) to further the careers of other homosexuals? Were they defensive 
formations, created by the attacks of influential heterosexuals? In short, how 
far is the existence of the Homintern true, how far a myth?

The great Icelandic novelist Halldór Laxness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jun/21/featuresreviews.guardianreview14>
 noted in 1925 thatReykjavik <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/reykjavik> had 
finally acquired all the accoutrements of modernity: “not only a university and 
a movie theatre, but also football and homosexuality”. During a discussion in 
1949, when the architect Frank Lloyd Wright said that “this movement which we 
call modern art and painting has been greatly, or is greatly, in debt to 
homosexualism”, he was trying to presentmodernism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/modernism> as unacceptable; but on 
the same occasionMarcel Duchamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/duchamp> identified lesbians and gay 
men as being largely responsible for the healthy state of the arts: “I believe 
the homosexual public has shown more interest [in] or curiosity for modern art 
than the heterosexual.”

The prolific biographer Jeffrey Meyers has argued that the homosexual writer 
in the 20th century was analogous to the Romantic notion of the tubercular 
artist in the 18th and 19th centuries. You could say that acceptance of 
homosexuality became one of the key measures of modernity long before societies 
like ours in Britain condescended to update their anti-gay structures.

In 1869, Friedrich Engels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/apr/29/friedrich-engels-prostitution-suffrage>
 had already noticed, as he put it in a letter to Karl Marx, that “the 
pederasts are beginning to count themselves”, speculating half jokingly that 
they might one day amount to “a power in the state”. Over the next century or 
so the question would be whether this was a good thing (equality and all that) 
or a bad (moral decline and all that). Engels had been reading the pioneering 
sexual theorist Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, just one of many European scientists 
working on sexuality at the time. In most of these men’s work, the defining of 
new sexual types was followed by an estimation of numbers, often shockingly 
high.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba31f6b2126fcd4b76c8796bea5c5e7486d3a74b%2F3_28_1482_1807%2F1482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba31f6b2126fcd4b76c8796bea5c5e7486d3a74b%2F3_28_1482_1807%2F1482.jpg>
 Oscar Wilde. Photograph: Corbis 
A succession of scandals was reported in the press. Prominent cultural figures 
were tried and imprisoned:Oscar Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde> in England (1895), the poet 
Jacques d’Adelswärd-Fersen in France (1903), the artist Nils Santesson in 
Sweden (1907). Works of art were subjected to similar public scrutiny: witness 
the attempted prosecution ofMaud Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2013/apr/29/wild-women-of-1920s-dance-in-pictures>
 for her performance in Wilde’s playSalomé and Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of 
Loneliness <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jan/02/books.gayrights> (1928). 
Press coverage brought the existence of homosexuality to the forefront of the 
collective consciousness in a way that turned out to be both threatening and 
enabling to homosexuals: threatening because scandal could happen to any of 
them, but enabling because it gave them access to information about the 
homosexual community in a world where it was rarely discussed.

One outcome of this sense that homosexual people existed in large numbers 
while still remaining more or less invisible to the naked eye was the suspicion 
that when they got together they were likely to engage in something more, 
something even worse than the indulging of a perversion. Notoriously, the 
networks of homosexuality seemed to transcend many more formal social and 
political boundaries, reifying crossovers not only between national and ethnic 
cultures, but between high society and the demi-mondes of bohemian artists, and 
so forth. The Homintern certainly helped cross-fertilise the arts.

The history of cafes and bars in Europe and Latin America is full of artistic 
groups whose drinking and smoking oiled the wheels of conversation, helping to 
integrate gay men into mainstream cultural development. In the 1920s alone, the 
Rinconcillo group flourished in Granada, Antinous in Moscow, the Contemporáneos 
in Mexico City, Pod Picadorem in Warsaw. Most modelled their activities on the 
left bank in Paris, where every cafe was supposedly a hotbed of literary 
inventiveness. Paris and Berlin were the two main cities in the Homintern 
mythology. Largely because of economic collapse, the gay scene in Berlin was 
the more frantic, although it didn’t mean much to lesbians. Of the “divine 
decadence” celebrated by the post-IsherwoodCabaret incarnation of Sally Bowles, 
there was little on offer. Some nightclubs may have been full of glamorous 
crossdressers, but this was more a performance than a way of life. In general, 
gay visitors were no less agog and aghast than the straight out-of-towners who 
made up the rest of the audience.

For women, the possibilities were less public. Lesbians were more likely to 
meet in private houses than in public bars. The most famous of their groups was 
hosted in Paris by the poet Natalie Barney, a self-styled Amazon and feminist, 
in whose home at 20 Rue Jacob both women and men met on Friday evenings from 
four till eight. Many men attended her salons (André Gide, Jean Cocteau, Esra 
Pound, TS Eliot, F Scott Fitzgerald, Rainer Maria Rilke, Rabindranath Tagore) 
but the real glory of her guest list was its women: Colette, Mata Hari, Isadora 
Duncan, Nancy Cunard, Greta Garbo, Peggy Guggenheim, Edna St Vincent Millay, 
Janet Flanner, Françoise Sagan. The Russian poet Marina Tsvetaeva read there on 
a brief visit to Paris, but was not a success: not only was she unfashionably 
dressed, but the work she read was also old fashioned, representing lesbian 
love, in the manner of the 1890s, as a kind of vampirism.

Gertrude Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gertrude-stein> was a 
different species of Parisian hostess altogether, professionally male-centred, 
keen to compete with men on their own terms. As a hostess, she was determined 
to showcase her own opinions for her male guests. Her lover Alice Toklas would 
sit aside with the wives. One woman who went to both Barney’s and Stein’s 
salons but had plenty going on at her own base, the bookshop Shakespeare and 
Company, was Sylvia Beach, who numbered among her great achievements the 
publication of James Joyce’s Ulysses. Her lover was Adrienne Monnier, who also 
had a bookshop “of one’s own”. During the German occupation, Beach was 
imprisoned for refusing to dismiss a Jewish girl who worked for her. Whether in 
wartime or at peace, where support was not forthcoming from the male world, it 
was often available from other women. The shipping heiress Winifred Ellerman, 
who wrote under the pseudonym Bryher, gave money to writers including Djuna 
Barnes, Dorothy Richardson and Edith Sitwell, as well as to Beach and others.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dbfe5596dd9e35c36073112473b2ffdc0dd3e5a%2F0_147_1904_1142%2F1904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dbfe5596dd9e35c36073112473b2ffdc0dd3e5a%2F0_147_1904_1142%2F1904.jpg>
 Nickolas Grace and Jeremy Irons inBrideshead Revisited (1981) Photograph: 
ITV/REX/Shutterstock 
In England, partly because of strict laws against male-male sex and the 
discretion imposed by the aftershock of the Wilde scandal, but also simply 
because of the lack of a continental cafe culture, the most flamboyant 
goings-on happened in the protective environment of private houses and 
institutions such as universities.Alan Pryce-Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/feb/09/guardianobituaries3>, one-time 
editor of the Times Literary Supplement, once said of 1920s Oxford that “it was 
chic to be queer, rather as it was chic to know something about the 12-tone 
scale and about Duchamp’sNude Descending a Staircase.” The gay aesthetes in 
Evelyn Waugh’s novels all have close connections with international modernism: 
Ambrose Silk, inPut Out More Flags, is nostalgic for “the days of Diaghilev” 
and has “frequented” Cocteau and Stein in Paris; Anthony Blanche, inBrideshead 
Revisited, has dined with Proust and Gide, been even closer to Cocteau and 
Diaghilev, and received copies of the novels of Ronald Firbank “with fervent 
inscriptions”. Similarly advanced fictional characters include Nancy Mitford’s 
Cedric Hampton (inLove in a Cold Climate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/18/comfort-reading-nancy-mitford-love-cold-climate>
), Jocelyn Brooke’s Hew Dallas (inA Mine of Serpents) and Esmé Wilkinson (in 
The Goose Cathedral), and Reginald in Saki’s short stories.

Wilfully unnatural, beholden only to the demands of his own artifice, the 
Wildean dandy cloned himself everywhere, in both his person and the books he 
wrote. In her famous 1964 essay “Notes on Camp”,Susan Sontag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jan/19/politics> wrote that “homosexual 
aestheticism and irony” had been one of the two “pioneering forces of modern 
sensibility” (the other being “Jewish moral seriousness”). She was right. You 
can follow the glittering trail of camp from Bow Street magistrates court to 
Moscow, from the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées to Cinecittà, from Monte Carlo to 
Montevideo, from Broadway to Hollywood.

Indeed, Hollywood became a special case, profusely and pervasively camp, yet 
hostile to the idea that it might ever seem so. Then as now, the popular 
audience was assumed to be heterosexual and homophobic. So the studios made 
sure that those who appeared on screen could not be perceived as gay, marrying 
them off in a whirl of publicity if necessary. When the talkies first came in, 
leading men with effeminate voices lost their careers. Boys who could get away 
with being camp in the chorus lines of the Broadway theatres were much too 
visible when blown up on the silver screen. The voluntary Hays Code – a set of 
industry moral guidelines – ensured that the topic of homosexuality was never 
so much as mentioned on screen: “Sex perversion or any inference to it is 
forbidden.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe529ee5b90c33c2e9554fd1ea2b4d3503ff3a30%2F0_210_2007_2338%2F2007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe529ee5b90c33c2e9554fd1ea2b4d3503ff3a30%2F0_210_2007_2338%2F2007.jpg>
 Hollywood costume designer Gilbert Adrian, known professionally as Adrian, 
with Greta Garbo. 
Yet there were plenty of openly gay people behind the scenes, notably divided 
by gender along recognisable lines: lots of lesbian technicians, lots of gay 
male designers and choreographers. Between them, they contributed an 
incalculable amount to the high camp of the movies themselves. Many of the 
great icons of femininity were shaped or designed by gay men: Joan Crawford by 
William Haynes, Marlene Dietrich by Travis Banton, Greta Garbo by Adrian, Judy 
Garland by Roger Edens, Marilyn Monroe by Jack Cole. Conversely, Rudolph 
Valentino was tweaked to his peak by the lesbian couple Alla Nazimova and 
Natacha Rambova, the latter of whom happened to be his wife.

Because of the aesthete-queen’s high visibility, the arts could be a difficult 
option for less confident men. The composer Charles Ives, for instance, spent 
his whole career in a sort of cringe, fearfully anticipating the accusation 
that to make music was a “sissy” activity. This seems to have been a particular 
problem for American men in the years after the first world war: they all had 
fathers to appease. Many a straight man had to pose himself even straighter so 
that his artistic activities would not seem suspect.Ernest Hemingway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway> is the key performer in 
this charade, his characterisation of Stein as “a woman who isn’t a woman” a 
crude mirroring of his own gender fears.

It follows that the cultural history of homosexuality is everywhere shadowed 
by that of homophobia. For every “coterie” of Audens, Spenders and Isherwoods, 
there is a chorus of George Orwells, Roy Campbells and Dylan Thomases, spitting 
vitriol. The group aroundBenjamin Britten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/benjamin-britten> and Peter Pears was 
resented and therefore ridiculed by the group around William Walton. The 
coincidental success of Tennessee Williams, Edward Albee and William Inge on 
the Broadway stage in the 1950s was followed by a backlash of attacks, mainly 
from straight male critics deploring their supposed sexism: their women 
characters were distortions, either because they were “really” men or because, 
as women, they were hated by their misogynistic homosexual authors. Dramatists 
as successful as John Osborne and Simon Gray would regularly complain that you 
had to be queer if you wanted to get on in the English theatre. It is a 
catch-22 familiar to many subordinate groups: to protect yourself against 
discrimination you gather together for mutual support, whereupon you’re accused 
of discriminating against the discriminators. Gay people were tolerated in the 
arts, but then accused of taking over. The end position of this tendency is 
that, while gay people may be wonderfully artistic, their involvement ruins the 
arts.

The “-intern” half of the Homintern is crucial. It was the aspect most often 
objected to by nationalist politicians and bureaucrats. New modes of transport 
sped people away from home – often away from repressive climates towards more 
liberal ones, or merely from cold climates to hot ones. Many individuals had to 
leave home in order to flourish. Colonies of both transient visitors and 
permanent exiles developed in places such as Capri, Taormina and Tangier. You 
didn’t even have to arrive to meet interesting people: you could encounter them 
on the way, on the transatlantic liners (Noël Coward and Sergei Eisenstein were 
placed at the same table on one crossing) or the Train Bleu down to the 
Riviera, or the Orient Express.

Gay ubiquity began to make it seem difficult for homophobes to travel anywhere 
interesting without encountering their bugbear. Interwar Paris was marred for 
Henry Miller by the fact that, as he put it, “The populace had grown so 
hardened to artists that gruff-voiced Lesbians in corduroy breeches and young 
men in Grecian or medieval costume could walk the streets without attracting a 
glance” – or anybody’s glance but his. In 1949, Saul Bellow went to a cocktail 
party hosted by Cyril Connolly, and found his preconceptions of literary 
England being undermined: “Although I don’t judge the inverted with harshness, 
still it is rather difficult to go to London thinking of Dickens and Hardy to 
say nothing of Milton and Marx and land in the midst of fairies.”

Most of the people I’ve mentioned were living their lives more or less openly. 
The more-or-lessness is the point: they lived as if they had louvre blinds of 
managed discretion around themselves, which could be closed or opened at will. 
The secret of their homosexuality might be open to a social circle but a secret 
from family, or open to friends and family but a secret from work, or even, in 
some cases, known to both private and public worlds, but never openly spoken of.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2a2f7eddf2d2e50339be769a1e79b10035008e3%2F0_297_5021_3014%2F5021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2a2f7eddf2d2e50339be769a1e79b10035008e3%2F0_297_5021_3014%2F5021.jpg>
 Patricia Highsmith at home in the village of Moncourt, near Fontainebleau. 
Photograph: Jacques Pavlovsky/Sygma/Corbis 
Patricia Highsmith once inadvertently revealed she was a lesbian at a literary 
party in New York, and was disgusted by the amount of salacious interest she 
received from fellow guests. She later said, “Do you think anyone at a cocktail 
party in Paris or Rome would ever mention something like that? How vulgar!” 
Some of the most devil-may-care in their sexual pursuits and indiscreet in 
conversation still operated strict rules of behaviour of which a younger 
generation might be ignorant. Although invited to take his lover along to a 
dinner party chez Rudolf Nureyev, the young dancer Michael Clark made the 
mistake of imagining this gave him licence to kiss him in front of the other 
guests – but their host was furious.

Quite a few lived in the protective custody of mariages blancs, or what 
Hollywood called the “twilight tandem” – couples such as Edmond de Polignac and 
Winnaretta Singer, the sewing-machine heiress; actors Barbara Stanwyck and 
Robert Taylor; writers Paul and Jane Bowles. These marriages might be celibate, 
or dynastic formalities for the production of a new generation, while allowing 
for outside interests: Harold Nicolson and Vita Sackville-West are a case in 
point. In many more instances, gay men married and had children, and ignored 
their families to an entirely conventional extent, indistinguishable from their 
straight confrères, pursuing their more urgent emotional and professional 
interests in male-centred spaces outside the home. Negligent they may have 
been, but few subjected their families to such obvious risk asOscar Wilde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde> had.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940624aaf4cd3ac1cda722412100e1530415ae89%2F0_5_2598_2243%2F2598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20gay%20conspiracy%20to%20queer%20chic%3A%20the%20artists%20and%20writers%20who%20changed%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F08%2Fgay-conspiracy-homosexual-culture-liberated-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940624aaf4cd3ac1cda722412100e1530415ae89%2F0_5_2598_2243%2F2598.jpg>
 American film stars Barbara Stanwyck and husband Robert Taylor, 1947 
Photograph: Popperfoto/Getty Images 
Notwithstanding the new sexual definitions of the era, many of the individuals 
in question did not identify as homosexual at all, or even bisexual, but merely 
went about their lives without taking the contingencies of desire as an 
identifying factor. What elements determined the choice between “the closet” 
and the relative indiscretion of the “open secret”? How did the latter so often 
operate with impunity in a context of homophobic laws and social conventions? 
Discretion was expected – and then suspected: you were required to be discreet, 
whereupon you were accused of being secretive. In this context, how on earth 
was a man like Liberace even possible? He was not so much hiding in plain sight 
– nothing was “plain” where he was concerned – as turning the whole ecology of 
self-presentation inside out. Everything he did was too gay to be gay.

Even in 1950s America, when anyone identified as deviant might also be 
suspected of spying, it was possible to survive being, in both senses, queer. 
The era’s paranoia was merely more extreme than before and since. Even then, 
the pederasts whose counting had been overheard by Engels were making steady 
progress. There’s a moment in Raymond Chandler’s 1953 novelThe Long Goodbye, 
when the writer Roger Wade voices a common fear as an established fact. It’s 
not easy to catch his exact tone. In part he’s joking; but he also believes it, 
voicing a half-concealed resentment. Anyway, his claim is not original: it has 
the ring of an echo. Others will have suspected the same thing, and said so. 
And who is to say they are wrong? Wade says to Philip Marlowe: “The queer is 
the artistic arbiter of our age, chum. The pervert is the top guy now.”

• Gregory Woods is the author of Homintern: How Gay Culture Liberated the 
Modern World and The Myth of the Last Taboo: Queer Subcultural Studies.
 