
Dan Brown's Inferno 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2013/may/14/dan-brown-inferno-first-look> is 
doing wonders for Dante and the artists who have illustrated him. For instance, 
the other day a story in the Observer about the thriller writer's gift to 
tourism in Florence was illustrated with apainting by Domenico di Michelino 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-L2H5wCn4KRg/UOtIlujzwXI/AAAAAAAAAN0/CyS34r0cz4M/s1600/dante.jpg>
 in the city's cathedral.

In this picture, which dates from around 1465, the medieval poet Dante 
Alighieri stands, a red-robed colossus, revealing his poem The Divine Comedy to 
the city of Florence which he dwarfs. The title of Brown's new novel and its 
"symbological" codes refer to thefirst of three books 
<http://www.worldofdante.org/> that constitute The Divine Comedy: they are 
Inferno, Purgatorio and Paradiso.

In the cathedral painting, Dante gestures to the three worlds of the afterlife 
his poem describes – they have materialised in front of Florence, to show its 
people the moral choices they face.

You're going to reap just what you sow, as Lou Reed said, and this painting 
illuminates the consequences of our actions, according to Dante. The Divine 
Comedy is the supreme cultural expression ofChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity>. If you commit unforgivable 
sins you will go to Hell, the fiery pit whose levels of increasingly ingenious 
punishments are acutely imagined in Inferno. If you are not quite as derelict 
you will have a chance after death to work your way up Mount Purgatory to reach 
Paradise, the realm of ethereal bliss.

Dante, writing in exile at the start of the 14th century after he fell foul of 
the Florentine republic's bitter factional struggles, wanted to give 
Christendom its answer to the ancient epic poet Virgil. He is guided through 
the infernal realm byVirgil <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virgil> himself 
– and Dante's poem records what they saw there, as if it were a true memoir. It 
is the most precise piece of visionary writing in European literature.

This hallucinatory quality has always inspired artists 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/70/William-Adolphe_Bouguereau_(1825-1905)_-_Dante_And_Virgil_In_Hell_(1850).jpg>
.

While a 15th-century painting was illuminating the Observer, a feature about 
Dan Brown in the Sunday Times (pay wall) included Gustave Doré's mesmerising 
19th-century illustrations for Inferno. Doré gives Dante aninky darkness and 
romantic horror 
<http://uploads3.wikipaintings.org/images/gustave-dore/the-inferno-canto-32.jpg>
. He makes us feel the weight of the cavernous Earth that encloses this 
hopeless realm, the fact that we are looking into the grave, and beyond.

Doré was following a fashion for Dante in 19th-century French art. In his 1822 
paintingThe Barque of Dante 
<http://www.ibiblio.org/wm/paint/auth/delacroix/barque-dante.jpg>, Delacroix 
shows Dante and Virgil being ferried across hellish waters in which lost souls 
struggle, while in Ugolino and His Sons, sculptor Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux 
portrays themost horrible of all images in Dante 
<http://www.artexpertswebsite.com/pages/artists/artists_a-k/carpeaux/Carpeaux_UgolinoAndHisSons.jpg>
: Count Ugolino was walled up with his children in a tower in Pisa and left to 
starve. Dante leaves the story's ending horribly ambiguous – it seems that 
after the little boys died, the starving Ugolino ate them. As revenge, hechews 
on his captor's head for all eternity 
<http://www.shmoop.com/inferno/canto-xxxiii-summary.html>.

Dante has inspired so many artists – from Rodin 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/__data/assets/image/0010/187597/gates_of_hell_musee_rodin.jpg>
 toRobert Rauschenberg 
<http://24.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lmh4mjaeLq1qghk7bo1_500.jpg>. But my 
favourite has to be Sandro Botticelli.

When Botticelli set out to illustrate Dante 
<http://myweb.lmu.edu/jfredericks/images/BotticelliMap.jpeg> in Florence in the 
late 15th century, he resisted the lurid imagery the poet may seem to call for. 
Or rather, while he meticulously records every horror, he uses a calm graphic 
style that gives his drawings a fresh and direct feel of eyewitness truth. His 
illustrations are so authoritative that the first time I saw them in an 
exhibition in Rome, I almost felt tempted to become a Roman Catholic. For 
Botticelli, alone among artists, makesParadiso as fascinating as Inferno 
<http://danteworlds.laits.utexas.edu/paradiso/gallery/0110lunar.jpg>.

Give yourself a treat this summer. Read Dan Brown; why not. But also read 
Allen Mandelbaum'sEveryman translation of The Divine Comedy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Divine-Comedy-Everymans-Library-Classics/dp/1857151836>
 that is illustrated with Botticelli's wonderful drawings.
 