
In a slew of romantic and screwball comedies of the 1930s and 40s, Katharine 
Hepburn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/katharinehepburn> defied convention 
by playing women who were independent, forthright and unruly. She had the 
audacity to behave that way off-screen, too. Myth and nostalgia would have you 
believe she was unique, but she has spawned many kindred spirits working today. 
Less the manic pixie such as Zooey Deschanel or Kirsten Dunst, or feisty 
beauties such as Penelope Cruz or Jennifer Lawrence, or even scatty 
navel-gazers such as Greta Gerwig or Lena Dunham. Here are 10 Hollywood actors 
who have channelled Hepburn’s chutzpah, and whose shtick wouldn’t exist without 
her.

Tilda Swinton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423152868868%2F21c8692d-3045-4bd0-b415-2f0b07e69d48-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423152868868%2F21c8692d-3045-4bd0-b415-2f0b07e69d48-2060x1236.jpeg>
Who does Hepburn haughty better than Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>? From We Need to Talk About 
Kevin to Snowpiercer to Only Lovers Left Alive to Grand Budapest, Swinton 
regularly excels at self-assured socialites with almost otherwordly poise. As 
her comically imperious turn in Burn After Reading demonstrates, she feeds on a 
screwball frenzy when she has the chance. “Comedy = lifeblood” said Swinton on 
Reddit recently. Could her reteaming with the Coens in their forthcoming 1950s 
Hollywood-set film about a gossip columnist be another motormouth like 
Hepburn’s hack in Woman of the Year?

Cate Blanchett 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZY6VrG7H2Qw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZY6VrG7H2Qw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZY6VrG7H2Qw&media=>
Her lips and eyes are more pronounced and seductive, her hair blond, her face 
not nearly as flat or angular, but Blanchett shares Hepburn’s signature 
cheekbones and her prowess as a changeling, particularly when it comes to 
playing male. Wasn’t Blanchett the best of the six Bob Dylans in Todd Haynes’s
I’m Not There <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120865/i.m.not.there>? 
The Australian star was Martin Scorsese’s second choice to play Hepburn in his 
Howard Hughes biopicThe Aviator <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-aviator>, 
but she was a better fit than Nicole Kidman. Cate’s Kate was the perfect 
lecturing patrician, but her performance extended beyond mimicry to reimagine 
the actor. Blanchett was also remarkable as the Wasp princess inBlue Jasmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/blue-jasmine>: Tracy Lord after many too many 
Stolly martinis.

Tina Fey
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423154303770%2F48f20238-e5ed-42da-a490-e7882ce4578e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423154303770%2F48f20238-e5ed-42da-a490-e7882ce4578e-2060x1236.jpeg>
What comeback would feminist and queen of the riposte Hepburn have had to 
Jerry Lewis’s “women aren’t funny” 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/05/23/jerry-lewis-female-comedians-not-funny_n_3326623.html>
 comment? Perhaps something like Fey’s“We don’t fucking care if you like it” 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/top_right/2011/07/we_didnt_come_to_saturday_night_live_to_be_cute.html>
 (sans obscenity). And was there not a hint of Hepburn’s famous quote,“Enemies 
are so stimulating” 
<http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/k/katharineh152372.html>, in Fey’s 
Mean Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2013/jan/29/tina-feys-mean-girls-movie-classic>
? True, self-deprecation wasn’t in Hepburn’s repertoire, and with her dislike 
of children she would have been allergic to a film likeBaby Mama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125196/baby.mama>, but both Fey and 
Hepburn specialise in professional women, battle patriarchy with wit (Fey was 
the first female head writer in Saturday Night Live’s history) and demonstrate 
an aptitude for sparring. Fey, the author of the Hepburnian-titled memoir 
Bossypants, conquered Hepburn’s accent in 30 Rock even when mimicking Rosalind 
Russell in His Girl Friday.

Meryl Streep
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423153104546%2F92c3c161-d17f-40f3-ac86-b3a6bd1ed63c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423153104546%2F92c3c161-d17f-40f3-ac86-b3a6bd1ed63c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Streep is a box-office powerhouse, while Hepburn was called poison in her 
time, but the two have more in common than numerous best actress Oscar 
nominations (Streep has the most, with Hepburn in second place). Hepburn 
wouldn’t like the comparison; she considered the star of films including The 
Deer Hunter and Postcards from the Edge too reliant on technique. Streep was 
kinder in return, calling Hepburn“the template upon which many smart 
20th-century women modelled themselves” 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2003/07/11/katharine-hepburn>. Streep frequently 
inhabits formidable professionals and, in comic mode, gleefully gets physical. 
Recently, inIt’s Complicated <https://www.theguardian.com/film/it-s-complicated>
, she dangled men a la Hepburn inThe Philadelphia Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/apr/27/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm.derekmalcolm>
. Also, both women were overlooked in favour of more “beautiful” stars – Dino 
De Laurentiis reportedly thought Streeptoo ugly 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/vf-hollywood/2015/01/meryl-streep-called-too-ugly-jessica-lange-role>
 for King Kong, David O Selznick considered Hepburn toounsexy for Gone with the 
Wind 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/56085/20-things-you-might-not-have-known-about-gone-wind>
 – and neither outspoken star took it demurely. However, not being the most 
conventionally pretty or sexy star around probably freed both actors.

Frances McDormand 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWeBcmNUrDaM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWeBcmNUrDaM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWeBcmNUrDaM&media=>
Katharine Hepburn was many things, but above all she was a voice: a nasal, 
metallic, Bryn Mawr, mid-Atlantic accent that she is said to have affected. 
McDormand, meanwhile, is most memorable for her folksy Minnesota drawl in 
Fargo. She possesses a distinctive voice, unmistakably her own, and one that is 
force to reckon with – reprimanding wayward youngsters over the phone inAlmost 
Famous <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/85703/almost.famous>, or bossing 
everyone about asOlive Kitteridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/03/olive-kitteridge-review-characters-shine-pace-slack-70s-maine>
. Like Hepburn, McDormand loves to lecture (she often chooses stern but 
humorous schoolmistress roles) and prefers to lose herself in non-conformist 
characters. See her chase afterJohn Malkovich in Burn After Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/burn-after-reading> in all her determined and 
unhinged glory.

Barbra Streisand
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0k5eEzlVyz8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0k5eEzlVyz8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0k5eEzlVyz8&media=>
“Not the usual glamour girl” said 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Funny_Girl_%28film%29> William Wyler of Streisand 
when he cast her as the fast-talking wannabe star in 1968’s Funny Girl. But it 
was her turn as a plucky free spirit four years later, in Peter Bogdanovich’s 
unabashed tribute to Bringing Up Baby,What’s Up, Doc? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0k5eEzlVyz8>, that confirmed her as a 
descendant of Hepburn. There Streisand is, an oblivious harbinger of chaos, 
hunting a professor who tries and fails to rebuff her in the same way Cary 
Grant did (although Ryan O’Neal never quite musters Grant’s charisma). 
Melodrama took Streisand away from way-out comedy, but thankfully she returned 
to boisterous antics as Roz Focker riding Robert De Niro’s uptight patriarch (
“Unleash the beast inside you, Jack!” 
<http://m.imdb.com/title/tt0290002/quotes?qt=qt1873602>) in Meet the Fockers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/104595/meet.the.fockers>.

Anna Kendrick
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6YRCrh92wnc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6YRCrh92wnc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6YRCrh92wnc&media=>
Kendrick confesses to loving screwballs and often plays characters with all 
the zeal and gab of a Hepburn heroine – none more so than her second film role, 
a competitive, voluble high-school debater inRocket Science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/28/drama>. Then there was the 
tough-talking corporate dame Natalie, looking to introduce video conferencing 
and cut staff inUp in the Air <https://www.theguardian.com/film/up-in-the-air>. 
Jason Reitman’s film has shades of the Spencer Tracy/Hepburn office war inDesk 
Set <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZK3zmPUxblk> (1957), but the roles are 
reversed: Kendrick plays Tracy’s efficiency expert and George Clooney’s Ryan is 
Hepburn, fighting with acerbic one-liners to save his role from a computer. In 
the end, Natalie doesn’t prove Ryan’s match. Here’s hoping in the future 
Kendrick finds more adventurous comic roles (ie maybe not Pitch Perfect 3), 
where she keeps the upper hand.

Rebecca Hall
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dih6Baoop5G4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dih6Baoop5G4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dih6Baoop5G4&media=>
Hepburn is one of Hall’s heroes, and it appears the British actor took her 
cues from her as the no-nonsense, combative Vicky in Woody Allen’s Vicky 
Cristina Barcelona. She sparred testily with Javier Bardem, with her imposing, 
Hepburnesque jawline and sharp but sober delivery – even if in her romantic 
comedies Hepburn would not have settled for less than the centre of the love 
triangle, occupied here by Bardem’s smouldering Don Juan. Sadly, Hall doesn’t 
indulge in much comedy, although the forthcomingTumbledown 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2338424/reference> by husband/wife duo Sean 
Mewshaw and Desi Van Til looks promising – some of Hepburn’s best scripts came 
from married scribes Ruth Gordon and Garson Kanin.

Diane Keaton
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMem9Hby9oRk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMem9Hby9oRk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMem9Hby9oRk&media=>
In Annie Hall, Keaton whacks a tennis ball with the same gusto as Hepburn does 
a golf ball 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x1412sw_hitting-davids-gold-ball-from-bringing-up-baby-1938_shortfilms>
 in Bringing Up Baby. Both characters showcase theirerratic driving 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x1l9bq2_driving-with-baby-from-bringing-up-baby-1938_shortfilms>
, whisking suitors away for a crazy car ride. Admittedly, Keaton plays awkward 
and ditzy – andself-effacing off-screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/14/then-again-diane-keaton-review> 
– in a way that Hepburn never would have considered, but Keaton shares 
Hepburn’s tall gangliness, offbeat sex appeal and penchant for loopy clowning 
around (see the lobster scene). Not to mention Hepburn’s intelligence, work 
ethic, androgynous fashion sense and general ambivalence about marriage.

Jason Schwartzman
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423153178480%2Fcf3fd835-487e-47bd-a1ce-b34aedcd0d81-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tilda%20Swinton%20to%20Tina%20Fey%3A%20who%20channels%20their%20inner%20Katharine%20Hepburn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F05%2Fkatharine-hepburn-tilda-swinton-tina-fey-bfi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F5%2F1423153178480%2Fcf3fd835-487e-47bd-a1ce-b34aedcd0d81-2060x1236.jpeg>
Whether working with Wes Anderson, Sofia Coppola, David O Russell or Alex Ross 
Perry, Schwartzman makes a beeline for eccentric charmers. He is at home with 
conversational comedy as well as the athletic variety. But, above all, who is
Rushmore <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rushmore>’s Max Fischer if not 
Bringing Up Baby’s Susan Vance? Just like her, he’s earnest and stubborn; a 
cocksure, quipping smartarse; a force of energy steamrolling the action, 
hellbent on a madcap pursuit of the object of his affection. He is a schemer – 
Susan would have cheered Max on as he appeared at Olivia Williams’s window 
after pretending to be hit by a car. He is not intimidated by other suitors 
and, naturally, won’t take no for an answer.

 * The Katharine Hepburn season is at the BFI Southbank, London, until 19 March
 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=katharinehepburn>
.
 