
Anthony Burgess, the author of "A Clockwork Orange 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Clockwork_Orange>," said last night that he 
thought Stanley Kubrick's controversial film based on his novel was "boring in 
places" and "should have been more violent".

Mr Burgess criticised judges who, in recent cases, attacked the film for 
allegedly spreading the cult of violence and who had called for some form of 
censorship. "These bloody judges and other people are just playing around on 
the fringes of a very difficult subject," he said in London. "Let us put the 
ball in their court and let them tell us what we may or may not write about, I 
just want to see what the ideas of the average legal or religious mind are 
about art."

Mr Burgess said that in the film Kubrick projected violence for its own sake, 
and that was "damnable". He added: "It was a good film, though boring in 
places, but it should have been more violent, because only by piling on the 
violence could the absurdity of violence be shown.

"We should have been able to reach a stage in violence where we were 
just laughing at it. This is what I tried to do in the book."

The writer was in London to talk about his two major projects for 
ATV [Associated TeleVision] – "Moses – the Law-Giver 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072547/>", which will be ready for screening next 
year with Burt Lancaster in the title role, and his own look at the life of 
Shakespeare.

He also saw his publishers about a sequel to "A Clockwork Orange", "The 
Clockwork Testament", his answer to criticisms of the original book.

In it he shows that many major works of art can be banned because of their 
violent content. He takes as his example Gerard Manley Hopkins's poem, "The 
Wreck of the Deutschland 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wreck_of_the_Deutschland>," in which five 
nuns were driven out of Germany by Bismarck's anti-Catholic legislation.

In the book a film-maker updates the poem and has the nuns attacked and raped 
by the SS. Inspired by the film, people go around attacking nuns and a 
worldwide protest follows to have the Hopkins poem suppressed.

Mr Burgess said he had never met any of his critics in Britain, though he was 
prepared to discuss anything with them. "I suppose I have never laid myself 
open for invitations, though."

He now lives permanently in Rome. "England is only the home of my language. 
The English don't care very much for their writers and the Establishment always 
regards writers as suspect."
 