
Anthony Burgess <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonyburgess> is thought 
of in America as one of our leading novelists, yet not nearly so much attention 
is paid to him here. This is perhaps because his mastery of comic situations is 
so often at the expense of his fellow-countrymen. (Last year, reviewing novels 
for the “Yorkshire Post,” he included his own novel “Inside Mr Enderby,” 
written under the pseudonym of Joseph Kell, which the paper had sent him in the 
weekly batch. The “Yorkshire Post” was not amused.)

Burgess’s new novel, “The Eve of Saint Venus,” is an extended joke about the 
goddess of love visiting a young couple who are about to be married. “The Venus 
book was originally an opera libretto,” he told me as he sipped at his first 
bourbon, “and I’m about to turn it back to an opera and write the music. . . . 
I first wanted to be a great cartoonist and had a drawing of my father 
published in the ‘Manchester Guardian’ when I was ten, for which I received 
five guineas. I was born and brought up in Manchester - my father was a pianist 
and my mother a musical comedy actress, ‘Beautiful Belle Burgess’ she was 
called, so it was natural enough when I began to take a special interest in 
music. During the war I was musical director for an Army Division and I 
composed two full-length symphonies and a couple of concertos. I never had much 
financial success with music though, and my life has been a slow process of 
finding an art one can practise with profit.

“After the war I gradually became interested in the possibilities of words as 
sounds. I got a job as a lecturer in phonetics and I also devised methods of 
teaching languages to the troops very quickly. Then I went to Malaya as an 
education officer in 1954 and was so enchanted with the country and angry with 
Somerset Maugham for writing all that stuff about planters’ wives that I began 
writing my Malayan trilogy. I found it easy to write there - you sweat so much 
that it seems to encourage you sweating out words.

“My wife and I taught in Borneo for a couple of years and then when neither of 
us could find work back home I was forced to become a professional novelist. 
There was simply nothing left for me to do. I wrote five novels in 1960 which 
some of the critics thought was rather a lot, but that was the sneer of the 
impotent. If they could do the same they would. Durrell wrote four in a year 
and Henry James would write two massive great novels in the same time. It’s not 
all that difficult to write a novel in eight weeks, but you’re considered a 
menace if you write more than one every three years.

“I write because I’ve a childish inability to separate fantasy from reality. 
It’s pathological, I suppose. I do write out of high spirits but the actual 
business can be a hell of a chore. My wife and I are not very in love with life 
- we both tend to be suicidal and manic-depressive. Life is interesting as raw 
material but I find significance not in the world but in the imagination. 
Writing novels is making the world dance to your tune, you know. The world 
continuously fails to live up to my ideal for it, so all I am left with is what 
goes on in my imagination.

 “My guilt derives from being the first of an almost continuous line of 
Manchester Catholics to have broken away. Although I don’t practise I still 
find myself thinking in Aristotelian terms. If you have belonged to the Church 
you have a yardstick by which to judge the world English Protestants have 
created - the Beatles, television, and bingo all spring from the Reformation 
you know. The English would have been far more passionate and vital if the 
Reformation had never taken place.

 “At the same time I’ve no very great ambition to live anywhere else. I’ve 
lived in Malaya and that’s enough. I often go to see William Burroughs and the 
colony of English writers who live in Tangier, and they really have very little 
to write about there. There’s always something happening in England so it can’t 
be as dull as is often made out. In my spare time I play the piano, compose 
music and drink.”

 As if to emphasise the point Mr Burgess finished off his sixth bourbon. “I 
would like to go to the theatre or opera occasionally but, and I know you’ll 
find this hard to believe, I’m far tooshy to go to the box-office to buy the 
tickets.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2Fanthony-burgess-author-interview-1964%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412858043390%2F7d2cca42-1883-471a-ab6b-63c7d20812ff-1020x544.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20interview%20with%20Anthony%20Burgess%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2010%20October%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2Fanthony-burgess-author-interview-1964%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20interview%20with%20Anthony%20Burgess%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2010%20October%201964&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F10%2Fanthony-burgess-author-interview-1964%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F9%2F1412858043390%2F7d2cca42-1883-471a-ab6b-63c7d20812ff-1020x544.png>
 The Guardian, 10 October, 1964.  