
The Pigeon Tunnel, by John le Carré

Novelists don’t usually make the best memoirists: there’s too much sitting 
around writing. ButLe Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre>’s 
extraordinary ability to find the sinister pulse of international politics over 
more than half a century makes him an exception. How much does he really know? 
And how does he come to know it? We’ve been lucky enough to see snippets of The 
Pigeon Tunnel, as we’re extracting it on the website on Saturday. With 
recollections ranging from life with a conman father to trysts with well-known 
dissidents, it’s an invaluable aid to decoding one of literature’s most 
intriguing characters.
•8 September, Viking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fbest-books-of-autumn-2016-arts-preview-le-carre-alan-moore-zadie-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4632dfb864dd952b7050daac6daa981864cf4a2%2F0_0_5254_4879%2F5254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Ali%20to%20Zadie%3A%20the%20best%20books%20of%20autumn%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fbest-books-of-autumn-2016-arts-preview-le-carre-alan-moore-zadie-smith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Ali%20to%20Zadie%3A%20the%20best%20books%20of%20autumn%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fbest-books-of-autumn-2016-arts-preview-le-carre-alan-moore-zadie-smith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4632dfb864dd952b7050daac6daa981864cf4a2%2F0_0_5254_4879%2F5254.jpg>
 Million word man … Alan Moore. Photograph: Kazam Media/Rex Shutterstock 
Jerusalem, by Alan Moore

A million-word exploration of Northampton, complete with a chapter about James 
Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>’s daughter told completely 
in a Joycean style, another in the style of a Samuel Beckett play and a noir 
crime subplot on top. It may not appeal to all, but being a novel by the 
comic-book giant behindWatchmen 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/watchmen-4.html>, From Hell and V for 
Vendetta, Jerusalem will be one of the biggest books of the year (in more ways 
than one).
•13 September, Knockabout.

Hygge: The Danish Art of Happiness, by Marie Tourell Søderberg

Pronounced “hue-guh”, hygge is a Danish concept that translates to something 
close to contentment, the quiet happiness that comes when enjoying soothing 
activities like eating comfort food, being cosy and spending time with close 
friends. It may sound like a niche topic, but Søderberg’s just one of many 
books coming out about how to live Danishly for the Christmas season:The Little 
Book of Hygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/hygge-the-danish-art-of-living-cosily-on-its-way-to-uk-bookshops>
, How to Hygge, The Art of Hygge. Get on the Scandwagon!
•6 October, Michael Joseph.

Autumn, by Ali Smith

Smith’s multi-award-winning last novel, How to Be Both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/13/how-to-be-both-ali-smith-review-novel>
, sprang so many narrative surprises that it would be a brave previewer who 
tried to predict the content of her next. What we know is that Autumn is the 
first in a quartet of interlinked novels that will use the seasons as a 
springboard for explorations of time, popular culture and the nature of 
stories. Here’s how her publishers describe the book: “Fusing Keatsian mists 
and mellow fruitfulness with the vitality, the immediacy and the colour-hit of 
pop art – via a bit of very contemporary skulduggery and skull-diggery – Autumn 
is a witty excavation of the present by the past.” One thing’s for sure, it 
will be fun.
•20 October, Hamish Hamilton.

Swing Time, by Zadie Smith

One of Zadie Smith’s most undersung qualities is her musicality (she briefly 
considered a career in musical theatre and is an awesome jazz singer). In her 
first novel since 2012’sNW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/nw-zadie-smith-review>, Smith 
puts music centre-stage in the story of two friends whose shared childhood 
dream of being dancers takes them in very different directions. Ranging from 
north-west London to west Africa, it promises to combine a study of friendship 
with a meditation on music, rhythm and time.
•16 November, Hamish Hamilton.
 