
For the American music producer Pharrell Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pharrellwilliams> it was an I’d like to 
Teach the World to Sing moment. Last week he and Al Gore, Nobel peace prize 
winner and former US vice president, announced a concert over seven continents 
that is designed to build support for a UN climate pact in Paris at the end of 
the year.

Some uncharitably wondered whether Pharrell had entered into a new, messianic 
phase of his career – one typically signalled by joining a society of 
billionaires and retired political figures in the Swiss ski resort ofDavos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>. Others said the global hitmaker 
was too cute to go along with anything that smacked only of an ego trip.

“I think you guys know how serious the global warming thing is, and so for us 
we’re taking it very seriously, and we wanted to do something very different 
this time,” Pharrell said in Davos. What he means by having “humanity harmonise 
all at once” might remain slightly mysterious, but organisers say they expect 
100 acts performing before a broadcast audience of two billion people across 
seven continents, including Antarctica.

Pharrell, whose song Happy was the bestselling single of 2014 and who was 
recently described by USGQ as “a quiet little Egyptian space cat of a dude”, is 
known for getting things done – at least in music.

As the magazine recently described, besides being a pop star in his own right 
he has become a kind of a musical consultant for other artists who guides you 
toward your “twinkling star”.

Singly or as one half of the producing duo the Neptunes, he’s worked with 
Missy Elliott, Gwen Stefani, Beyoncé, Solange, Jay-Z, Daft Punk and Robin 
Thicke to name a few. His prodigious output – he wrote his part of Thicke’s 
Blurred Lines in half an hour – has made him the most important and productive 
music producer of the era. “I am a slave only to my curiosity,” he said 
recently.

Music executive Davitt Sigerson, who signed Pharrell to his first production 
deal after hearing a song remixed by the girl group SWV, recalls Pharrell, who 
comes from Virginia Beach in the state of Virginia, describing how he had 
stayed on a park bench when he first arrived New York in an attempt to break 
into the music business.

The experience found its way into a song. “He’s clearly unbelievably smart, 
open-minded and unthreatened,” recalls Sigerson. “Everything that’s happened 
since is unsurprising. He could clearly do anything he wanted.”

Pharrell’s hit Happy, from the soundtrack to Despicable Me 2, proved so 
popular worldwide that hardliners in Iran were moved to arrest eight performers 
of a lip-sync tribute video. The incident may have helped to inform Pharrell’s 
global conscience; certainly, it showed him that his music could inspire across 
the globe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fpharrell-williams-spreading-happiness-to-saving-the-planet-al-gore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422050471216%2F0224f913-91f9-4688-ac41-5b9fd5a57d54-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20spreading%20happiness%20to%20saving%20the%20planet%2C%20the%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20Pharrell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fpharrell-williams-spreading-happiness-to-saving-the-planet-al-gore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20spreading%20happiness%20to%20saving%20the%20planet%2C%20the%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20Pharrell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fpharrell-williams-spreading-happiness-to-saving-the-planet-al-gore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422050471216%2F0224f913-91f9-4688-ac41-5b9fd5a57d54-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pharrell Williams performs on the main stage at Wireless festival in Finsbury 
Park, London. Photograph: Joel Ryan/Invision/AP 
There’s no delay in pop culture consumption in Iran, points out 
Iranian-American author Hooman Majd. He believes the Iranian authorities would 
not have clamped down on the Happy video people if it had not become so popular 
and attracted media attention in the west. Tehran police said the clip was a 
threat to “public chastity”.

“It’s not like the authorities don’t know what their youth is like and what 
they do – it’s that they feel obliged, because of hardline sentiment, to 
confront the youth when something becomes too big to ignore,” says Majd.

Iranian president Hassan Rouhani later responded, indirectly, saying that 
young people should not be harassed for being “happy”. In his comments, 
Pharrell said: “It’s beyond sad that these kids were arrested for trying to 
spread happiness.”

He also spoke out after a Missouri jury refused to indict a white police 
officer in the death of Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old black man, last 
August. “Everyone is heartbroken,” he said. “It’s another teen, unarmed teen 
gunned down.”

Pharrell appears to be settling into his role as a multimedia prophet. He has 
given himself over to invocations of pseudo-mysticism, recently explaining: 
“It’s all math. You have a certain number of bones in your body. You have seven 
holes in your face. There are nine planets, a sun, trillions and trillions of 
galaxies. Everything quantifies to numbers.” He’s been described as pop’s Bill 
Clinton – “a masterclass in charm and empathy”.

Of course, that’s a lot more entertaining than the business of licensing fees, 
rights and credits that makes up the day-to-day running of a music production 
operation, his unusual side-group N*E*R*D (No-one Ever Really Dies), and an 
empire of spinoffs including Billionaire Boys Club and Ice Cream apparel, and a 
textile company, Bionic Yarn.

The pop success that Pharrell enjoys was a dream when, aged 17, he formed an 
R&B band with schoolfriends called the Neptunes. Discovered in a high school 
talent show by Teddy Riley, the originator of new jack swing, Williams 
initially wanted to be a soul singer. “Yes sir!” he later recalled. “That was 
the dream back then. But then I started writing songs, and producing them, and 
realised I could love that just as much.”

Under Riley’s direction, Pharrell and bandmate Chad Hugo picked up writing and 
production credits. “When I was growing up, doing something like this never 
seemed like a possibility. It wasn’t on my wish list. I just figured I’d study 
my ass off and try to be some kind of art professor.”

The Neptunes’ big break came in 1999 when they produced the whole of 
Kaleidoscope, the debut album by a hot new talent named Kelis. Two years later 
Pharrell had a global No 1 single with Britney Spears’s I’m A Slave 4 U.

Pharrell says the trick in producing other people is to drop his ego. “I say 
to the artist, whether it be Beyoncé or Usher, what do you want to do? And when 
they tell me, I say, OK, let’s do it like this. It’s real simple.”

Like Prince, Pharrell surrounds himself with women – his assistant, Cynthia 
Lu; art director Phi Hollinger; and Fatima Robinson, his choreographer.

“Women have a way of expressing themselves that I can relate to more 
honestly,” he toldGQ. “I am a sensitive person, so I want to be with sensitive 
people.”

His only failure, it seems, was with his own solo album, In My Mind, in 2006. 
“No, I did not enjoy that!” he told interviewer Ian Gittins in 2010. “It was 
just too much work. I was all by myself and it is kind of harder when it is 
your name on the front of the record. Every one just kept saying, ‘You! You! 
You!’ And I was like, ‘No! No! No!’”

Now aged 41 and with an estimated net worth of $80m, Williams is determined 
more than ever to have his success on his terms.

“He’s too bright to be used in any way he doesn’t want to be used but he’s not 
precious either,” says Sigerson. “So it doesn’t surprise me he might be 
connecting to things that are a bit more interesting than singing on a charity 
record ... and that extends to real problem solving in the real world.”

LIFE AND TIMES

■ Born 5 April 1973, the oldest of three brothers. His mother was a teacher, 
his father a handyman. It was his grandmother, with whom he spent a lot of time 
while his parents were working, who noticed his musical potential.

■ Attended Princess Anne High School in Virginia Beach, where he played drums 
and sang. He met Chad Hugo at the age of 12 and the pair went on to form the 
Neptunes. In 2003, the two produced almost 20% of songs played on British radio 
and 43% on US radio.

He is behind many hits, including Robin Thicke’s Blurred Lines and Daft Punk’s 
Get Lucky, and has won seven Grammy awards.

■ Married long-time girlfriend Helen Lasichanh in 2013. The couple have one 
son.
 