
Leading shares fell back for the first time in three days despite a strong 
showing from the banking sector.

Lloyds Banking Group added 1.29p to 83.8p following reports the UK government 
could sell its remaining £19bn stake to the public, in a similar fashion to the 
Royal Mail flotation.

In a buy note, Cormac Leech of Liberum Capital said:
 The implied stock overhang is already fully discounted in our view. Lloyds 
trades on a 2015 PE of 7.2 times and yields 4.8%.

Royal Bank of Scotland rose 7.5p to 357.9p while Barclays was 2.75p better at 
283.7p.

Still with financials, RSA Insurance climbed another 2.95p to 100.7p on hopes 
its problems in Ireland were restricted to that country. More details of a PwC 
report into the irregularities are due on Thursday.

Meanwhile analysts at Berenberg suggested the insurer could be a target for 
rivalAviva, up 6p at 460.2p. The bank said:
 While an acquisition of RSA would represent a significant change of tack for 
Aviva's management, it is not without theoretical merit, and could help cement 
the delivery of the "cash flow plus growth strategy". 
On Monday, analysts at UBS outlined the prospect of the insurer facing a 
consortium break-up bid led by Scandinavia's Sampo.

But with Wall Street falling in early trading as it waited for the release of 
the US Federal Reserve's latest minutes, theFTSE 100 fell 33.67 points to 
6721.78. Investors also became more cautious ahead of Thursday's Bank of 
England and European Central Bank meetings, and Friday's US non-farm payroll 
data. Another reason for the day's falls, according to some analysts, was a 
better than expected ADP jobs figure from the US, which was taken to mean 
further trimming of the Fed's bond buying programme was becoming more likely.

Among the fallers, J Sainsbury slid 8.9p to 360p after it reported a strong 
festive season but warned consumers were likely to cut back in the early part 
of 2014.

But Ocado surged 53.9p to 513.5p after positive Christmas trading news from 
one of the online grocery group's partners Waitrose. Waitrose reported a 3.1% 
rise in like for like sales in the five weeks to Christmas eve, with online 
sales up 33.4%. Investors believed this boded well for Ocado's update next week.

Still with retailers, Mothercare plunged 128.5p to 291.5p after it warned full 
year figures would not meet expectations.

In the mining sector, Glencore Xstrata added 5.95p to 314.8p following a 
report it plans to restart production at its Pasar copper smelter in the 
Philippines, shut since early November following damage from typhoon Haiyan.

It was also lifted by a positive note from Bank of America Merrill Lynch, as 
well as comments from JP Morgan Cazenove which put an overweight rating on
Glencore <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glencore> Xstrata with a 350p 
target price.

Lonmin lost 3p to 301.9p despite vague talk of possible bid interest.

Elsewhere Aberdeen Asset Management dropped 17.7p to 473.3p after negative 
comments from a number of major banks about the outlook for emerging markets, 
one of the company's specialities.

Catering group Compass closed 3p lower at £10.34 on similar concerns following 
downbeat comments on emerging markets from peer Sodexho.

Tate and Lyle lost 27.5p to 773p on worries about a fall in corn sweetener 
prices.

But Smiths Group added 12p to £14.92 after Morgan Stanley raised its target 
price on the engineering group from 1,507p to 1,536p, saying the market was 
overestimating the risks of a slowdown in its oil and gas business, while there 
was a possibility of consolidation in the medical sector. The bank said:
 As shown by GE's acquisition of Thermo Fischer Scientific assets this week 
and CareFusion's $500m purchase of Vital Care in November, [medical] industry 
M&A activity remains intense. Since 2000, 29 transactions have been completed 
in an enterprise value/earnings range of 15.5 to 23 times. However, our base 
case medical business valuation is 12.2 times only. Our bull case value for 
Smiths is £18.88.

Among the mid-caps, software group Aveva added 137p to £22.61 after UBS moved 
to buy from neutral.

Domino's Pizza put on 19p to 522p after it reassured investors with a better 
than expected rise in UK sales. The company had been under the cosh recently 
with the announced departures of its chief executive and finance director, 
concerns about a slowdown of its UK opening programme and worries about its 
German business.

UK sales rose by 10.9% in the fourth quarter, ahead of forecasts of a 1% to 4% 
gain. It said UK and Irish profits for the year would beat expectations, but 
German losses would be higher than forecast. Overall full year figures would be 
in line, the company said.

But International Personal Finance, the emerging markets credit company which 
was hit by a £2.4m fine from Polish authorities at the end of 2013, lost 26p to 
484p after Panmure Gordon cut its recommendation from buy to sell.

Finally blur, which operates an online marketplace for companies to buy and 
sell services from advertising to legal help, added 7p to 581p after fourth 
quarter figures showed a 1500% rise in the value of projects submitted to the 
exchange. George O'Connor at Panmure Gordon said:
 [Blur] is attracting larger customers - who in turn are submitting more 
projects at higher value and for longer duration, making a more robust 
financial model. In our opinion, blur offers an investment play on the theme of 
industrial digitisation, benefits from accelerating global momentum and 
competitive barriers due to its technology platform. We increase our target 
price to 695p (from 677p). Buy.  