
The FTSE 100 is continuing the week’s recovery, with chip designer Arm leading 
the way.

The company, which supplies Apple’s iPhone, has jumped more that 5% to £12.13 
after it beat forecasts for its first quarter. Boosted by theiPhone 6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6>, Arm said profits rose 24% to 
£120.5m and royalties were expected to continue growing. Chief executive Simon 
Segars said:

As the world becomes more digital and more connected, we continue to see an 
increase in the demand for Arm’s smart and energy-efficient technology, which 
is driving both our licensing and royalty revenues.

In recent months many handset [manufacturers] have announced smartphones and 
tablets based on Armv8-A and Mali graphics processors. As production of these 
mobile computers start to ramp up in the second half of the year, Arm will 
benefit from the higher royalty percentage per chip that these technologies 
deliver compared to the processors in previous generations of mobile devices.

Licensing revenues are not, however, expected to continue at the high levels 
previously seen, with compound annual growth rate of 29% in the past five 
years. Arm expects revenue growth of 5% to 10% per annum in the medium term.

Analyst Julian Yates at Investec said:


Overall Arm’s results were a good set of numbers and we expect 2015 consensus 
to nudge up. Royalty growth was stellar with higher royalty chips now coming 
through (V8 was 3.5% of volume) with sales up 31% to $167.5m versus our $160.1m 
(consensus $159.9m). However licences were down 2% to $109.3m versus our 
$113.8m (consensus $113.2m) with backlog down 7%. The exceptional licence 
growth of last two years could not continue forever so we are not overly 
concerned with this one data point. Shares are at our target and we stay at 
hold.

At FinnCap analyst Lorne Daniel said:


This is a strong start to the year as the mobile industry continues to expect 
strong progress in 2015, demonstrated at the Mobile World Conference in 
February.

But the bearish Liberum repeated its sell rating:

Having spoken to the company we don’t expect any material changes to consensus 
estimates for 2015 (royalty nudged up, licensing nudged down). Expect the 
royalty growth to be well received, but don’t expect any change to numbers.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 26.67 points at 7078.80, with the 
earnings boost from Arm and alsoSky, up 52p at £11.04p after nine month profits 
rose 20%.

But Associated British Foods fell 65p to £27.98 after disappointing figures, 
with problems at its sugar business again outweighing a good performance at 
Primark. With currency concerns it said it expected a modest decline in full 
year earnings per share.

Miners also suffered some profit taking after Monday’s rise following China 
cutting its reserve rate requirments.Rio Tinto has fallen 57p to £28.17 as iron 
ore production rose but amid falling prices. and Barclays cut from overweight 
to equal weight.BHP Billiton has lost 15p to 1466.5p.

Investors seem, for the moment, to be ignoring any worries about Greece 
running out of money before it can come to a deal with its creditors.

Among the mid-caps International Personal Finance rose 26p to 501p as Polish 
regulators accepted its plans to change its fees on loans and decided not to 
levy a fine.

Just Eat has jumped 14.7p to 459.9p as Citigroup raised its target price from 
495p to 515p. The bank said:

We reduce EBITDA by around 9% largely due to increased investment in 
technology. At the adjusted earnings per share level however our estimates are 
increased 7% for 2015 and 1% for 2016 as we adjust for acquired amortization, 
in line with recent company reporting.
 