
The market seems to be straining to head higher but hedge fund group Man is 
missing out.

The company is down 4.2p at 118.8p, making it the biggest faller in the 
leading index, as a number of brokers turn negative on the asset management 
sector. JP Morgan was cautious onMan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mangroup>, saying consensus forecasts 
implied what looked like an unlikely level of performance at the start of the 
year. It said:
 Man continues to struggle against weaker investment performance and poor 
flows. In our view estimates risk falling further.

Meanwhile Credit Suisse lowered its price target on Man from 215p to 175p to 
reflect a 26% reduction in its 2012 earnings forecast. The bank has cut its 
rating from outperform to neutral on bothAshmore, 4.4p lower at 326.5p, and 
Jupiter Fund Management, 7.2p lower at 200.2p.

Overall, though, the FTSE 100 has edged up 9.79 points to 5634.05. But the 
uncertainty over the eurozone crisis continues, with Italian bond yields for 
example heading higher once more to 7.18%, well over the 7% level seen as 
marking the danger zone.

And all eyes will be on the US non-farm payroll figures this afternoon, with a 
rise of 150,000 jobs expected. On Thursday reasonable US private sector job 
numbers failed to pull markets out of their Europe-inspired gloom, but if the 
non-farm figures are disappointing, they are sure to add to investors' woes. 
That seems to be the state of things at the moment - good news ignored, bad 
news seized upon. Owen Ireland at Valbury Capital said:
 Friday's trading in Asia saw the Nikkei and Hang Seng fall over 1% amid 
rumours of an incident at a North Korean nuclear facility. Sentiment at the end 
of the week is often a crucial indicator of what we might expect when trading 
resumes after the weekend. There is not a single investor who is not wildly 
searching for the next big opportunity, and none will turn away from the 
markets today before they have made the decision whether to be risk-on or 
risk-off over the weekend. 
Among the risers Burberry benefited from hopes for its Asian business, adding 
29p to Â£12.32.Eurasian Natural Resources Corporation continued its rise on the 
back ofsettling a dispute in the Democratic Republic of Congo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/jan/05/enrc-settles-congo-mine-dispute>
, up 12p to 707p.

Meanwhile to no one's surprise Blacks Leisure shares have been suspended, at 
last night's closing price of 1.375p. The companywill go into a pre-pack 
administration and then be sold 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/jan/06/dragons-den-peter-jones-blacks-administration>
, leaving nothing for shareholders. Dragons' Den star Peter Jones, JD Sports 
and Sports Direct are among those said to be interested in the business.
 