
The nervous Santa rally which began this week took flight in earnest on 
Thursday, and it was mainly central banks behind the surge once more.

Markets were initially buoyed by the overnight news from the US Federal 
Reserve that it was “patient” about raising interest rates, which saw the 
dollar slip and commodities climb. Concerns that an early Fed increase could 
dampen global economic growth were allayed - for now.

Switzerland introduced negative rates in an effort to lower the franc’s value, 
which had been partly boosted by investors fleeing the rouble. Meanwhile the 
Russian currency remained steady after its crash earlier in the week, after the 
Russian central bank’s measures to support the financial system and President 
Putin’s annual address.

Another positive factor was a Reuters interview with Alexis Tsipras, the 
leader of Greek opposition party Syriza. Recent political turmoil in the 
country raised the prospect of a snap election which Syriza - which opposes 
austerity and the Greek bailout terms - could win. But Tsipras said he wanted 
to negotiate any new debt deal and keep Greece in the euro.

Overall the FTSE 100 finished 129.52 points or 2.04% higher at 6466.00, with 
European markets also recording reasonable rises and Wall Street up around 220 
points by the time London closed.

Better than expected UK retail sales also helped matters. Tesco climbed 7.65p 
to 175.80 on hopes of a turnaround for Christmas, andSainsbury added 5.4p to 
235p.

But oil fell back in late trading, partly on reports a port strike in Nigeria 
had ended, allowing crude oil shipments to resume and boosting supply at a time 
of uncertain demand.

Building materials group CRH climbed 66p to £15.33 as Deutsche Bank raised its 
target price from £14.20 to £15, whileArm added 45.5p to 975.5p after a 
positive response to an investor call on the Chinese smartphone market.

South Africa focused companies recovered from recent weakness, with Old Mutual 
up 10.2p to 189.9p andSABMiller 178.5p better at 3374.5p.

AstraZeneca rose 123.5p to 4572.5p as its new treatment against ovarian cancer 
was given European approval. The company believes the drug, Lynparza, could be 
a $2bn a year blockbuster. The news is positive for Lynparza after US 
authorities voted against its accelerated approval, withAstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> expected to hear back from 
regulators early in January.

British Airways owner International Airlines Group climbed 19.9p to 463.5p as 
it revealed it had made an approach toAer Lingus, up 9% to €1.98 but been 
rejected.

Among the fallers United Utilities slipped 3.5p to 914.5p as its shares went 
ex-dividend, whileCoca-Cola Hellenic Bottling dropped 20p to £12.22 on 
continuing concerns about its operations in struggling Greece and Russia.

BT fell 1p to 400.8p on talk of a possible cash call to help pay for its 
proposed acquisition of mobile group EE.

Lower down the market IT group Aveva lost 74p or 5.5% to £12.55 after Morgan 
Stanley moved from equal weight to underweight, and JP Morgan downgraded from 
overweight to underweight. The bank estimated 70% to 80% of the company’s 
revenues are directly or indirectly affected by the oil price.

ValirX, the life science business, fell 25% to 0.22p after it raised £800,000 
with a placing of 4m new shares at 0.2p each, to develop the remainder of its 
portfolio now its lead compound Val201 has a clinical trial underway.

Finally Real Good Food recovered from earlier losses to close up 1.5p to 30.5p 
after a 1% fall in half year revenues and a loss of £3m, compared to a profit 
of £2.2m. The company was hit by a price dispute with British Sugar, but its 
distribution business Napier Brown has returned to profitability since October.
 