
Leading shares are heading rapidly into bear market territory, with the FTSE 
100 now down more than 17% from its recent peak in the middle of April.

By most definitions, a bear market is underway when an index falls by 20%. With
Barclays heading the fallers, the FTSE 100 today lost another 111.12 points to 
4805.75. It is now at its lowest level since September 3 last year and has 
dropped nearly 500 points in the last eight days of trading after an ever 
growing cocktail of bad news for investors.

Today's rout came amid more signs that a global slowdown could yet turn into a 
double dip recession. Chinese and US manufacturing surveys for June both showed 
faltering growth, with US new orders at their lowest since October 2009. Also 
in the US, pending home sales slumped 30% in May - much worse than expected - 
as a homebuyers tax credit ran out.

As for Europe, investors were unnerved by an overnight threat by ratings 
agency Moody's to downgrade Spain's debt, although there was some positive news 
as Spain succeeded in a €3.5bn bond sale and European banks repaid a €442bn 
loan to the ECB and borrowed €111bn in short term funding, in line with 
forecasts.

But investors accentuated the negative, and technical analysts said that if 
the leading index fell below 4800 the next stop could be 4630. Tomorrow's US 
non-farm payroll numbers, which always have an impact on the market, could be 
crucial for the future direction of share prices.

Barclays lost 15.2p to 255.35p as analysts rushed to cut their earnings 
forecasts after the bank warned - as part of an investor day on Wednesday - 
that it was seeing a slowdown in itsBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> Capital investment banking 
business. RBS reduced its price target from 420p to 410p, saying:

Future expectations for global retail banking were overshadowed by comments on 
the group's second quarter performance, particularly for revenue in Barclays 
Capital, which missed market expectations for the fourth quarter in a row.

Miners moved lower on concerns about future demand from China, despite reports 
they were close to a compromise agreement with Australia's new prime minister 
over the contentious 40% supertax the country had proposed to impose on the 
sector.Rio Tinto lost 64p to 2904.5p while BHP Billiton was down 60p at 1694.5p.
Randgold Resources dropped 345p to £60.80 as gold slid to a three week low.

Royal Dutch Shell B shares fell 77p to £1554 on talk analysts were downgrading 
their forecasts, butBP bucked the downward trend to add 9.05p to 327.95p amid 
rumours - denied by the company - that it had finally capped the Gulf of Mexico 
leak.

Among the mid-caps, positive updates lifted pubs group Greene King 2.7p to 
395p and department store ownerDebenhams 2.1p to 55.1p. But Chloride, the 
uninterruptible power supply specialist, lost 15.9p to 370.1p as Swiss group 
ABB withdrew from the auction for the business, leaving the way clear for the 
375p a share offer from America's Emerson.

Dana Petroleum added 42p to £11.77 on renewed bid chatter. Austria's OMV has 
been mentioned in the past as one possible predator.

But Aquarius Platinum dropped 28.3p to 300p after it cut output targets by a 
fifth at its Blue Ridge mine after a suspension of operations and a safety 
review following two deaths. Panmure Gordon issued a sell note, saying:

Today's news is a further disappointment from an asset which has failed to 
perform as expected since acquisition.Aquarius Platinum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aquariusplatinum> is often named as a 
potential acquirer in the sector, and has not denied an interest in 
participating in industry consolidation. We wonder how the experience at Blue 
Ridge influences Aquarius' thinking on further acquisitions.

Analyst Louise Collinge at Evolution Securities was also negative on the 
company:

We had pencilled in production from Blue Ridge for 2011 of just over 
125,000oz. Aquarius has since undertaken a comprehensive review of mining 
operations and safety systems, and now anticipates that production of 80,000oz 
will be achieved during 2011. The ramp-up of this mine, which has been underway 
for around 12 months, will now take a further 12 months. We reiterate our 
reduce recommendation and our 256p target price.
 