
Despite Scottish shares mounting a mini-revival after a new poll, markets have 
edged lower as nervousness about the referendum in a week's time and the global 
outlook continues.

The poll - for the Daily Record - showed a majority against independence ahead 
of the vote. Andy McLevey at Interactive Investor said:
 Although the latest poll indicates a lead for those opposed to Scottish 
Independence the uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the referendum vote and 
potential repercussions continue to be a concern for investors and we can 
expect a nervy and potentially volatile week ahead.

Even so, companies with Scottish links have rallied. Standard Life has been 
lifted 11.2p to 418.6p,Royal Bank of Scotland has risen 4.2p to 346.4p and 
Lloyds Banking Group is up 0.57p to 73.80p. SSE has added 30p to £14.75, helped 
by RBC analysts raising their target price from £15 to £15.80. RBC said:
 SSE is potentially a significant winner from the introduction of the UK 
capacity market which we forecast will add just over £300m of EBITDA. This 
positive exposure to the UK capacity market, clarity on regulated networks and 
actions taken to correct the balance sheet net-off against continued political 
and retail market risk.

We see limited downside to our conservative assumptions. The double whammy of 
Scottish Independence and a Labour victory may not ultimately impact longer 
term profitability at SSE, although we recognise a potential hit to sentiment. 
But Next is leading the losers, down 160p at £70.05. It reported a 19.3% rise 
in first half profits to £324m and repeated its July guidance of a full year 
profit of £775m to £815m. But the figures, impressive as they were, came in 
slightly below some expectations, and the retailer said part of its strong 
performance had come from external factors - such as the improving economy, low 
interest rates and availability of credit - which may not last into next year. 
Analyst Alistair Davies at Investec said:
 Next has had a stellar first half, but numbers are a little short of 
consensus (£5m at a pretax profit level)... Within the numbers, retail had an 
exceptional first half – the strength of full price sales (up 8.6%) having a 
key role in improving the earnings before interest and tax margin by 180 basis 
points. Directory earnings rose 10.2%, but we note a 130 basis point decline in 
the operating margin with higher levels of advertising and change in sales mix 
all having a dilutive earnings margin effect. No changes to forecasts this 
morning. Hold.

Overall the FTSE 100 is down 4.64 points at 6825.47, with mining shares 
dipping as metal prices edged lower. Chinese inflation came in lower than 
expected, prompting concerns about future growth rates in the country, a key 
consumer of commodities. SoAntofagasta has fallen 8.5p to 770.5p while Anglo 
Americanis down 13p at 1501.5p.

On a busy day for retail results, Ocado is up 11.4p to 323.2p, while partner 
Morrisonshas added 1.2p at 177.8p as it raised it dividend despite a 51% slump 
in first half profit, with some traders even reviving talk it could be a 
takeover target. But Argos and Homebase ownerHome Retail is down 9.4p at 178.2p 
after like for like sales came in below expectations.

Arm has recovered 10.5p to 959.5p following Wednesday's dip on profit taking 
following the iPhone and watch launch from Apple, one of the chip designer's 
key customers.

Among the mid-caps Ashmore has fallen 23.3p or nearly 7% to 321.6p as the 
emerging market money manager reported a 34% fall in full year profits to 
£87.3m, hit by currency fluctuations.
 