
May proved to be the worst month for leading shares for three years, and the 
first trading day of June saw the selling continue.

With poor manufacturing figures from China, the UK and Europe, and 
disappointing US non-farm payroll numbers, investors abandoned shares once 
again, pushing theFTSE 100 down 60.67 points to 5260.19, its lowest level since 
25 November last year. Over the week the leading index lost 91 points as Spain 
came firmly to the forefront of the eurozone crisis, amid growing fears it 
could be the next to need a bailout. Signs that Greece's anti-bailout party 
Syriza was gaining more support ahead of this month's elections added to the 
apprehensive mood.

Angus Campbell, head of market analysis at Capital Spreads, said:
 It may be all fun street parties outside but the Jubilee week end is being 
tainted with a streak of red that isn't part of the Union Jack, rather flashes 
of selling across traders' computer screens. More bad news for the markets both 
here and across the pond has lead investors rushing for the exit [as they] were 
unwilling to go into the Jubilee with too much exposure, especially when other 
markets are open when London is closed on Monday and Tuesday. 
In Europe, Germany's Dax dropped 3.19% while France's Cac closed 2.1% lower.

But Man bucked the downward trend, adding 2.6p to 75.5p with the help of some 
speculative takeover talk and a bit of bargain hunting. Even so, the hedge fund 
group's recent share price performance has been so poor that it will be ejected 
from the FTSE 100 index this month, subject to ratification by FTSE Group next 
Wednesday. It has been a member of the leading index since September 2001 and 
will be replaced byBabcock International, down 9.5p at 840.5p.

The day's rise followed renewed rumours of possible bid interest in Man from 
Bank of New York Mellon, with a price of 100p a share mentioned. Many analysts 
are sceptical of suggestions it could be taken over while there is so much 
uncertainty about the outlook for its business, but the theory does have some 
supporters. In AprilUBS suggested Man could be a target for a north American 
asset manager 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2012/apr/24/man-ftse-bid-talk?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

With gold moving sharply higher as investors sought havens for their cash, 
Randgold Resources rose 360p to £55.55, African Barrick Gold added 19.9p to 
349.4p and Russia-focusedPetropavlovsk put on 21.1p to 388.1p.

But other miners dropped back as copper hit a new low for the year following 
the signs of a slowdown in China, a key consumer of commodities.Vedanta 
Resources dropped 45.5p to 883.5p, while Aquarius Platinum fell 8.55p to 64.8p 
after downbeat comments from Goldman Sachs.

Utilities were in demand for their low-risk qualities, with electricity 
supplierSSE adding 9p to £13.32 and United Utilities up 5.5p at 662.5p. Severn 
Trent, which released better than expected profits on Thursday along with news 
of a £150m payout to shareholders, ended 39p higher at £17.60.

BP rose 7.1p to 402p after it put its half share in its Russian joint venture 
TNK-BP up for sale.

InterContinental Hotels fell 44p to £14.82 but the group was in demand during 
the week. First Numis suggested it could be a takeover target for US peet 
Marriott, then it emerged that activist investor Nelson Peltz had taken a 4.27% 
stake. Analysts said Peltz might pressurise the company to speed up the sale of 
some of its trophy hotels, to boost shareholder value.

ITV fell 3.45p to 69.45p on talk that advertising sales for July and August 
were weaker than expected, despite hopes for a lift from Euro 2012 and the 
Olympics. Analysts at Investec moved from hold to sell, saying:
 Uncertain macros look to be offsetting Euro football/Olympics boost, with 
seemingly gravity-defying TV advertising now coming under pressure - we see 
risk to consensus forecasts. 
Lower down the market Enterprise Inns fell 4.75p to 60.5p despite successfully 
renegotiating banking facilities ahead of schedule.

It has secured a new £220m agreement until 2016 which starts when the existing 
facilities expire in December 2013. The move allows the pub owner to continue 
its strategy of reducing its debt, which is down from £1.1bn in 2008 to £446m 
at the moment. As part of this, it plans to make £200m worth of disposals this 
year and £150m in 2013.

HMV added 0.59p to 3.99p after it sold its music venue, Hammersmith Apollo, 
for £32m to a joint venture between Anschutz Entertainment and CTS Eventim. The 
sale - subject to shareholder agreement - would allow it to amend its £220m 
bank facility.

Finally, it may not have been the most auspicious day for a market debut but 
Sheffield software groupWandisco managed to get off to a bright start. It 
joined Aim with a placing at 180p a share, valuing the business at £37m, and 
closed 19p higher at 199p.
 