
Global stock markets moved sharply higher with the UK's leading index 
recording its best daily performance since 2 January.

Much of the rise was due to hopes of an interest rate cut by the European 
Central Bank - perhaps as soon as next week - and an easing up of austerity 
after poor manufacturing data, particularly from Germany. There were also some 
disappointing purchasing manager indices from the US and China. But this was 
partly outweighed by a number of reasonable corporate results, including 
Netflix and Travelers in the US.

In the UK, the star performer was Arm, up 103p to 972p or nearly 12%. The 
Cambridge-based chip designer beat profit forecasts after strong demand for 
smartphones and tablets using its technology.

The business supplies the likes of Samsung and Qualcomm as well as Apple. But 
whereas Apple is expectedto report disappointing figures later 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2013/apr/22/can-apple-stop-profits-rot> 
as rivals eat into its market share, Arm is benefiting from its breadth of 
customers including Apple's competitors.

So Arm reported a 44% jump in profits to £89.4m, some £10m ahead of analyst 
forecasts. As well as buoyant demand for its chip designs in smartphones and 
tablets and its low-energy processors, the company was also helped by the 
strength of the dollar after it collects most of its revenues in the US 
currency.

Also reporting good figures was Associated British Foods, the grocery and 
sugars business which also owns discount clothing retailer Primark. Its shares 
ended 149p better at £19.99.

Primark, which opened 15 new stores in the first half including a second 
outlet on London's Oxford Street, was the driving force behind ABF recording a 
10% rise in half year revenues to £6.3bn and a 20% increase in operating 
profits to £496m.

The retailer reported a 24% rise in first half sales - a 7% increase on a 
like-for-like basis after a good Christmas and despite the cold spell at the 
start of the year. Operating profits rose from £154m to £238m. Primark is also 
making a successful push into continental Europe and next year it will open its 
first stores in France.

Arm and ABF were the top risers in the FTSE 100, which finished 125.50 points 
or 2% higher at 6406.12. Alex Young, senior sales trader at CMC Markets, said:

PMI data out of Germany this morning initially disappointed traders, who 
dragged indices back from their highs early in the session. The tone quickly 
changed however, with the consensus view seeming to be that data of this nature 
makes an imminent European rate cut more likely. This perverse 'bad data is 
good' rationale has been a feature of US markets for some time now as investors 
rely on the back stop of quantitative easing, but for bears unable to reconcile 
a bleak macro picture with perpetual equity market enthusiasm, these are 
frustrating times indeed.


But the poor Chinese figures pushed commodities like copper lower and hit the 
mining sector, withFresnillo falling 24p to £10.92 and Antofagasta down 8.5p at 
884p.

Elsewhere International Airlines Group, owner of British Airways and Spain's 
Iberia, climbed 13.2p to 269.6p after a positive note from Morgan Stanley. The 
bank raised its 2013 earnings forecast from €629m to €694m ahead of first 
quarter results due on 10 May, to reflect the airline's recent traffic 
statistics and falling fuel prices. It listed its reasons for an overweight 
recommendation on the shares:

Iberia downsize returns focus to BA margin strength (+3.4% in 2012 versus 
Iberia -7.3%). Transatlantic demand and pricing an ongoing support for BA 
earnings. Oneworld network strengthened by announcement that [Latin America's 
biggest airline] Latam is to join the alliance. US Airways' planned merger with 
American will expand the US domestic feed and negates risk of another carrier 
stepping in to acquire American's allegiance.

Meanwhile the Spanish stock market regulator said IAG had enough acceptances 
for its bid for airline Vueling to gain control. IAG already owns 45.85% and 
raised its offer by a third after an initial rejection, leading to a board 
recommendation

Among the mid-caps Aveva, the IT systems supplier, added 96p to £21.59 after a 
positive trading update. Investec analyst Julian Yates said:

[The] pre-close signals profits to be in line with expectations and there are 
some subtle messages in terms of trends in trading that should give reassurance 
in our view. Firstly, there is no sign of end markets slowing which has been a 
recent investor concern. Secondly, the group hit profit expectations despite 
another £1m bad debt write-off in China and a still difficult Brazil. Lastly,
Aveva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> Net [information 
management software] is trading ahead of expectations with around 40% second 
half sales growth and £1m-£2m 2013 profit contribution. We maintain buy.

Premier Oil put on 14.7p to 365.8p after it announced an oil find in the North 
Sea at its Bonneville exploration well. Flooring retailer Carpetright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carpetright> climbed 7p to 637p as it 
reported a 2.1% rise in year on year sales in the fourth quarter. Shore Capital 
analyst David O'Brien raised his rating from hold to buy and said:

The net impact of [the statement] and the guidance within this has led us to 
upgrade our current year revenue expectations by 0.5% and we move our gross 
margin improvement from 2.0% to 2.25% in the UK year on year, although we have 
increased our operating cost expectations, reflecting the increased promotional 
activity and sterling weakness relative to the euro during the fourth quarter. 
The combination of this has resulted in an upgrade to adjusted earnings per 
share of 14.4% for 2013.. We are encouraged by the market share gains made by 
Carpetright, led by the promotional activity, new product lines and store 
refurbishment programme, and the improving trend in floor coverings sales 
generally in the first three months of calendar 2013.

Finally Rialto Energy rose almost 27% to 4.2p after the oil and gas business 
announced a partnership with oil trader Vitol to develop the company's 
interests in Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana. Under the terms of the deal, Vitol will 
take a 20% interest in the Ghana operation in exchange for a $7.7m facility to 
meet drilling obligations. Vitol will also supply $50m of capital and take a 
65% in Rialto Energy (Côte d'Ivoire). Investec analysts said:

The proposed deals, while dilutive, will importantly remove some of the 
uncertainty that has hung over the stock since a disappointing appraisal 
campaign at Gazelle (Cote d'Ivoire) last year. In addition the entry of Vitol 
reinforces the potential of both blocks, while also providing the weight of a 
name that can possibly advance commercialisation options in the block.
 