
Despite a sharp fall in the Chinese stockmarket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/jan/19/chinese-stock-market-fall-eurozone-qe-business-live#block-54bcb722e4b06c06b3d99fa0>
 after regulators acted to clamp down on speculative trading which had driven 
some of its recent gains, European markets are on the front foot once more.

Troubled Tesco is among the leading risers, up 4.3p to 223.35p after analysts 
at Morgan Stanley raised their rating from equalweight to overweight and their 
target price from 155p to 260p. Investors are increasingly wondering whether 
the worst could be over for the superrmarket after its recent warnings and 
executive changes, with like for like sales over Christmas down just 0.5%, a 
steadier performance than some rivals.

New chief executive Dave Lewis has unveiled price cuts and initiatives to win 
back customers previously unhappy with its service levels. Morgan Stanley, 
which has added the supermarket group to its best ideas list, said:

We think Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has scope to 
materially improve its UK operations and return to 3.5% earnings before 
interest and tax margin by 2019. Combined with moves to optimise the portfolio, 
this should drive the shares to outperform in the next 12 months.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 14.43 points at 6564.70, with German and 
French markets also higher ahead of the much anticipated European Central Bank 
meeting this week, which is widely expected to sanction some form of 
quantitative easing. Swiss shares rebounded after last week’s shock move by the 
central bank to remove its currency cap against the euro.

But mining shares have been hit again, not helped by the Chinese situation and 
despite copper edging higher after recent declines.Rio Tinto has lost 60.5p to 
£28.28,Glencore is down 5p at 247.55p and Anglo America has fallen 18p to 
1081.5p.

Elsewhere temporary power supply business Aggreko has added 27p to £15.67 as 
RBC moved from sector perform to outperform whileImperial Tobacco was 42p 
better at £29.34 after Canaccord Genuity raised its target price from £21.30 to 
£22.

Chocolate specialist Thorntons edged up 2p to 81p after it reported its retail 
business saw a 5% rise in like for like sales for the second quarter to 10 
January, after good demand for inlaid boxes, seasonal products and advent 
calendars.

But as it warned in December, its commecial business disappointed, with sales 
down 10.3% after problems with some of its supermarket customers. Nicola 
Mallard at Investec said:

A setback in revenues in the second quarter is disappointing, but should not 
be interpreted as a failure of the group’s strategy. Whilst [commerical] was 
weaker than hoped, this was only in two particular customers (not across the 
board) and Retail numbers were very good and an indication of consumers’ 
continuing regard for the brand. We downgrade absolute numbers (2015 estimated 
pretax profit down 30%), but leave future growth rates intact. There are no 
serious concerns around the balance sheet given debt facilities were recently 
refinanced.
 