
Hopes of a Greek deal after Monday’s summits appear not to have been 
immediately dashed, meaning markets are heading north again.

The FTSE 100 is currently up 10.24 at 6835.91, while Germany’s Dax is 103 
points or nearly 1% higher. The Athens market has climbed another 3% as 
investors remained optimistic that the latest set of proposals could finally 
form the basis of a deal between Greece and its creditors, thus releasing much 
needed bailout funds and avoiding a default. Tony Cross at TrustNet Direct said:

The FTSE-100 is adding a little to yesterday’s gains as the trading session 
gets underway with investors continuing to buy into the idea that a Greek 
compromise can be found in the near term. Striking exactly the right balance 
however is going to be the difficult bit - if the concessions are too generous 
then the likes of Spain and Italy – who are struggling but also act as Greek 
creditors – will balk, whilst if there’s not enough on the table then voters in 
Greece will be left wondering what’s happened. In light of this, expect no 
let-up in the scrutiny the eurogroup is under in trying to agree terms here.

Away from Greece and the eurozone, the day’s biggest riser so far is Mike 
Ashley’sSports Direct International. The retailing group is 21.5p better at 
724p as analysts at RBC upgraded from sector perform to outperform. RBC said 
click and collect would boost the UK business, and although the integration of 
the Austrian business was taking longer than expected and there were some 
currency headwinds, Sports Direct faced an easier comparative performance this 
winter compared to last year.


But Associated British Foods has fallen 31p to £30.63 as RBC cut from 
outperform to sector perform.

Elsewhere Smith & Nephew has added 20p to £11.07 after UBS moved from neutral 
to buy. It said:

Our channel checks lead us to believe that Smith & Nephew’s wound division is 
currently operating below its potential. We now see scope for divisional EBITA 
margins to increase to 33% in 2019 against 18.6% in 2014. We believe Smith & 
Nephew has been losing share in core wound care products for the past decade as 
management has been focused on the higher growth Negative Pressure Wound 
Therapy opportunity, yielding the market leader position to Mölnlycke. With a 
renewed focus on the US, catalysed by disappointing performance in the first 
half of 2014, Smith & Nephew could regain share and benefit from the 
significant operating leverage. We increase 2019 group earnings per share 
estimates by 11%, lift our price target to £12.75 [from £11.75] and upgrade to 
buy.

But Bunzl has dropped 39p to £18.52 after the supplies distributor said 
organic growth has slowed in the first half of the year, and the purchase of 
four businesses also made investors cautious. Chris Beauchamp at IG told 
Reuters:

The fact they’re about to splash the cash around is worrying investors... 
Reported performance didn’t inspire either.

Severn Trent fell back 21p to £21.55 after Monday’s rise which was fuelled by 
takeover talk. Meanwhile HSBC cut its target price from £21.50 to £21.40.

Miners are under pressure on falling iron ore prices, with Rio Tinto down 
16.5p at 2753.5p andAnglo American 1.9p lower at 993.2p.

Among the mid-caps Ladbrokes has jumped 12.2p to 134.3p on news it was in 
merger talks with Gala Coral. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/23/ladbrokes-and-coral-in-talks-to-create-biggest-bookmaker>


Petrofac has put on 81.5p to 951p after it said its order book at the end of 
May had grown to $20.5bn, although its full year profit would be weighted 
towards the second half.
 