
Leading shares are edging lower, with Standard Chartered leading the way down 
aftera third quarter loss, a £3.3bn fundraising and 15,000 job cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/standard-chartered-seeks-billions-from-investors>
.

But housebuilders are also subsiding on concerns about weaker house price 
inflation and the effect of rising interest rates.Stronger UK manufacturing 
figures on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/02/uk-manufacturing-output-rebounds-markit-cips-pmi-report>
prompted some talk that the Bank of England could sanction dearer borrowing 
costs more quickly than expected.

As a consequence of these concerns, Liberum issued a gloomy sector note, 
helping to pushBarratt Developments down 17p to 593p, Taylor Wimpey 4.8p lower 
to 193.4p, andPersimmon 30p down at £19.38. Liberum analyst Charlie Campbell 
said:

We believe the largest housebuilders’ valuations are too optimistic to 
withstand the gross margin pressure that we expect in the coming years as house 
price inflation is suppressed by a more vigilant regulator and build cost 
inflation returns. We cut our ratings on Barratt, Persimmon andTaylor Wimpey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/taylorwimpey> from Hold to Sell. There is 
better value in builders who can grow profits by raising output: top picks 
Bellway and Gleeson.

House prices are much more stretched than widely assumed because price/income 
multiples are now watched by a regulator with growing powers. Stricter controls 
on lending standards will depress house price inflation, which could cause 
gross margins to fall as build costs have started rising materially, especially 
labour. Falling gross margins will lower returns especially for those not 
growing output.

Rising rates will not derail the housing market, but sentiment is vulnerable. 
We believe investors may see the first US rate rise as a signal to reset 
portfolios. Housebuilders’ shares could also be vulnerable as returns-based 
models generate lower valuations as interest rates rise. The other main risk to 
the sector is that Help to Buy is repealed. The government will keep this in 
place while it generates job growth, but if house prices were to stall the 
scheme’s costs could rise materially.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently down 7.05 points at 6354.75, with Standard 
Chartered <https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> 56.3p lower 
at 657.3p.

Associated British Foods, owner of Primark, groceries and sugar businesses, 
has slipped 36p to £33.98 after a 2% fall in annual earnings and a warning 
about currency pressures affecting the current year. It said the first US 
Primark store opened eight weeks ago was trading well.

Meggitt, hit recently by a full year profit warning, has recovered 9.2p to 
366.3p after Barclays kept an overweight rating on the engineering group, 
albeit with a price target slashed from 610p to 420p. Barclays said:

Rarely do we find aerospace and defence companies which are simply too cheap. 
But post last week’s warningMeggitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/meggitt> is firmly in that bracket. At 10 
times 2016 PE, 9 times enterprise value/EBITA with a comfortably affordable 
dividend yielding around 4.5%, the shares trade at a 25% discount to their own 
historical averages versus the sector in spite of a 6% earnings per share 
compound annual growth rate and unmatched cash progression. We too harbour 
concerns around near term visibility and capital deployment discipline, but 
this looks to be more than in the price.

Mining shares have slipped back despite Australia’s central bank keeping 
interest rates on hold and suggesting economic conditions had ‘firmed’ a little.

BHP Billiton is down 1.5p at 1024.5p, Rio Tinto is off 40p at 2281.5p and 
Anglo American has dropped 8.5p to 535.8p.
 