
After an initial attempt to recover from recent losses, leading shares are 
struggling to cling onto the day’s gains.

Oil shares are among the biggest fallers after crude prices slid further in 
the wake of a downbeat report from the International Energy Agency. The agency 
said the oil market would be oversupplied until at least the first six months 
of 2017, given a sharp slowdown in demand and rising stocks. A month ago it 
predicted suppy and demand would be broadly in balance for the rest of the 
year, and inventories would fall sharply.

Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG, said:

The IEA has joined OPEC in pouring more cold water on the oil price this 
morning. After OPEC flipped its prediction of dwindling non-OPEC supply in 
2017, instead warning that it was set to rise due to a major new oilfield in 
Kazakhstan coming online, the IEA has issued a stark warning that the pickup in 
demand seen in the first half of the year has completely evaporated. It has cut 
its demand forecasts for the second half and the whole of 2017 and is now 
predicting the glut will remain in the global market for the whole of next 
year. Oil prices are down this morning, although the real capitulation could 
come towards the end of the month if OPEC and Russia fail to agree a supply 
freeze

Brent crude is down more than 2% to $47.29 a barrel while West Texas 
Intermediate - the US benchmark - has slipped 2.46% to $45.15. SoBP is down 
5.9p at 422.80p whileRoyal Dutch Shell A shares are 22.5p lower at 1834.5p.

A number of mining shares are also under pressure, with Anglo American down 
3.9p at 815.6p andBHP Billiton 3.7p lower at 987.3p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is up just 5.04 points at 6705.94, with little impact 
from the better than expected UK inflation figures.

Associated British Foods is again the biggest faller after Monday’s 
disappointing figures, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/primark-vows-low-prices-brexit-votes-profits-associated-british-food-abf>
 down another 96p to £27.19. Jefferies moved from hold to underperform, saying:

Despite the precipitous, full year IMS triggered ABF sell-off, we remain 
concerned that the Primark investment debate will now revolve around more 
normalised valuation criteria. With a third successive year of Primark margin 
falls now expected for 16/17, we value the division on 23 times PE, and see 
double-digit downside to the stock.

Shopping centre specialist Intu Properties has dropped 6.6p to 288.8p as 
Deutsche Bank moved from hold to sell. It said:

We do not see the ‘scenario weighted’ risk/reward as attractive given we would 
expect Intu to materially underperform in a UK downturn. We note that Intu has 
high EPS sensitivity to like for like growth and also capital values. Given 97% 
of asset value is UK shopping centres and given an loan-to-value off 44%, we 
see high sensitivity to a down-cycle should it occur. We forecast a c.20% 
capital value decline driving a c.35% decline in net asset value. With the 
stock trading at a 15% premium to our 2018 NAV forecast, we downgrade to sell.

Among the mid-caps, contrasting fortunes for two retailers after their updates.
JD Sports Fashionhas jumped 71p to £14.04 as it reported a 73% rise in first 
half profits. But online grocerOcado is down 44.5p at 277.5p on disappointment 
at the lack of news on an international tie-up and continuing pressure on its 
profit margins.
 