
Leading shares are off to a positive start, as Brent crude slips on hopes Opec 
will pump more oil to make up for any lost Libyan production, and investors 
turn to defensive stocks.

The FTSE 100 is up 13.13 points at 5986.91, although it must be remembered the 
index looked on course for a move higher yesterday, before falling at the last 
hurdle. Brent is currently down 81 cents at $114.23 a barrel after Kuwait's oil 
minister said Opec was in talks to increase production for the first time in a 
couple of years.

Among the main risers Old Mutual added 2.8p to 136.1p after the UK and South 
African financial group's full year figures beat expectations with a 14% 
increase in operating profit. The dividend was increased from 1.5p to 4p. The 
results follow news overnight that the group sold its US life company to 
Harbinger Capital for $350m, and Shore Capital said the sale at a discount to 
its net asset value showed how keenOld Mutual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oldmutual> was to exit the US. Analysts 
at KBW said it was disappointing there was no news about a possible sale of 
Nedbank, and they were concerned about the fact that the rand was fundamentally 
overvalued.

A positive note on the telecoms sector from Morgan Stanley has lifted BT 4.9p 
to 188.7p andVodafone 3.5p to 182.2p. The bank said:
 In the past, mobile termination rate (MTR) cuts, roaming, unbundling and 
deflation in digital subscriber line products all dragged. The outlook is 
calmer now, with MTRs cuts in the final furlong, EU roaming a lower exposure, 
and fixed line prices inflating.

Key overweights are Telenor and Vodafone for top line growth, BT for 
restructuring and fixed line pricing. 
Banks moved higher with HSBC up 11.1p to 668.6p and Barclays 1.4p better at 
309.35p. Miners were also in demand, and following its results and news of a 
100 cents a share special dividend,Antofagasta added 1p to Â£14.21.

The latest changes in the FTSE indices will be based on tonight's closing 
prices, although the details need to be ratified by FTSE Group tomorrow. As 
things stand at the moment, it continues to look likeITV, down 0.3p at 91.35p, 
andJohn Wood, up 4p at 666p, will move from the FTSE 250 to the FTSE 100, at 
the expense ofAlliance Trust, down 0.3p at 355.1p, and African Barrick Gold, 
10p lower at 558p.
 