
Airline shares are flying but the banking and mining sectors are dragging the 
market down after Friday’s gains.

Budget airline Ryanair has risen 9% to €8.2 after raising its profit forecast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/03/ryanair-raises-profit-surge-winter-bookings>
, just days after a positive update from British Airways ownerInternational 
Airlines Group. The sector had come under pressure last month on worries about 
reduced travel following the spread of the Ebola virus, but the recent 
statements seem to have calmed investors’ nerves.

IAG has added 6.8p to 416p while easyJet is up 39p at £15.39, the biggest 
riser in a fallingFTSE 100. Overall the index is down 19.42 points to 6527.05, 
with disappointing manufacturing surveys from China and the eurozone.

The Chinese figures in particular have reinforced concerns about a slowdown in 
the country, a key consumer of commodities. So mining shares have lost ground, 
withAnglo American down 1p at 1315.5p and Glencore 1.8p lower at 318.1p

After last week’s gains as the Bank of England’s solvency ratios appeared less 
onerous than feared, banks have also slipped back.

Royal Bank of Scotland is down 5.3p at 382.7p as analysts reacted to its 
recent results. JP Morgan issued a neutral rating but raised its target price 
from 370p to 400p but Investec moved from hold to sell with a 370p target. 
Investec’s Ian Gordon said:

 * It is true that RBS is (by far) the top performing UK bank year-to-date. 
However it has regularly offered clear (short-term) selling opportunities 
throughout the year and we believe that the strength of Friday’s euphoria has 
just presented another one. 
 * 

HSBC is down 2.3p at 637.2p as it set aside $378m for a potential fine for 
alleged manipulation of foreign exchange markets, and reported a worse than 
expected 12% fall in underlying third quarter earnings.

Elsewhere software group Aveva has lost 48p to £14.88 after Goldman Sachs 
issued a sell note and cut its price target from £19.50 to £14.20.

But Betfair was 36p better at £12.46 as it reported a 13% rise in second 
quarter revenues. Nick Batram at Peel Hunt said:

Betfair is yet another gaming company to report a strong third quarter, helped 
by above-average gross win margins and good cross- sell into gaming. As a 
consequence, we are raising our 2015 estimated EBITDA forecast by 6%. The 
recovery atBetfair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/betfair> is 
impressive, but then so is the rating, and the point-of- consumption tax is a 
material cost moving forward. Hold.
 