
Mining shares are helping the UK market push higher, ever closer to its record 
levels, but investors are still cautious amid quiet trading.

Europe has a day's holiday, so traders believe UK shares could drift ahead of 
the US opening, with Wall Street not expected to make any sudden movements.

The Chinese trade data over the weekend showed exports rising 7% year on year 
in May, easing fears of a slowdown in the country's economy. The figures 
followed Friday's positive US non-farm payroll data, while there has also been 
an upward revision to Japan's first quarter GDP.

So with those positive notes, the FTSE 100 has added 19.07 points to 6877.28. 
The record close for the index was 6930 on 30 December 1999, before the dotcom 
bubble burst.

With the Chinese news lifting commodity companies, Antofagasta has added 14.5p 
to 787p whileAnglo American is up 20p at £14.85 and Randgold Resources has 
risen 56p to £44.12.

But Lloyds Banking Group has lost 1.01p to 79.14p after it priced the 
flotation of its TSB business at between 220p and 290p a share, below book 
value. <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/09/tsb-flotation-lloyds>

Aggreko has lost 15p to £16.72 as Panmure Gordon moved its rating on the 
temporary power supply business from buy to hold, following a visit last week 
to the company's operations in the Americas. Analyst Paul Jones said:
 This visit was positive in overall terms, with more optimistic news on local 
economies than we previously imagined and a sense that the business is setting 
the foundations for further growth with training programmes and efficiency 
drives which should enable it to drive deeper into existing sectors and also 
expand further into Latin America to take advantage of structural power 
shortages. However, until these potential prospects and opportunities translate 
to profits, we feel the shares look high enough after a recent run.

Among the mid-caps, Dixons Retail has dropped 0.86p to 48.74p and merger 
partnerCarphone Warehouse is down 3.2p at 322.3p following reports that mobile 
phone group EE could stop supplying the chain.
 