
One of the new niche areas for investment in the energy sector is – no, not 
solar arrays, wind farms or anaerobic digestion plants, but diesel generation 
parks. It is one of the ironies of the current "energy crisis" that it has 
allowed the return of one of the most carbon-polluting technologies at a time 
when we are trying to tackle global warming.

How did it happen? The running-down of traditional electricity generating 
capacity, due to the closure of old atomic reactors and dirty coal-fired 
plants, has left the UK threatened by the lights going out at peak times. And 
so enterprising, if not green, entrepreneurs have realised there is cash to be 
made by assembling a load of old diesel generators in a field or industrial 
park and offering them as power sources when the National Grid is struggling to 
meet demand.

A high-profile energy specialist, who has asked to remain nameless, said he 
had received a steady stream of diesel-power providers over the last 12 months 
looking for City cash to expand, or advice on initial public offerings. These 
fossil-fuel projects tend to be small, but their total capacity is already in 
the hundreds of megawatts, which could just be the difference between lights on 
or blackouts as traditional capacity shrinks.

Generally, the diesel generation parks are not providing power to the grid but 
offering it to other businesses or organisations, allowing them to fall into 
the category of "demand-side response" at peak moments. National Grid is forced 
to operate these days on the Tesco motto of "every little helps" and last week 
was forced to rush out an initiative offering payments to those who could offer 
new capacity to the system this winter.

The original idea was that the network operator would encourage power 
providers such as Centrica or SSE to de-mothball some of their gas-fired or 
other idle electricity generating stations for the winter of 2015-16 when 
capacity margins – the difference between demand and supply – are expected to 
be at their very tightest, 2%.

The new call for more immediate assistance has come because the situation this 
coming winter is looking increasingly precarious, with twoEDF nuclear plants at 
Heysham and Hartlepool offline because of a technical fault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/04/nuclear-power-stations-out-december-edf>
. They should be back in action by the end of December, according to the 
French-owned generating company, but we can't be sure. And their two gigawatts 
of atomic power is out of action at a time when capacity has been reduced at 
two coal-fired facilities, Ironbridge and Ferrybridge, because of fires.

Both the grid and the industry watchdog, Ofgem, play down the idea that we are 
running into a crisis and insist they are just being prudent and preparing for 
all eventualities.

So should we be worried? Peter Atherton, an equity analyst at Liberum Capital, 
is surprised by the sudden call for more capacity and questions how much can be 
conjured up at such short notice. But equally, he argues it is not yet time to 
panic: "These [nuclear and coal plants out of action] are just two unforeseen 
events that have arrived but it would take four or five to knock over the 
system." This could come via an extremely cold winter that sends demand soaring 
or a windless winter that leaves turbines unturned, or just a few more problems 
at big traditional power stations.

The government's Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Act 
has provided a range of tools, such as capacity payments and contracts for 
difference, to deal with the wider power crunch and to stimulate investment in 
new capacity.

But this crisis caused by old stations going offline faster than newer – 
greener – ones can be constructed has been a long time in the making. If 
attempts to patch up the system this winter look more Heath Robinson than 
hi-tech then that is because they are. Where is that old diesel generator in 
the shed?

Autonomy's fallen idol


An email reveals that even Autonomy's finance director thought the 
once-soaraway Cambridge software company was heading for a financial plane 
crash.Or so Hewlett-Packard would have us believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/05/hp-court-filing-autonomy-email-finance-director-hewlett-packard>
. In the latest instalment of the row between HP and Autonomy founder Mike 
Lynch, whose management team is accused of cooking the books, a sensational 
piece of evidence has been made public in a court filing.

Sent from Sushovan Hussain's phone on 10 December 2010, weeks before 
Autonomy's former finance director was expected to wow the City with yet 
another quarter of double-digit growth, the email is a cry for help.

"Revenue fell away completely," wrote Hussain, referring to US sales of the 
key Idol search engine. Addressed to Lynch, the email says: "There are swathes 
of reps with nothing to do maybe chase imaginary deals." It warns that "radical 
action is required".

HP's lawyers say Hussain was urging Lynch to sell Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>. The Lynch camp says 
he was asking for the firing of unreliable sales reps, adding that the email 
has been taken out of context and the company's forecast for the quarter, even 
taking out deals that have been questioned, was "ahead of target". Either way, 
eight months later the Cambridge firm was sold to HP for $11bn.

Information revealed so far, in leaks and legal documents, is alarming. There 
are questionable deals with resellers:Guardian revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/05/hp-court-filing-autonomy-email-finance-director-hewlett-packard>
 last week showed Autonomy acquiring a reseller, MicroLink, which had built up 
a $23m debt for software not paid for; and HP claims $100m of Autonomy revenue 
came from often loss-making sales of hardware, while investors thought they 
were buying into a pure software company. Autonomy has denied wrongdoing, 
referring to differences between UK and US accounting standards and claiming it 
had been open and transparent.

The evidence so far is not proof of fraud. But the picture that emerges is of 
a company whose growth appears to have been unsustainable and whose disclosure 
to shareholders appears poor. Had some of this information been known while 
Autonomy was still in the FTSE 100, its shares would have crashed. Lynch is 
unlikely to be able to lead a publicly listed company again.

Why Glasgow should fear independence


An interesting perspective on the Scottish referendum debate has been provided 
by economists at Panmure Gordon.

A yes vote, they say, will mean short-term instability and business stagnation 
as the terms of independence are negotiated. In the longer term, they reckon 
the economic outcomes will be similar both inside and outside the union. The 
big risk is how long it takes to get from stage one to stage two. So far, so 
familiar.

But they raise another, far less well debated "economic tremor" – that 
independence would entrench an east-west divide in wealth, house prices and 
unemployment similar to England's north-south divide.

A yes vote, they say, would mean increased investment in Edinburgh, the 
administrative capital, while a focus on oil revenues would mean more 
investment in Aberdeen. Meanwhile industrial decline, led by less MoD spending, 
would be focused on Glasgow.

The costs and benefits of a yes, they make clear, would not be distributed 
evenly.
 