
Peterborough City Council may have to make 150 compulsory redundancies 
<http://www.peterboroughtoday.co.uk/news/Eighty-council-jobs-could-go.5172464.jp>
, after failing to reach its original job cuts target through voluntary 
departures. The council announced in February it had to make 400 redundancies, 
but so far only 250 posts have been lost through voluntary redundancy and 
natural staff turnover. John Peach, council leader, said yesterday the council 
was looking at various ways of shedding staff; compulsory redundancy was an 
option but it still wanted volunteers to come forward.

Engineering software group Aveva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup> said today it was cutting 
about 80 jobs to counter a more difficult trading environment. The company's 
design software is used in construction of ships, oil rigs, nuclear power 
stations and chemical plants.

Thomas Cook said it plans to reduce staff numbers at its call centre in Larbert
 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/tayside_and_central/8001726.stm> near 
Falkirk, Scotland. The news will affect 59 workers on temporary contracts. The 
travel firm is implementing a new telephone system to enable stores to deal 
with some calls previously dealt with by the call centre. The announcement is 
the second blow in a week for the town's call centre staff after TSC, based 
nearby, said 300 jobs were at risk.

High street car parts and cycles chain Halfords has announced it is closing 
its standalone cycle stores, 
<http://business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/business/industry_sectors/retailing/article6103398.ece>
 just two years after they were launched. The stores trade as Bikehut or Cycle 
Republic and will either be rebranded as Halfords or closed, at a cost of 
£1.2m. Halfords said the pilot chains "have been impacted by the increasing 
success of our superstores in the premium market segment and the migration of 
sales to the web, particularly for accessories".

Visteon, the car parts firm, offered extra payments to former workers today in 
an attempt to resolve protests over redundancies. The firm has faced 
demonstrations and sit-ins over the past few weeks in Northern Ireland, 
Basildon in Essex, and Enfield, north London, after announcing 560 job cuts. 
Visteon UK went into administration on 31 March and union officals have been 
holding talks with the US-based management of the parent company, Visteon 
Corporation,in an attempt to secure improved redundancy packages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/apr/14/visteon-deal>. The company 
said its offer meant most of the former employees would receive an immediate 
cash payment equivalent to 16 weeks of their previous pay. It said further 
payments would be made later, increasing the total severance benefits to the 
approximate amounts former workers would have received under their most recent 
contract.

The recession has sparked a big jump in the number of fraudulent insurance 
claims, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/apr/16/insurance-fraudulent-claims> 
industry data suggested today. The number of of false claims last year was up 
17% on 2007, and their value was more than 30% higher at £730m, compared with 
£560m in 2007, the Association of British Insurers said. A survey for the trade 
body also found that a fifth of people would not rule out making a fraudulent 
claim. The association said the figures showed fraud "thrives" during a 
downturn.
 