
In a personal sense, grace represents enlightenment within oneself. I find 
grace within the beauty of art, within the beauty of people, within the beauty 
of love, within the beauty of moments, within the beauty of human 
relationships, within the beauty of life, within the beauty of death and within 
the beauty of colour.

My interpretation of grace resides within one’s aesthetic perception. My 
fascination of colour stems from my synesthesia, a rare neurological 
phenomenon. I have an idiosyncratic form of synesthesia, which differentiates 
vastly in experiential form. The dominance lays within my ability to ‘hear’ 
colour, which is known as chromesthesia or sound ­to­ colour synesthesia. As a 
child, I became transfixed by iridescent moments, crystallised oceans and 
polychrome skies. My eyes simply could not resist the existential beauty posed 
by graceful luminosity. My visual sensibilities tend to form an emotionality 
that is beyond my control, visceral feelings which I can solely express through 
artistry. Colour is sewn into my being, the existence of colour within oneself 
is an abundant creation of love, death, beauty, light within darkness.

'Colour is sewn into my being': a portrait of synesthesia by Jack Coulter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/gallery/2016/mar/01/colour-is-sewn-into-my-being-a-portrait-of-synesthesia-by-artist-jack-coulter>
Grace holds the highest form of beauty. It is the purest, most introspective 
reflection of true expression. In relation to my artwork, I desire the 
beautiful exterior of my paintings to be paralleled with an elusively harrowing 
interior, my intention is to expose the connotation of light within darkness in 
every sense. Which is precisely the occupational philosophy of grace. I am not 
speaking of ‘grace’ in a religious sense, as I do not believe in God. I am not 
a religious person, although my love for art is almost religious. The ‘higher’ 
power of the word grace sits within every human’s reach, although we feel as if 
we are incapable of birthing the divine without religious intervention or 
devotion to faith. Grace has the power to alter our emotional feelings, our 
tendencies, our inclinations and our emotions.

A great example which serves importance in this matter is The Rothko Chapel in 
Houston. The chapel withholds enticing colour field works by Rothko, which 
leave the viewer in an intangible state of ‘grace’ which can only be perceived 
in observance. The pale, yet harsh use of deep colour leaves the viewer in a 
mesmeric trance, in a spiritual state of self-analysis. I would love to 
experience the emotional weight of air which exists there. I could not stop 
crying atJackson Pollock’s ‘Blind Spots’ exhibition 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-liverpool/exhibition/jackson-pollock-blind-spots>
. The resulting weight of subconscious melancholy truly left me in a pensive, 
dreamlike state. Ambient fuelled atmospheres truly resonate with me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fg-is-for-grace-share-your-artwork-of-enlightenment-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc424dfc77af804b94bd22c1968b629a87dbcc04b%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=G%20is%20for%20Grace%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20of%20enlightenment%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fg-is-for-grace-share-your-artwork-of-enlightenment-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=G%20is%20for%20Grace%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20of%20enlightenment%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fg-is-for-grace-share-your-artwork-of-enlightenment-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc424dfc77af804b94bd22c1968b629a87dbcc04b%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Broken Obelisk, Rothko Chapel, Houston, Texas
CC8K9F Broken Obelisk, Rothko Chapel, Houston, Texas Photograph: Nikreates / 
Alamy Stock Photo/Alamy Stock Photo 
In certain situations, ‘grace’ as a feeling can reflect or be perceived as a 
mirage. As a substance, colour schemes can falsify emotion through visual 
means. For example, when viewing a beautiful spectrum of colours, your natural 
instinctual feeling would be happiness or serenity. Although if you strip those 
visual sensations to monochrome, it may portray sadness or depressive nature. 
How would one feel if falling in love was held within a monochrome moment. The 
experience would still hold emotionality within psychological aesthetics, 
however it would lack the romanticism which we all crave. Monochrome visuals 
are vastly introspective, it allows depth, growth, self-­analysis.

I am infatuated by the idealisms held within life’s iridescent chromaticity. 
My personal visualisations of colour arise within luminous flames of 
iridescence. Visual perceptions remind us daily that we are alive, it is of 
utmost gratification that we can simply gaze at the opalescent hue of a sunset 
or sunrise. Grace is a vital ingredient to the potion of art. Art would cease 
to be beautiful without grace. Especially in my practice as an abstract 
expressionist. I find grace within the intricacies of my iridescent vision, the 
graceful movements held within my synesthesia emanate tetrachromatic hues of 
colour. My visualisations of colour rhythmically pulsate in harmonious unison, 
my experiences hold grace in every sense of the word. I find grace within the 
intimacy of flowing paint falling from a piece of shimmering glass onto canvas. 
The point in which I am trying to portray is you can find your own sense of 
grace. It can be found in all forms. Tapping into one’s personal idealisation 
of ‘grace’ can birth an instinctual personification of truth. As individuals 
with a basic understanding of consciousness, the ‘higher’ power of the word 
grace exists within us. Find your grace.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

 * You can view more of Jack Coulter’s artwork here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/gallery/2016/mar/01/colour-is-sewn-into-my-being-a-portrait-of-synesthesia-by-artist-jack-coulter>
.  