
PAC-MAN 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=eu.bandainamcoent.pacman256&hl=en>
256 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=eu.bandainamcoent.pacman256&hl=en>

iOS/Android

This is Pac-Man, but not as you know it: an all-new title based on the gaming 
legend (and his ghosts) developed by the makers of casual hit Crossy Road. More 
power-ups, an endless structure and lots of clever references to the original 
make this a joy.

FIVE NIGHTS AT FREDDY’S 4

iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/five-nights-at-freddys/id912536422?mt=8>/
Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.scottgames.fivenightsatfreddys&hl=en_GB>

The Five Nights at Freddy’s games have been a bracing series of 
survival-horror titles that’ll put you off ever entering a toy shop again. The 
latest (and last) shifts the action to your character’s home, as you fend off 
more nightmarish animatronic animals.

SPIDER: RITE OF THE SHROUDED MOON

iOS/Android <http://www.shroudedmoon.com/>

If you prefer playing as Play a creepy animals yourself, this is a delightful 
game that sees you exploring a dusty mansion as a spider, trapping insects and 
solving puzzles as you uncover the story behind it. It’s a beautifully-crafted 
game for arachnophiles.

LARACROFT GO

iOS / Android <http://www.laracroftgo.com/>

There were always puzzles in the Tomb Raider games, so this new mobile 
incarnation isn’t as big a departure as it may seem. But the emphasis is firmly 
on puzzling as you guide Lara through five stylish chapters of brain-teasing 
action.

THIS WAR OF MINE

iOS/Android <http://www.11bitstudios.com/games/16/this-war-of-mine>

Ported from PC to tablets, this is one of the best war-games ever – but you’re 
not in control of any armies. Instead, you’re in charge of civilians trying to 
survive in a wartorn city, maintaining a shelter while scavenging outside for 
supplies. A gripping game with an important message.

PRUNE

iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/prune/id972319818?mt=8>

Described as “a love letter to trees”, Prune may not be an all-action game, 
but it’s one of the most engrossing you’ll play. Grow your tree with gentle 
swipes on the screen, avoiding hazards and generally blissing out to the 
relaxing soundtrack. An ideal stress-reliever.

ANGRY BIRDS 2

iOS/Android <http://www.angrybirds2game.com/>

The original Angry Birds has hatched lots of sequels, but this is the first to 
be granted official sequel status. It has everything that made the original 
bird-flinging formula so popular, although its focus on freemium purchases can 
get in the way of the gameplay.

MARCH OF EMPIRES

iOS <https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/march-of-empires/id976688720?mt=8> / 
Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.gameloft.android.ANMP.GloftGHHM&hl=en>

If you gathered every ‘build an army and conquer the world” mobile game, you’d 
have… well, quite an army.March of Empires distinguishes itself with excellent 
production values and clever battles, although it has a bit of work to do 
balancing powerful and new players.

ALPHABEAR

iOS / Android <http://spryfox.com/our-games/alphabear/>

There’s a big audience out there for accessible word games on mobile, and 
Alphabear is one of the best recent examples. In time-honoured fashion you 
spell words from a grid of Scrabble-ish tiles, with the inclusion of cute bears 
giving this a quirky touch of charm.

CHAMPIONSHIP MANAGER ALL STARS

iOS 
<https://itunes.apple.com/dk/app/championship-manager-all-stars/id960229605?mt=8>
 /Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.squareenix.cmallstars&hl=en>

This latest version of the franchise is a massive multiplayer football 
management game bringing transfers, tactics and training to the fore.
 