 Gavin O'Reilly takes up music post. Photo: Gianluigi Guercia/AFP/Getty Images 
Gavin O'Reilly, the former chief executive of Independent News & Media (INM), 
has been appointed CEO of theThe Agency Group <http://www.theagencygroup.com/>, 
the London-based entertainment booking agency.

It is his first appointment since leaving INM in April 2012. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2012/apr/19/gavin-oreilly-steps-down-inm> His 
sudden departure followed a long-running dispute with the company's biggest 
shareholder, Denis O'Brien.

It marked the end of a 40-year Irish newspaper family dynasty, INM having been 
founded by his father, Tony O'Reilly, following his 1973 acquisition of the 
Irish Independent.

By the time Gavin took on the role of INM's chief executive in March 2009, 
O'Brien was well on his way to gaining effective control of the company. 
Boardroom clashes became common as directors and shareholders struggled to cope 
with mounting debts.

One of O'Reilly's most painful decisions occurred in March 2010, when he 
agreed to sell The Independent andIndependent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> to Alexander Lebedev 
for a nominal Â£1.

Now, after a year of reflection, he is moving into a very different business. 
I bumped into him a couple of weeks ago near his Chelsea home and noted how 
relaxed he looked.

His final years with INM had been unhappy and he also spent five years, from 
2005 onwards, as president of the World Association of Newspapers during an 
increasingly difficult period for its membership.

O'Reilly was recruited by The Agency Group's founder and current CEO, Neil 
Warnock, who will become the group's president.

Aside from London, the agency has three offices in the US, with others in 
Canada and Sweden. It has a roster of more than 2,000 artistes, including Alfie 
Boe, Brian Wilson, Dolly Parton, Ringo Starr andKatherine Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/katherine-jenkins>.

O'Reilly said of his new challenge that he is looking forward to expanding the 
group. And Warnock explained that his successor will now be responsible for the 
day-to-day running of the group while he looks to develop the business, 
probably in the fast-growing Asian markets.
 