
Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, is to rally her 
conservatives at a party conference on Tuesday for a German election in 2017 
that she expects to be “tough like no other”.


Seeking a fourth term in office, Merkel must unite her Christian Democrats 
(CDU) and try to recapture some of her personal popularity, undermined by the 
crises that have rockedEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

 Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi’s referendum defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
 and the impendingdeparture of France’s President François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/francois-hollande-france-president-re-election-retreat-mixed-response-europe>
 underline Merkel’s status as Europe’s most experienced leader but she needs to 
win back disgruntled voters at home.

The CDU has seen its support eroded by the far-right Alternative for Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> (AfD), which has profited from 
popular concern about the influx in 2015 of around a million migrants, many 
fleeing war in the Middle East.


Italian PM Matteo Renzi resigns after referendum defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
 “We know our world is changing. It always has been,” said Peter Tauber, the 
CDU secretary general. “Anyone who promises to be able to stop that isn’t being 
honest.

 “What we are promising is to turn this change in a good direction for our 
country.”

 With Britain poised to leave the EU, Russia testing the Nato alliance and 
southern Europe’s economies struggling, the CDU will debate a main resolution 
entitled: “Orientation in difficult times – for a successful Germany and 
Europe“.

 The conference is in Essen, a former industrial hub where unemployment is at 
11.6%, twice the national average. It is where Merkel was first elected CDU 
party chairwoman in 2000.

Hollande's re-election retreat met with mixed response
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/francois-hollande-france-president-re-election-retreat-mixed-response-europe>
 Returning to Essen, Merkel, aged 62 and chancellor for 11 years, must rally 
her party to fight off the social media-savvy AfD while also appealing to the 
centre ground.

 Since she declared in November that she would seek a fourth term, her 
conservatives have gained support.

 A survey by pollster Emnid published on Sunday showed support for the 
conservative bloc – Merkel’s CDU and its Bavarian sister party, the Christian 
Social Union – rising by two points to 37%, the highest level since January.

 With her nearest rivals and current coalition partners the Social Democrat 
trailing by 15 points at 22% as, Merkel stands to win the election next 
September.

 But coalition building could then prove difficult, with the AfD likely to 
enter the national parliament for the first time.

 “In Essen we need to move into fight mode,” said one CDU official.
 