
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, the German 
chancellor, has strong support from her electorate to to take a tough line with 
the UK over Brexit, according to a new survey.

Minister dismisses 'have cake and eat it' Brexit notes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/greg-clark-minister-dismisses-having-cake-and-eating-it-brexit-notes>
Fifty-eight percent of the German public think Berlin should not be open to 
compromise with Britain over its EU departure and instead think Merkel should 
take a firm negotiating position, the Körber Foundation poll found.

There was particular backing for Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> to take a hardline approach with 
the UK among supporters of Merkel’s own CDU party, with 65% of them saying she 
should not give way. Support for a compromise deal was strongest among the 
far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) and leftwing parties, the survey 
found.

The results came as it was reported that Merkel had rebuffed efforts by 
Theresa May 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/uk-theresa-may-pre-brexit-expats-plan-nixed-by-german-chancellor-angela-merkel-negotiations-european-union-residence/>
 to secure an early deal on the reciprocal residency rights of UK and EU 
citizens in the wake of Brexit.

Although France is often proposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/greg-clark-minister-dismisses-having-cake-and-eating-it-brexit-notes>
 as the country most likely to drive a hard bargain with the UK, the survey 
shows Merkel has approval to be tough.

It found that support for a tough negotiating line with the UK was strongest – 
at 64% – in the former West Germany. And more bad news for the British 
government came in the form of figures showing that the number of Germans 
backing cooperation with the UK is falling, down from 63% in 2014 to 53% now.

Indeed, relations with the UK were regarded as a top German foreign policy 
priority by only 5% of those surveyed. Only 5% said they regarded the UK as 
Germany’s most important or second most important partner, with 60% citing 
France and the same number the US.


The survey, undertaken in October, also found that 67% of Germans believed the 
Brexit vote had reduced EU cohesion among remaining members of the EU, making 
them feel the bloc is heading in the wrong direction.

Speaking at the unveiling of the survey, Paolo Gentiloni, the Italian foreign 
minister, argued that Brexit represented a wake-up call for the whole of the 
EU. He emphasised that the EU’s position that the free movement of citizens is 
the price for access to the single market was non-negotiable.

The survey made clear the extent to which Germans see the EU in a different 
light from many Britons, with 79% of respondents saying they regarded the EU as 
a project for peace and 75% believing that it protected individual freedom.
 