
I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out Of Here! fans desperate to experience some 
jungle-based critter exposure for themselves are to finally get their chance – 
without having to become a faded, minor celeb or fly out to the Australian 
wilds.

The reality show, not content with being the jewel in the tin crown of ITV’s 
winter schedule, has inspired a new maze at Thorpe Park in Surrey, which 
promises to “bring to life the trials and tribulations of the jungle”.

Entrants to the maze, a partnership between the theme park and ITV Studios, 
will be greeted by a recorded message fromAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> before tackling a 
variety of bush-tucker trials, all in what the press release calls 
“rainforest-temperature mist”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fmediamonkeyblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fim-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-maze-to-open-at-thorpe-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423734926788%2F8f5db6c9-7cfd-49b1-af19-c7739ab44055-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20me%20out%20of%20here!%20I'm%20a%20Celebrity%20maze%20to%20open%20at%20Thorpe%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fmediamonkeyblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fim-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-maze-to-open-at-thorpe-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20me%20out%20of%20here%21%20I%27m%20a%20Celebrity%20maze%20to%20open%20at%20Thorpe%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fmediamonkeyblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fim-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-maze-to-open-at-thorpe-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423734926788%2F8f5db6c9-7cfd-49b1-af19-c7739ab44055-1020x612.jpeg>
 Natalie Appleton takes part in a bush tucker trial from 2004. Photograph: ITV 
“Multi-sensory leg-ticklers” will simulate the feeling of being covered head 
to toe in bothersome bugs, while a vibrating bridge walkway and moving trees 
and walls will leave you wanting tomake like Towie’s Gemma Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/19/gemma-collins-quits-im-a-celebrity-towie>
 and scream: “I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here!”

The three trials revealed so far involve sticking your hands into dark 
crevices, battling against water jets and a 56mph wind machine, and entering a 
shower cubicle with “slippery and slimy surprises” hanging over you like the 
sword of Damocles. All in order to get hold of those special gold stars.

Alongside the new maze, which opens on 12 March, is the “Bush BBQ”, where 
families can grab a bite to eat and choose between a selection of “critter” 
sauces including meal worm mayo and critter coleslaw.

The divisional director of Thorpe Park, Mike Vallis, said: “After 13 years of 
watching I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out Of Here! on the small screen, we’re 
delighted to offer our guests the chance to brave bush tucker trials inspired 
by the hit TV show – you don’t have to be a celebrity to grab a slice of the 
action on our island!


“And the good news is that we don’t expect any of our guests to chew on a 
kangaroo’s less palatable parts.”
 