
There's already a healthy debate going on in response to Alex Ross's article 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/28/alex-ross-modern-classical-music?CMP=twt_gu>
. Some of the comments agree with him that music has a particular problem, or 
suggest that John Cage et al really are the equivalent of the emperor's new 
clothes; others – rightly, in my view – exhort the naysayers to "open your 
mind, experience the new, and you may find that you enjoy music a good deal 
more". But where are the thousands of Promsgoers who cheered Berg's Three 
Pieces for Orchestra to the rafters when Simon Rattle played it in September 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/sep/12/simon-rattle-proms-fiona-maddocks>
? Or the other thousands who have already been toRaskatov's A Dog's Heart at ENO
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/21/a-dogs-heart-eno-review> in the 
last week? Or the yet other thousands who rapturously enjoyed Berio's Sinfonia 
a few weeks ago with theLondon Symphony Orchestra at the Barbican 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/10/l-s-o-harding>, or who saw Matthew 
Herbert with the London Sinfonietta, and the Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2010/nov/23/matthew-herbert-one-day>
, last Saturday?

Thing is, I think in this country we've developed a greater love for some 
parts of the 20th and 21st century, in particular the repertoires of a 
harder-edged European modernism, than has happened over the pond: if Berg's 
century-old masterpiece can still empty a few rows at Lincoln Centre, that 
doesn't happen at the Royal Albert Hall. That's in part because our orchestras 
have a longer history of changing the repertoire and bringing whole communities 
of listeners with them. WhatEsa-Pekka Salonen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/esa-pekka-salonen> was doing in Los Angeles 
in the 90s, Simon Rattle had long been doing in Birmingham and the rest of 
Britain throughout the 80s, connecting the repertoires of what Ross describes 
as a "gilded cage" with the contemporary, and crucially, showing audiences that 
there was nothing to be scared of in 20th-century music.

In the orchestral scene in London today, with Salonen at the Philharmonia, 
Vladimir Jurowski <https://www.theguardian.com/music/vladimir-jurowski> at the 
London Philharmonic, some adventurous programmes at the LSO, and the BBC 
Symphony Orchestra's continual advocacy of today's music, that model of 
programming is now a commonplace. The surprise would be if new and new-ish 
music weren't part of these orchestras' programmes. Ross is definitely right 
that we need to let the classical masters out of the cult of "consoling beauty" 
that we have created for them, by connecting them with the present. But my 
hunch is that it's slowly happening – even if the process needs to speed up. He 
suggests that it's taken a century to get used to Berg's Three Pieces. At that 
rate, mainstream orchestras will only just be getting Stockhausen and Xenakis 
by about 2050. We shouldn't have to wait that long.
 