
An unrelenting early afternoon sun beats down over the road passing through 
Mocho, a cluster of 52 farming communities nestled in the hills of rural 
Clarendon Parish, central Jamaica. Ripe fruit fallen from ackee trees litters 
the tarmac in explosions of yellow, black and bright red.

On the side of the road, a group of four youths - two boys and two girls - 
brandishing pens, notepads, and tape recorders approach a couple of farmers 
taking a break from tending their fields of pepper. The first farmer, holding a 
machete discreetly by his side, stands in silence. The other cradles a honeydew 
melon as he speaks into a tape recorder pointed in his direction. "Bwoy it 
gettin' rough yuh nuh. The price high. It rough," he responds when prompted by 
a question about the rising cost of fertilisers and pesticides.

These boys and girls are youth journalists trained by Panos Caribbean, a 
non-governmental organisation dealing with issues found at the intersection 
between development and the media. Today they are conducting vox pop interviews 
with local residents in Mocho.

Panos works to empower marginalised sections of the population, those whose 
voices tend to be absent from development debates in the media and elsewhere. 
It gives them the opportunity to tell their own stories in their own words. In 
one of Panos's projects, groups of young people are trained in journalism and 
children's rights, and equipped with the skills and the confidence necessary to 
be seen and heard amid the cacophony of voices in the media. Panos runs two 
such projects in Jamaica, one based in Kingston, the other in Mocho.

The UK Department for International Development's latest white paper 
explicitly highlights the role of local media in the development process. 
Traditional media such as newspapers, magazines, television and radio all play 
an essential role in ensuring that all sections of society, including a 
country's youth, can participate in the debates and decisions that affect their 
lives. Further, in societies where sensitive issues are not discussed openly, 
people can access such issues through the media.

Jamaica, an island nation of less than 3 million, boasts a relatively free and 
open media. The organisation Reporters Sans Fronti√®res recently placed the 
country at number 21 in its World Press Freedom Index report of 2008, ranking 
it higher than its neighbour to the north, the US. Yet some issues are slow to 
appear in the media, and hence on the national consciousness. HIV/Aids remains 
taboo in Jamaican society, so the media has a critical role to play in terms of 
making this issue visible.

Jamaica is not usually thought of as a developing country but inequality here 
runs deep. About 37% of Jamaicans are below the age of 18 and about half of all 
Jamaicans living in poverty are children. Despite 90% of students completing 
primary education, functional illiteracy among graduates is high and growing. 
Official government statistics put the level of illiteracy at Jamaican primary 
schools at 25%. In reality, it is much higher, between 60-70% by some 
estimates. Poor educational attainment exacerbates already existing problems of 
youth unemployment and the gang culture in urban Jamaica, which acts as a 
beacon for wayward boys.

The proliferation of media houses since the liberalisation of the sector in 
the 1990s has given youth in Jamaica increasing opportunities to become 
involved. Whether young people's voices are heard is another matter.

The two most widely read daily newspapers, the Gleaner and the Jamaica 
Observer publish popular weekly supplements produced by young people, Youthlink 
and Teenage respectively. Although these papers often cover topical issues of 
concern to young people, their main focus tends toward entertainment, fashion, 
lifestyle, relationship advice, sports and technology.

"Right now our focus is on fluff," admits Sean Bennett, 20, a writer at 
Youthlink. "Our readers are interested mainly in entertainment," he continues.

"Bling sells," says Vernon Davidson, editor at the Jamaica Observer, by way of 
explanation. "It is a reflection of society today."

Jamaica's 22 radio stations are also a media space where young people are 
making their presence felt. Nearly all Jamaican households own at least one 
radio. "Radio is more accessible than other forms of media," explains Fae 
Ellington, a lecturer at the Caribbean Institute of Media and Communication 
(Carimac). "Where young people are illiterate or challenged," she continues, 
"radio is their most effective media platform." Radio programmes aimed at youth 
can also be effective at conveying particular messages.

Irie FM, based in Ocho Rios on the island's north coast, is a progressive 
station where young people produce and host their own programmes. Since 1990, 
Irie has trained 300 young people between the ages of seven and 18 in radio 
broadcasting and production. "We are not necessarily looking for the best 
students," says station manager Andrea Williams. Many of the stations numerous 
programmes aimed at children and adolescents focus on the specific educational 
needs of young people. "Public education is a broad brush we paint with," 
continues Williams.

Despite the presence of youth voices, the media as a whole fails young people 
when it comes to issues of children's rights. "Young people are not aware of 
their rights," offers Dwayne Patterson, 20, a writer at Teenage. On the eve of 
the 20th anniversary of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), 
ratified by Jamaica in 1991, this is a worrying situation. "We need," he 
continues, "to break down the law for kids and what it means for them."

Unicef Jamaica is about to embark on a project to produce youth-friendly 
policy analysis papers that will explain the CRC and the Jamaican Child 
Protection Act (2004) in language that is appealing, digestible and easy to 
understand. The plan is to involve young people directly in their production 
and disseminate the information through the media.

Another space in which to discuss issues of importance to young people which 
are not covered well by mainstream media is through alternative media and forms 
of communication. In Jamaica, this would include dub poetry, story-telling, 
theatre (ranging from Jamaicanised pantomime to street theatre) dance and 
music, all of which are firmly entrenched in the local imagination. This 
mirrors what is happening in society; it is a place where Jamaicans are used to 
having difficult subjects brought up. "Alternative media carries a message," 
says Jan Voordouw, director of Panos Caribbean, "it brings out the good and bad 
in Jamaican society."

In Mocho, the sun sits high in the sky. A shop-front sign reads: "Dear Lord, 
help me this day to keep my mouth shut." The Panos youth journalists are 
wrapping up an interview with a shopkeeper. Their demeanour has been confident 
and polite, their questions probing.

About half of the group of 22 consider journalism as a future career. That is 
not to say that Panos' training has not benefited those young people with other 
ambitions. Their self-belief, knack for public speaking, and conviction for the 
truth as a result of the training will stay with them well past their youth. 
Being involved with the group has also helped many with their school work. 
Calvin Grant, 14, the son of a farmer, says "I used to write essays that were 
half a page long. Now I write two or three pages."

Mocho is stigmatised as a backwards farming community. It tends to be the butt 
of many a Jamaican joke. "Persons from Mocho are back-a-bush." says White, a 
taxi driver in Kingston. "They not civilised."

Part of the focus for the youth journalists in Mocho is to try to change this 
reputation. For them the full potential of the media is clear. "We want to use 
journalism to try to clear this stigma," says Jemar Green, 16. "We want to say 
that we are human. Persons should come to Mocho to see for themselves."
 