
The first act to be announced for this summer's Glastonbury is the Malian 
singerRokia Traoré 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/26/rokia-traore-barbican-review> and 
bands from the embattled country will open the Pyramid stage each day, 
organisers have said. In an intended act of solidarity with musicians in Mali, 
whereIslamists in the north have banned music 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/15/mali-music-ban-islamists-crushing>
, other parts of the festival site, including a revamped dance area, will also 
feature a heavy west African presence.

"We have a long tradition dating back to the 80s of African acts playing the 
festival," the festival's co-organiser Emily Eavis said. "Given the situation in
Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> at the moment, it felt 
particularly important to show some solidarity.

"We want to stay out of the politics, but if we can give musicians a platform 
we will always do that," she added.

The 38-year old Traoré, who comes from north-western Mali and is one of the 
country's most celebrated performers, previously played the festival in 2009. 
"What is happening with the Islamists is a tragedy, although we have been given 
some hope by events this week," she said, referring to the intervention of 
French troops in the country's conflict. "All we want to do is to get on with 
our normal lives."

"Music is such an important part of our culture. It has always been a way of 
bringing together the different ethnic groups; it is what makes the country," 
Traoré continued. "If it can happen in Mali, it can happen anywhere. We're very 
grateful to Glastonbury for allowing us the opportunity to help draw attention 
to what's going on."

Tickets for the festival in June sold out in a record one hour, 40 minutes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/07/glastonbury-tickets-sell-out> when 
they went on sale in October. No other acts have yet been announced for the 
bill, and whileKeith Richards of the Rolling Stones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/16/keith-richards-glastonbury> and 
Fleetwood Mac's Stevie Nicks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/12/stevie-nicks-return-of-fleetwood-mac?intcmp=239>
 have both expressed an interest in playing, it is understood that only one 
headliner has been booked so far, and their identity remains a secret.

"It's a relief not to talk about the headliners," Eavis said. "The festival is 
so much more than three bands at the top of the bill. It's good to remind 
everyone what we're really about – and we've got a responsibility to introduce 
people to great music that they may not have heard before. One of the best 
things I've ever seen at Glastonbury wasAmadou and Mariam on the Pyramid stage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jun/28/amadou-mariam-glastonbury-2009> in 
2009."

Other Malian acts to have played the festival include Tinariwen, Toumani 
Diabaté <https://www.theguardian.com/music/toumani-diabate>, Salif Keita and 
the late Ali Farka Touré.

The Guardian is Glastonbury's media partner.
 