
Q My flat has one wall which is triple glazed. It creates a greenhouse effect 
when the sun is out. Lined curtains don't do much other than block out the 
light. I have a balcony and have seen external blinds in other countries that 
can be attached to the inside of the balcony, but I can't find any suppliers in 
the UK.
Kris Ryder

A The traditional method of dealing with this is to plant deciduous trees 
outside - their foliage provides shade in the summer, and by winter their empty 
branches let the weak sunlight warm your home. You may have problems with the 
planners if you fit external blinds that affect the appearance of the building, 
so try an interior option, such as reflective aluminium Venetian blinds (
www.interiordecordirect.co.uk <http://www.interiordecordirect.co.uk>). Or try 
conventional roller blinds with a Solar Protective Coating - the reflective 
back coating blocks heat gain and UV radiation (www.247blinds.co.uk 
<http://www.247blinds.co.uk>).

Q We are two pensioners with a house full of very tired antique furniture 
handed down to us by our parents. A bureau with split-end panels, a tripod 
table with a split top, early-Victorian dining chairs with slack joints, an 
erratic long-case clock and so on! None of our family is interested in these 
items. I guess the cost of repair would be enormous. So should we junk the lot 
and shop at Ikea, or continue to live in uncomfortable and precarious style?
Joyce and Tom, Ireland

A Please don't 'chuck out the chintz'! You will lose an expressive part of 
your character and family's identity, and for what? Some cheaply made flat-pack 
furniture that won't last beyond the final episode of Lost? It's important we 
find ways to use the resources we have and don't just jump on the consumer 
bandwagon. The pieces you have are probably well made and just need a little 
care and attention. Look to inspired designers, such as Lisa at
www.squintlimited.com <http://www.squintlimited.com>, who are reusing furniture 
to turn it into modern masterpieces. Or find a local cabinet-maker and 
upholsterer to restore them. Surely it's better to spend money on what you have 
than risk it all ending up in landfill? Imagination, determination and 
satisfaction are the orders of the day.

Â· If you have a question, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 