
Gloria Swanson was 50 years old when she played Norma Desmond, the deluded 
antiheroine of Sunset Boulevard. Director Billy Wilder said of Swanson that 
there was “a lot of Norma in her”. The parallels between Swanson –a former 
goddess of the silent screen who all but disappeared with the advent of the 
talkies – and her character were not lost on 1950s viewers, even if the movie’s 
success ironically brought for her the renewed recognition her character so 
tragically craves.

Glenn Close: Sunset Boulevard heroine is 'part of fabric of my being'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/02/glenn-close-sunset-boulevard-heroine-is-part-of-fabric-of-my-being>
This week it was Glenn Close, 68, who was ready for her close-up. The actor 
was in London to promoteher starring role in a new production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/02/glenn-close-sunset-boulevard-heroine-is-part-of-fabric-of-my-being>
 of Andrew Lloyd Webber’s musical version of Sunset Boulevard, which opens in 
London’s West End next year. Close first played the part more than 20 years ago 
on Broadway, to great acclaim, and has always described it as one of her 
favourite roles. But nobody is ever likely to say of Close, “There’s a lot of 
Norma in her.” She seems to earn more awards and critical praise and juicy 
parts the older she gets, and her grasp on reality never looks remotely shaky. 
That might be a measure of how things have changed for older female actors 
since Swanson’s era, but if those opportunities have improved, Close is a big 
part of the reason why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97d080f932a3aae1e9138cd2ceb9d2e8b177b0a6%2F0_45_1232_740%2F1232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97d080f932a3aae1e9138cd2ceb9d2e8b177b0a6%2F0_45_1232_740%2F1232.jpg>
 Glenn Close was at her bunny-boiling best in Fatal Attraction with Michael 
Douglas. Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex Features 
She was only just getting started in film at the age Swanson retired. Close 
was 35 when she got her first decent screen role, in The World According to 
Garp, in 1982. She played Robin Williams’s mother, despite being just four 
years older than him (she would later play Mel Gibson’s mother in Hamlet, 
despite being only nine years his senior). She was a relative latecomer, having 
cut her teeth on the stage, but quickly caught up. Three best supporting 
actress Oscar nominations in three years (for Garp, The Big Chill and The 
Natural) put her at the front of casting directors’ minds, and by the end of 
the 1980s she had become a permanent cultural fixture thanks to her roles in 
two huge hits of the decade: Fatal Attraction and Dangerous Liaisons. Both of 
those earned her Oscar nominations too, although she has somehow never won one.

Show me the bunny! Fatal Attraction is being turned into a TV show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/02/show-me-the-bunny-fatal-attraction-is-being-turned-into-a-tv-show>
“She is an actress who can very easily convey a sense of strength and 
intelligence,” says the playwrightChristopher Hampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2009/aug/02/my-week-christopher-hampton>
, who worked with Lloyd Webber on Sunset Boulevard and wrote the stage version 
of Dangerous Liaisons and who has known Close for nearly 30 years. Hampton 
originally cast her in the 1987 Broadway version, opposite a then unknown Kevin 
Spacey, but, he recalls: “The company who were putting on the play suddenly 
called us and said ‘Sorry, we crunched the numbers and these people don’t 
really mean much at box office.’ Two weeks later, Fatal Attraction opened!” A 
year later, when Stephen Frears began filming his movie version of Dangerous 
Liaisons, there was no question who would take the role of the Marquise de 
Merteuil, the cold, cruel arch-schemer.

If there is an easy shorthand for Close, it is the “strong woman”. She has 
rarely been one to play shrinking violet types, or even straightforward 
romantic leads. With her strong features and almost aristocratic demeanour, 
Close excels at formidable, intelligent women who want to be in control. That 
is matched by a reputation for professionalism. “She is very prepared and she 
works very hard and she doesn’t come to the set without knowing pretty much 
exactly what she’s going to do,” says Hampton.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5822eff05dc954a72d8a5e1202573ba17bc6f03%2F4_55_4636_2783%2F4636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5822eff05dc954a72d8a5e1202573ba17bc6f03%2F4_55_4636_2783%2F4636.jpg>
 Close with Christopher Hampton (left) and lyricist Don Black at the Sunset 
Boulevard photocall in London this week. Photograph: James Gourley/Rex 
Shutterstock 
In the 1980s, a female character had to be punished for displaying such 
qualities. In Dangerous Liaisons, Close gets her comeuppance, but her 
performance is so delectable that she steals the picture anyway. Fatal 
Attraction was on dodgier ground. Close’s Alex begins the movie as a seductive, 
single career woman, but after one night with Michael Douglas, she becomes a 
wild-haired stalker who is ultimately a threat to Douglas, his family and his 
pets. Close did her own research into psychiatry to reassure herself that 
Alex’s behaviour was remotely plausible. She always had her reservations about 
the ending, though. Originally, Alex committed suicide, but they reshot it six 
months later and made her a knife-wielding maniac. Close fought against it. 
“Changing [Alex] into a psychopath was never fair to her,” she later 
complained. “But they were right in giving the audience what they wanted.”

Even in bit parts and lighter roles, Close invariably plays commanding 
figures: the US vice-president in Air Force One, the tough police captain in TV 
seriesThe Shield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/aug/23/box-set-club-the-shield>
, or Nova Prime, intergalactic leader inGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
. She has often been characterised as masculine, a description she herself 
invited with 2011’sAlbert Nobbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/26/albert-nobbs-review>, in which 
she played a 19th-century Irish woman who lives and works as a man. Close 
co-wrote the film, which earned her another Oscar nomination. But she has 
actually done much to complicate those “strong woman” stereotypes. Perhaps it 
is fairer to say that she has shown how attributes such as toughness, 
aggression and authority are by no means exclusively masculine.


Nowhere did she prove this more conclusively than in the TV series Damages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/may/28/damages-review>, as Patty 
Hewes, the top-flight lawyer with a Machiavellian knack for manipulation and a 
flexible approach to right and wrong. The part was written for Close, and in 
her hands, over five seasons, Hewes became a rich, complex, often contradictory 
character: monstrous, power-hungry, unpredictable, but never cartoonishly evil.

“Glenn is often described as having a glacial or distant quality about her, 
but in person she’s the absolute opposite: warm and intimate,” says the actor
Iain Glen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/07/iain-glen-this-much-i-know>
, who co-starred with her in the National Theatre’s 2002 production ofA 
Streetcar Named Desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/oct/09/theatre.artsfeatures1>. “She’s a 
real company leader. She reminded me of Judi Dench in that way. She had time 
for everyone. She had us all over for supper at times. She was very open. I 
remember she was not in love at the time, she was saying she would love to 
settle down and find a partner in her life, which she subsequently has.” She 
married venture capitalist David Shaw, her third husband, in 2006. They 
recently “amicably” divorced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F430e0587063501ac51f1356b13aaf7cdcd5b2053%2F0_215_1930_1159%2F1930.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F430e0587063501ac51f1356b13aaf7cdcd5b2053%2F0_215_1930_1159%2F1930.jpg>
 As top-flight lawyer Patty Hewes in the US TV series Damages. Photograph: 2008 
Sony Pictures Television Inc. and Bluebush Productions, LLC. All Rights 
Reserved. 
Where did all this strength come from? On paper, Close is of a similar 
pedigree to Katharine Hepburn: an, educated, East Coast blueblood from a 
wealthy, well-connected family. But her childhood took an unexpected detour 
when her parents joined Moral Re-Armament (MRA), a conservative religious 
movement that was, to all intents and purposes, a cult. Aged seven, Close was 
removed from her Connecticut country life and she and her three siblings moved 
to a school in Switzerland while her doctor father was away in Congo.


She remained connected to MRA until she was 22, singing, recording and touring 
with their youth group Up With People, whose disturbingly wholesome acoustic 
songs make Norma Desmond look unthreatening. It is not something she has often 
talked about publicly. “Many things led me to leave,” shetold the Hollywood 
Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/glenn-close-returns-stage-reveals-740633>
 last year. “I had no toolbox to leave, but I did it.” She went to university, 
studied theatre, then moved to New York and joined the Phoenix Theatre company 
in the mid-1970s. She has strayed far from those conservative roots, too, 
becoming a prominent pro-choice supporter and a regular donor to Democrat 
presidential campaigns.

As much as strength, Close has shown us its limits. It is not just powerful 
women she enjoys playing; it is also powerful women who fall apart. This theme 
runs through many of her defining roles: Fatal Attraction, Dangerous Liaisons, 
Damages, Sunset Boulevard, even her magnificently over-the-top Cruella de Vil 
in the live-action 101 Dalmatians, who could almost be Norma Desmond’s sister.

Streetcar’s Blanche DuBois would be another example. Traditionally, the 
character is a melodramatic car crash, but Close’s reading was slightly 
different, says Glen. “She was able to bring strength to the role, so it became 
more of a contrast when she lost touch with reality. It was more moving. I’m 
sure that’s why she was drawn to the role, to show different qualities that 
perhaps people were less familiar with. She was able to completely access that 
vulnerability. There was a real softness to her.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85bab81b4ebc63e634c868d1fa43f2d6fdc2ae25%2F0_115_2464_1479%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glenn%20Close%3A%20critical%20acclaim%20built%20on%20strength%20of%20character&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F06%2Fglenn-close-profile-critical-acclaim-strength-sunset-boulevard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85bab81b4ebc63e634c868d1fa43f2d6fdc2ae25%2F0_115_2464_1479%2F2464.jpg>
 Close’s interpretation of Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire at the 
National Theatre in 2002 made the character more moving, says her co-star Iain 
Glen. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
She revealed a similar insecurity when it came to Sunset Boulevard 20 years 
ago,Christopher Hampton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/christopherhampton> 
reveals. Lloyd Webber was looking to replace Patti LuPone in the Norma Desmond 
role, in response to middling reviews. Hampton suggested Close, having worked 
with her on Dangerous Liaisons and remembering that she could sing. “Andrew 
asked me, ‘Does she have a voice?’” Hampton recalls. “I said, ‘Well, she’s been 
in musicals.’ He said, ‘Will she audition?’ That was trickier. I didn’t know.”

I think she’s a worrier. She worries about getting everything right.
Christopher Hampton 
But sure enough, Close came over from New York to Lloyd Webber’s London 
apartment, and duly aced the audition. They were reminiscing about that time 
last week, when she was in London announcing the revival, Hampton says. “I 
didn’t know before, but she’d done an enormous amount of preparation. She had, 
in fact, trained for the audition with a voice coach, because she really, 
really wanted the part. She certainly seems confident, but I don’t think she’s 
any more confident than anybody else, really. I think she’s a worrier. She 
worries about getting everything right.”

The production went on to receive rave reviews, even from the 
difficult-to-please but all-important New York Times. “When the curtain came 
down,” wrote critic Vincent Canby, “Glenn Close had suddenly become a big, 
exciting new star of the American musical theatre of the 1990s.” Hampton and 
Lloyd Webber have also been preparing a new film version of the musical, the 
playwright reveals. No prizes for guessing who they have in mind for the lead. 
“As far as I’m concerned, she is the definitive Norma Desmond,” Hampton says. 
In some parallel universe, Close might have ended up sequestered in a Hollywood 
mansion, nostalgically watching reruns of Fatal Attraction and complaining how 
it was the pictures that got small, but in this one, her reputation just keeps 
on growing.


Potted profile

Born: March 1947

Career: Got her break aged 35 in The World According to Garp. Followed that up 
with The Big Chill and The Natural, getting Oscar nominations for all three. 
Also earned Oscar nods for Fatal Attraction and Dangerous Liaisons, as she 
became one of the biggest stars of the 1980s. Has since mixed TV – she took the 
lead in Damages – with theatre, and continues to be a film star, with recent 
acclaim for the lead role in Albert Nobbs.

High point: Damages, which put her back on the radar and won her two Emmys. 
She describes her character, Patty Hewes, as the role of her life.

Low point: Not having won an Oscar despite six nominations.

She says: “I’m good at what I do. In this crazy profession, everyone is lying 
if they say, ‘I mapped out my career and every move is what I planned.’ That’s 
bullshit, that can never happen. You just make the best choices possible and 
suddenly you’ve done it for 30 years and your career is the sum of those 
choices.”

They say: “The musical allows Glenn Close 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/glenn-close> to give one of those legendary 
performances people will be talking about years from now … The actress takes 
breathtaking risks, venturing so far out on a limb at times that you fear it 
will snap. It doesn’t” – New York Times review of Close in the Broadway version 
of Sunset Boulevard.

Sunset Boulevard is at the Coliseum in London from 1 April to 7 May 2016.
 