
We’ve ridden a clear cycle with the prime minister since leaving Australia a 
week ago.

Malcolm Turnbull's reality check finds him adrift in Europe's sea of 
uncertainty | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/malcolm-turnbull-g20-reality-check-adrift-europe-uncertainty>
We had two days of joyful exuberance, in Jakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/nov/13/malcolm-turnbull-gets-mobbed-and-sweaty-during-indonesian-trip-video>
 and in Berlin. Malcolm’s expansive adventures with new peers.

Then the horrors of Paris rolled in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/malcolm-turnbull-g20-reality-check-adrift-europe-uncertainty>
, and theurgency and complexity of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/15/malcolm-turnbull-says-australia-could-send-peacekeepers-to-syria>
 and theG20’s countering violent extremism agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/terror-attacks-paris-are-likely-malcolm-turnbull>
 forced Turnbull to contract back into himself in order to get across the 
weight of work required to stay on top of the many things under way at once.


Then over the past couple of days in Manila, the prime minister has climbed 
out of his bunker and begun to engage once again.

The interesting thing is that Turnbull is not only engaging again, he’s 
carefully resetting his government’s agenda in a few content-rich ways.


 Let’s work through a couple of examples.

Turnbull sought in the early days of his prime ministership to recalibrate the 
national conversation around terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/03/parramatta-shooting-turnbull-urges-unity-amid-tight-security-for-grand-finals>
.


I’ve noted before that he wanted to draw a line over the inflammatory language 
that was fuelling a national sense of contingency in Australia in ways that 
must have been extremely unhelpful to the practical task for security agencies 
of keeping diverse communities safe.


Let’s call this first Turnbull reset “terrorism is not a bloody culture war”. 
Just to keep it dignified, the “Tony” in this sentence can be implied, not 
stated.


In truth, the prime minister wasn’t obsessing over being the anti-Tony (leave 
that to Canberra journalists and our endless appetite for compare and 
contrast). He just wanted to clear the public space to talk about more 
Malcolmish things – the tax review, his innovation statement, this compulsion 
he’s now developed for this being the most exciting time to write a shopping 
list, or eat a Mars Bar, or launch your very own internet start-up.


But events have pushed him back into national security territory. He’s had to 
stow the exuberance (by and large, with a couple of mildly odd break outs).

Given he’s been funnelled into the “tin hat” space, Turnbull is not merely 
squatting in a defensive posture. Given he’s been given day release from the 
closed quarters of Canberra, where the various well-meaning colleagues line up 
regularly to check his free-thinking impulses, he’s pushed out in clear 
definitional terms.


The global pivot on the political solution for Syria has given Turnbull 
opportunity tomake some statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/18/apec-summit-malcolm-turnbull-says-syria-solution-hinges-on-power-sharing>
 about his inclinations on matters geopolitical which have the practical effect 
of drawing a hard line between his own shaded and qualified views andTony 
Abbott’s apparent radically simplified fixation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/07/tony-abbott-hints-at-taking-fight-to-isis-in-syria-amid-pressure-to-help-countrys-refugees>
 with dispatching Australian special forces to turn the tide in civilisational 
conflicts, either with an invitation, or without one.


Tony is Mr Force. Turnbull is Mr Nuance.

Of course we knew this at the helicopter level. But now we can bring our air 
conveyance down in order to inspect some fine print.


The prime minister has told us several things over the past 48 hours or so.


He’s signalled the Syrian conflict might not be able to be resolved by 
interventionist means at all. If it is to be resolved, it will require the 
great powers to demonstrate considerable pragmatism to ensure the world does 
not repeat the mistakes made after the resolution of the Iraq war, where 
“peace” (such as it was) was allowed to manifest in Baghdad as winner takes all.


Apec summit: Malcolm Turnbull says Syria solution hinges on power sharing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/18/apec-summit-malcolm-turnbull-says-syria-solution-hinges-on-power-sharing>
It will involve the disparate religious forces of Syria being welded together 
in a doubtless unattractive but functional working coalition that may, for a 
time, include the loathed dictator Assad, and radical Sunni elements we don’t 
much care for (although Turnbull clarified on Thursday that this did not mean 
Islamic State.)


In the basic sense of policy construction and its political articulation, we 
are now some distance from goodies and baddies and witches brews.


The reaction of “friends of Tony” in the Australian press to Turnbull’s 
articulation of an emerging but extremely fragile global consensus on Syria has 
been entirely predictable.“What an astonishing surrender,” 
<http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/index.php/heraldsun/comments/the_turnbull_plan_cutting_a_deal_with_the_islamic_states_supporters/>
 gasped the News Corp blogger Andrew Bolt, as if this posturing outrage 
actually meant something. Surrender to whom?


As well as the terror reset and the foreign policy reset, Turnbull snuck in a 
teensy forward-looking reference on climate change policy during his press 
conference in Manila on Thursday.

 In his opening days as prime minister, Turnbull was rusted on fully to the 
Direct Action policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/malcolm-turnbull-holds-the-line-on-climate-policy-and-marriage-equality-plebiscite>
 that he had once correctly characterised correctly as an ineffective and 
epically expensive boondoggle.

He remains carefully rusted on, but with the Paris climate talks ahead of him, 
and with the US president’sG20 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> 
invocation that Paris has to actually mean something ringing in his ears, he’s 
limbering up for movement.

 Direct Action stays until the review in 2017, Turnbull said in Manila, 
repeating the formulation we’ve heard before. Then, nudging the door a little 
way open. If things were lagging where they should be, “we always have the 
option of buying international credits,” Turnbull noted casually, as if this 
was the most rational thing in the world.

It is an entirely rational course, but bringing international permits into the 
mix was once considered by this government as a thought crime worthy of a 
period of indefinite detention.


So you see what he did there, right? That little stretch of the hamstring.


On this trip, Turnbull and the journalists following him have been out of the 
domestic news cycle, not because we are trapped in the touring bubble of hoary 
old cliche, but because there have been too many serious and meaty developments 
to process and cover while hurtling around time zones.

There’s been no time to listen to the murmurings back home.

But if the posturing of Bolt is any barometer of the feelpinions of 
Australia’s rump of wounded conservatives, and one suspects it is, then 
Turnbull is flying back into interesting times.


Because Turnbull’s real existential challenge is not winning points in the 
hermetically sealed halls of the world and gaining the personal mobile numbers 
of a bunch of world leaders – it’s keeping his riven government together and 
moving them carefully towards the political centre in good time for the next 
federal election. To put the task simply, he’s got to appeal to rational 
self-interest in an era where self-interest tends to prevail without the 
tempering rationality.


Malcolm Turnbull heckled by Liberals as anger lingers over Tony Abbott's ouster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/10/malcolm-turnbull-heckled-in-liberal-party-meeting-over-tony-abbott-ousting>
 The early field evidence from the opinion polls suggests Australians want 
Turnbull to succeed, but there are people in his own show who would have rather 
lost with Abbott than won with Malcolm.

Turnbull and the Court of King Malcolm are acutely aware of this fact, it’s 
inescapable, but the instinct of the prime minister is always to expand rather 
than contract.


The story immediately after this trip is just how long is Malcolm’s piece of 
string? He’s had a small taste of freedom trotting about the globe, and he’s 
attempted to bank it for a rainy day.


But just how much repositioning can a mulish conservative bear?

 