
Gemini News Service was launched from Wheatsheaf House, Carmelite Street, 
London on 1 January 1967 by journalistsDerek Ingram  
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f4518&pos>
andOliver Carruthers 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f7528&pos=>
. One of the key aims of Gemini was to improve the exchange of news between 
developed and developing countries by providing subscribers with news, opinion 
and features relating to countries across the world.

Gemini distinguished itself from mainstream news agencies with its use of 
articles written by journalists who were from, resided in, or had significant 
knowledge of the country they were reporting on. The agency built up a large 
network of regular and occasional correspondents based across the world. These 
contributors were a mix of well established journalists and those in the 
initial stages of their career. Contributors includedKuldip Nayar 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f7496&pos>
, Johnny Maseko,Francis Mwanza 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f8474&pos>
,Tony Cozier, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/tony-cozier-obituary> Abby Tan 
<http://news.abs-cbn.com/nation/metro-manila/09/18/10/manila-based-singapore-journalist-dies>
,Gamini Navarante 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f8491&pos=>
, Nicola Cole,Clyde Sanger 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f2176&pos>
 andChris Mullin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chris-mullin>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cdf069749a0603a2590bd8b9091edc994d0742%2F0_0_4871_3764%2F4871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20journalism%20against%20the%20odds%3A%20Gemini%20News%20Service%20(1967-2002)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20journalism%20against%20the%20odds%3A%20Gemini%20News%20Service%20%281967-2002%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15cdf069749a0603a2590bd8b9091edc994d0742%2F0_0_4871_3764%2F4871.jpg>
 Promotional leaflet for Gemini News Service, 1971. (Archive ref:GEM/6/1/4 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GEM%2f6%2f1%2f4&pos>
) Photograph: Gemini News Service/GNM Archive 
Once written, copy was edited and illustrated by a small team of journalists 
and graphic designers at Gemini’s London offices. It was then dispatched twice 
weekly to subscribers all over the world. Gemini’s articles and graphics could 
be found in regional and national newspapers across Asia, Africa, Australia, 
Europe, North America and South America. As well as publishers, subscribers 
included broadcasters, schools, universities and government offices.

Gemini covered a wide variety of subjects including politics, economics, 
culture, gender, the Commonwealth, human rights, education, entertainment, 
science and the environment. The service had a number of successful stories and 
exclusive reports, one of the most famous beingRichard Hall’s 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Seymour_Hall> coverage of the end of the 
Nigerian-Biafran War <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/596712.stm> in 
January 1970. This coverage appeared in national newspapers including the 
Guardian, The Observer and The Sunday Times.

Peter Clarke, caricaturist, illustrator, designer: teaching resource
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/2016/jun/01/peter-clarke-caricaturist-illustrator-designer-teaching-resource>
Many of Gemini’s articles were accompanied by distinctive black and white 
graphics often in the form of maps, charts and illustrations of key 
personalities. Used to provide a visual accompaniment to articles that covered 
complex issues or were about remote countries, the graphics were often kept 
simple so that they could be easily reproduced by other publications. Graphics 
proved popular with subscribers, with some choosing to use only the graphics in 
their publications. A number of Gemini’s artists, includingCliff Hopkinson 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f1017&pos>
, Brana Radovic,Peter Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/dec/19/peter-clarke> and Paddy 
Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/paddyallen>, went on to pursue 
careers in national newspapers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c0b7db8bf5464de4870c2bf433defc488c8c17d%2F0_0_4734_6159%2F4734.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20journalism%20against%20the%20odds%3A%20Gemini%20News%20Service%20(1967-2002)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20journalism%20against%20the%20odds%3A%20Gemini%20News%20Service%20%281967-2002%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c0b7db8bf5464de4870c2bf433defc488c8c17d%2F0_0_4734_6159%2F4734.jpg>
 Gemini News Service graphic showing the wars of the 1960s, c1969. This graphic 
featured in a series of special articles produced by Gemini to mark the end of 
the 1960s. (Archive ref:GEM/4/1/2/1 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GEM%2f4%2f1%2f2%2f1&pos>
) Photograph: Gemini News Service/GNM Archive 
 Gemini endured financial troubles throughout its existence. In 1973 it was 
bought by theManchester Guardian and Evening News Limited 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f1760&pos>
 and shared offices with the Guardian for a time. In 1982, due to its own 
financial difficulties, the Guardian handed Gemini back to founder Derek Ingram 
who was forced to suspend the service in April 1982.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92ef083746430e3b04620bc7ce3e58115334bb25%2F0_204_2467_2467%2F2467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20journalism%20against%20the%20odds%3A%20Gemini%20News%20Service%20(1967-2002)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20journalism%20against%20the%20odds%3A%20Gemini%20News%20Service%20%281967-2002%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgemini-news-service-international-development-journalism-archive-teaching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92ef083746430e3b04620bc7ce3e58115334bb25%2F0_204_2467_2467%2F2467.jpg>
 Derek Ingram, founder and editor of Gemini News Service, pictured at the time 
of Gemini’s relaunch in 1983. (Archive ref:GEM/1/3/1/2 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GEM%2f1%2f3%2f1%2f2&pos>
) Photograph: Gemini News Service/GNM Archive 
Following the suspension Gemini’s supporters looked to find financial backing 
to relaunch the service. In late 1982 theNewsConcern International Foundation 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f7498&pos>
 was established as a not-for-profit international organisation, with the aim 
of reviving Gemini. The Foundation was funded by a range of international 
agencies and managed by a board of governors. Gemini was relaunched in March 
1983 and under the Foundation it maintained its editorial independence, gained 
new subscribers and created a range of seminars, training schemes and 
publications for journalists.


 In the late 1980s the Foundation formed a partnership with the The Panos 
Institute 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f7512&pos>
, an international development charity for which Gemini produced features. The 
Panos Institute took over the management of Gemini in 1999. The service 
continued to operate under The Panos Institute until 2002 when it was closed. 
Despite efforts to relaunch Gemini, the pioneering service remains closed at 
the time of writing.


Gemini News Service’s records <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gemini> 
were donated to theGNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> in 2002 to ensure their 
long-term preservation and to provide access to researchers. The collection 
consists of 185 boxes of records dated from 1966-2008, and includes news 
articles, graphics, photographs, records relating to the foundation and 
management of the service and correspondence with Gemini’s journalists and 
subscribers. With the help of a grant from the International Development 
Research Centre the GNM Archive was able to catalogue these records in 2009. The
Gemini archive catalogue 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GEM&pos=1>
 is available to search online and records can be accessed by appointment in 
the GNM reading room in King’s Cross, London.
 