
If things had fallen a little flat in an all-England first semi-final of the 
EDF Energy Cup at the Millennium Stadium nobody would have minded. Welsh grand 
slams tend to make a Cardiff audience forgiving for a while.

There was, however, no need to put their patience to the test. England's 
finest came here and put on an enthralling show, an eight-try spectacle that 
went the way ofLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> in 
thunderous fashion. Prop Martin Castrogiovanni shook the ground with the dive 
for the try that put the Tigers 17 points ahead with no time left for a Wasps 
revival.

They nevertheless had a stab at one, the combination of Danny Cipriani and 
Paul Sackey proving most effective once again as the one, playing at full-back 
after the introduction of Dave Walder, took an inside pass from the other, an 
out and out wing.

Cipriani stood out as the book-ends to his team's try-scoring. In the first 
half he had gone solo, completely against the run of the first quarter's run of 
play, to cut through a dog-leg defence for the game's first try. Leicester had 
had all the ball and all the territory, but here was the hottest property in 
the English game leaving them trailing on the board.

Amazingly, Cipriani was not the player of the day. Against him was Andy Goode, 
as pear-shaped as Cipriani was youthfully lean but on the day full of wit and 
invention. He started with a series of little flicks and darts, proved accurate 
with his boot, landing two penalties to offset that early Cipriani try and 
generally grew and grew into his role of chief strategist.

He hovered in the right area when Johne Murphy made a thrust in midfield and 
timed his supporting run to perfection to score the try that restored 
Leicester's lead. This afterWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> had scored from deep, Eoin 
Reddan running away from the Tigers' blindside defence at a scrum. The 
scrum-half's pass to Sackey left the wing with a full-back to beat, but such 
was the surge of pace and power that it was made to look easy. Sackey is in 
fine form at all levels.

Goode, although never likely to bother the England selectors again, had an 
even more decisive moment. Harry Ellis, his half-back partner and very much in 
the mind of the country's coaches, generally played a very sensible game, 
passing accurately and prudently to Goode, but when, just after half time, he 
had a chance to take a tap penalty to himself, the outside-half was off on his 
own. Dan Hipkiss stayed with him, and Seru Rabeni kept up with the centre. The 
try put Leicester eight points clear.

Cipriani had faded a conversion against the post; now he hooked a penalty 
wide. The double-try-scorer missed some easier pickings.

Goode then struck again after Tom Croft stole a line-out on the Wasps throw. 
The wing-forward was athletic all day, part of the posse of jumpers that 
wrecked the Wasps line-out.

On this occasion, Martin Corry drove on and then Goode chipped over the 
up-rushing defence, gathered his own kick and slipped the ball to Hipkiss who 
ran away to score. Goode has never looked especially combustible, but he was on 
fire here.

Sackey's second try reduced the gap again, but Castrogiovanni challenged 
Goode's pre-eminence with his run, plunge and crater-creation. In earlier times 
it would have spelled the end of the dinosaurs.

The Italy prop, who played basketball until he was 18 - he decided to stop 
after he half-hit, half-pushed a referee into next week - had flunked an 
earlier chance. He had burst into midfield during the early period of control 
but got a little carried away, his run ending not with a simple pass to the 
supporting Ben Herring but a dummy and collision with Josh Lewsey. 
Castrogiovanni is an absolute gem.

But he still wasn't as prominent as Goode. The outside-half trudged off before 
the end, looking as slightly bedraggled as usual and limping on a leg that had 
required attention on more than one occasion. But he had more than played his 
part. Danny Cipriani looks a star and is going to be one. Goode doesn't but was 
one on this day.

Millennium Stadium 43,000

Leicester J Murphy; Varndell, Rabeni, Hipkiss, Tuilagi; Goode (Vesty 77), 
Ellis; Stankovich (Ayerza 45), Chuter (Kayser 73), Castrogiovanni (White 72), L 
Deacon, Kay, Croft, Herring (Crane 49), Corry (capt)

Tries Goode, Rabeni, Hipkiss, Castrogiovanni Cons Goode 4 Pens Goode 2

Wasps Lewsey; Sackey, Waters (Waldouck 66), Flutey, Doherty (Walder 57); 
Cipriani, Reddan (McMillan 72); Payne, Iba√±ez (Ward 72), Vickery (French 73), 
Skivington, Palmer (Birkett 73), Hart (Leo 62), Haskell, Dallaglio (capt)

Tries Cipriani 2, Sackey 2 Cons Cipriani, Walder
 