
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> kept themselves 
on course for a second successive EDF Energy Cup title with a comprehensive win 
over Sale on a soggy night at Welford Road.

A downpour before the match meant tasty rugby would be at a premium and even a 
Tigers try from Johne Murphy after only three minutes, converted by Andy Goode, 
failed to spark much action. Neither side was about to throw caution to the 
wind, with kicking always going to be the tactic of choice. Confirmation came 
within minutes whenSale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> cut the 
deficit with a Luke McAlister penalty but Goode replied as the Tigers turned 
round 10-3 up.

After the break, it was left to Martin Corry to get the ball rolling with a 
charge from his own half followed by a jinking run by the replacement Sam 
Vesty, taking Leicester deep into Sale territory. Inevitably the finishing 
touch was applied after a handful of phases when Goode fed Dan Hipkiss, who had 
cut a delightful line to cross beneath the posts.

Sale briefly then tried to make a contest of it. Taking on Leicester at their 
own game, they bullied their way back upfield to provide the All Black 
McAlister with an overlap and the simplest of scores. But the try was against 
the run of play and Leicester's dominance soon paid dividends again with a 
second penalty by Goode.

Although he had a mixed evening, it was perhaps fitting that a break by Goode 
sealed the victory. Taking the ball clear of the Sale defence, the fly-half did 
not have the legs to complete the job but Tom Varndell was at hand. Collecting 
the ball at speed, the winger gleefully took the ball from the No1o at halfway 
and finished off the move.

With only a couple of minutes left on the clock, Leicester rubbed salt in 
Sale's wounds with a Tom Croft interception try. Drab it might have been last 
night but, at a time when the EDF Energy Cup's future is changing direction, 
the competition does at least have one big fan in the tryscorer Varndell. "It 
brings together the Welsh and English teams - it's like the FA Cup of rugby and 
I love playing in it," he said. "We put out a strong side and so did Sale and 
that proves how serious we take this competition - we want to win it. But then 
we want to win all three competitions."

Few would bet too much against them doing just that with the All Black centre 
Aaron Mauger due to join Leicester in time for the rather more important 
Heineken Cup game in Toulouse next weekend.

Looking ahead to that, the Tigers' new head coach Marcelo Loffreda pronounced 
himself "satisfied" with this display and said: "We are improving in each game. 
The team was really solid throughout. We put in a very good performance."

Leicester G Murphy (Vesty, 42); J Murphy, Smith, Hipkiss, Varndell; Goode, F 
Murphy; Ayerza, Kayser (Chuter, 22), White (Moreno, 32), L Deacon, Kay 
(Hamilton, 38), Corry (capt), Abraham, Crane (Croft, 21).

Tries J Murphy, Hipkiss, Varndell, Croft. Cons Goode 3. Pens Goode 2.

Sale Cueto; Laharrague, McAlister, Keil, Lamont; Hodgson (Mayor, 32), Martens 
(Wigglesworth, 20); Faure, Lawson (Bruno, 24), Roberts, Fern√°ndez Lobbe 
(Schofield, 20), Day, White (capt), Lund, Bonner-Evans (Jones, 20).

Try McAlister. Pen McAlister.

Referee C White (RFU). Attendance 17,172.
 