
OK, so Independent News & Media's financial dramas appear to have reached a 
satisfactory conclusion - for the moment at least.

There may well be some rejoicing in the O'Reilly camp at having pulled off a 
deal to reduce INM's €1.3bn (£1.2bn) burden, albeit bythe virtual halving of 
stakes held byTony O'Reilly and Denis O'Brien. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/sep/29/oreilly-obrien-reduce-inm-stakes>

But the big question here in Britain is about what the deal means for The 
Independent and the Independent on Sunday. Are they going to remain in the INM 
camp?

The answer is yes. I understand that the deals agreed between INM and the 
banks, and then between INM and the bondholders, are built around a five-year 
business plan in which the publication of the Indy titles is ensured.

Of course, it does not mean that if the economic climate got even worse - or 
sales fell to impossibly low levels - the situation would remain the same. But, 
all things being equal, INM will go on publishing the papers.

There is also a belief that the much-vaunted financial break-even plan for the 
titles is more likely to be realised now that the deal has been done.

An INM insider told me: "It has been very difficult for us over the last few 
months in terms of trading because O'Brien's actions have been destabilising. 
Now that we've removed that level of uncertainty we believe we can forge ahead."

INM's ceo, Gavin O'Reilly, has been steadfast in rejecting calls by O'Brien to 
sell the papers or close them, continually maintaining that they are on their 
way to breaking even.

In a TV interview last week, he was forced to admit that they are still losing 
"tens of thousands of euros every day" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2009/sep/23/gavin-oreilly-independent-losses>
, but he and the board believe that with the company having taken £20m out of 
the costs, the break-even point will be reached some time next year.

The insider said: "In INM' 11-year ownership it's fair to say that the titles 
are will lose less money this year than in any other year. With revenues having 
fallen by 35%, that's some feat. It also means we're losing a lot less than our 
rivals."

In his RTE TV interview 
<http://www.rte.ie/news/2009/0922/primetime_av.html?2614919,null,230>, O'Reilly 
justified the titles' value to the group by maintaining that they form "the 
central editorial hub" of INM's 200 papers across the world.

That may be so. But the fact is that their circulations appear to be in 
freefall. In August, the Indy sold an average of 187,000 copies a day, some 18% 
fewer than the same month a year ago.

Only 97,618 of those were sold at the full cover price. Its reliance on 
foreign sales and bulk sales is much greater than that of its rivals (including
The Guardian, which has eschewed bulks altogether).

As for the Sindy, its circulation in August was 160,809, and only 79,652 of 
those were sold at full price in Britain. Again, the total sale was 18% down on 
a year ago.

So can INM really put a brake on the circulation decline? The insider spoke of 
the need to "manage a very delicate balance carefully", claiming that 
advertisers have remained faithful to the papers despite the low sales. He also 
believed that sales would soon improve, or level out.

There have been wild rumours in recent weeks about the papers' fates. One 
suggested that theIndependent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> was to be closed. 
There was also gossip about disagreements between the managing director, Simon 
Kelner, and the Indy editor Roger Alton.

The source told me that both these rumours are "totally inaccurate." He said 
the "simple financial calculation" is that the Sindy "still makes a 
contribution." As for the Kelner-Alton relationship, that remains "sound."

So there we are. INM's restructuring and the consequent victory of the 
O'Reillys over O'Brien, appears to be the first bit of good news in a long, 
long time for staff on the Indy titles.

Sources: Media Guardian 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/sep/29/oreilly-obrien-reduce-inm-stakes>/
Greenslade 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2009/sep/23/gavin-oreilly-independent-losses>
/RTE <http://www.rte.ie/news/2009/0922/primetime_av.html?2614919,null,230>
 