
Google’s controversial advertising sales business in Dublin earned revenues of 
€22.6bn (£20.1bn) from Europe, the Middle East and Africa last year but paid 
just €47.8m in tax, according to company filings inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.

Revenues at Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Ireland 
Limited rose 23% in 2015, to €22.6bn, and were equivalent to a third of the 
search group’s global income. Of this Irish income, more than $7bn (£5.6bn) is 
thought to have come from transactions with advertisers in the UK.


Google has continued to route its sales from British advertisers through 
Ireland, despite efforts by the former UK chancellor George Osborne to crack 
down on multinational tech groups that “abused the trust of the British people 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-politics-osborne-tech-idUKKCN0HO15N20140929>
”.

Google Ireland Limited is one half of the search group’s so-called “double 
Irish” tax structure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/14/ireland-abolish-double-irish-tax-scheme-apple>
. Although Google reported booming revenues, its taxable profits were only 
€341m. This profit figure was small in large part because the company had to 
meet administrative expenses of €16.9bn.


These expenses are thought to be dominated by royalty fees paid to other 
Google subsidiaries – income which eventually makes its way to a business 
called Google Holdings Ireland, the second company in Google’s “double Irish” 
structure.

European commission to resurrect overarching corporate tax proposals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/european-commission-overarching-corporate-tax-proposals-profit-shifting>
Almost no information is made public about Google Holdings Ireland, which is 
an unlimited company. It is registered to the address of a law firm in Dublin, 
but is thought to pay no tax in Ireland as it is tax-resident in Bermuda.


Because it is unlimited, Google Holdings Ireland is not required to file 
accounts, under Irish company law. However, Bermuda does not charge corporation 
tax, so the billions of dollars of income Google is able to move into Google 
Holdings Ireland each year go untaxed.

Google has told investors that, at the end of last year, it had amassed an 
offshore cash pile of $42.9bn.


Other US tech companies that have made use of “double Irish” tax avoidance 
structures include Facebook, Microsoft and Apple. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/29/what-is-google-tax-george-osborne>

Under pressure from world leaders, Ireland agreed two years ago to start 
phasing out the tax benefits of such structures. However, Irish ministers have 
awarded generous “grandfathering rights” which ensure Google and others are 
able to pour income into their offshore tax havens up until 2020.

Google, which is ultimately owned by the holding company Alphabet Inc 
<https://abc.xyz/investor/>, insists it’s business in Ireland are much more 
than a tax structure. At the end of last year, Google Ireland Limited employed 
2,763 staff, an increase of 6% in 12 months.


“As Google grows, Ireland continues to benefit,” said Ronan Harris, who is 
shortly moving from Ireland tolead Google operations in the UK 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/technology/fionnuala-meehan-to-replace-ronan-harris-as-google-head-1.2845779>
. “In 2015 we opened our second data centre, bringing total investment in 
capital assets in Ireland to over €750m.”

Ahead of the UK election in 2015, George Osborne promised to stop tech firms 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-politics-osborne-tech-idUKKCN0HO15N20140929>
 routing sales from customers in Britain to gateway jurisdictions, such as 
Ireland or Luxembourg, from where income can then be easily transferred to 
offshore tax havens.


As UK chancellor, Osborne introduced a new punitive tax, known as the diverted 
profits tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/googles-tax-deal-with-the-uk-key-questions-answered-chancellor-taxes>
, which he said would hit companies found to be artificially shifting UK income 
overseas.


It later emerged, however, that while some companies, such as Amazon and 
Facebook, said they would change their ways, others – includingGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/googles-tax-deal-with-the-uk-key-questions-answered-chancellor-taxes>
 andeBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/08/ebay-pays-11m-uk-tax-on-revenues-it-told-us-investors-were-11bn>
 – have continued to book UK sales overseas.

In January, UK tax inspectors reached a £130m tax settlement with Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/29/googles-tax-deal-with-the-uk-key-questions-answered-chancellor-taxes>
 over taxes stretching back 10 years. Osborne initially heralded asa “major 
success” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/28/george-osborne-repeats-claim-that-googles-uk-tax-deal-is-major-success>
, though many others condemned it as too lenient.


Separately, Google has promised significant investment in the UK, which some 
tax campaigners fear may have been a factor in the minds of those at HMRC 
reaching the settlement.


A more serious challenge to the “double Irish” tax avoidance method – or at 
least the most significant instance of it –came from European competition 
commissioner Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/margrethe-vestager-eu-competition-commissioner-google-tax-deal-uk-government>
. In August she ruled  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/eu-apple-ireland-tax-ruling-q-and-a>
thatApple’s long-standing tax arrangements in Ireland relied on illegal state 
aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/eu-apple-ireland-tax-ruling-q-and-a>
. As a result, the Irish government would have to collect €13bn in back taxes 
from the iPhone maker, she said.

 