
Here’s what you don’t want to do late on a Sunday night. You do not want to 
type seven letters into Google. That’s all I did. I typed: “a-r-e”. And then 
“j-e-w-s”. Since 2008,Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> 
has attempted to predict what question you might be asking and offers you a 
choice. And this is what it did. It offered me a choice of potential questions 
it thought I might want to ask: “are jews a race?”, “are jews white?”, “are 
jews christians?”, and finally, “are jews evil?”

Are Jews evil? It’s not a question I’ve ever thought of asking. I hadn’t gone 
looking for it. But there it was. I press enter. A page of results appears. 
This was Google’s question. And this was Google’s answer: Jewsare evil. Because 
there, on my screen, was the proof: an entire page of results, nine out of 10 
of which “confirm” this. The top result, from a site called Listovative, has 
the headline: “Top 10 Major Reasons Why People Hate Jews.” I click on it: “Jews 
today have taken over marketing, militia, medicinal, technological, media, 
industrial, cinema challenges etc and continue to face the worlds [sic] envy 
through unexplained success stories given their inglorious past and vermin like 
repression all over Europe.”

Google is search. It’s the verb, to Google. It’s what we all do, all the time, 
whenever we want to know anything. We Google it. The site handles at least 
63,000 searches a second, 5.5bn a day. Its mission as a company, the one-line 
overview that has informed the company since its foundation and is still the 
banner headline on its corporate website today, is to “organise the world’s 
information and make it universally accessible and useful”. It strives to give 
you the best, most relevant results. And in this instance the third-best, most 
relevant result to the search query “are Jews… ” is a link to an article from 
stormfront.org, a neo-Nazi website. The fifth is a YouTube video: “Why the Jews 
are Evil. Why we are against them.”

The sixth is from Yahoo Answers: “Why are Jews so evil?” The seventh result 
is: “Jews are demonic souls from a different world.” And the 10th is from 
jesus-is-saviour.com: “Judaism is Satanic!”

There’s one result in the 10 that offers a different point of view. It’s a 
link to a rather dense, scholarly book review from thetabletmag.com, a Jewish 
magazine, with the unfortunately misleading headline: “Why Literally Everybody 
In the World Hates Jews.”

I feel like I’ve fallen down a wormhole, entered some parallel universe where 
black is white, and good is bad. Though later, I think that perhaps what I’ve 
actually done is scraped the topsoil off the surface of 2016 and found one of 
the underground springs that has been quietly nurturing it. It’s been there all 
the time, of course. Just a few keystrokes away… on our laptops, our tablets, 
our phones. This isn’t a secret Nazi cell lurking in the shadows. It’s hiding 
in plain sight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec1af23d6af22a858d649bb92ecd084936e2ed14%2F0_0_1399_1267%2F1399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec1af23d6af22a858d649bb92ecd084936e2ed14%2F0_0_1399_1267%2F1399.jpg>
 Are women… Google’s search results. 
Stories about fake news on Facebook  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/19/facebook-fake-news-mark-zuckerberg>
have dominated certain sections of the press for weeks following the American 
presidential election, but arguably this is even more powerful, more insidious. 
Frank Pasquale, professor of law at the University of Maryland, and one of the 
leading academic figures calling for tech companies to be more open and 
transparent, calls the results “very profound, very troubling”.

He came across a similar instance in 2006 when, “If you typed ‘Jew’ in Google, 
the first result was jewwatch.org. It was ‘look out for these awful Jews who 
are ruining your life’. And theAnti-Defamation League  <http://www.adl.org/>
went after them and so they put an asterisk next to it which said: ‘These 
search results may be disturbing but this is an automated process.’ But what 
you’re showing – and I’m very glad you are documenting it and screenshotting it 
– is that despite the fact they have vastly researched this problem, it has 
gotten vastly worse.”

And ordering of search results does influence people, says Martin Moore, 
director of the Centre for the Study of Media, Communication and Power at 
King’s College, London, who has written at length on the impact of the big tech 
companies on our civic and political spheres. “There’s large-scale, 
statistically significant research into the impact of search results on 
political views. And the way in which you see the results and the types of 
results you see on the page necessarily has an impact on your perspective.” 
Fake news, he says, has simply “revealed a much bigger problem. These companies 
are so powerful and so committed to disruption. They thought they were 
disrupting politics but in a positive way. They hadn’t thought about the 
downsides. These tools offer remarkable empowerment, but there’s a dark side to 
it. It enables people to do very cynical, damaging things.”

Google is knowledge. It’s where you go to find things out. And evil Jews are 
just the start of it. There are also evil women. I didn’t go looking for them 
either. This is what I type: “a-r-e w-o-m-e-n”. And Google offers me just two 
choices, the first of which is: “Are women evil?” I press return. Yes, they 
are. Every one of the 10 results “confirms” that they are, including the top 
one, from a site called sheddingoftheego.com, which is boxed out and 
highlighted: “Every woman has some degree of prostitute in her. Every woman has 
a little evil in her… Women don’t love men, they love what they can do for 
them. It is within reason to say women feel attraction but they cannot love 
men.”

Next I type: “a-r-e m-u-s-l-i-m-s”. And Google suggests I should ask: “Are 
Muslims bad?” And here’s what I find out: yes, they are. That’s what the top 
result says and six of the others. Without typing anything else, simply putting 
the cursor in the search box, Google offers me two new searches and I go for 
the first, “Islam is bad for society”. In the next list of suggestions, I’m 
offered: “Islam must be destroyed.”

This is the equivalent of going into a library and asking a librarian about 
Judaism and being handed 10 books of hate
Danny Sullivan 
Jews are evil. Muslims need to be eradicated. And Hitler? Do you want to know 
about Hitler? Let’s Google it. “Was Hitler bad?” I type. And here’s Google’s 
top result: “10 Reasons Why Hitler Was One Of The Good Guys” I click on the 
link: “He never wanted to kill any Jews”; “he cared about conditions for Jews 
in the work camps”; “he implemented social and cultural reform.” Eight out of 
the other 10 search results agree: Hitler really wasn’t that bad.

A few days later, I talk to Danny Sullivan, the founding editor of 
SearchEngineLand.com <http://searchengineland.com/>. He’s been recommended to 
me by several academics as one of the most knowledgeable experts on search. Am 
I just being naive, I ask him? Should I have known this was out there? “No, 
you’re not being naive,” he says. “This is awful. It’s horrible. It’s the 
equivalent of going into a library and asking a librarian about Judaism and 
being handed 10 books of hate. Google is doing a horrible, horrible job of 
delivering answers here. It can and should do better.”

He’s surprised too. “I thought they stopped offering autocomplete suggestions 
for religions in 2011.” And then he types “are women” into his own computer. 
“Good lord! That answer at the top. It’s a featured result. It’s called a 
“direct answer”. This is supposed to be indisputable. It’s Google’s highest 
endorsement.” That every women has some degree of prostitute in her? “Yes. This 
is Google’s algorithm going terribly wrong.”

I contacted Google about its seemingly malfunctioning autocomplete suggestions 
and received the following response: “Our search results are a reflection of 
the content across the web. This means that sometimes unpleasant portrayals of 
sensitive subject matter online can affect what search results appear for a 
given query. These results don’t reflect Google’s own opinions or beliefs – as 
a company, we strongly value a diversity of perspectives, ideas and cultures.”

Google isn’t just a search engine, of course. Search was the foundation of the 
company but that was just the beginning. Alphabet, Google’s parent company, now 
has the greatest concentration of artificial intelligence experts in the world. 
It is expanding into healthcare, transportation, energy. It’s able to attract 
the world’s top computer scientists, physicists and engineers. It’s bought 
hundreds of start-ups, includingCalico <http://www.calicolabs.com/>, whose 
stated mission is to “cure death” andDeepMind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/27/google-acquires-uk-artificial-intelligence-startup-deepmind>
, which aims to “solve intelligence”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7c6b6ea730ea89bc6918b816471e16a5bdcd725%2F295_706_2200_2749%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7c6b6ea730ea89bc6918b816471e16a5bdcd725%2F295_706_2200_2749%2F2200.jpg>
 Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin in 2002. Photograph: Michael 
Grecco/Getty Images 
And 20 years ago it didn’t even exist. When Tony Blair became prime minister, 
it wasn’t possible to Google him: the search engine had yet to be invented. The 
company was only founded in 1998 and Facebook didn’t appear until 2004. 
Google’s founders Sergey Brin and Larry Page are still only 43. Mark Zuckerberg 
ofFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> is 32. Everything 
they’ve done, the world they’ve remade, has been done in the blink of an eye.

But it seems the implications about the power and reach of these companies is 
only now seeping into the public consciousness. I ask Rebecca MacKinnon, 
director of the Ranking Digital Rights project at the New America Foundation, 
whether it was the recent furore over fake news that woke people up to the 
danger of ceding our rights as citizens to corporations. “It’s kind of weird 
right now,” she says, “because people are finally saying, ‘Gee, Facebook and 
Google really have a lot of power’ like it’s this big revelation. And it’s 
like, ‘D’oh.’”

MacKinnon has a particular expertise in how authoritarian governments adapt to 
the internet and bend it to their purposes. “China and Russia are a cautionary 
tale for us. I think what happens is that it goes back and forth. So during the 
Arab spring, it seemed like the good guys were further ahead. And now it seems 
like the bad guys are. Pro-democracy activists are using the internet more than 
ever but at the same time, the adversary has gotten so much more skilled.”

Last week Jonathan Albright, an assistant professor of communications at Elon 
University in North Carolina, published the first detailedresearch on how 
rightwing websites had spread their message 
<https://medium.com/@d1gi/the-election2016-micro-propaganda-machine-383449cc1fba#.14h9hafbd>
. “I took a list of these fake news sites that was circulating, I had an 
initial list of 306 of them and I used a tool – like the one Google uses – to 
scrape them for links and then I mapped them. So I looked at where the links 
went – into YouTube and Facebook, and between each other, millions of them… and 
I just couldn’t believe what I was seeing.

“They have created a web that is bleeding through on to our web. This isn’t a 
conspiracy. There isn’t one person who’s created this. It’s a vast system of 
hundreds of different sites that are using all the same tricks that all 
websites use. They’re sending out thousands of links to other sites and 
together this has created a vast satellite system of rightwing news and 
propaganda that has completely surrounded the mainstream media system.”

He found 23,000 pages and 1.3m hyperlinks. “And Facebook is just the 
amplification device. When you look at it in 3D, it actually looks like a 
virus. And Facebook was just one of the hosts for the virus that helps it 
spread faster. You can see theNew York Times in there and the Washington Post 
and then you can see how there’s a vast, vast network surrounding them. The 
best way of describing it is as an ecosystem. This really goes way beyond 
individual sites or individual stories. What this map shows is the distribution 
network and you can see that it’s surrounding and actually choking the 
mainstream news ecosystem.”

Like a cancer? “Like an organism that is growing and getting stronger all the 
time.”

Charlie Beckett, a professor in the school of media and communications at LSE, 
tells me: “We’ve been arguing for some time now that plurality of news media is 
good. Diversity is good. Critiquing the mainstream media is good. But now… it’s 
gone wildly out of control. What Jonathan Albright’s research has shown is that 
this isn’t a byproduct of the internet. And it’s not even being done for 
commercial reasons. It’s motivated by ideology, by people who are quite 
deliberately trying to destabilise the internet.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbae5cf4cf587226815a1e111c94dddbc41019bd%2F121_82_4129_3764%2F4129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbae5cf4cf587226815a1e111c94dddbc41019bd%2F121_82_4129_3764%2F4129.jpg>
 A spatial map of the rightwing fake news ecosystem. Jonathan Albright, 
assistant professor of communications at Elon University, North Carolina, 
“scraped” 300 fake news sites (the dark shapes on this map) to reveal the 1.3m 
hyperlinks that connect them together and link them into the mainstream news 
ecosystem. Here, Albright shows it is a “vast satellite system of rightwing 
news and propaganda that has completely surrounded the mainstream media 
system”. Photograph: Jonathan Albright 
Albright’s map also provides a clue to understanding the Google search results 
I found. What these rightwing news sites have done, he explains, is what most 
commercial websites try to do. They try to find the tricks that will move them 
up Google’s PageRank system. They try and “game” the algorithm. And what his 
map shows is how well they’re doing that.

That’s what my searches are showing too. That the right has colonised the 
digital space around these subjects – Muslims, women, Jews, the Holocaust, 
black people – far more effectively than the liberal left.

“It’s an information war,” says Albright. “That’s what I keep coming back to.”

But it’s where it goes from here that’s truly frightening. I ask him how it 
can be stopped. “I don’t know. I’m not sure it can be. It’s a network. It’s far 
more powerful than any one actor.”

So, it’s almost got a life of its own? “Yes, and it’s learning. Every day, 
it’s getting stronger.”

The more people who search for information about Jews, the more people will 
see links to hate sites, and the more they click on those links (very few 
people click on to the second page of results) the more traffic the sites will 
get, the more links they will accrue and the more authoritative they will 
appear. This is an entirely circular knowledge economy that has only one 
outcome: an amplification of the message. Jews are evil. Women are evil. Islam 
must be destroyed. Hitler was one of the good guys.

Fake news and a 400-year-old problem: we need to resolve the ‘post-truth’ 
crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/29/fake-news-echo-chamber-ethics-infosphere-internet-digital>
And the constellation of websites that Albright found – a sort of shadow 
internet – has another function. More than just spreading rightwing ideology, 
they are being used to track and monitor and influence anyone who comes across 
their content. “I scraped the trackers on these sites and I was absolutely 
dumbfounded. Every time someone likes one of these posts on Facebook or visits 
one of these websites, the scripts are then following you around the web. And 
this enables data-mining and influencing companies like Cambridge Analytica to 
precisely target individuals, to follow them around the web, and to send them 
highly personalised political messages. This is a propaganda machine. It’s 
targeting people individually to recruit them to an idea. It’s a level of 
social engineering that I’ve never seen before. They’re capturing people and 
then keeping them on an emotional leash and never letting them go.”

Cambridge Analytica, an American-owned company based in London, was employed 
by both the Vote Leave campaign and the Trump campaign. Dominic Cummings, the 
campaign director of Vote Leave, has made few public announcements since the 
Brexit referendum but he did say this: “If you want to make big improvements in 
communication, my advice is – hire physicists.”

Steve Bannon, founder of Breitbart News and the newly appointed chief 
strategist to Trump, is on Cambridge Analytica’s board and it has emerged that 
the company is in talks to undertake political messaging work for the Trump 
administration. It claims to have built psychological profiles using 5,000 
separate pieces of data on 220 million American voters. It knows their quirks 
and nuances and daily habits and can target them individually.

“They were using 40-50,000 different variants of ad every day that were 
continuously measuring responses and then adapting and evolving based on that 
response,” says Martin Moore of Kings College. Because they have so much data 
on individuals and they use such phenomenally powerful distribution networks, 
they allow campaigns to bypass a lot of existing laws.

“It’s all done completely opaquely and they can spend as much money as they 
like on particular locations because you can focus on a five-mile radius or 
even a single demographic. Fake news is important but it’s only one part of it. 
These companies have found a way of transgressing 150 years of legislation that 
we’ve developed to make elections fair and open.”

Did such micro-targeted propaganda – currently legal – swing the Brexit vote? 
We have no way of knowing. Did the same methods used by Cambridge Analytica 
help Trump to victory? Again, we have no way of knowing. This is all happening 
in complete darkness. We have no way of knowing how our personal data is being 
mined and used to influence us. We don’t realise that the Facebook page we are 
looking at, the Google page, the ads that we are seeing, the search results we 
are using, are all being personalised to us. We don’t see it because we have 
nothing to compare it to. And it is not being monitored or recorded. It is not 
being regulated. We are inside a machine and we simply have no way of seeing 
the controls. Most of the time, we don’t even realise that there are controls.

Facebook and Google move to kick fake news sites off their ad networks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/15/facebook-google-fake-news-sites-ad-networks>
Rebecca MacKinnon says that most of us consider the internet to be like “the 
air that we breathe and the water that we drink”. It surrounds us. We use it. 
And we don’t question it. “But this is not a natural landscape. Programmers and 
executives and editors and designers, they make this landscape. They are human 
beings and they all make choices.”

But we don’t know what choices they are making. Neither Google or Facebook 
make their algorithms public. Why did my Google search return nine out of 10 
search results that claim Jews are evil? We don’t know and we have no way of 
knowing. Their systems are what Frank Pasquale describes as “black boxes”. He 
calls Google and Facebook “a terrifying duopoly of power” and has been leading 
a growing movement of academics who are calling for “algorithmic 
accountability”. “We need to have regular audits of these systems,” he says. 
“We need people in these companies to be accountable. In the US, under the 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, every company has to have a spokesman you can 
reach. And this is what needs to happen. They need to respond to complaints 
about hate speech, about bias.”

Is bias built into the system? Does it affect the kind of results that I was 
seeing? “There’s all sorts of bias about what counts as a legitimate source of 
information and how that’s weighted. There’s enormous commercial bias. And when 
you look at the personnel, they are young, white and perhaps Asian, but not 
black or Hispanic and they are overwhelmingly men. The worldview of young 
wealthy white men informs all these judgments.”

Later, I speak to Robert Epstein, a research psychologist at the American 
Institute for Behavioural Research and Technology, and the author of the study 
that Martin Moore told me about (and that Google has publicly criticised), 
showing how search-rank results affect voting patterns. On the other end of the 
phone, he repeats one of the searches I did. He types “do blacks…” into Google.

“Look at that. I haven’t even hit a button and it’s automatically populated 
the page with answers to the query: ‘Do blacks commit more crimes?’ And look, I 
could have been going to ask all sorts of questions. ‘Do blacks excel at 
sports’, or anything. And it’s only given me two choices and these aren’t 
simply search-based or the most searched terms right now. Google used to use 
that but now they use an algorithm that looks at other things. Now, let me look 
at Bing and Yahoo. I’m on Yahoo and I have 10 suggestions, not one of which is 
‘Do black people commit more crime?’

“And people don’t question this. Google isn’t just offering a suggestion. This 
is a negative suggestion and we know that negative suggestions depending on 
lots of things can draw between five and 15 more clicks. And this all 
programmed. And it could be programmed differently.”

What Epstein’s work has shown is that the contents of a page of search results 
can influence people’s views and opinions. The type and order of search 
rankings was shown to influence voters in India in double-blind trials. There 
were similar results relating to the search suggestions you are offered.

“The general public are completely in the dark about very fundamental issues 
regarding online search and influence. We are talking about the most powerful 
mind-control machine ever invented in the history of the human race. And people 
don’t even notice it.”

Good luck in making Google reveal its algorithm | John Naughton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/good-luck-in-making-google-reveal-its-algorithm>
Damien Tambini, an associate professor at the London School of Economics, who 
focuses on media regulation, says that we lack any sort of framework to deal 
with the potential impact of these companies on the democratic process. “We 
have structures that deal with powerful media corporations. We have competition 
laws. But these companies are not being held responsible. There are no powers 
to get Google or Facebook to disclose anything. There’s an editorial function 
to Google and Facebook but it’s being done by sophisticated algorithms. They 
say it’s machines not editors. But that’s simply a mechanised editorial 
function.”

And the companies, says John Naughton, the Observer columnist and a senior 
research fellow at Cambridge University, are terrified of acquiring editorial 
responsibilities they don’t want. “Though they can and regularly do tweak the 
results in all sorts of ways.”

Certainly the results about Google on Google don’t seem entirely neutral. 
Google “Is Google racist?” and the featured result – the Google answer boxed 
out at the top of the page – is quite clear: no. It is not.

Google and Facebook are thinking long term. They have the resources, money and 
ambition to do whatever they want
John Naughton 
But the enormity and complexity of having two global companies of a kind we 
have never seen before influencing so many areas of our lives is such, says 
Naughton, that “we don’t even have the mental apparatus to even know what the 
problems are”.

And this is especially true of the future. Google and Facebook are at the 
forefront of AI. They are going to own the future. And the rest of us can 
barely start to frame the sorts of questions we ought to be asking. 
“Politicians don’t think long term. And corporations don’t think long term 
because they’re focused on the next quarterly results and that’s what makes 
Google and Facebook interesting and different. They are absolutely thinking 
long term. They have the resources, the money, and the ambition to do whatever 
they want.

“They want to digitise every book in the world: they do it. They want to build 
a self-driving car: they do it. The fact that people are reading about these 
fake news stories and realising that this could have an effect on politics and 
elections, it’s like, ‘Which planet have you been living on?’ For Christ’s 
sake, this is obvious.”

“The internet is among the few things that humans have built that they don’t 
understand.” It is “the largest experiment involving anarchy in history. 
Hundreds of millions of people are, each minute, creating and consuming an 
untold amount of digital content in an online world that is not truly bound by 
terrestrial laws.” The internet as a lawless anarchic state? A massive human 
experiment with no checks and balances and untold potential consequences? What 
kind of digital doom-mongerer would say such a thing? Step forward, Eric 
Schmidt – Google’s chairman. They are the first lines of the book,The New 
Digital Age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/29/digital-age-schmidt-cohen-review>
, that he wrote with Jared Cohen.

We don’t understand it. It is not bound by terrestrial laws. And it’s in the 
hands of two massive, all-powerful corporations. It’s their experiment, not 
ours. The technology that was supposed to set us free may well have helped 
Trump to power, or covertly helped swing votes for Brexit. It has created a 
vast network of propaganda that has encroached like a cancer across the entire 
internet. This is a technology that has enabled the likes of Cambridge 
Analytica to create political messages uniquely tailored to you. They 
understand your emotional responses and how to trigger them. They know your 
likes, dislikes, where you live, what you eat, what makes you laugh, what makes 
you cry.

And what next? Rebecca MacKinnon’s research has shown how authoritarian 
regimes reshape the internet for their own purposes. Is that what’s going to 
happen with Silicon Valley and Trump? As Martin Moore points out, the 
president-elect claimed that Apple chief executive Tim Cook called to 
congratulate him soon after his election victory. “And there will undoubtedly 
be be pressure on them to collaborate,” says Moore.

Journalism is failing in the face of such change and is only going to fail 
further. New platforms have put a bomb under the financial model – advertising 
– resources are shrinking, traffic is increasingly dependent on them, and 
publishers have no access, no insight at all, into what these platforms are 
doing in their headquarters, their labs. And now they are moving beyond the 
digital world into the physical. The next frontiers are healthcare, 
transportation, energy. And just as Google is a near-monopoly for search, its 
ambition to own and control the physical infrastructure of our lives is what’s 
coming next. It already owns our data and with it our identity. What will it 
mean when it moves into all the other areas of our lives?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceb6dbcba38f48bf4e773778c4da56fd753658fe%2F0_92_2872_1724%2F2872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%2C%20democracy%20and%20the%20truth%20about%20internet%20search&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgoogle-democracy-truth-internet-search-facebook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceb6dbcba38f48bf4e773778c4da56fd753658fe%2F0_92_2872_1724%2F2872.jpg>
 Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg: still only 32 years of age. Photograph: 
Mariana Bazo/Reuters 
“At the moment, there’s a distance when you Google ‘Jews are’ and get ‘Jews 
are evil’,” says Julia Powles, a researcher at Cambridge on technology and law. 
“But when you move into the physical realm, and these concepts become part of 
the tools being deployed when you navigate around your city or influence how 
people are employed, I think that has really pernicious consequences.”

Powles is shortly to publish a paper looking at DeepMind’s relationship with 
the NHS. “A year ago, 2 million Londoners’ NHS health records were handed over 
to DeepMind. And there was complete silence from politicians, from regulators, 
from anyone in a position of power. This is a company without any healthcare 
experience being given unprecedented access into the NHS and it took seven 
months to even know that they had the data. And thattook investigative 
journalism to find it out 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/2086454-revealed-google-ai-has-access-to-huge-haul-of-nhs-patient-data/>
.”

The headline was that DeepMind was going to work with the NHS to develop an 
app that would provide early warning for sufferers of kidney disease. And it 
is, but DeepMind’s ambitions – “to solve intelligence” – goes way beyond that. 
The entire history of 2 million NHS patients is, for artificial intelligence 
researchers, a treasure trove. And, their entry into the NHS – providing useful 
services in exchange for our personal data – is another massive step in their 
power and influence in every part of our lives.

Because the stage beyond search is prediction. Google wants to know what you 
want before you know yourself. “That’s the next stage,” says Martin Moore. “We 
talk about the omniscience of these tech giants, but that omniscience takes a 
huge step forward again if they are able to predict. And that’s where they want 
to go. To predict diseases in health. It’s really, really problematic.”

For the nearly 20 years that Google has been in existence, our view of the 
company has been inflected by the youth and liberal outlook of its founders. 
Ditto Facebook, whose mission, Zuckberg said, was not to be “a company. It was 
built to accomplish a social mission to make the world more open and connected.”

The more we argue with them, the more they know about us. It all feeds into a 
circular system
Jonathan Albright 
It would be interesting to know how he thinks that’s working out. Donald Trump 
is connecting through exactly the same technology platforms that supposedly 
helped fuel the Arab spring; connecting to racists and xenophobes. And Facebook 
and Google are amplifying and spreading that message. And us too – the 
mainstream media. Our outrage is just another node on Jonathan Albright’s data 
map.

“The more we argue with them, the more they know about us,” he says. “It all 
feeds into a circular system. What we’re seeing here is new era of network 
propaganda.”

We are all points on that map. And our complicity, our credulity, being 
consumers not concerned citizens, is an essential part of that process. And 
what happens next is down to us. “I would say that everybody has been really 
naive and we need to reset ourselves to a much more cynical place and proceed 
on that basis,” is Rebecca MacKinnon’s advice. “There is no doubt that where we 
are now is a very bad place. But it’s we as a society who have jointly created 
this problem. And if we want to get to a better place, when it comes to having 
an information ecosystem that serves human rights and democracy instead of 
destroying it, we have to share responsibility for that.”

Are Jews evil? How do you want that question answered? This is our internet. 
Not Google’s. Not Facebook’s. Not rightwing propagandists. And we’re the only 
ones who can reclaim it.
 