
Google has responded to the European commission’s (EC) renewed statement of 
objections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/european-commission-files-third-antitrust-charge-against-google>
, declaring its case against Google Shopping to be “wrong on the facts, the 
law, and the economics” and dismissing it as just “the interests of a small 
number of websites”.


The seven-year case revolves around the charge that the market dominance of 
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> within search is being 
used to leverage its price comparison service to the detriment of third-party 
sites.

Within its second 100-page response to the EC, Google said that its Shopping 
service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/15/google-one-box-search-european-commission-case>
, which appears as a tab within search results and within adverts at the top of 
the page, was simply the result of its push to present users with useful 
information and direct answers to questions.

It also said that the exclusion of retailers such as Amazon and eBay from the 
case was wrong, as they compete with price comparison sites also, despite 
paying for referral traffic.

Kent Walker, Google’s senior vice president and general counsel, said: 
“Consumers don’t just look for products on a search engine, then click on a 
price comparison site, and then click again to visit merchant sites. They reach 
merchant websites in many different ways: via general search engines, 
specialist search services, merchant platforms, social-media sites, and online 
ads served by various companies.

“And of course merchants are reaching consumers directly like never before. On 
the mobile web – and more than half of Europe’sInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> traffic is mobile these days 
– dedicated apps are the most common way for consumers to shop.”

Adjoining the EC’s updated charges, European competition commissioner, 
Margrethe Vestager, said the commission’s preliminary investigation into Google 
Shopping revealed that Google had “unduly favoured its own comparison shopping 
service in its general search result pages”, meaning that “consumers may not 
see the most relevant results to their search queries”.

A Google spokesperson said: “We remain confident that these claims lack 
evidence and are wrong on the facts, the law, and the economics. The surest 
signs of dynamic competition in any market are low prices, abundant choices, 
and constant innovation — and that’s a great description of shopping on the 
internet today.”

Google also responded to the charges made against its advertising services, 
Adsense for Search, which places contextual, text-based ads near and around 
search results.

A Google spokesperson said: “Our text ads help websites generate income and 
have always faced strong competition from other ad formats, so we disagree with 
the Commission’s assessment. Nevertheless, even before the Statement of 
Objections was filed, we changed practices the Commission takes issue with, so 
we hope to resolve this case quickly.”

The EC originally filed charges in April 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/15/google-faces-antitrust-action-from-eu-competition-watchdog>
, receiving a response from Google later that year. New, reinforcing charges in 
the Google Shopping case werethen filed by the EC in July this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/european-commission-files-third-antitrust-charge-against-google>
, which also included charges against Adsense.

Google is also facing antitrust charges against its Android mobile operating 
system, which runs on the majority of smartphones globally. It has until 11 
November to respond in the Android case, butfaces fines of up to 10% of its 
global turnover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/15/google-faces-3bn-fine-over-shopping-service>
.

 * Google shopping: the search tool at the heart of the European commission 
case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/15/google-one-box-search-european-commission-case>
 