
Google’s parent Alphabet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet> 
defied expectations to report a 20.2% rise in quarterly revenue on Thursday, 
while retail giant Amazon slightly missed predicted predicted forecasts due to 
spending on preparations for the holiday season.

Indicating an end to its record-breaking profits streak, Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> reported profit of $252m or 52 
cents per share, though analysts had predicted 85 cents per share. Revenues 
reached $32.71bn but are predicted to reach between $42bn and $45.5bn for the 
busy fourth quarter.

Alphabet meanwhile continues to dominate the fast-growing mobile advertising 
market, along with Facebook. The company has benefited from robust sales of 
advertising on mobile devices and on YouTube, and also said it would repurchase 
about $7bn of its Class C stock.

Shares of Alphabet, which is the world’s second largest company by market 
value, were up 1.6% in after-hours trading.


 Google’s ad revenue rose 18.1% to $19.82bn in the third quarter, accounting 
for 89.1% of Google’s total revenue, compared with 89.8% of revenue in the 
second quarter.

 Paid clicks rose 33%, compared with a rise of 29% in the second quarter. Paid 
clicks are those ads on which an advertiser pays only if a user clicks on them.

Google Fiber to cut jobs and halt expansion of US internet service
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/26/google-fiber-internet-stops-alphabet-layoffs>
Cost-per-click, or the average amount advertisers pay Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, fell 11% in the latest period 
after dropping 7% in the second quarter.

 Analysts on average had expected a decline of 7.9%, according to FactSet 
StreetAccount.

 Per-click costs have been falling as people shift to mobile devices from 
desktops. Because of the limited space, advertising on mobile devices is 
generally cheaper.

 Research firm eMarketer has estimated that Google will capture $52.88bn in 
search ad revenue in 2016, or 56.9% of the global market.

 Google’s Other Revenue, which includes the company’s increasingly important 
cloud business, jumped 38.8% after rising 33% in the second quarter.

 The cloud business competes with services offered by market-leader Amazon, 
Microsoft and IBM.

 Alphabet’s Other Bets generated revenue of $197m, but reported an operating 
loss of $865m. In the year earlier period, revenue was $141m and the loss was 
$980m.

 Other Bets includes broadband business Google Fiber, home automation products 
Nest, self-driving cars as well as X, the company’s research facility that 
works on “moon shot” ventures.

 The company’s consolidated revenue rose to $22.45bn in the three months to 30 
September from $18.68bn a year earlier. Net income rose to $5.06bn. Alphabet’s 
shares have risen 5.1% since the start of the year.
 