
In the midst of a highly charged presidential election, where fact and fiction 
have frequently become confused,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> News has introduced a new fact 
check feature in search results for news stories.

Launched today, fact check will now appear as a label among news search 
results, alongside other established labels such as opinion, local source and 
highly cited.

Google News algorithmically connects fact-checking articles with live news 
stories partly based on an established process calledClaim Review 
<http://pending.schema.org/ClaimReview>. Google says that sites meeting the 
definition of a fact-checking service can apply to have their service included.

Debate fact-check: Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump's claims reviewed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/presidential-debate-fact-check-donald-trump-hillary-clinton>
In a blogpost 
<https://blog.google/topics/journalism-news/labeling-fact-check-articles-google-news/>
 promoting the new feature, Google said: “We’re excited to see the growth of 
the Fact Check community and to shine a light on its efforts to divine fact 
from fiction, wisdom from spin.”

Facebook, despite its increasingly critical role in the distribution of news, 
has yet to deploy any fact-checking feature.Research 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-media-socialmedia-news-idUSKCN0Z02UB> by the 
Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism in June 2016 found that Facebook 
was the primary source of news for 18- to 24-year-olds. After sacking its 
trending topics news team, the social media site was at the center of a storm 
when its algorithmstarted promoting fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/29/facebook-fires-trending-topics-team-algorithm>
.

In Google News, fact check labels are visible in the expanded story box on the 
Google News site, on both the iOS and Android apps, and roll out for users in 
the US and UK first.

The timing of the new label is significant, contributing to an unprecedented 
US presidential election where both sides have been accused of misrepresenting 
facts. Some commentators have used the term “post-truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/13/boris-johnson-donald-trump-post-truth-politician>
” to describe the current state of political discussion.

There are 26 days, and one remaining debate, until the US electorate votes on 
8 November – not 28 November, as Donald Trump incorrectlystated this week 
<https://twitter.com/Walldo/status/786022757804892161?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.

• This article was amended on 19 October 2016 to state that the Reuters 
Institute, not Pew, was the source of the June 2016 research.
 