
Google’s latest feature will tell you how busy a place is in real-time before 
you set off.


The new extension to the Popular Times feature added to Google Maps and search 
in July 2015 has beenupgraded with a live feed 
<https://blog.google/products/search/know-you-go-google/> of how busy a place 
is for certain venues.

With a new “Live” tag, Maps now displays a red overlay on top of the historic 
busy period data showing whether it really is busy or quiet as usual at the 
moment.

The feature uses anonymised location data from other Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> users, as well as searches, to 
analyse how busy it is at that moment. While predicted busy times from historic 
data is generally useful, at sales times or when transport conditions are less 
than ideal, the flow of people might increase at normally quiet times.
 Google live popular times data. Photograph: Google 
The feature is being rolled out ahead of the busy Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> shopping period, but could 
equally be useful for checking out whether a particular bar or cinema is packed 
among other venues with variable busy times.

Google Maps, like others such as CityMapper, already displays live traffic and 
public transport congestion information pulled from both public data and other 
Google Maps andWaze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/may/28/waze-uri-levine-tips-startup-google>
 users. The introduction of live data is one of the big differentiators for 
mapping apps along with indoor navigation and libraries of store and points of 
interests data.

Google has also expanded the extra information Maps displays, including data 
on how long people generally stay in the venue or location, as well as opening 
hours for concessions and departments within a larger store or business, which 
are set by the individual businesses.

 * Google reverses decision to ban Pixel phone resellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/18/google-reverses-decision-ban-pixel-phone-resellers>

 * Google commits to massive new London headquarters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/15/google-commits-to-massive-new-london-hq>
 