
Desktop Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> searches could 
end up slightly out of date compared to those done via smartphones, as the 
company begins to push mobile search.

Google is fully splitting its search index into two distinct versions: a 
rapidly updated mobile one, and a separate, secondary search index for the 
desktop web.

The change will hit within “months”, according to a Google webmaster trends 
analyst, Gary Illyes, speaking at digital marketing conference Pubcon in Las 
Vegas, and will leave the desktop version of the index less up to date than the 
mobile one.

It’s the culmination of a long-running push by Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/20/google-mobilegeddon-will-shake-up-mobile-search-results>
 to encourage webmasters to prioritise mobile-friendly versions of their sites. 
The search engine already promotes sites that work well on mobile devices over 
ones that don’t, a change introduced in April 2015. Criteria for that promotion 
include features such as text size and how easily tappable links are on 
smartphone touchscreens.

Maintaining a fully separate index would allow Google to expand the push by 
judging sites with alternate mobile and desktop sites very differently, putting 
an end to the sort of situation where clicking through from a search result 
leads to a mobile site that has none of the promised information.

Barry Schwartz of Search Engine Land said 
<http://searchengineland.com/google-divide-index-giving-mobile-users-better-fresher-content-261037>
: “The most substantial change will likely be that by having a mobile index, 
Google can run its ranking algorithm in a different fashion across ‘pure’ 
mobile content rather than the current system that extracts data from desktop 
content to determine mobile rankings.”

It’s not the first time Illyes has mentioned the split, having discussed it at 
the SMX conference in September last year, but webmasters are taking note of 
the proposed date for the transition.

Joost de Valk, who runs search optimisation firm Yoast.com 
<https://www.yoast.com/>, said that the change is “the logical next step” for 
the search engine.

“It makes sense to me that they’d have two separate indexes and treat them as 
equals, but now they’ve got a primary one. That makes sense too, because it’s 
probably the fastest way for them to grow their index,” de Valk said.

“I think in part it is about pushing people to change their sites to be 
responsive rather than having a separate desktop and mobile site. By saying 
that their mobile index is more important, it will push people to focus on 
their mobile sites.”

In a statement, Google said “[we] are always experimenting with different 
approaches to keep search index as relevant and useful as possible, but we 
don’t have any new developments to announce”.

 * Google’s ‘mobilegeddon’ will shake up search results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/20/google-mobilegeddon-will-shake-up-mobile-search-results>
 