
The chief executive of the super indie All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, the company behind hits such as 
Peep Show and Skins, has accused Google TV of behaving "like a cowboy" for not 
sharing advertising revenue with content makers.

Steve Morrison said that with Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> moving into television, 
producers should receive a share of the income.

Speaking at the Royal Television Society international conference in London 
today in a session about video on demand, Morrison added: "We do think if our 
content is attracting a search and generating income and it is, that's why 
Google's doing it, then we should be allocated a share of that income."

He said that if someone searched via Google for an episode of Peep Show online 
"the first thing they get is a sponsored link from Seesaw". "Seesaw are paying 
Google, but Google are not paying us anything… Google is outside, like a 
cowboy," he added.

However, Matt Brittin, Google managing director of UK and Ireland operations, 
defended the US internet search giant, arguing that Google TV is "just putting 
the internet on the television".

He said "we don't like being described as a cowboy" and argued Morrison was 
risking "falling into the trap" of thinking of television and the internet as 
separate models.

Morrison replied that there needs to be a new way of pricing and packaging 
episodes of programmes online, depending on demand and how new they are.

He got out a plastic pot of fruit salad and a tinned one to illustrate his 
point, saying that the tin costs 80p, while the fruit salad costs £1.99, 
"because it's fresher, that's the key".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 