
GlaxoSmithKline <https://www.theguardian.com/business/glaxosmithkline> has 
teamed up with Google’s parent company Alphabet to develop miniature electronic 
implants for the treatment of asthma, diabetes and other chronic conditions.

GSK, Britain’s biggest drug company, said it would form a joint venture with 
Verily Life Sciences, a division ofAlphabet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/alphabet>, to work on research into 
bioelectronic medicines. GSK will own 55% of Galvani Bioelectronics, and Verily 
will hold 45%.

Galvani will be based at GSK’s global research and development centre at 
Stevenage, Hertfordshire, just north of London, and will have a second research 
hub at Verily’s base in San Francisco. The companies will combine their 
existing intellectual property rights and invest up to £540m over seven years 
if the collaboration meets certain goals.

GSK has been working on bioelectronic medicines since 2012 in a push to 
develop new patentable treatments as its Advair respiratory treatment faces 
competition from generic versions. It has invested $50m (£38m) in a venture 
capital fund for bioelectronics and provided funding for scientists outside the 
company working in the field.

Dr Google will see you now: Alphabet's forays into biotechnology
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/01/google-alphabet-gsk-forays-biotechnology>
Bioelectronic remedies attach battery-powered implants the size of a grain of 
rice or smaller to individual nerves to correct faulty electrical signals 
between the nervous system and the body’s organs.

GSK believes altering these nerve signals could open up the airways of asthma 
sufferers, reduce inflammation in the gut from Crohn’s disease and treat 
patients with a range of other chronic ailments such as arthritis. So far, the 
implants have only been tested on animals but the aim is to produce treatments 
that supplement or replace drugs that often come with side-effects.

GSK and Verily, renamed from Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> Life Sciences in December, said 
their collaboration would combine GSK’s drug development and understanding of 
disease biology with Verily’s expertise in miniature electronics, data and 
software for clinical purposes. The new company will initially employ about 30 
scientists, engineers and doctors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgoogle-gsk-bioelectronic-medicines-verily-life-sciences-alphabet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a361b3b23331a833cfd064b2f2cf27871b195ba%2F0_139_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Google%20and%20GSK%20form%20venture%20to%20develop%20bioelectronic%20medicines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgoogle-gsk-bioelectronic-medicines-verily-life-sciences-alphabet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Google%20and%20GSK%20form%20venture%20to%20develop%20bioelectronic%20medicines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fgoogle-gsk-bioelectronic-medicines-verily-life-sciences-alphabet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a361b3b23331a833cfd064b2f2cf27871b195ba%2F0_139_3508_2105%2F3508.jpg>
 An artist’s impression of a closeup of a bioelectronic implant ‘cuff’ wrapped 
around a bundle of nerves. Photograph: GSK/PA 
Kris Famm, GSK’s head of bioelectronics, said an advantage of bioelectronics 
would be that researchers should be able to apply it to more diseases as the 
technology develops. He said working with Verily would speed up this process 
and that he hoped to conduct the first tests on humans within three years.

Famm said: “We have to figure out how to interface devices with the small 
nerves in our bodies to find a new way to deliver therapies. We will build the 
tiny devices that lie at the centre of bringing these treatments to potential.

“The smaller the devices the less they will need to be charged and the more 
precise they are, and the more attractive this will be as an intervention. 
Hopefully in 10 years there will be a treatment option where your doctor will 
say ‘Why don’t you go for bioelectronic?’, and a surgeon will do a little 
procedure and it will help the organ to do what it should be doing.”

Moncef Slaoui, GSK’s chairman of global vaccines, will chair the new company’s 
board, which will also include Verily’s chief executive, Andrew Conrad, and 
Famm.

Galvani will be named after Luigi Aloisio Galvani, an 18th-century scientist 
whose study of a frog’s reactions paved the way for the study of neuroscience. 
The companies hope the joint venture will be in operation by the end of this 
year once it has been approved by US competition regulators.

GSK said last week it would invest £275m in its UK operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/27/gsk-says-britain-still-an-attractive-place-to-invest-brexit>
 and that Britain remained a good place to do business despite the vote to 
leave the EU. The company’s chief executive, Sir Andrew Witty, is due to leave 
in March 2017, making the Galvani venture one of his last deals at the company.


Verily is one of Alphabet’s most important long-term ventures. It is part of 
the tech giant’s lossmaking “other bets” divisionthat also includes Nest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/20/google-nest-aquisition-learning-thermostat>
, which develops household products connected to the internet.

Brian Otis, Verily’s chief technology officer, said: “This is an ambitious 
collaboration allowing GSK and Verily to combine forces and have a huge impact 
on an emerging field. Bioelectronic medicine is a new area of therapeutic 
exploration, and we know that success will require the confluence of deep 
disease biology expertise and new highly miniaturised technologies.”
 