
Hurled marker pens, upturned chairs and – perhaps still to come – thrown 
phones. The debris fromAndrew Rawnsley's new book 
<http://www.guardianbooks.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/qs_product_tbp?storeId=10401&catalogId=25501&langId=100&parentType=category&parentId=42105&productId=182271>
 lies heaped on the floor of the No 10 study. Although many of the sources are 
unnamed, it paints a compelling picture of a man with a temper. Still, and 
despite reports that Downing Street staff have called an anti-bullying 
helpline, there was nothing inyesterday's Observer serialisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/21/gordon-brown-abusive-treatment-staff>
 to suggest Gordon Brown had actually hit anyone. An unruffled Peter Mandelson 
sat onAndrew Marr's soft seats 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/andrew_marr_show/8526768.stm> yesterday 
and suggested that viewers would well understand that important people can get 
hot under the collar when they want important things done. Churchill and 
Thatcher had their rages, so perhaps the mess from Brown's can be cleared up 
and forgotten by polling day.

The great difficulty with this sanguine reading is that much of Mr Brown's 
fury does not seem to have been fired by any great cause. The Rawnsley 
revelation that will stick is that Mr Brown's anger is fed at root by an 
insecurity which also inhibits him in the core prime ministerial tasks – 
delegating and deciding. Time and again he is recorded as railing against a 
lack of information, a lack of good fortune and a lack of people he can trust. 
Time and again his overriding concern to dump blame on others damages the 
government he leads, and by extension also sets back his sincere ambitions to 
stamp out ignorance, squalor and want.

Around the election that wasn't in 2007, Rawn­sley records Brownite bellowing 
at No 10 aides and US pollsters. These are not people whose names are known in 
Derby North or Dudley West, so the ungentlemanly conduct they endured may carry 
no electoral price. The rage was less damaging in itself than damaging because 
Mr Brown used it to divert from the painful need to make up his mind. His 
flip-flopping over whether he needed a personal mandate shattered his 
reputation for solidity, and reflected the (still unresolved) anxiety about 
whether – after years in the shadows – he wanted to be anything more than Tony 
Blair mark II.

With a keener sense of what might go wrong than what might go right, Mr Brown 
has at times undermined the confidence and the authority of his ministers, with 
the result that his government has had a faltering flavour. Rawnsley records a 
ruinous obsession with reining in a perfectly reliable chancellor. After that 
disastrous non-election, he insisted on writing Alistair Darling's pre-budget 
himself, crassly copying Tory plans to cut inheritance tax in a tactical fix 
devoid of all strategy. He likewise shot Mr Darling down for no greater crime 
than telling the truthto the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/aug/30/alistairdarling.economy> 
about the financial crisis being the worst in 60 years. The prime minister 
quibbled over the detail of the remarks, but in truth he was unhappy that a 
cabinet colleague should have had the nerve to say something important without 
clearing it through No 10.

The first extracts from the book covers one episode where Mr Brown emerged in 
a more flattering light. In September 2008 the cashpoints were days from 
running dry, and in the desperate race to cobble together a banking rescue 
package the prime minister was bold and clear-sighted. An expert on finance, he 
was no doubt intellectually confident about the shape of the deal required, and 
on such a technical question he was less disabled than usual by grim fears 
about the public's view. In sum, he briefly led the way because he briefly felt 
secure.

Having weathered the financial storm and seen off the plotters, and now rising 
slightly in the polls, Mr Brown's operation is a smidgen less miserable than in 
the dog days of summer 2008. But no prime minister can govern well by 
frustrating every ministerial decision until he is 100% sure that every detail 
is exactly as he would wish. In the unlikely event that Mr Brown belatedly 
acquires a mandate of his own in the spring, it must be hoped that this will 
give him the confidence to lead and trust his team – confidence he has thus far 
sorely lacked.
 