
The government has said that it will look into the closure of more than 20 
libraries in Lancashire following complaints from local MPs.

Lancashire county council, which has blamed the closures on government cuts, 
confirmed in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/31/lancashire-county-council-library-closures>
that it was set to shut more than 20 local libraries, a move locals have 
described as “devastat[ing]”.

But following letters from two Conservative MPs  
<https://www.benwallace.org.uk/news/local-mp-continues-fight-library-decision>– 
Ben Wallace, member for Wyre and Preston North, and Paul Maynard, MP for 
Blackpool North and Cleveleys –complaining about the cuts, the Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport has confirmed that it will investigate the situation.

The outcome of consultation was announced so quickly I don't believe they had 
time to examine the evidence gathered
Paul Maynard MP 
“Obviously this is a first step and it’s important to recognise they are 
looking into the process of how things have been done,” said Maynard this 
morning. “One of my concerns was that the outcome of the consultation was 
announced so quickly that I don’t believe they had sufficient time to properly 
examine the evidence gathered, so was it genuine or not? “ The council had 
received more than more than 7,000 responses to its consultation about the 
libraries’ future.

Maynard said he was also keen for the government to investigate the level of 
local need, as required under the Public Libraries and Museums Act of 1964 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-on-libraries-as-a-statutory-service/libraries-as-a-statutory-service>
. “As someone who actually attended the Wirral enquiry, I know the inspector 
there had great concerns about the way the Wirral went about assessing the 
level of need,” said Maynard. “I don’t believe Lancashire has done a sufficient 
examination [of this].”

In 2009, a public inquiry into library closures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/oct/04/wirral-libraries-closure-rachel-cooke>
 in the Wirral found the council to be “in breach of its statutory duties 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/a-local-inquiry-into-the-public-library-service-provided-by-wirral-metropolitan-borough-council]>
 under the Public Libraries and Museums Act 1964, to provide ‘comprehensive and 
efficient public library services for all persons desirous to make use 
thereof’”, primarily because “ the council failed to make an assessment of 
local needs (or alternatively to evidence knowledge of verifiable local needs) 
in respect of its library services”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fgovernment-to-probe-lancashire-library-closures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76bce59def2e428536ae6cf878386ddbeaeb4487%2F0_0_5700_3800%2F5700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Government%20to%20probe%20'devastating'%20Lancashire%20library%20closures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fgovernment-to-probe-lancashire-library-closures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Government%20to%20probe%20%27devastating%27%20Lancashire%20library%20closures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fgovernment-to-probe-lancashire-library-closures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76bce59def2e428536ae6cf878386ddbeaeb4487%2F0_0_5700_3800%2F5700.jpg>
 The MPs’ challenge centres on whether Lancashire county council adequately 
assessed local needs. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Library use in England fell dramatically over last decade, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/16/library-use-in-england-fell-dramatically-over-last-decade-figures-show>
Maynard had written in September to Matt Hancock, minister for digital and 
culture, laying out his belief that Lancashire council’s library closures were 
being undertaken “without even considering the alternative avenues that could 
be open to them”. Maynard wrote: “I am deeply concerned that there has not been 
an adequate assessment of need,” calling for “a public inquiry to establish 
whetherLancashire county council <http://www.lancashire.gov.uk/> is in breach 
of its duties” under the 1964 libraries act.

He received a reply on Friday 
<https://twitter.com/PaulMaynardMP/status/784826303920934915>, in which new 
libraries minister Rob Wilson said the department had received “a number of 
representations concerning the revisions to Lancashire’s library service 
provision”. Wilson confirmed that the representations were “being treated as a 
formal complaint”, and that the DCMS had notified Lancashire of the situation.

“Officials will also request all the relevant information regarding proposed 
changes 
<http://lancashirecc.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=5b7e9830a63f40fab732971384d1a5b3>
 to the library services. The overarching question for the secretary of state [
Karen Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/14/is-there-more-to-karen-bradley-than-a-love-of-fiction-culture-minister>
] to consider is whether the public library services provided by the local 
authority remains ‘comprehensive and efficient’,” wrote Wilson. “There is no 
set timetable for the secretary of state to consider a complaint that a local 
authority may be failing to carry out its duties in accordance with the act ... 
all relevant detail will be carefully considered to enable the secretary of 
state to decide whether a local inquiry is necessary to resolve any real doubt 
about the council’s compliance with its statutory duty under the act.”

He added that it was “for the council’s elected members to decide whether or 
not to continue with the implementation of their plans, prior to the outcome of 
the secretary of state’s consideration of the complaint and determination as to 
whether or not to order a local inquiry”.

But David Borrow, Lancashire council’s deputy leader, told the Lancashire 
Evening Post 
<http://www.lep.co.uk/whats-on/arts/culture-secretary-steps-in-to-question-library-closures-1-8172186>
 that he was “happy” for the DCMS to look at the council’s work. “We have 
carried out a great deal of detailed work to ensure our proposals fulfil the 
council’s statutory duty to provide a comprehensive and efficient library 
service. I’m happy for them to be scrutinised by the secretary of state.The 
changes we’re making 
<http://lancashirecc.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=5b7e9830a63f40fab732971384d1a5b3>
 will contribute to huge savings the council needs to make while ensuring 
people still have good access to library services.”

A spokesperson for the DCMS said: “Local authorities have a statutory duty to 
provide a comprehensive and efficient library service. We have received 
representations about the proposed library changes by Lancashire County 
Council, which we are treating as an official complaint.”
 