
The Higher Education Statistics Agency 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/component/option,com_pubs/task,show_pub_detail/pubid,1/Itemid,286/>
 recently published data showing that in 2010/11 fewer state school pupils were 
admitted to Russell Group universities than in the previous year.

Does this mean that fewer state school pupils are achieving the right grades 
to get in? Perhaps – but perhaps they are going to other universities. 
According toHefce <http://hefce.ac.uk/pubs/hefce/2011/11_20/>, almost 9,000 UK 
students in 2009-10 achieved grades of AAB or above, but attended universities 
where less than 10% of students achieved such grades.

Some of these students have picked very specialist courses offered at only a 
handful of places. But the suspicion must be that many of these high achieving 
students were simply unaware that the experience and benefits of going to 
university differ enormously from one institution to another.

This is where the government's new initiative, the evocatively named KIS, 
comes in. KIS (orKey Information Sets 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/learning/infohe/kis.htm>) will appear on all university 
and college websites and are intended to help people choose the best university 
by providing information on graduate employment and salary prospects for every 
university course.

The theory is sound, but many people who need to see this information may not 
look at it. To get the information to the people who need it most,CentreForum 
<http://www.centreforum.org> has set out a number of actions that government 
can take.

The most innovative idea is to get personalised information to prospective 
students and their families. To get child tax credits – which will cover almost 
all access groups – parents tell the government their incomes. The government 
should use this information to calculate the maintenance grant and loan 
eligibility of all children covered.

The government could include young people's loan, fee and grant eligibility on 
the parents' tax credit statement, in very simple terms, with annual updates. 
This would be particularly relevant for parents with children aged 16 to 18 who 
are still in education, but could also be relevant to those with younger 
children to introduce parents to the idea and costs of higher education.

The government could even go further – by adding a URL that takes the parent 
(or their web-savvy offspring) to a personalised online grant and loan 
application form that already contained details of their income, address, and 
so on, and could be submitted with one mouse click. This would guarantee the 
child the fee and maintenance loan and grant amounts if they are accepted to a 
university that academic year. As well as giving a web address, the child tax 
credit would also have a QR code to take smart phone users straight to the form.

This approach – actively giving people information, rather than passively 
making it available – could make a real difference. It is also almost costless, 
so the government has no excuse not to act.

Gill Wyness is an education researcher at CentreForum 
<http://www.centreforum.org/>, the liberal think tank, and LSE 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 