
GPs are to test a new approach to diagnosing asthma 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Asthma/Pages/Introduction.aspx> following 
concerns that many people being treated for the conditiondo not have it 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2016/02February/Pages/Half-of-all-childhood-asthma-cases-are-overdiagnosed.aspx>
.


The body that determines good practice for clinicians in England, the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) <https://www.nice.org.uk/>, has 
already told doctors they mustback up their suspicions from patients’ symptoms 
with objective tests 
<https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/GID-CGWAVE0640/documents/interim-findings> 
before making any diagnosis.

Now it wants to see whether the tests – measuring how much and how fast a 
person breathesusing a spirometer 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Asthma/Pages/Diagnosis.aspx> – should routinely 
be backed up by other tests for any patient over five years old, including 
measuring levels of nitric oxide a patient is breathing out.

The GP trials will help determine new guidance on diagnosing and treating 
asthma for England next year. Across the UK, care for about 5.4 million people 
with the condition costs theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> about 
£1bn a year.

More than 1m people in UK may have been wrongly diagnosed with asthma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/28/1m-people-uk-wrongly-diagnosed-asthma>
Nice warned last year that up to 30% of people diagnosed with asthma did not 
show clear evidence of having the condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/28/1m-people-uk-wrongly-diagnosed-asthma>
, while a study of 650 children conducted in the Netherlands and reported in the
British Journal of General Practice <http://bjgp.org/content/66/644/e152>on 
Friday suggested half those diagnosed with the condition were unlikely to have 
had it. Only a few had had lung function tests.

But Asthma UK <https://www.asthma.org.uk/> warned parents of children with an 
asthma diagnosis or currently going through the diagnosis process not to stop 
giving them their medicine on the basis of the Dutch study, without talking to 
their doctor. It said the Netherlands, where the “small” research had taken 
place, was a country with a very different health system.

The use of spirometers for checking breath flow is commonplace, but nitric 
oxide <https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/dg12> checks tend to be used only in 
specialist asthma clinics. There will be an initial outlay for equipment and 
mouthpieces for these new tests, but Nice believes the overall cost per test, 
including the time of GP practice nurses, will be £13.66.

Volunteer GP surgeries will be prepared for the trials of a battery of 
assessments, which will run from May to October, although the Royal College of
GPs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> has already warned that extra 
funding will be needed to implement any new strategy that may result across the 
country.

Maureen Baker, who chairs the RCGP, said there was no one test that could 
definitively diagnose asthma, causing difficulties for GPs, particularly when 
some common symptoms were similar to those of other illnesses.

“Some useful diagnostic tests are already available in primary care in the UK, 
but we need increased investment so that we can broaden GP access to this 
equipment and undergo the training necessary to use it in the best interests of 
our patients.”

Dan Murphy, director of external affairs at Asthma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/asthma> UK, said: “Asthma has many complex 
causes, which is why it is very difficult to get a definitive diagnosis. It is 
also a highly variable condition that can change throughout someone’s life or 
even week by week, meaning treatment also needs to change over time.

“The annual asthma review meeting is the bedrock of asthma care to ensure 
people with asthma get the right medication and know when to use it, and yet 
last year over 1 million people skipped this vital appointment.”
 