
Statistics recently released across all British universities show that, over 
the past decade, the proportion of students gaining afirst class degree has 
nearly doubled <http://www.hesa.ac.uk/content/view/3103/>, from 11% in 2003-4 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=931&Itemid=161>
 to 19% in 2012-13. The proportion of students attaining a 2.1 has also 
increased.Research at Lancaster University's School of Management 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-25811702> argues that this simply reflects 
the rising quality of A-level students. Others have suggested that this may be 
evidence of "dishonesty", as universities chase league table recognition. Who 
is right?

The dishonesty argument hinges on university autonomy; a university that has 
degree awarding powers sets its own standards and could, in theory, manipulate 
them. In practice, though, there is a long-developed system of checks and 
balances that set levels of parity across broad networks of universities.

The external examination system is central to this. A broad range of external 
accrediting bodies, mostly for the professions, impose specific sets of 
requirements. And the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA) audits every university on 
a regular basis, looking in particular at the ways in which appropriate 
standards are implemented.

Every university that I know takes these assurance systems very seriously; in 
my university, I read every external examiner report for all our academic 
programmes. No system is perfect. But the argument that universities are 
dishonestly manipulating results is both lazy and ill-informed.

So why is the proportion of good degrees going up? Research such as the 
Lancaster study is important, because we don't know enough about the 
relationship between students' inherent abilities, the value that is added 
through the opportunities universities provide and the systems we use to 
measure these factors. There is no golden age of grading, despite nostalgia for 
a time when only a few students attained a first.

Back in the day, assessment took the form of an endurance race through five 
successive days of written papers and no-one would ever get more than 80%. It 
was never clear what was actually being assessed, other than the ability to 
remember a huge amount and write almost continually for five days. The stakes 
were much lower; since less than 10% of school levers went to any university, 
the employment advantage was gained by getting in, and getting out with 
something. People with third class degrees got jobs along with a reputation for 
valuing a good social life.

Today, this age of innocence is long gone. Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are schooled to worry about 
employment before they start university. With the majority of their 
contemporaries going on to post-compulsory education, the stakes are immensely 
higher and students work much harder. So one reason why there is an increasing 
proportion of graduates with good degrees is simply that they deserve them. 
Looked at it another way, it would be profoundly unfair to pile on all the 
pressure for attainment while continually moving the finishing line further 
towards the horizon.

In addition, assessment has become a lot more sophisticated, and appropriately 
so. There needs to be a sensible balance between formative assessment 
(coursework) and summative assessment (final examinations). Students today are 
not at university to be "filled up" with knowledge. Rather, they want the 
opportunity to develop advanced analytical techniques to make sense of an 
increasingly complex world, awash with information. This requires experiential 
learning, melding theory and principles with applications, and this in turn 
leads to a blend of assessment methods that measure students' abilities more 
closely. So golden age comparisons are setting very different worlds of 
learning against each other, as if they are comparable.

This said, the Lancaster study is, in itself, an inadequate explanation. 
Firstly, it misses the point that only about half of students in BritishHigher 
education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/higher-education> have 
A-levels. Significant numbers of students enter university from further 
education colleges, with vocational qualifications. Secondly, it ignores the 
compelling evidence – lined up by the Sutton Trust and in other studies – that 
A-level attainment is correlated with socioeconomic status and household 
income. And, of course, A-level assessment methods have themselves changed 
dramatically over the past decades. We cannot, then, turn to A-levels for a 
simple assurance nothing has changed.

What is needed? We are probably nearing the point where traditional degree 
classifications will be abandoned. We should rather look for reliable, secure 
and trusted ways of providing our students with comprehensive transcripts of 
everything they have done at university. Because employers increasingly demand 
all this additional information in any case, we need to find ways of providing 
them with the best possible means of expressing a graduate's full range of 
capabilities, work and attainment while at university. This would be fairer to 
our students, more useful to employers and better than an arcane system of 
degree classification that is outliving its usefulness.

Martin Hall is vice-chancellor of the University of Salford 
<http://www.salford.ac.uk/> – follow him on Twitter @VCSalford 
<https://twitter.com/VCSalford>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 