
You know that CV you wrote during college or university? Burn it and start 
again. I speak to graduates daily and around 90% of them dedicate one line of 
their CV to their degree, yet have five lines about their job in a pub. I 
interviewed someone recently who had two pages of retail work experience, but 
just 14 words about their degree and not even a mention of which university 
they attended. Does that represent you fully? Does that reflect the three-plus 
years you spent studying and self-motivating? No.

To help you stand the best chance of landing your dream job after university, 
here are my tips for writing the perfect graduate CV:

School-leavers and graduates: how to write your first CV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/school-leavers-graduates-how-to-write-first-cv>
What to include

Capitalise on what’s most impressive about you – your degree, your technical 
skills, that two-week internship. But don’t get complacent. Some of the worst 
(and shortest)CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> we see are from 
students at top universities. Your excellent degree will get you attention but 
if there’s nothing else to read, what sets you apart from the competition?

Does your sector require technical skills? If so, build a technical skills 
section. Mention the buzzwords, as recruiters will be looking for these, but 
expand further. If you’ve built something inC# 
<https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-gb/library/67ef8sbd.aspx>, mention it. If you 
can use pivot tables, macros or v-lookups in Excel (one of the most important 
pieces of software across all job sectors), put it on your CV.

Be aware that if you do not mention your A-level grades or the university you 
attended, for example, recruiters may conclude that you have something to hide.

Above all, be honest. You want to present the most professional version of 
yourself in job applications, but you don’t want to lie because you will get 
caught out at the interview stage.

The order

The order of your CV is important – I can’t stress it enough. The most 
important aspects of your CV should be on the first page. You’ll want to catch 
a recruiter’s eye early on to entice them to read the rest. Remember that when 
using this template, everything is open to your own interpretation and needs to 
be tailored towards you. The most important part of your CV should have the 
most written about it and be presented as early as possible – essentially, 
what’s going to get you the job? Below are two examples of how to order your CV:

The technical CV

 * Personal statement 
 * Education 
 * Technical skills 
 * Work experience 
 * Other skills 
 * Extracurricular/positions of responsibility (optional) 
 * Interests 
 * References 
Your degree is your biggest selling point here, so the more detail you include 
the better. For example, if you hope to work in the analytics sector, you could 
mention information about quantitative-led projects detailing specific software 
and techniques used. Extracurricular pursuits are still important to highlight 
even on a technical CV, as employers like to see some personality.

The non-technical CV

 * Personal statement 
 * Education 
 * Relevant work experience 
 * Other work experience 
 * Extracurricular/positions of responsibility 
 * Skills 
 * Interests 
 * References 
Arts graduates should emphasise their academic achievements, but also mention 
relevant work experience and internships. Excellent communication skills are 
highly sought after too.

If you are looking at salesor management schemes, be sure to capitalise on any 
positions of responsibility or leadership

Length

Your CV should be two pages. If it’s too short, you appear inexperienced; too 
long, you seem verbose. Don’t be afraid to change the margins as long as it 
looks symmetrical and prints well.

Formatting

 * All typefaces should be the same and sizing should be consistent. 
 * If you’re capitalising key phrases or sector names, make sure you have done 
so throughout. 
 * Make sure everything is in line. 
 * Bullet points must be short. 
 * Ensure the spacing is consistent. 
If design isn’t your thing, get a friend who knows Word well to check your CV 
for inconsistent formatting.

Your CV is a vital door-opener, so don’t underestimate its importance. And 
remember, it must be tailored towards each job you apply for.

 * Download this free template 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/09/CVTemplate.docx.docx> (pdf) for help 
writing your first CV.

Steve Agace is the director of graduate recruitment at the Graduate 
Recruitment Bureau <http://www.grb.uk.com/>.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 