
Researchers believe they have found the grave of a man who could be considered 
the first black male slave freed by Abraham Lincoln, after tracking his final 
resting place to the cemetery of a former Minnesota psychiatric hospital.

William Henry Costley was just 10 months old in 1841 when Lincoln, who was 
still a young lawyer, won an Illinois supreme court case freeing Costley’s 
mother from indentured servitude – a status historians say would have been akin 
to enslavement for the black woman and child at that time. That was 22 years 
before Lincoln, as president, issued the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring 
slaves in rebel states not under Union control free.

Nance Legins-Costley and her son William were from Pekin, a central Illinois 
community about 130 miles south-west of Chicago, which is what drew the 
interest of a local amateur historian, Carl Adams. Adams, who now lives in 
Stuttgart, Germany, spent years researching her and her children’s lives. Last 
year he published Nance: Trials of the First Slave Freed by Abraham Lincoln – a 
True Story of Nance Legins-Costley.

In his book, Adams writes that after winning her lengthy legal battle for 
freedom, Legins-Costley, who had been born to slaves and sold twice before 
Lincoln took up her cause, lived to a ripe old age in Pekin. Military records 
helped Adams retrace her son’s steps, but finding his gravesite required the 
help of a curator at the Abraham Lincoln presidential library and museum in 
Springfield, Illinois, and a historical researcher in Minnesota.

“We are 99.9% certain that this is William H Costley,” Adams said of the 
gravesite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Fabraham-lincoln-slavery-grave-minnesota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F18%2F1437241798419%2F5c46e3fc-b933-4fd1-b09a-11df43f9d177-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grave%20of%20first%20male%20slave%20freed%20by%20Lincoln%20rediscovered%2C%20experts%20believe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Fabraham-lincoln-slavery-grave-minnesota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grave%20of%20first%20male%20slave%20freed%20by%20Lincoln%20rediscovered%2C%20experts%20believe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F18%2Fabraham-lincoln-slavery-grave-minnesota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F18%2F1437241798419%2F5c46e3fc-b933-4fd1-b09a-11df43f9d177-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The grave of a man considered the first black male slave freed by Abraham 
Lincoln is shown at the Rochester state hospital cemetery in Rochester, 
Minnesota. Photograph: Scott Jacobson/AP 
William Costley enlisted as a private in the 29th Regiment of US Colored 
Troops from Illinois in 1864, three years after the civil war started following 
the election of Lincoln as president.

Costley was wounded during the war, and after Confederate general Robert E Lee 
surrendered in April 1865, Costley’s regiment was dispatched to Galveston, 
Texas. Adams said he may have witnessed General Gordon Granger’s 19 June 1865 
declaration there that the state’s 250,000 slaves were now free. That date is 
now celebrated as the holiday Juneteenth.

In 1870, an all-white jury acquitted Costley of murder in the fatal shooting 
of a man considered disreputable in the community. Costley’s defense was that 
he killed him while protecting a woman.

Costley moved to Iowa and later to Minnesota, where his health declined. A war 
wound, a head injury he suffered as a teenager and a case of sunstroke in 1887 
eventually left him an invalid. He died in Minnesota in 1888, Adams said.

Adams said Costley’s pension records show that he had been sent to an insane 
asylum in Rochester, but Adams couldn’t determine where Costley had been 
buried, so he enlisted the help of Rich Arpi, a staffer with the Ramsey County 
Historical Society who also does independent research. Arpi found the Rochester 
state hospital’s records for a black patient named “William H Crossley”, whose 
grave was marked by a number at the institution’s cemetery in what’s now a city 
park until it was replaced recently by a “Crossley” headstone.

Besides spellings that varied even within the pension and hospital records, 
there were other discrepancies that Adams needed to clear up. The dates of 
death were slightly different – 1 October in the hospital records, 2 October in 
the pension records. But the birth years were five years off. The researchers 
eventually concluded it had to be Costley’s grave. Adams said Costley was 
illiterate, and may have been incoherent when admitted, so the spelling 
apparently just got jumbled along the way.

“I think it is so likely that it’s nearly a sure thing,” said James Cornelius, 
curator of the Lincoln Collection at the Lincoln Library and Museum, who 
consulted with Adams.

Cornelius said Adams has done a remarkable job of pulling together the history 
of Costley and his family and resolving the discrepancies to locate his grave 
given that “vanishingly few records” exist on most people who lived on the 
margins of society because they were slaves, poor or illiterate, as Costley was.
 