
What is it that makes the biggest players shine in the most important moments?

How is it that Aaron Rodgers can scramble with the season about to end, turn 
to the most awkward throwing position he could and heave a touchdown pass half 
the length of a football field? What lets Larry Fitzgerald catch a pass in 
overtime then run through what seems like the entire Packers defense to set up 
a winning score?

The best thing about playoff football in the modern era is the greatness that 
comes from desperation. By now we know what Rodgers can do with a football as 
time is running out. His game-winning heave in Detroit a few weeks ago already 
stood as perhaps his finest play. But Saturday, with the season dying and the 
clock running out, he was even better. After the game he talked about the 
finality that comes with the end of a season, the reality of sitting one day 
with cherished team-mates on a road trip and then suddenly going home forever. 
The push to keep the team together a few days more was intense. He had to find 
a way to get the game to overtime.
NFL (@NFL) 
Aaron Rodgers: 2 Hail Marys. 1 season. Here's both of them, side by side. 
#GBvsAZ <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GBvsAZ?src=hash> #GBvsDET 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GBvsDET?src=hash> https://t.co/4292H7uHYd 
<https://t.co/4292H7uHYd>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/688595783726153728> January 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/688595783726153728> 
Fitzgerald knows he is the energy that drives the Cardinals. He talked about 
it late Saturday – after his touchdown on a shovel pass in overtimegave Arizona 
a 26-20 victory over Green Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/17/aaron-rodgers-hail-mary-in-vain-as-cardinals-beat-packers-in-all-time-thriller>
 in the divisional round of the NFL playoffs. Somehow, after Rodgers had just 
tied the game on the Hail Mary, he had to get the ball, he had to do something.

Aaron Rodgers' Hail Mary in vain as Cardinals beat Packers in all-time thriller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/17/aaron-rodgers-hail-mary-in-vain-as-cardinals-beat-packers-in-all-time-thriller>
What is it about the biggest moments that brings out the biggest plays? 
Fitzgerald could sense his quarterback Carson Palmer was in trouble on that 
first possession of overtime. He did the only thing he knew: twisting, 
contorting himself, trying to get open. Then when Palmer threw his way he got 
the ball and began to run. As he sprinted, trying to avoid lunging Packers 
defenders, he couldn’t have imagined how magnificent this must have looked on 
television – the darting and dodging – all he could think of was the end zone. 
How quickly could he end the game?

Then, with the Cardinals just short of the goal line, they called for the 
shovel pass, the quick toss to Fitzgerald who was to run through the middle of 
the Packers defense and into the end zone.
NFL (@NFL) 
This is the play before The Play after The Other Play: Larry Fitzgerald starts 
OT with a 75-yard catch#BeRedSeeRed 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BeRedSeeRed?src=hash> https://t.co/PQIxOy1FMX 
<https://t.co/PQIxOy1FMX>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/688585012598329344> January 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/688585012598329344> 
“When you get your number called, the shovel, my eyes lit up in the huddle,” 
he later said.

What is it that brings these biggest plays in the most dire of moments? 
Fitzgerald contemplated everything that had happened before overtime, the way 
Rodgers had snatched away the Cardinals victory with one last enormous heave to 
the end zone and shook his head.

“He’s the reigning MVP of the league for a reason,” Fitzgerald said. “The guy 
can flat out play his butt off.”

A moment later Fitzgerald added: “We just wanted to respond.”

Years from now, when people talk about the greatest playoff games, they will 
remember the Saturday night in the far west suburbs of Phoenix when two of the 
best players of their time made the biggest plays at the most desperate 
moments. They will remember Rodgers scramble from his own end zone and the pass 
that set up the Hail Mary and then, of course, the final heave itself that 
seemed practiced so perfectly the way the ball flew and Jeff Janis was in 
perfect position to grab it. And they will remember, too, Fitzgerald’s catch 
and mad race to the goal line – the one that set up the last shovel pass.

After the game, Rodgers said he didn’t really know exactly who was in the end 
zone or where the ball would land when he threw it. This is probably an 
exaggeration. Even as he was lunging to his left, stumbling toward the ground 
he seemed to have a sense of exactly how much pressure to put on the pass and 
where Janis was likely to be. The throw was too precise; Janis was in too ideal 
a place.

Sure they have worked on this. Anyone who has been to an NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> practice has seen the last moments 
after the workout when the quarterbacks throw exactly these passes to their 
receivers. But the beauty of the Rodgers throw was the calm with which he made 
it. The Cardinals were blitzing, many quarterbacks would have panicked. He made 
it look like he and Janis were playing catch in the yard.

Fitzgerald appeared just as at ease when he caught the ball from Carson Palmer 
in overtime and then took off. It was almost as if he was faster in overtime 
than he had been for the entire 60 minutes before. Desperation does this. It 
makes the blur of rushing bodies look clearer. The best players always talk 
about making the game slow down.

As everything turned into a jumble on Saturday, Aaron Rodgers and Larry 
Fitzgerald made the game slow down. And for several minutes, two of the best 
players in the game made the biggest plays no one will ever forget.
 