
For many years the Great Lakes region of central Africa has hosted the world's 
largest number of displaced people. The main refugee-producing countries have 
been Rwanda and Burundi, two landlocked and tiny nations characterised by 
persistent conflict between Hutu and Tutsi ethnic factions.

Although bitter rivalry has existed between Hutus and Tutsis for decades, the 
shooting down of a plane carrying both Burundian and Rwandan leaders in the 
spring of 1994 led to an eruption of violence in both countries. The outflow of 
more than 2 million Rwandans in the wake of the 1994 genocide was an exodus of 
unprecedented size and swiftness. The international community's failure to 
respond effectively set in motion further cycles of conflict in the region, 
including a war in the Democratic Republic of Congo that has claimed more than 
3 million lives and caused more than 1 million more people to flee. Less 
publicised is Burundi's bitter 15-year conflict, characterised by widespread 
atrocities on the civilian population, including systematic acts of murder, 
rape, and torture.

After years of being the primary host to the region's massive refugee 
populations, Tanzania has been leading efforts to establish effective 
power-sharing in Burundi and Rwanda. Signs of improvement have certainly come; 
but as nations are working together to build peace, so refugee populations have 
been encouraged to return home, increasingly seen as an unwelcome reminder of 
the region's violent past. But the Great Lakes remains a volatile region, with 
ongoing conflict in the Congo and many Burundians concerned that next year's 
elections could lead to a resumption of violence.

â€¢ This article was amended on 20 November 2009. The original said that the 
plane carrying leaders from Burundi and Rwanda was shot down in 1993. This has 
been corrected.
 