
Green Room has been making people sick. People have said they’ve stopped 
breathing during the film; that watching it made them feel unsafe. When he read 
the script for the first time,Patrick Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/patrick-stewart> was so unsettled he 
stopped after 30 pages to ensure all his windows and doors were locked, then 
poured himself a scotch (once he’d read the rest, he signed up immediately to 
play the film’s merciless neo-Nazi Darcy). Jeremy Saulnier loves all of this. 
He likes upsetting people.

Green Room review - gruesomely effective neo-Nazis vs rockers horror
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/green-room-review-horror-cannes-film-festival-2015-patrick-stewart>
Green Room is a nasty piece of work: a taut, vicious little siege film. It 
delivers on a promise: in 2013, Saulnier’sBlue Ruin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hCXRTdzkDas> felt new. A sticky thriller about 
a vagrant blunderingly avenging his parents’ murder, it was an intentionally 
clumsy yet pretty piece that didn’t follow formula. Hearteningly, Saulnier’s 
much anticipated followup is even more uncomfortable, drawing inspiration from 
the exploitation films Saulnier grew up loving, with the irresistible addition 
of a deplorable Patrick Stewart bringing the pain.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVpJeAw2PvRc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVpJeAw2PvRc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVpJeAw2PvRc&media=>
It gets going quickly: we meet young hardcore punk band the Ain’t Rights, 
struggling across the Pacific North-west. A last-minute booking finds them 
playing a backwater dive that turns out to be skinhead central, full of 
neo-Nazis, and when one of the band stumbles into a murder scene, things fall 
apart. Faced with genuine brutality, our kids find themselves exceptionally out 
of their depth, and Saulnier goes to town as the punks, pitted against the 
armed fascists, have no choice but to go primal. “Things,” sighs Stewart’s 
Darcy as people start getting hurt, “have gone south.”

Saulnier, from Alexandria, Virginia, grew up making lo-fi monster movies in 
his parents’ back yard. As he got older, the films got bigger, and his first 
professional feature, the 2007 comedy horrorMurder Party 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qI_DqgxNR7U>, had a bit of buzz, though hardly 
enough to bring in the big bucks. Saulnier, then 30 with two kids, took a 
strategic decision: he stepped back from features, went into corporate and 
commercial film-making to develop his skills and pay the bills. But as the 
years went by, he started to become scared of losing traction as a director, 
and decided to go for broke. Self-funding Blue Ruin with his wife, he put 
$180,000 on a credit card and raised $38,000 via Kickstarter – just enough to 
go into production. The risk paid off: the film was critically lauded, and 
Saulnier was offered sizeable studio projects. But then he went and turned them 
down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ab104ee0413204dc80486464272b0fa4a84eed0%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20Room%3A%20inside%20the%20punk%20Patrick%20Stewart%20thriller%20that's%20making%20people%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20Room%3A%20inside%20the%20punk%20Patrick%20Stewart%20thriller%20that%27s%20making%20people%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ab104ee0413204dc80486464272b0fa4a84eed0%2F0_0_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Imogen Poots in Green Room. Photograph: Allstar/Altitude Film Entertainment 
“I could have done much bigger movies after Blue Ruin,” he smiles, “but the 
last thing I ever wanted to do was replicate what I’d done with that film.”

Blue Ruin review – a dignified revenger's tragedy
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/01/blue-ruin-review> 
Tonally? “Yeah,” he says. “Some people were disappointed that I went this 
route, but I had to expel this demon. I had to makeGreen Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/green-room>. I could try to do my first 
studio movie, or I could go back to make a movie for all my hardcore friends. I 
dedicated the movie to them.”

Saulnier was on the frontline of the US punk scene in the early 1990s, singing 
in the band No Turn On Fred. Saulnier, who looks like Eric Bana and makes for 
calm but confident company, says he was a jock who hated sports, but loved 
physical exertion, which was hardcore’s draw. He’d “get all up in the pit,” 
often getting beaten up. The Ain’t Rights’ gig in Green Room highlights his 
reverence for the scene; as the band play, Saulnier films the moshpit violence 
in ecstatic, operatic slo-mo.

Then, though, the violence gets real, the venue becoming an actual 
battleground. And Green Room’s pain is unflinching. You feel it. Saulnier hates 
seemingly inconsequential Hollywood violence, and believes cinema has a 
responsibility to make it count.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19357fa809f3403b20cd9ba7c74822d14eda1953%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20Room%3A%20inside%20the%20punk%20Patrick%20Stewart%20thriller%20that's%20making%20people%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20Room%3A%20inside%20the%20punk%20Patrick%20Stewart%20thriller%20that%27s%20making%20people%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19357fa809f3403b20cd9ba7c74822d14eda1953%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Alia Shawkat and Anton Yelchin perform with the Ain’t Rights in Green Room. 
Photograph: Scott Green 
“Cinematic violence is kinetic, visual, and, until recently with all the 
goddamn CG, very tactile,” he says. “I’ve no idea why when lion cubs play they 
pretend to kill each other. It’s the safe space for violence, the cinema. But 
the violence in my movies has to be coupled with an emotional component. I’ll 
watch movies and be completely disgusted by acts of violence, but I try to 
couple mine with a narrative thrust, so you’re on this thrilling journey and 
it’s intense and immediate and it serves as a way to up the stakes where life 
or death means a heightened storytelling vantage point. I don’t get off on 
movies that are about unmarried couples cheating on each other. It just does 
not register with me. I’m very happy in my house; my wife and I have three 
beautiful daughters, and they put us through the wringer. But when I sit down 
and watch a movie I want something more than a mid-20s sob story about painting 
a fucking apartment.”

Patrick Stewart: 'I can store emotions. No experience is ever wasted'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/patrick-stewart-x-men-twitter> 
Saulnier does put his unlikely heroes through the wringer, and with an almost 
sadistic glee; he loves throwing seemingly inept people into extreme situations.

“I like films that are grounded,” he says. “Blue Ruin downscaled the revenge 
genre to this everyman level. I like to watch him squirm. Same with Green Room: 
you have this very cinematic traditional situation, but downscaled to some very 
unlucky kids in a punk band. Just to see how real humans might operate in that 
traditional space. You’re used to seeing some badass with a secret past kicking 
ass and having some kind of expertise or tradecraft to lean on. I don’t give my 
protagonists that background, they have to just figure it out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2378d587a5014cc58c2e4b197b1d86d48463bf%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20Room%3A%20inside%20the%20punk%20Patrick%20Stewart%20thriller%20that's%20making%20people%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20Room%3A%20inside%20the%20punk%20Patrick%20Stewart%20thriller%20that%27s%20making%20people%20sick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F10%2Fpatrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2378d587a5014cc58c2e4b197b1d86d48463bf%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Anton Yelchin and Imogen Poots in Green Room. Photograph: Allstar 
Green Room has more fun than Blue Ruin; Saulnier has more people to watch 
squirm, for starters. One of the ways he has evolved as a film-maker, he says, 
is in creating on-screen tension. He studied audiences as they watched Blue 
Ruin, watching how they responded to its most tense scenes, and wanted to go 
further. “It’s a very hard thing to achieve with an audience. Can you make them 
sweat? I fed off of that. That’s something you can’t just decide to do – you 
have to really craft it. And I wanted to ratchet that up 10 times for Green 
Room. It was an exercise in tension-building. Most of the craft in this film 
comes before all hell breaks loose and blood is shed, when it’s just people 
talking in a room. There’s not much going on but it’s the tension that’s slowly 
mounting, that becomes unbearable. I wanted to just cut loose and make a really 
aggressive genre film, and celebrate my cinematic history and my brief foray 
into the hardcore scene. The film fills a void no one else could fill, and 
that’s what’s really satisfying to a film-maker.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpatrick-stewart-sketch-what-has-the-echr-ever-done-for-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Stewart%20sketch%3A%20what%20has%20the%20ECHR%20ever%20done%20for%20us%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpatrick-stewart-sketch-what-has-the-echr-ever-done-for-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Stewart%20sketch%3A%20what%20has%20the%20ECHR%20ever%20done%20for%20us%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpatrick-stewart-sketch-what-has-the-echr-ever-done-for-us-video&media=>
Patrick Stewart sketch: what has the ECHR ever done for us? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/apr/25/patrick-stewart-sketch-what-has-the-echr-ever-done-for-us-video>
He hopes the film he makes next will be even more challenging, but very much 
cut from the same cloth. His childhood friend Macon Blair, who appears in Green 
Room and starred in Blue Ruin, has written Hold The Dark, adapting it from 
William Giraldi’s novel, set in the Alaskan wilderness, about a hunter on the 
trail of some wolves who snatched a child. “It’s a very elevated human story,” 
enthuses Saulnier. “With a lot of violence. It’s a huge step up. We’re gonna go 
for movie stars.”

And, presumably, he’s going to make them squirm, too.

Green Room is in cinemas from Friday May 13
 