
Q My daughter has just bought a new home with a laminate floor in the lounge. 
Everything appears OK, but there is a strange peppery smell, and we cannot 
trace the source. Could this be the formaldehydes gassing off? Any ideas as to 
how I could check this out?
Brenda Lever

A I suspect this peppery smell is the result of recently cut MDF - a 
constituent part of most laminate flooring. As the floor is cut, the speed of 
the blade scorches the material and the smell lingers, emanating from the sawn 
areas. My advice is to ventilate the room and vacuum regularly - the smell will 
slowly dissipate. During a contract, I once tried to remove this smell at 
source by vacuuming the dust straightaway from the cutting blade, only to find 
that hot embers had also been sucked up, igniting the dust inside the machine. 
Plumes of smoke began belching out of the client's cherished vacuum cleaner, 
the cable of which was tangled with every tool and ladder in the room. Needless 
to say, this contract did not end at all well, so please vacuum carefully.

Q Our house was built in 1908 and has a beautiful front door and frame, both 
with stained-glass panels. Both the door and the frame need replacing, as the 
wood in both is rotten. Please suggest where we might look for a professional 
to replace them, including using the existing glass in the new door and frame.
Annie Minihan

A The front door and threshold is an important symbolic area, and I commend 
you for wanting to restore the original door. This can be a difficult and 
expensive task to pull off, as it's likely that the old door and frame have 
warped and twisted. Your best bet is to find a local joiner who would work with 
a glazier to restore your door. Contact the institute of carpenters at
central-office.co.uk <http://www.central-office.co.uk> to find a local 
tradesperson. An alternative may be to scour a local reclaim yard for 
similar-type doors and frames. Go armed with the dimensions and a photo of your 
door, and look for a door that's just slightly too big so that it can be cut to 
size.

Â· If you have a decorating question for Oliver, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk
 <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 