
The photo above, taken at the Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> Guardian and Evening News stables 
at Broughton Lane in Salford, commemorates the retirement of the delivery 
horses in 1952.

The company built the stables in 1896. It was an imposing red brick building, 
described in the Guardian’s 1955-56 working report as “magnificent”. It had a 
decorative facade including a terracotta frieze of acanthus leaves, 
chequerboard tiles and a classical style entrance with a winged pediment 
supported by pilasters. It was clearly intended to impress.


Centenary photograph album: teaching resource from the GNM Archive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/centenary-album-resource-gnm-archive>
A sense of pride in the Broughton Lane stables is evident in the photo of the 
stables staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/centenary-staff-album#img-9> 
in the 1921 Guardian centenary photo album. They stand upright (or sit a little 
more uncomfortably on blankets) in the stable yard. They are dressed for the 
occasion mainly in three piece suits rather than the heavy working jackets seen 
on the drivers in the 1952 photograph, but several of the men hold the flat 
caps worn by delivery drivers in their hands. All of them have flowers in their 
button holes.


In his biography of the Guardian, David Ayerst notes that the horses were one 
of the few things about the newspaper business that Russell Allen, proprietor 
of theManchester Evening News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/manchester-evening-news>, enjoyed. He was 
said to be a regular visitor to the stables, and exceptionally proud of the 
Welsh cobs, which he deemed far superior to the hackneys employed by the News’ 
competitor, the Manchester Evening Chronicle. Ayerst vigorously describes the 
papers’ horses rushing across the city: “The beautifully groomed horses, 
drawing high two-wheeled carts, smartly painted in the livery of Cross street 
or Withy Grove (where the rival newspapers were) made indeed a splendid sight 
as they raced one another, threading in and out of the traffic in their 
determination to be first to deliver each new edition of their paper to the 
news-agents and street-sellers.”


Ayerst’s description highlights why the animals were so valuable to the 
company, especially to the Evening News. Though the horses were used by both 
newspapers, they were crucial to the evening paper for their ability to weave 
through the traffic and be first to get the the half-time football scores and 
racing results to the newsagents. Allen also prized the pigeons kept by the 
Evening News, which were used to deliver local sports results faster than the 
telephone network could.


Building the stables allowed the company to increase its stock of horses and 
carts. Numbers reached their peak before the first world war, at around 64 
horses and 48 carts, but after the war, as motorised vehicles became more 
common, the horses dramatically decreased in number, and had to share their 
stables with the cars, vans and mechanics. By the beginning of the second world 
war the size of the stables had shrunk to just 20 horses and 26 carts. During 
petrol rationing, the horses were once again found useful, but their numbers 
continued to dwindle, until in 1950 there were only 16 left. By contrast, the 
number of motor vehicles used in that year increased to 90.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fguardian-delivery-horses-teaching-resource-gnm-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611618572%2F3d9d4174-c0df-4442-bfda-bb45dbbeb3fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20delivery%20horses%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20resource%20Oct%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fguardian-delivery-horses-teaching-resource-gnm-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20delivery%20horses%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20resource%20Oct%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fguardian-delivery-horses-teaching-resource-gnm-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611618572%2F3d9d4174-c0df-4442-bfda-bb45dbbeb3fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Manchester Guardian and Evening News delivery van in 1950. Photograph: 
Guardian News & Media Archive 
There seems to have been great affection for the horses and the period of the 
papers that they represented. The last page of the 1952 issue of the Guardian 
working report is given to a commemoration of the horses, a playful first 
person piece entitled “The day the horses went”, written “By One of ’Em”. It 
laments the loss of “the noblest workers the Guardian and News ever had” and 
explains their legacy: “We horses linked the two great journals with the past. 
We guided their destinies, at least as far as the railway stations”. The piece 
also notes “We’d only been gone six months when they changed the front page of 
the Guardian”, referring to the fact that in the same year that the horses left 
the company, the Guardian radically altered its front page to includenews 
rather than advertising for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-august-2011>
, and modernised the masthead and the look of the paper.


Guardian working reports: teaching resource from the GNM Archive November 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/guardian-working-reports-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
The working report for 1955-56 details the history of the Broughton Lane 
stables and their transformation, 60 years after they were first built, into 
“probably the largest private garage in Manchester”, the modern site replete 
with underground petrol tanks, a tyre store and a vehicle inspection pit. The 
dominance of motorised delivery is clear in the remark that “With a fleet of 
nearly 200 motor vehicles we can make good use of it.”

The transition from stables to garage at Broughton Lane reflects a period of 
wider modernisation and transformation at the Guardian. Later in the same 
decade that news appeared on the front page for the first time,Manchester was 
dropped from the newspaper’s title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-september-2011>
. By the beginning of the 1960s printing in London had begun and the Guardian 
was becoming a truly national publication.

The catalogue for the GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> is 
available to browsehere <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>. 
Please seethis page <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for 
further information on the archive collections and how to access them.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.

Every effort has been made to locate the copyright owner(s) of the images 
displayed on this page in order to obtain their permission to publish them. If 
you have further information concerning these images, please send an email to
archives@theguardian.com <mailto:archives@theguardian.com>.

 