
The first edition of the Manchester Guardian Weekly, as it was then known, was 
published on Friday 4 July 1919. Few records relating to the foundation of the 
Weekly have survived but the Guardian historian, David Ayerst, notes that the 
then editor of the Manchester Guardian,Charles Prestwich Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott>, took 
the step to launch an international edition of the newspaper to provide a 
British liberal voice in the United States following their increasing 
isolationism after the first world war.

EJ Phillips who had worked as a writer at the Guardian since 1900 was 
appointed editor of the Weekly and responsibility for launching the newspaper 
was given to new employee, WJ Lascelles (as the then circulation manager was on 
honeymoon). The Weekly contained material from the daily Manchester Guardian 
that was deemed of interest and independent of time to its international 
readership.

At the time of its launch a number of other newspapers had weekly editions, 
indeed an advert for The Times Weekly features in the first edition of the 
Manchester Guardian Weekly. However, other weekly newspapers had a tendency to 
be aimed at British citizens living abroad. The Manchester Guardian Weekly was 
different in this respect, as Ayerst notes: "from the beginning much of the 
overseas circulation of the Manchester Guardian Weekly was among people to whom 
England had never been home. What its readers had in common was not a community 
of blood but a community of political faith."

The first edition of the Weekly was produced on lead type printing press from 
theManchester Guardian and Evening News offices at Cross Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/cross-street-journal-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 in Manchester. The newspaper was more compact than the daily newspaper and 
unlike the daily it did not have any advertisements on the front page - 
although these did appear later. Initially the Weekly was available on 3, 6 and 
12 month subscriptions and copies could be obtained direct from the Manchester 
Guardian or overseas from news agencies and book sellers in Canada, 
Australasia, South Africa, Japan, China, France and India.
 Subscription form for the Manchester Guardian Weekly published in the first 
edition on 4 July 1919. Photograph: Guardian 
Like today's Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly> the first 
edition contained a variety of international and home news, comment, special 
reports and letters. The news in the week of its first edition was dominated by 
the aftermath of the first world war and in particular, the signing of the 
Treaty of Versailles on 28 June 1919 which officially ended the conflict. The 
Weekly devoted eight of its 20 pages to news and comment on the signing of the 
Treaty which included reports from London, Paris, Berlin, Tallin (formerly 
Reval) and New York. The Weekly also included comment pieces on topics which 
highlighted the political, economic and social consequences of the war such as 
Russia and its border states and the UK's Aliens Restriction Bill.

'The Peace Signed', Manchester Guardian Weekly, 4 July 1919, page 4 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1402567213479/First-Guardian-Weekly---pag.pdf>

Other news covered in the first edition included the introduction of the 
Wartime Prohibition Act in the United States (the precursor to theNational 
Prohibition Act 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/gcsebitesize/history/mwh/usa/prohibitionrev1.shtml>
 which banned the sale, production, importation, and transportation of alcohol 
from 1920-1933), press censorship in Ireland, the first attempt to return cross 
the Atlantic by the British airship R34 and a severe earthquake in Northern 
Italy.

Front page of the first Manchester Guardian Weekly, 4 July 1919 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1402567015293/Front-page-Guardian-Weekly-.pdf>

The Weekly proved to be a success across the globe with the highest recorded 
sales outside of the UK in the United States. The Weekly also had high 
circulation figures in Germany after the first world war. Ayerst notes that it 
was well read in 1920s Germany by men who had been influential in the Wiemar 
Republic, stating: "it was important that, with the German press muzzled, 
somebody should be able to tell them what was happening in their own country".

Today the Guardian Weekly is one of the world's oldest and best selling weekly 
international newspapers, providing international news, politics, special 
reports, comment and culture to more than 200,000 readers in 173 countries.

The GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> contains 
a variety of records relating to the Guardian Weekly including copies of the 
first and early editions, circulation and sales figures, interviews with former 
staff and papers concerning the printing and distribution of the Weekly in 
Germany after the second world war. These records can be consulted in the GNM 
Archive reading room by appointment and more information can be found on the
archive catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>.

Further reading

The Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly>

The Guardian Weekly at 90: a short history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/jul/15/guardian-weekly-at-90>

The Guardian Weekly - a brief history
 <https://www.theguardian.com/GWeekly/Brief_History/0,,210684,00.html>

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

Resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers>
 