
"It is a good thing that those who are employed in the service of our company 
should know as much as possible about the business which earns for them their 
bread and butter." This is howJohn Russell Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/apr/06/from-the-archives-obituary-john-russell-scott>
, founder and chairman of the Scott Trust and managing director of the 
Manchester Guardian and Evening News Ltd, introduced the first working report 
for the company in 1947.

The report was described by JR Scott as "an experiment". It was a successful 
one. The business produced annual working reports from 1947 to 1989 which were 
issued to all staff to keep them informed about the organisation. Read today, 
they provide a history of the Guardian from the inside, noting particular 
achievements and challenges, bidding farewell to longstanding members of the 
company and welcoming their successors, even detailing the amount of ink, tons 
of newsprint and number of cups of tea used in the preceding year.

These details give an insight into the huge amount of resources required to 
keep a newspaper company running and the changing nature of the business over 
the years. In the earlier issues of the reports, somedata visualisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/data-visualisation> of materials used 
gives figures for utilities and equipment such as cubic feet of gas, tons of 
twine, sheets of zinc and telegraph rolls, accompanied by illustrations of the 
different items. In the first three issues, the number of horses (and tons of 
hay) used by the company are included. By the 1950-51 issue these have 
disappeared. The following year there are references to the retirement of the 
horses, including a whimsical piece of writing called "The day the horses 
went", written from the point of view of a horse. The next year's report 
includes 144 motor vehicles in the materials bought and used.

In his introduction to the 1972-73 working report, the final issue before he 
retired as chairman, Laurence Prestwich Scott looks back at his 25 years in the 
role and the changes in the company since he began. He notes: "In 1949 we ran a 
fleet of 83 cars and vans and 19 horses, in 1973 we were using a fleet of 380 
vehicles. In the year to March 1949 we used 29,342 gallons of petrol and 75 
tons of hay, in 1973 it was 225,000 gallons of petrol."

The 1957-58 report takes a more humorous look at the items in order to make 
sense of the enormous figures: for example 42 tons of twine is "approximately 
218 miles of twine. Would reach from here to Edinburgh" and 2,318,176 miles run 
is "equivalent to more than four return journeys to the moon (including 
diversions to avoid US moon rockets!)."

The tradition of taking account of materials continues to this day, though in 
today's more environmentally conscious age, the aim is to reduce the amount of 
resources used. Efforts are recorded in theGuardian sustainability report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/series/sustainability-report-2014>, 
which includes sections on the company's carbon and resource footprints and 
waste emissions.
 Materials used at the Manchester Guardian and Evening News Ltd, 1949-1950 
Download image 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1414584874456/Materials-used-at-the-Manch.pdf> 
Rationing, recessions and trade union disputes are all mentioned throughout 
the working reports because of the effect they have on the company's finances 
and how the business is run. However the biggest changes at the Guardian do not 
stem from outside forces. A particular focus for the paper throughout the 
period covered by the working reports is the need to increase readership by 
printing in London as well as Manchester. The evolution of the paper from a 
regional to a national title is documented in the reports, as is the 
corresponding move of the editorial centre from Manchester to London.

Many different innovations were made in the attempt to get the paper 
distributed more widely in London. The first reference comes in the working 
report for 1950-51. The Guardian had commissioned a "special train" that would 
speed the papers south more quickly than the normal express. There is a rather 
romantic description suggesting that "many people have probably heard it, for 
with its light weight and high speed it makes a noise unlike any other train, 
as it roars along the Styal line from London Road to Wilmslow."

The following year LP Scott outlines the reasons why printing in London is so 
important: "It is one of our greatest regrets that over large parts of Southern 
England we cannot get the paper to the homes of readers on the same day". He 
explains that in order to be seen as a national paper, and to grow readership 
in the south, it is essential that the paper can get to the newsagents at the 
same time as their competitors.

A "novel method" of printing in London, which they are planning to trial, is 
an early incarnation of faxing, in which a "good proof will be pulled of each 
page and photographically transmitted to London … this will be turned into a 
plate for lithographic printing." The "Guardian Facsimile Process" is mentioned 
again in the 1958-59 issue, as it was being used in Japan to transmit theAsahi 
Shimbun <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asahi_Shimbun> between Tokyo and Sapporo.
 Communications between London and Manchester, 1960-61 Download image 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1414584951550/Communications-between-Lond.pdf> 
In the 1960-61 working report, a historic announcement is made: "On 11th 
September 1961, The Guardian was printed in London for the first time." The 
Guardian shared printing with the Sunday Times at Thomson Newspapers' presses 
on Grays Inn Road.

The following issue includes a review of a year in London. There is joint 
planning of the paper between the Manchester and London offices as the two 
produce slightly different editions. "A general picture of the night's news … 
is secured by the vital ceremony of the six o'clock conference, when groups 
gather round loudspeaker/microphone units in Grays Inn Road and Cross Street to 
tell each other what is in prospect."

In 1966-67, the report mentions that the management of the Guardian has moved 
to London, separating from the Manchester Evening News. By 1974-75 the company 
is looking towards opening premises in Farringdon Road.

In 1975-76 the heart of the paper appears established in London. Guardian 
editorial, management and composing departments have moved to Farringdon Road. 
Monday 30 August "saw the dawn of the new age of facsimile transmission from 
London to Manchester," and "all time-critical material is now set in London, 
while advertisements and features continue to be made up in Manchester."

The same issue features a piece "from the Archive" which highlights how far 
the company has come in its aim of getting readers in London since the previous 
century: "An earlier London presence of the Guardian is recalled by this Notice 
from the edition of Friday 18th February 1887. Our London office was at 26 
Charing Cross and seven newsagents carried the paper from 9am, as well as WH 
Smiths bookstalls at the mainline stations." The archive notice from the paper 
reads: "Notice, Special Train Express: We have made arrangements with the 
London and North Western Railway Company for a Special Newspaper Train which 
leaves Manchester on every publishing day at 2.15am."

After 1989, the working report was renamed Annual Report and Accounts, and 
then the GMG PLC Annual Report.GMG PLC's reports 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/financials/gmg/> since 2008 can be viewed online. The 
Annual Report now has much more of a financial focus, but theAnnual Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2015/jul/30/gmg-annual-results-2015-video>
 shares its conversational tone and celebration of innovations with the 
earliest Working Reports.
 Who reads the Guardian? Pages from the Guardian working report 1964-65 
Download image 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1414585343109/Who-reads-the-Guardian-Page.pdf> 
Copies of the working reports can be consulted in the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> reading room by appointment.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers>.
 