
From Islington to Earl’s Court, Peckham Rye to Ladbroke Grove, just about 
every area of London has a rich, historic literature of its own. Countless 
writers down the ages have sought to make some sense of this labyrinthine 
metropolis: Dickens wittily unravelled the social fabric of the Victorian era, 
Virginia Woolf perfected the modernist city symphony and Muriel Spark elevated 
the quirks of postwar working-class life to literary greatness. But the concept 
of the London novel is a strange and fluid thing, hard to define beyond its 
obvious geographical premise. So how might aspiring novelists set about penning 
aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> masterpiece?

For a recent Guardian Live event 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/how-to-write-a-london-novel-with-will-self-al-kennedy-and-tony-parsons-22450594332>
, Will Self, author of The Book of Dave; AL Kennedy, whose Serious Sweet is set 
for release this week, and Tony Parsons, bestselling author of Man and Boy, 
came together to share tips on how best to write about this city.

You must know London ...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5acd12918a6a6ee948b612fc9a3f874a7c8dc50f%2F394_893_1849_2312%2F1849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20Live%3A%20How%20to%20write%20a%20London%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20Live%3A%20How%20to%20write%20a%20London%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5acd12918a6a6ee948b612fc9a3f874a7c8dc50f%2F394_893_1849_2312%2F1849.jpg>
 Will Self.
 Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
“You’ve got to know the city,” explained Self, who takes a rambling, 
psychogeographical approach to his work and clearly knows a thing or two about 
the capital. “The long view is essential for the city writer,” he said. “You 
must feel the shadow … feel your own evanescence.” Amid multiple tangents and 
digressions, he touched on the repeal ofthe Test Acts 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Test_Act>, the history of municipal socialism in 
the city and nigh on 40 years of “unrestrained neoliberal globalising 
bollocks”, demonstrating a little of his own broad knowledge. He’s an advocate 
of exploring the past and not getting overly bogged down in the the present 
day. “You can get a bit overexcited about the present, in my view,” he said.

... but use an outsider’s perspective
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe49ed36b00ad9164e50e25187cc34e9fa2ed4c39%2F724_799_1206_1507%2F1206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20Live%3A%20How%20to%20write%20a%20London%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20Live%3A%20How%20to%20write%20a%20London%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe49ed36b00ad9164e50e25187cc34e9fa2ed4c39%2F724_799_1206_1507%2F1206.jpg>
 AL Kennedy. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Of course, knowing London doesn’t mean you have to have lived there all your 
life, nor does it necessarily require some kind of complete understanding. 
Kennedy seems in favour of an intimate, almost microcosmic line of action. “So 
much about London is about a very small view,” she said, explaining that it was 
the likes of Spark’s shabby and weird – but lovely – stories that initially 
attracted her to the city.

Like Spark, Kennedy is Scottish, and she appears to use her outsider’s vantage 
to observe and perceive things in a way that perhaps those who have long 
inhabited the city don’t. Whether coming at things from a “newly-arrived” or 
“here-forever” point of view, it stands to reason that a clear idea of what you 
want, or need, to say is integral. “What’s your focus?” Kennedy asked. “What 
kind of research are you doing? Is it present day? Is it past? What’s 
resonating? What isn’t resonating? It’s a research project like any other 
research project, but it will also reflect what you feel is important about the 
world.”

For Serious Sweet, she explained, she recorded instances of kindness between 
strangers. “London partly floats on those,” she said, “because it’s almost 
intolerable without [them]”.

Read your predecessors

Familiarising yourself with your fellow London writers, be they novelists, 
essayists, poets or historians, is a given. Referring again to the importance 
of taking the long view, Self implored us to “look at the great London writers 
of the past … De Quincey’s Confessions of an English Opium-Eater – very much 
about man coming in and out of the city, coping with it, not coping with it, 
fucking up. Defoe’s [A] Journal of the Plague Year, a very great early work of 
the psychogeography of the city – again, a similar sense of movement. Dickens, 
of course, Jack London’s The People of the Abyss.” These authors all make use 
of the perambulating approach adopted by Self, and they all drifted in and out 
of London.

Avoid cliche

“I don’t think there is a distinctly London novel,” said Self, when asked what 
cliches of the genre should be given a wide berth. “I think the city is so big 
and looms so large that you can treat it as a world entire, so it’s the same 
problems that you have with any novel of place. Cliche is the endless enemy; 
whatever the cliche is, it has to be avoided.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd19538a146d09ab05291c5fbcb9f16c1571df7c%2F1310_1235_1670_2087%2F1670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20Live%3A%20How%20to%20write%20a%20London%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20Live%3A%20How%20to%20write%20a%20London%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fguardian-live-how-to-write-a-london-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd19538a146d09ab05291c5fbcb9f16c1571df7c%2F1310_1235_1670_2087%2F1670.jpg>
 Tony Parsons. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Parsons described how he cashed in his pension so he could take two years off 
to write his first crime novel, during which time he thought deeply about how 
to avoid London cliches – one of which, he said, is Scotland Yard. “You just 
have … to avoid anything that seems as though it’s been done to death. My 
novels are set in West End Central because one of the first pieces of 
journalism that I ever did … was writing about the vice squad [there] … So I 
knew it and it seemed like a good way to swerve the cliche.”

And don’t try to write a London novel

With all its regional, generational and other contextual variations, perhaps a 
definition of the London novel beyond that basic – and arguably tenuous – 
geographical premise is impossible. As such, is it a mistake to set out to 
write one?

 “Ideally,” Kennedy said, “whatever you’re writing about, all of the parts of 
it will fit organically, and – hopefully – as a writer … if you were going to 
walk out of the building and get hit by a truck, you would have said the thing 
that burned within you that you had to say. And it’s not like it’s going to be 
a canonical novel, or it’s going to be a London novel, or it’s gong to be a 
woman-in-peril novel; it’s going to be the thing that youhave to write.”

• To find out about forthcoming Guardian Live events 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/events>, sign up to become a Guardian Member
 <https://membership.theguardian.com/welcome>.
 