
The Irish writer Colin Barrett has won the 2014 Guardian first book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardianfirstbookaward> with a lyrical 
collection of short stories, Young Skins.

Born in 1982, Barrett grew up in County Mayo and worked for a mobile phone 
company in Dublin before returning to college to study creative writing. His 
stories began appearing in the Irish literary journalThe Stinging Fly 
<http://www.stingingfly.org/> in 2009, with the magazine bringing out a 
collection four years later as Barrett signed with Jonathan Cape in the UK and 
Grove in the US.

The collection is set for the most part in the fictional town of Glanbeigh, a 
nowheresville hard by the “gnarled jawbone” of Ireland’s Atlantic coastline 
with a roundabout, an industrial estate, a five-screen Cineplex and “a century 
of pubs packed inside the square mile of the town’s limits”. A cast of petrol 
pump attendants, recovering addicts, drug dealers and bouncers weaves around 
this constricted world from night club to fast-foodery, from river bank to 
concrete picnic area, the city far enough away that it might well as be on the 
moon. Violence hangs in the air – violence which can be swerved, or pushed 
aside to offer some unexpected transcendence, but is always there, hovering 
like the “thickets and thickets” of midges in the evening.

Writing in Guardian Review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/15/first-book-award-the-shortlist>, 
Barrett said the collection was full of the “usual things that transpire within 
the confines of any small town … misjudgments and violence, affairs and 
kindnesses, silences and eruptions”.

“I grew up in a town like this, knew people infused with the same peculiar 
sensibility as this cast of characters,” Barrett wrote, “but do not let me 
mislead you by implying I have any authoritative judgment to deliver on this 
world. What fascinated me as I worked on these stories and incrementally built 
the world of Glanbeigh was how little I truly understood the people and places 
of this town.” Art thrives on such combinations of intimacy and mystery, he 
continued, “and so I resolved to draw the characters as meticulously and 
vividly as I could, but to simultaneously preserve the integrity of their 
essential unknowability.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fguardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417038586582%2Ff3a1e58d-c6ab-42e8-98d7-cebeade9fe19-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20first%20book%20award%202014%20goes%20to%20Irish%20writer%20%E2%80%98who%20can%20go%20the%20distance%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fguardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20first%20book%20award%202014%20goes%20to%20Irish%20writer%20%E2%80%98who%20can%20go%20the%20distance%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fguardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417038586582%2Ff3a1e58d-c6ab-42e8-98d7-cebeade9fe19-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Colin Barrett. Photograph: Lucy Perrem 
It is the intensity of the short story which attracts him, Barrett wrote, 
citing Anne Enright’s description of John McGahern’s stories as the “literary 
equivalent of a hand grenade rolled across the kitchen floor”. In some of his 
stories the explosion is yet to come, while others explore the “ringing 
aftermath”, but “that is what I wanted these stories to be infused with: the 
pure combustibility of being alive”.

According to Enright, one of the judges on this year’s first book award panel, 
what brings a panel to a consensus in such a diverse prize is “always the 
quality of the writing, how it moves on the page. You’re also looking for an 
author who has a clear path in front of them, who can go the distance.”

Young Skins is “from line to line … as interesting as prose can get these 
days,” Enright continued. “You expect everything to go horribly wrong in these 
stories, but they move towards redemption and not disaster. Barrett is very 
good at the unexpected. You’re working through something that’s feels gritty 
and hard but by the end, each story has turned into something almost lyrical 
and open. That’s real writing.”

The Booker winner places Barrett as part of a new generation of Irish writers 
such as Eimear McBride, Claire Kilroy and last year’s first book award winner, 
Donal Ryan. “There’s a sense of excitement in the air. It’s like the 80s, all 
over again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fguardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417032702855%2F3a085fb0-093c-4014-892d-5962f05c8850-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20first%20book%20award%202014%20goes%20to%20Irish%20writer%20%E2%80%98who%20can%20go%20the%20distance%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fguardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20first%20book%20award%202014%20goes%20to%20Irish%20writer%20%E2%80%98who%20can%20go%20the%20distance%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fnov%2F26%2Fguardian-first-book-award-2014-colin-barrett-short-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417032702855%2F3a085fb0-093c-4014-892d-5962f05c8850-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Young Skins by Colin Barrett. Photograph: Graeme Robertson/the Guardian 
Surrounded by the blizzard of words on the internet, readers are looking for 
“something a little more difficult”, Enright continued. “They don’t want fluff, 
they want something real and Barrett’s a real writer – there’s no doubt about 
that.”

Chair of judges, Guardian Review editor Lisa Allardice, added: “Colin Barrett 
has already been hailed as a ‘new, young genius’ – and you can’t get much 
better than that. It was a particularly strong shortlist and each of the titles 
was ardently debated, but in the end we had to go with the book that, in the 
words of one of the judges, was ‘simply the best written’ – and it is true that 
Barrett barely hits a false note throughout the collection.”

Enright was joined on the panel for the £10,000 award by the classicist Mary 
Beard, the shadow secretary of state for education Tristram Hunt and the 
psychoanalyst and literary theorist Josh Cohen. Young Skins has already won 
plaudits, taking the 2014Frank O’Connor short story award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/11/frank-o-connor-short-story-award-colin-barrett-young-skins>
 as well as the Rooney prize for fiction.

The Guardian first book award celebrates the best literary debuts in any 
genre. Barrett adds his name toa list of winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/28/guardian-first-book-prize-2013-donal-ryan>
 including Zadie Smith, Robert Macfarlane, Chris Ware and Yiyun Li.
 