
The phone line from Buenos Aires is slightly crackly but Gus Pichot’s opinions 
are crystal clear. “The Fiji v England game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/england-fiji-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 last Saturday wasn’t very good for rugby. Having a Fijian saying he was better 
leaving Fiji to play for England … I don’t like that. I think it’s unfair for 
other teams.” In his days as Argentina’s captain, Pichot was among the most 
passionate and honest of leaders and, praise be, rugby administration has not 
changed him.

At this vital juncture in the professional game’s evolution, the 42-year-old 
vice-chairman of World Rugby represents perhaps the single best hope of 
negotiating a path across the familiar minefield of global calendar, 
eligibility and player welfare problems.

Rugby union autumn internationals: 10 things to look forward to this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend>
To label Pichot and the new chairman, Bill Beaumont, as the Ant and Dec of 
oval-ball diplomacy might be stretching it physically but theirs is no mediocre 
double act. If this persuasive pair cannot politely twist a few arms no one 
will.

That, at least, is Pichot’s stated mission. Too often rugby’s rulers have 
clung selfishly to the status quo, reluctant to give up so much as a paper clip 
to the traditionally weaker nations.

Now, with no international fixtures in the diary beyond 2019 and with the 
professional club game in England and France draining the southern hemisphere 
of leading players, the sport has far-reaching decisions to make and limited 
margin for error.

On Friday, for example, a source within Premiership Rugby suggested the 
English clubs were “frustrated and surprised” at the failure to gather all 
parties around the same table this autumn to hammer out a workable deal. It 
would be a noisy old summit, a veritable Tower of Babel, particularly if and 
when Pichot, capped 71 times by Argentina, lectures the assembled chief 
executives on why money is only part of the solution.

“When I started playing professionally my father didn’t like it at all,” he 
says. “He was very amateur and didn’t want money in the game. But in Argentina 
we understood very quickly. Money is not the be-all and end-all. People 
shouldn’t be playing rugby just to be rich. They should be playing because they 
love it.

“We are not just here to make a £10m profit at Twickenham this Saturday. What 
do we do with all that money? Put it in a bank or help grow the game 
everywhere, not just in England? That’s the tricky part.”

Pichot takes some stopping once he gets going. He was particularly heartened 
last week to hear Lawrence Dallaglio, Brian O’Driscoll, Jeremy Guscott and 
Keith Wood felt similarly when they shared a train up to their induction into 
World Rugby’s Hall of Fame.

“We all spoke the same language,” says Pichot. “It’s about giving, because 
rugby has given so much to all of us. I think that’s something we can’t lose.”

It is precisely this spirit of brotherhood that Pichot is now looking to 
bottle. Shrewdly, he has also been talking to former adversaries in Australia 
and New Zealand – the ex-Wallaby captain John Eales prominent among them – to 
try and filter the message upwards to worried executives.

“Ultimately it is about organising the professional game. Then we can use that 
revenue to grow the game.”

But what if some have different agendas? “It’s like a rugby team. If people 
don’t want to follow the big objective then, even though they’re good, they 
have to be on the bench. It’s about producing what’s best for the whole game. 
That’s very important.”

Pichot is under few illusions about the scale of that task – “You have to play 
the waiting game in World Rugby” – and is certainly not in it for personal 
gain. “I was elected to make things better, not just to cruise along and float 
in the system. I’m not that kind of guy. I don’t like going away from my 
family, I don’t need the money and I don’t need to be in a Royal Box this 
weekend. I don’t enjoy that.”

What drives him, instead, is the greater good.

“We have a brilliant, beautiful game that I’m passionate about. It can’t just 
be on a Monday morning before Fiji play England that people start asking: ‘What 
is going on in Fiji?’ Bill and I were in Fiji six months ago to find a 
solution. It’s not easy but at least it’s on the agenda now. Before it wasn’t. 
It’s the same with the global calendar. I’m not sure we’re going to find a 
magical solution but at least we’re trying.”

A scrapping of summer tours immediately after World Cups and a slight 
reshuffle of domestic seasons will probably come to pass but Pichot also 
confirms further talks are scheduled for mid-January about assisting the 
Pacific Island nations: “We’re not just here to see if we can have a revenue 
share from England for Fiji on a Saturday once a year. That’s not going to make 
the system work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e2524fe8d7e6b76a1fd9a7f01734fd102646d0d%2F0_68_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gus%20Pichot%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Fiji%20v%20England%20game%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20very%20good%20for%20rugby%20%E2%80%A6%20it%E2%80%99s%20unfair%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gus%20Pichot%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20Fiji%20v%20England%20game%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20very%20good%20for%20rugby%20%E2%80%A6%20it%E2%80%99s%20unfair%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fgus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5e2524fe8d7e6b76a1fd9a7f01734fd102646d0d%2F0_68_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Agustin Pichot made 71 appearances for Argentina, who face England at 
Twickenham on Saturday. Photograph: Tom Hevezi/AP 
Nor, in his view, does the idea of players switching Test allegiance once 
their Tier One days are done: “I don’t think that’s the solution. A player 
should not be playing for one country to make money and then coming back 
because the All Blacks aren’t selecting him any more.”

He does not regard Nathan Hughes’s selection for England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/england-dave-attwood-fiji-billy-vunipola-rugby-union-autumn-internationals>
 via three years’ residency as beneficial either. “That’s not right. He should 
be able to make good money playing club rugby in England but still play for 
Fiji.”

Like many others he also winced at several of the tackles in Dublin last 
weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/22/new-zealand-ireland-rugby-discipline-citing-brutal>
.

“It’s wrong … just hitting players like that is very dangerous, we have to 
start educating players not to do it any more.”

Endlessly banging his own head against a bureaucratic wall of indifference 
holds equally little appeal. “I like fighting for what I think is right. If in 
three to four years people don’t listen I’ll be very happy back in my house 
with my family again. I’ve captained my country, I played for some of the best 
clubs in Europe, I won leagues, I played in Rugby World Cups. I’ve achieved 
everything I wanted to. If people want to work together, we’ll do it. If it’s 
simply about [arguing over] a commercial entity, I’ll go back home.”

The fight to preserve rugby’s soul could not be in better hands.
 