
Greg Semu’s upcoming large-scale photographic work at the National Gallery of 
Victoria in Melbourne draws attention to the true impact of colonisation in the 
Pacific. The Samoan born artist has a deep interest in this period of human 
history, which witnessed the catastrophic collision of indigenous tribal 
worlds, colonial imperialism and the creation of great European history 
painting.

Semu writes: “A colleague recently introduced me to the word hegemony and 
while I was not privy to its meaning I felt its palpable complexity. The most 
basic meaning is ‘leadership or dominance of one group over another.’ As I 
struggled with how it affects me and my art, a bulb lit up in my head and 
Public Enemy’s Fight the Power seared itself into my virtual retina.

How we made Public Enemy's Fight the Power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/07/how-we-made-public-enemy-fight-the-power>
“Fight the Power  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/07/how-we-made-public-enemy-fight-the-power>
was the anthem of the year in 1990 for all rap and hip-hop enthusiasts. A 
call-to-arms to wake up and take notice of the injustice and inequality that 
the American hegemony had wielded, and continues to enforce. By 1990, hip hop 
had entered irreversibly into mainstream radio play. The lyrics told us to 
resist the power of oppression. These young pioneers, fuelled by generations of 
pain, anger and resentment and armed with their newly found weapons of words 
and subsonic, bass-heavy beats, were venting the problems of being ethnically 
diverse, impoverished and at the mercy of white cruelty.

“They spoke to me – 1990 saw my first steps towards a career in visual arts. 
But as an angry young man of Pacific Island diversity, growing up in a 
monocultural society with little tolerance, you can only shout so loud and for 
so long before the audience you are trying to impeach will stop listening. 
Ostracised into the camp of “Samoa”, I have battled for recognition in the art 
scene and searched for ways to communicate outside this cultural cell. My art 
in recent years has evolved around the shared covenant of displacement by 
colonial hegemony. Geographical displacement and attempted cultural genocide 
seems to be the modus operandi in the name of religion, wealth and protection.

“My new body of work comes in two parts and is a restaging and digitally 
capture of two epic 19th-century European history paintings that heroicise 
survival at sea; Théodore Géricault’s,The Raft of the Medusa (1819) 
<http://www.louvre.fr/en/oeuvre-notices/raft-medusa> and Louis John Steele and 
Charles F Goldie’sThe Arrival of the Māoris in New Zealand (1898 
<http://www.aucklandartgallery.com/explore-art-and-ideas/artwork/166/the-arrival-of-the-maoris-in-new-zealand>
), which is based directly on Géricault’s work. By reworking these two 19th 
century European paintings, I’m attempting to champion the reclamation of Maori 
stories and myths and challenge European art history’s domination of 
narratives, especially those concerning Pacific Islander peoples.

“Looking and waiting for the hegemony to accept blame and take ownership of 
the trauma and tragedy historically is a small part of the solution. The true 
battle for hegemony is a battle with ourselves. Let’s move forward gracefully 
by visualising an empowered inclusive new generation and take proactive steps 
towards reconciliation, then progress it to our policy leaders. In my opinion 
the true hegemony is greed, fear and corruption. United we stand, divided we 
fall. I look forward to the art you share.”

Greg Semu, The Raft of the Tagata Pasifika (people of the pacific) 
<https://www.ngv.vic.gov.au/exhibition/greg-semu/> is exhibited at NGV 
International between 10 June and 10 September 2016 in support by Creative New 
Zealand and the Wallace Arts Trust.
 