
Los Angeles sibling trio Haim <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/haim> have won 
the BBC'sSound of 2013 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/efxzp6> poll. Sisters 
Danielle, Este and Alana Haim, who have released just one EP and one single so 
far, pronounced themselves "unbelievably honoured" to have won the poll of 
critics, editors, broadcasters and bloggers.

"We have found our second home in the UK! We can't wait to release new music 
and play as many shows as possible this year. Thank you to everyone who voted 
for us! We are so excited," they added.

Haim generated wild critical excitement last year for their fusion of 
west-coast soft rock with the vocal rhythms of R&B. They signed to the 
Universal imprint Polydor in June, immediately before a show at Dingwalls that 
received a five-star review in the Guardian. "Haim are a group on a crest of a 
wave – in demand, adored and feeling capable of anything,"the Guardian reviewer 
wrote <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/20/haim-review>.


Haim learned their trade playing with their parents in a group called 
Rockinhaim. They only split from their parents in 2011, though singer-guitarist 
Danielle had played with Jenny Lewis and Julian Casablancas. "It was the best 
school," guitarist Alanasaid in a Guardian Guide cover story 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/24/haim-london-ellie-goulding> last 
year. "To learn songs, we'd have to record them off the radio to cassette tape 
and then press pause and play for hours to learn all the chords and lyrics by 
ear. By the end we knew every chord progression out there."

The runners-up in the Sound of 2013 poll were London duo AlunaGeorge, who 
feature in today's G2 Film&Musictips for British bands to watch in the year 
ahead 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2013/jan/02/ones-to-watch-2013-alunageorge?intcmp=ILCMUSTXT9383>
. The pair have pronounced themselves to be a pop act – but as fans of pop made 
by people who aren't "afraid to try something a bit weird".

Coming in behind the top two were New York-based rapper Angel Haze in third 
place, followed by Birmingham singerLaura Mvula 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/dec/31/ones-watch-2013-laura-mvula>
 in fourth, and Glasgow electro-pop band Chvrches in fifth.

The BBC's Sound of … polls have been a reliable indicator of success in recent 
years. Last year's winner wasMichael Kiwanuka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-kiwanuka>, whose debut album Home 
Again reached No 4 and was nominated for the Mercury music prize. He was 
preceded by Jessie J in 2011 and Ellie Goulding in 2010.
 