
In the quiet, neat calm of a Brisbane courtroom, a world from the muggy heat 
and steel fences of the Manus Island detention centre,the final, agonised days 
of Hamid Kehazaei’s life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaeis-last-days-a-timeline>
 have been forensically assayed and analysed.

 The bare details of the 24-year-old asylum seeker’s death in 2014  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/delay-to-treatment-of-hamid-kehazaei-before-he-died-revealed-in-leaked-files>
are well known – the worsening infection, the stubborn fever that could not be 
shifted by any treatment, the requests to move him to hospital delayed and 
resisted, the heart attacks, the brain death, and finally, the end.

But laid before Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> state coroner Terry 
Ryan over two weeks there has been new evidence with brutal details, including:

Hamid Kehazaei inquest: faulty machine ruled out use of vital drug
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-manus-island-asylum-seeker-gentamicin>
• Doctors’ instructions to provide Kehazaei with intravenous paracetamol were 
ignored two nights in a row by night staff, leaving him in increasing pain, 
vomiting and growing increasingly confused as infection took over his body and 
left him without enough oxygen going to his brain.

• As he grew increasingly sick and sepsis took hold, Kehazaei was heard, even 
from outside the medical centre, screaming unremittingly, how he was unable to 
recognise friends and staff whom he knew well.

• Severely hypoxic, scared and unable to understand what was happening to him, 
Kehazaei pulled the intravenous lines from his arm, became combative with staff 
and refused to wear a mask.

• Kehazaei was left lying unsheltered from the tropical sun at the airfield – 
febrile and septic, but unsedated – while he waited for the air ambulance to 
land and finally fly him off the island to a hospital.

“He was the most awful colour I’ve ever seen in a human being,” Dr Marten Muis 
said of Kehazaei’s final conscious moments on the island. “He was a sort of 
grey-purply colour.

“His breathing was over 30, he seemed confused. If you went anywhere near him 
to put a mask on him, he would put his arms up or strike out.”

Over a fortnight of hearings at the coronial inquest into Kehazaei’s death, 
Manus Island <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> medical 
staff appeared in steady succession before the coroner to explain in detail how 
the 24-year-old’s health deteriorated precipitously while he was being treated 
in detention, as their pleas to have him moved to a hospital were either 
ignored or refused by Australian immigration department officials.

Hamid Kehazaei's last days – a timeline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaeis-last-days-a-timeline>
One doctor revealed how he was reduced to rummaging through a cupboard, “the 
very small pharmacy that we had”, to see if there were any more antibiotics 
they might give Kehazaei, because nothing over 36 hours had helped him, and he 
was growing sicker by the hour.


 Another was reportedly furious at being told by bureaucrats in Australia that 
Kehazaei couldn’t be moved – “You’re on your own and you’re going to have to 
keep this man overnight” – and that her instructions to give him pain relief 
medicine overnight were ignored two nights in a row.

But beyond Kehazaei’s specific, tragic circumstance, and perhaps ultimately of 
greater import, are the statements made before the coroner about the broader 
systemic failures of a regime that is maintained as a closely guarded secret.


 A succession of health professionals gave evidence that the clinical opinions 
of health professionals are routinely overruled in offshore detention by 
non-medically trained department bureaucrats.

Doctors on Manus Island also told the coroner they were constantly frustrated 
at their working conditions within the rudimentary clinic, by poorly trained 
staff who ignored clinical directions, by a lack of medication and diagnostic 
equipment, by unhygienic conditions, and most crucially, by a system of control 
from Canberra that resisted all efforts to move critically ill patients to 
higher levels of care in hospital.

 “There was a pressure regarding finances and budgets of doing air ambulance 
evacuations ... and for people to travel to Australia we knew that there was a 
political pressure in the department,” one doctor said.

 A cohort of immigration and border protection staff called to appear before 
the coroner attempted to resolutely – truculently at times – defend the 
policies.

 Each ran, without much variation or sophistication, a defence that they were 
following orders.

 “My role was not to question or to seek further information,” Caroline Gow, 
the department’s former assistant director of detention health services, said 
when asked why she hadn’t sought more information on Kehazaei’s worsening 
health.

 “I can’t undermine my bosses and go above them. It’s their responsibility to 
give the approval.”

Hamid Kehazaei inquest: doctors faced 'political pressure' over patient 
transfers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-doctors-faced-political-pressure-over-patient-transfers>
 Their answers revealed the dangers of a hollowed out department, where frank 
and fearless advice, and any commitment to the genuine service of the public 
interest are at risk from a slavish prosecution of a policy that is known to be 
dangerous.

 None of the senior immigration officials appearing before the coroner, rising 
to the level of first assistant secretary, seemed to acknowledge there was any 
moral dimension to their responsibilities or to those of their organisation. 
None conceded to understanding there was a higher responsibility to keep 
Kehazaei alive.

Before the coroner, examples abounded of lapse, followed by justification.

An “urgent medical transfer request” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-told-warning-infection-was-life-threatening-didnt-seem-urgent>
 at 1.15pm that warned Kehazaei was at risk of “sepis, life-threatening 
widespread systemic infection”, nonetheless “did not paint a picture of urgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-told-warning-infection-was-life-threatening-didnt-seem-urgent>
” to the director of detention health services, Amanda Little, who declined to 
send the case to her superiors for approval.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fhamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2694868150a268c9a6e2b043daa0a89eabb2123c%2F0_0_2955_1993%2F2955.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamid%20Kehazaei%20inquest%20exposes%20failures%20of%20Australia's%20secretive%20immigration%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fhamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamid%20Kehazaei%20inquest%20exposes%20failures%20of%20Australia%27s%20secretive%20immigration%20regime&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fhamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2694868150a268c9a6e2b043daa0a89eabb2123c%2F0_0_2955_1993%2F2955.jpg>
 Amanda Little, a former director of detention health services at the 
immigration department, leaves the magistrates court in Brisbane on Wednesday. 
Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP 
 When she did ultimately “escalate” the case to assistant secretary Paul 
Windsor – at 7:24pm - he had gone home for the day and did not read his emails 
for another 13 hours.

“The time it took me to put something forward was not something that would 
significantly delay the process,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-hears-immigration-bureaucracy-left-asylum-seeker-stranded-extra-day>
 he told the coroner in defence of the delay.

“You could argue that the process could be streamlined so it didn’t have to 
pass through the hands of four officers. I would argue that the process worked 
well on many occasions.”

 The evidence before this coronial inquest has also shown, beyond any 
reasonable argument, who runs offshore detention.

 Australia controls offshore detention, and micromanages the decisions that 
take place within the camps on Nauru and Manus Island. No asylum seeker or 
refugee can be moved from an offshore camp without the express permission of 
the Department of Immigration and Border Protection in Canberra. The department 
retains absolute and forensic control of everything that happens in those 
places.

 Approval for an asylum seeker in detention to go to hospital needed to pass 
across the desk of five department bureaucrats “to ensure that the officer 
commanding Operation Sovereign Borders, and subsequently the minister was aware 
of transferee movements”, Little told the coroner.

Papua New Guinea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> and 
Nauru are, in this respect if not entirely, client states of Australia. The 
argument that they are independent sovereign nations running offshore detention 
of their own accord is a fiction long been rejected by almost-universal legal 
opinion. This coronial inquiry has only reinforced Australia’s realist 
domination of its two neighbours.

The day my friend Hamid Kehazaei died | Behrouz Boochani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/the-day-my-friend-hamid-kehazaei-died>
 Ryan will sit again in February for two weeks to further examine Kehazaei’s 
treatment, decline and death.

 But the evidence already before him shows a systemically impaired system that 
was known to provide insufficient and ineffective healthcare to those it was 
supposed to look after for.

Healthcare in offshore detention is “broadly comparable” with that available 
in the Australian community, Mark Parrish, the regional director of 
InternationalHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> and 
Medical Services, told the coroner. That phrasing – “broadly comparable” – has 
been widely adopted, by ministers and prime ministers, and by the department, 
and was repeated by officials brought before the coroner as evidence in and of 
itself that all is fine offshore.

 But saying something over and over again does not make it true: this coronial 
inquest, long before it has finished, has exposed the flaws in that statement.
 