
Fifty years ago today, Anthony Burgess published his ninth novel, A Clockwork 
Orange <http://www.todayinliterature.com/stories.asp?Event_Date=5/14/1962>. 
Reviewing it in the Observer, Kingsley Amis called the book"the curiosity of 
the day" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2012/may/13/kingsley-amis-a-clockwork-orange-review>
. Five decades later and there is still nothing quite like it.

When discussing A Clockwork Orange 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9780241951446/a-clockwork-orange>
, many mistakenly confuse the book withStanley Kubrick's 1971 film 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/75644/clockwork.orange> and immediately 
focus on the violence of the story, when really it's the language of the book – 
a vernacular so lively and colourful it renders those much-discussed 
descriptions of beatings and rape almost –almost – comical – that is its most 
remarkable and revolutionary aspect. Kubrick's dazzling adaptation contributed 
greatly to the book's ascension to the lofty position it holds today as one of 
pop culture's most influential and enduring pieces of literature, but it's the
slang that 15-year-old protagonist Alex uses <http://soomka.com/nadsat.html> in 
his narration – a post-Joycean mash-up of Slavic, Cockney rhyming, Gypsy and
Polari 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2010/may/24/polari-language-origins> – 
that allows Burgess to present Alex's diabolical deeds as digestible, if not 
remotely justifiable.

Certainly there is a lyricism to the language that makes the Beethoven-loving 
Alex's animalistic behaviour all the more disturbing. It triggers the same 
reaction in the reader as when we first saw those school portraits of James 
Bulger's killers, or other such adolescent-as-killer criminal cases. Cherubic 
might and murderer – the two almost don't compute. But let's not forget that 
Alex is the victim of violence too: through his brainwashing – violence used to 
quash violence – Burgess pre-empted many ofBaudrillard's ideas on the violence 
of the visual image <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QF-eThkBOg>.

Because A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-clockwork-orange> is also an allegorical 
tale of state control – of the establishment versus the individual, of 
puppet-masters and puppets – which could only have been concocted during the 
paranoid postwar/cold war years, but whose themes have never really diminished 
since publication. Alex represents anti-authoritarianism. He is the 
iconoclastic anarchist, the insubordinate lacking obedience to social order, 
who himself became an icon – and it's this, coupled with his powerful 
aesthetic, that has allowed his influence to extend beyond literature into 
wider culture.

Actually, Kubrick was beaten to the onscreen adaptation by Andy Warhol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/andywarhol>, whose film Vinyl 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0059880/> explored similar themes of free will, 
albeit it in a rather flawed, freeform way. It wasKubrick's take on Alex's 
"height of fashion" clothes 
<http://fashionfilmstudies.blogspot.co.uk/2010/09/case-study-clockwork-orange-1971.html>
 rather than Burgess's (black tights over a jelly mould at the crotch, "waisty 
jacket without lapels … off-white cravats which looked like whipped-up 
kartoffel") that has been aped by everyone from football hooligans to bands from
the Adicts 
<http://www.colombiawow.com/tasks/sites/default/assets/Image/the_adicts_2.jpg> 
toBlur <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BrbxWOMpwfs&ob=av2e>. (Unsurprisingly, 
in fact, the book's influence upon music is far-reaching. Many have identified 
aspects of Alex in Bowie's flamboyant Ziggy Stardust andJohn Lydon's disdainful 
Johnny Rotten <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QJm97o-4qYI>; then there are the 
bands who took their name from the book: Heaven 17, Moloko and Campag Velocet 
among others.)

The book's dystopian setting and aestheticisation of violence meanwhile seemed 
to signify a re-examining of man's cruellest impulses. On this subject, it's 
possibly the key post-war text, and its force can be felt in the work of JG 
Ballard, Philip K Dick, William Gibson, Jeff Noon,Chuck Palahniuk 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/author/chuck-palahniuk>; in American 
Psycho, Battle Royale and The Hunger Games; and beyond literature into visual 
art and the glut of ultraviolent films that emerged in the 1990s

Next month, the International Anthony Burgess Foundation 
<http://www.anthonyburgess.org/> are hosting a multi-disciplinary conference to 
celebrate the book's anniversary. It seems like a must for oomny devotchkas and 
malchiks who like hanging around the old biblio. Real horrorshow.
 