
Both Australia and the UK have seen an expansion in the numbers of students 
entering higher education. Australia has removed the cap on student numbers 
altogether, while the cap in England (though not in Wales, Scotland and 
Northern Ireland) will beremoved in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/dec/16/student-number-cap-university-questions>
.

What impact has this had on access? There are now more students than ever 
before entering higher education, but is the student body more representative 
than it was when higher education was just for a few? Are we seeing an increase 
in the proportion of students fromless well-off backgrounds entering the elite 
institutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/nov/13/working-class-students-shun-top-universities>
, or are those still the preserve of the wealthy and privileged?

In the UK, Alan Milburn's 2013 report, The fair access challenge 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/higher-education-the-fair-access-challenge>
, found that people living in the most advantaged areas are still three times 
as likely to participate in higher education as those in the most disadvantaged 
areas. The odds of a child at a state secondary school who is eligible for free 
school meals in Year 11 being admitted to Oxbridge by the age of 19 is almost 
2,000 to one. By contrast, the odds of a privately-educated child being 
admitted to Oxbridge are 20 to one.

In Australia, the pattern is similar. A 2013 report, Widening participation in 
Australian higher education 
<http://www.deakin.edu.au/arts-ed/efi/pubs/wp-in-australian-he.pdf>, found that 
while 25% of the population comes from the lowest socioeconomic group, only 17% 
of students come from this group, and this proportion has barely changed in 
five years.

Both the UK and Australian governments say they want to widen access. The 
Office for Fair Access <http://www.offa.org.uk/> in England was set up to 
monitor universities' access agreements, and its director Les Ebdon argues that 
universities need to work harder to improve access for disadvantaged groups. In 
May, the Australian government announcednew access measures 
<http://education.gov.au/news/new-higher-education-access-and-participation-measures-announced>
 – but how effective will they be?

This Thursday (17 July), an online panel of experts from the UK and Australia 
will discuss:

• Widening access – what should the focus be?
• Impact on removal of caps on student numbers (UK and Aus) and tuition fees 
(just Aus)
• Employment prospects for students from poorer backgrounds – does uni make a 
difference?
• Impact of divide between the top universities and the rest
• Challenge of making comparisons between the two countries

The debate is open to all and will take place in the comments section below 
this article on17 July from 9-11am BST or starting between 5-6pm for readers in 
Australia. Create a Guardian comment account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?returnUrl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com&guni=Article:in%20body%20link&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 to join in.

Panel

• Graeme Atherton, head of AccessHE <http://www.accesshe.ac.uk/>, a 
London-based organisation that helps get under-represented groups into higher 
education

• Claire Callender, professor of higher education studies, Institute of 
Education <http://www.ioe.ac.uk/>

• Richard James, professor of higher education and director of the centre for 
the study of higher education,University of Melbourne 
<http://www.unimelb.edu.au/>

• Lucy Collins, head of widening participation and undergraduate recruitment, 
Bristol University <http://www.bris.ac.uk/>

• Carl Rallings, deputy vice-chancellor for students and communities, 
University of South Queensland <http://www.usq.edu.au/>

• Penelope Griffin, head of widening participation, Nottingham University 
<http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/>

• Dr Tim Pitman, senior research fellow, national centre for student equity in 
higher education at John Curtin institute of public policy,Curtin University 
<http://www.curtin.edu.au/>. @timothypitman <https://twitter.com/timothypitman>

• Elisabeth Weedon, deputy director of the centre for research in education 
inclusion and diversity,University of Edinburgh <http://www.ed.ac.uk/home>

• Tamsin Hinton-Smith, senior lecturer in higher education, University of 
Sussex <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/>

• Andy Westwood, chief executive, GuildHE <http://guildhe.ac.uk/>. @guildheceo 
<https://twitter.com/guildheceo>

• Mahsood Shah, associate professor, responsible for strengthening the 
research capacity on areas including access, participation, and academic 
outcomes,University on Newcastle, <http://www.newcastle.edu.au/> Australia

• Trevor Gale, professor and chair in education policy and social justice in 
the school of education,Deakin University <http://www.deakin.edu.au/>

Join the higher education network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered.  <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>
 