
Another year, another Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> fringe festival – and 
another controversy.

How Adelaide could become Australia's most exciting city – simply by doubling 
down on culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/04/how-adelaide-could-become-australias-most-exciting-city-simply-by-doubling-down-on-culture>
With a festival this big (the fringe prides itself on being the second-largest 
arts festival in the world, and the 2016 program boasts more than 1,200 shows), 
consternation is bound to bubble up, and over the weekend Facebook exploded 
with arant from British comedian Alexis Dubus 
<https://www.facebook.com/alexisdubus/posts/10153946786950979?pnref=story>, 
saying the 2016 festival is the worst he’s experienced – and he won’t be back.

“I’m not sure what can actually be changed at an open access festival that’s 
now seemingly allowed greed and complacency to dictate its direction, but part 
of the change has to be the attitude of Fringe-goers, who need to re-evaluate 
the meaning of ‘fringe’,” he wrote.

“Audiences choosing soulless, mass-produced bollocks over thoughtful, 
innovative works in quirky spaces is what has now turned the Fringe into what 
it was initially rallying against.”

An open-access festival, Adelaide fringe has space for any show that wants to 
take a risk and put up the registration fee. Since moving from a biannual to 
annual festival in 2007, the number of shows in the program has more than 
doubled, leaving many to ask: how big is too big?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fhas-the-adelaide-fringe-festival-gotten-too-big-for-its-boots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53f4d0020a3d4d28c74b848d3e55001db1c3e67e%2F0_150_3240_1944%2F3240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20Adelaide%20fringe%20festival%20become%20too%20big%20for%20its%20boots%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fhas-the-adelaide-fringe-festival-gotten-too-big-for-its-boots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20Adelaide%20fringe%20festival%20become%20too%20big%20for%20its%20boots%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fhas-the-adelaide-fringe-festival-gotten-too-big-for-its-boots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53f4d0020a3d4d28c74b848d3e55001db1c3e67e%2F0_150_3240_1944%2F3240.jpg>
 British comedian Alexis Dubus says the Adelaide fringe festival has ‘allowed 
greed and complacency to dictate its direction’. Photograph: Frank Baron for 
the Guardian 
Open-access festivals are mutable and responsive to changing cultural 
landscapes, and the Adelaide fringe has gone through many guises. At times in 
its history it has been dominated by strong theatre programs; in recent years 
it has been primarily home of the standup comedian. These days, the focus has 
shifted again, and it seems to be contemporary circus and burlesque that 
dominates the cultural conversation – driven largely by the commercial 
mega-venues of theGarden of Unearthly Delights 
<http://www.gardenofunearthlydelights.com.au/> and the Royal Croquet Club 
<https://royalcroquetclub.com.au/>.

These two venues find themselves the target of much of the criticism towards 
the current model, which has been perceived as shifting the focus away from the 
artists and on to brands, bars and booze. But this ignores the incredible work 
that is programmed into these spaces, and the fact it is exactly the elements 
that make Adelaide such a great festival city – abundant parks, long, warm 
evenings – that are also to blame for the city’s summer drinking culture.

This drink culture does, unfortunately, lead to some terrible audiences, who 
Dubus points his finger at. We’ve all sat through drunken crowds and heard 
horrible stories of artists being mistreated while performing. But I am also 
consistently struck by the incredible generosity of fringe audiences: not 
simply for so often taking a punt on unknown performers, but in the way they 
give their hearts over to the artists.

Adelaide fringe 2016: five acts that prove in theatre, bigger isn’t always 
better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/03/adelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better>
This year, there was the woman who felt so sorry for Sam Halmarack 
<https://adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/ad545873-0117-4f23-a0b6-4866d6ed5899> 
when his band didn’t show up (the whole conceit of the performance) that she 
spent the hour trying to reassure him he was doing a good job. There was the 
woman who interrupted the applause at Telia Nevile’sPoet vs Pageant 
<https://adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/poet-vs-pageant/c347ab30-d474-4a5f-87bf-d31a084f8e84>
 to tell her how much she loved the show. And every year, there are the 
countless people who grin and bare it through excruciating attempts at audience 
participation.

One of the arguments oft-cited by the fringe’s organisation is that they don’t 
promote or produce work, and so venues and artists will stand and fall by their 
own merits.

Yet when small shows are falling harder and faster, it might be time for them 
to re-evaluate.

Up until 2008, the Adelaide fringe ran and programmed its own venues: 
nonprofit-driven spaces known to support art and artists first. Still running 
at other Australian open-access festivals like Perth’s Fringe World, the 
Melbourne international comedy festival and Melbourne fringe, this 
“promoter-hub” approach has its detractors, with criticisms it can lead to a 
two-tiered model, where shows within the hubs are supported above their 
external peers.
But in Adelaide, without the promoter offering support, it is the big venues 
that have an incalculable advantage. Untapped audiences won’t be found getting 
drunk at festival bars: they’re reading the daily paper or watching morning 
television and the nightly news. And in a competitive market, it’s the best 
publicists – which only the mega-venues can afford – that will get coverage 
across these outlets.

Even then, being in these venues is no guarantee of ticket sales. Daniel 
Clarke has been producing work at Adelaide fringe for over 10 years, and last 
year, while working on the critically acclaimedFake It ‘Til You Make It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/09/fake-it-til-you-make-it-review-adelaide-fringe-love-story-about-male-depression>
 and Sex Idiot, he told me a five-star review in the Adelaide Advertiser was 
once a guarantee for a sold-out run. These days, he says, ticket sales are a 
hustle no matter how well received a show finds itself or where it’s located.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fhas-the-adelaide-fringe-festival-gotten-too-big-for-its-boots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3c4efce40bc2a5f4e663b22ed5ad26118e96591%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20Adelaide%20fringe%20festival%20become%20too%20big%20for%20its%20boots%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fhas-the-adelaide-fringe-festival-gotten-too-big-for-its-boots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20Adelaide%20fringe%20festival%20become%20too%20big%20for%20its%20boots%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F09%2Fhas-the-adelaide-fringe-festival-gotten-too-big-for-its-boots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3c4efce40bc2a5f4e663b22ed5ad26118e96591%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Circus and burlesque dominate this year’s Adelaide fringe festival. 
Photograph: Andre Castellucci/The Garden of Unearthly Delights 
While this controversy has erupted in Adelaide, I suspect it will strike up 
again as the Melbourne international comedy festival opens at the end of March. 
Similarly in Perth, Fringe World has been experiencing several golden years, 
with whole weekends of shows selling out and the festival achieving enormous 
growth since it was launched in 2011. But with growth comes competition, 
including large-scale commercial productions. In all these cases, it is the 
small and new artists most likely to find themselves struggling.

How Adelaide could become Australia's most exciting city – simply by doubling 
down on culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/04/how-adelaide-could-become-australias-most-exciting-city-simply-by-doubling-down-on-culture>
In Adelaide, there have been calls for the state government to separate out the
clustering of events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/23/everything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival>
 in February and March – buttheir modelling 
<http://dpc.sa.gov.au/sites/default/files/pubimages/documents/ICSG/Review%20of%20SA%20Major%20Events%20in%20March-Volume%201.pdf>
 has found it’s precisely this cluster which makes it so successful: the sum is 
greater than its parts. What is missing, though, is a conversation on how much 
artists themselves are subsidising the economic impact on the state. Discussion 
about South Australia’s economybecoming increasingly arts-driven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/04/how-adelaide-could-become-australias-most-exciting-city-simply-by-doubling-down-on-culture>
 is, I think, an important one. But it cannot come at the expense of 
independent artists and arts workers, holding down second and third jobs to 
produce work with little financial return; if it does, they will decide it’s 
simply not worth it and walk away.

There will always be a tension between small independent artists and the major 
organisations that comprise Adelaide fringe. For some, like Dubus, that will 
manifest as screeds against this city. For artists like Brendan Maclean, it 
will be about the festival taking money from sponsors thatcontradict the 
fringe’s core values 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10154128948347868&set=a.451429622867.238740.513172867&type=3&theater>
 as a space for queer artists.

Increasingly, though, I hear calls from artists for the fringe to become more 
transparent.

If, as fringe director Heather Croall says 
<http://indaily.com.au/news/local/2016/03/07/terrible-festival-the-worst-by-a-long-shot-has-adelaide-gone-beyond-the-fringe/>
, 40% is a good house, what is an average house? How many seats are on sale 
across the festival, and how many of these are sold? How many comps are given 
away? How many shows put their tickets on sale at half-price, and how many 
tickets are sold this way? How many shows are cancelled each year? And how have 
these figures been changing?

As Adelaide fringe wraps up at the end of this week, I suspect we will be told 
raw ticket sales are up again on last year, as they have been consistently. But 
while the number of shows grows each year, the audience is becoming 
increasingly segmented. More artists are coming, but how many are walking away 
happy?

In the end, Adelaide fringe is an open-access uncurated festival, so its shape 
will always be crafted by the artists who choose to populate it. Perhaps Dubus 
is right, and the fringe has permanently shifted to a commercial hub-based 
model – perhaps that’s what audiences want. Or perhaps it will self-correct, 
and we’ll again have golden years of theatre and quirky venues.

For now, all we can do is start envisioning the best possible future and 
figure out what needs to change – or stay the same – to let that happen.
 