
Q I am preparing my Forties terraced house for sale and have stripped off the 
wallpaper. The plaster walls have many patches of filler and cracks. I can get 
the walls skim plastered. Or - provided I chose a gentle pattern - would 
wallpapering the house in blown vinyl be a valid option? Has blown vinyl had 
its day?
Iain, Manchester

A Any experienced house buyer would know instantly that heavily textured 
wallpaper must be covering poor walls, and this may raise suspicion that you 
are hiding other nasties. It will also look very outdated, so unless you have a 
period home and want to replace it with an appropriate paper such as Anaglypta, 
stay clear of it. Try investigating thicker 'filler' paints and easy-to-use 
smoothing-over skims. Polycell (www.polycell.co.uk <http://www.polycell.co.uk>) 
does a range aimed at the DIY market covering everything from cracked walls to 
textured papers and wall finishes, leaving you with smooth surfaces to repaint 
in your favourite house-selling colour.

Q I have opted for a kitchen refurb. The design, 20 years old, was of the 
Smallbone variety. The doors and handles have been replaced, the walls are 
Farrrow and Ball Lime White, and it's all looking a bit samey and bleak. The 
floors and worktop are mid-brown wood. In between I have those Mexican handmade 
tiles: rough glaze, some patterned, with wide grouting. What could I replace 
these with and how?
Lynne Coulthard 

A Kitchens that develop or are refurbished over time can loose their way in 
design concept and end up as a mishmash of styles. As yours seems to have a 
predominance of retro elements, I wouldn't introduce anything too contemporary. 
Tile the area with back-painted recycled glass tiles from Design 888 (01886 821 
201): made from waste cola bottles, they come in 20 colours, from calm and 
neutral to vibrant, and have clean, straight edges. Try out different 
colourways by photographing your kitchen and using a computer programme such as 
Photoshop to superimpose your favourite colour options - and pull that 
misdirected kitchen back together again.

Â· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 