
Haseeb Hameed will make his Test debut for England against India in Rajkot on 
Wednesday afterAlastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> 
confirmed the Lancashire opener has replaced Gary Ballance in the batting 
lineup.

Haseeb Hameed’s perfect timing earns teenager chance to answer England call | 
Will Macpherson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/haseeb-hameed-england-squad-bangladesh-lancashire>
Cook, announcing the reshuffle on the eve of the first Test, also sought to 
clarify comments given in a recent interview regarding his future as captain, 
insisting it is “business as usual” and that, as has been the case since he was 
sacked from the one-day role in late 2014, he continues to weigh up his 
position on a series-by-series basis.

Of greater relevance to Cook before a five-Test encounter with India in which 
the home side begin as strong favourites, is the decision to install a new 
opening partner in Hameed, who will become the 10th batsman to assume the 
position since Andrew Strauss retired in 2012.

At 19 years and 297 days of age, Hameed will also be England’s fifth youngest 
Test cricketer and the youngest since Ben Hollioake against Australia at Trent 
Bridge in 1997, with his first cap coming on the back of an impressive county 
season in which he scored 1,198 first-class runs.

The right-hander’s inclusion means Northamptonshire’s Ben Duckett, who opened 
with Cook in Bangladesh, will move down to No4 with Jos Buttler of Lancashire, 
the other spare batsman in the squad, forced to wait his turn alongside 
Yorkshire’s Ballance, who averaged 19.9 in six Tests since his recall last 
summer.

Cook, who stopped short of naming his full side as he and the head coach, 
Trevor Bayliss, ponder conditions and the make-up of their bowling attack, 
said: “I can’t give my team as we haven’t trained yet and seen the wicket but I 
can tell you Has will open the batting and Ben will bat at No4.

“It’s an unfortunate decision on Gary. In his six Tests back he hasn’t quite 
scored the runs he would have liked. It’s given someone else an opportunity and 
it’s a very exciting day for a young guy who has impressed everyone so far on 
this trip.

“You wonder about picking a guy at 19, whether he might be overawed, but 
hasn’t been at all. He’s looked good in the nets.” He added, jokingly, “He has 
shirked 12th man duties which shows his experience at 19 and it’s very special 
day to pick someone so young.”

“He was picked on the tour and talking to Ashley Giles [Lancashire’s head 
coach] and the selectors, people who are very good judges of a player, it’s 
maybe a year earlier than he would have thought but it’s the way he has 
developed so quickly. He’s one of those natural run scorers. He should be very 
proud and hopefully do well.”

On Duckett moving down the order, after making his debut in Bangladesh and 
registering one half-century in his fourth innings, Cook said: “It’s not ideal 
to have two games at the top and change but he’s a pretty unflappable character.

“He had three tough innings then a really good one. Historically he has been a 
middle order batsman – it’s only in the last year he’s been at the top of the 
order – and he’s comfortable there. It’s never ideal when you chop and change.”

Cook, like Hameed, made his Test debut for England in India, doing so in 
Nagpur in 2006 aged 21 years and 67 days. The 31-year-old Essex batsman has 
since gone on to make 10,688 Test runs but believes his new opening partner to 
have greater ability than he possessed at the same age.

“He’s incredibly unflappable,” said Cook. “He looks a very good player of spin 
– he picks length very well and uses the crease well, both forward and back. 
Stuart Broad bowled at him last summer and was almost straight on the phone to 
me saying how impressed he was with this guy. A lot of people have said he 
looks like he can handle it.

“To average 50 in Division One as a 19-year-old is an incredible feat. I 
remember how hard it was and I was nowhere near the player he was at 19. It’s 
really exciting. Of course there are going to be some tough moments for him 
over the next few years of playing Test cricket, but this guy can play.”

Cook’s pre-match press conference on Tuesday included a number of questions 
regarding his future as captain, after he was quoted in the Cricketer magazine 
saying: “Deep down I don’t know how much longer I am going to carry on. It 
could be two months, it could be a year.”

The left-hander has previously stated he fancies a spell back in the ranks 
under new leadership before he retires from Test cricket – Joe Root, the 
vice-captain, is his heir presumptive – but despite this long-term plan, 
thoughts of calling time on his captaincy appear far from his thoughts at 
present.

Cook, who will this week surpass Mike Atherton’s record of 54 Tests as England 
captain, said: “It was just an honest answer to a question that is quite hard 
to answer. Someone asks: ‘How long do you go on for?’ Ever since the Sri Lanka 
series before the 2015 World Cup [when Cook was sacked as one-day captain] I 
have been open and said we’ll take it series by series.

“I said it could be two months – the end of the current series – six months, 
two years. I don’t know. The headline’s been made but my situation hasn’t 
changed. No one is talking about it in the dressing room. So to me, it’s 
business as usual. It’s a mountain out of a molehill.”
 