
Family gatherings can be such a bind. It's not just that they are often sombre 
occasions, such as funerals; even the happiest events - weddings, 
anniversaries, births - can be diminished by the fact that they are invariably 
celebrated in the back end of beyond. The journey turns the whole thing into a 
chore. This thought was with me as I stood uncomfortably in a $40,000 grizzly 
bear coat holding the fossilised remains of a walrus penis.

The kind (and drunk) proprietor of an Alaskan restaurant in downtown Anchorage 
had insisted that her English guest posed for pictures with her father's 
antique fur. I wouldn't have minded so much, but I'd just eaten one of the 
worst meals of my life: soggy defrosted chicken with soggy defrosted corn on 
the cob, washed down with warm medium-dry wine. But guess what? I was having 
the time of my life, and it was about to get better.

The few people from the UK who make the long and arduous journey to Alaska 
usually come between May and September, when the weather is mild and the snow 
has all but disappeared save for the ice-bound mountains and the 100,000 or so 
glaciers that carve up this most spectacularly pristine corner of the United 
States.

I was here for a reason, but it wasn't a chore. It was the baptism of my 
godson, Stephen, who was born in Argentina but whose American parents, Bill and 
Michelle Scannell, decided to bring him up in the Last Frontier.

The word "Alaska" carries a lot of stereotypical baggage, so what is truth and 
what is myth?

First, yes, in the winter it is unrelentingly, unimaginably cold. The sun can 
be shining (as it did for me for five days in February) but the temperature is 
still -30C. I discovered this on my first morning when I strolled across the 
parking lot of the Dimond Center Hotel, on the edge of town, to buy provisions. 
I hadn't got 200 metres before I had to return to fetch my fleecy hat, the one 
in which I looked ridiculous, but the one that would stop my ears falling off.

Second, it is also undeniable that Alaska, tucked up between northern Canada 
and western Siberia and twice the size of Texas and more than six times larger 
than Britain, is a place apart from the rest of the US. The people are fiercely 
independent and many only reluctantly identify with the rest of the US, which 
they refer to as "the Lower 48" - but they respect anyone who has made the 
effort to visit and outsiders are warmly welcomed.

But the image of the state as inhospitable and impenetrable is not wholly 
accurate. In summer, the countryside opens up for walking, canoeing, 
mountaineering and salmon fishing. And, believe it or not, in the interior 
temperatures can reach 25C. Transport can be difficult - there is just one 
railway line, from the port of Seward to Fairbanks in the heart of the 
interior, and only a couple of major highways outside populated areas - but 
there are ferries and plenty of reasonably priced short-hop flights.

My visit coincided with the annual fur "rondy" (rendezvous), which 
commemorates the days when fur trappers used to come into Anchorage to sell 
their wares, get drunk, blow their cash and then return to the wilderness. 
Today, it is marked by a carnival, dog-sled races, ice sculpture and generally 
more genteel pursuits.

You can still buy furs if you want to. A wolverine pelt will set you back 
$525, a lynx $295. Hats of beaver will fetch $215, blue fox $225. Only your 
conscience can be your guide. John Sarvis, a 59-year-old former trapper and fur 
salesman, claims that only "excess animals" - those that would die anyway due 
to natural selection or a lack of food - are "harvested".

Anchorage is home to about 250,000 people, 42% of Alaska's population, and it 
is not a particularly attractive town. Nevertheless, it has some good hotels 
and restaurants, particularly if you are partial to fresh crab, cod, salmon and 
halibut. And there are plenty of bars, where the people might sometimes have 
the appearance of a death-cult militia, but where the kindness is enough to 
thaw your frozen extremities.

But enough of Anchorage. As well as his son's baptism, Bill had arranged 
another highlight: a journey to Talkeetna, the town on which the television 
series Northern Exposure was based (detested here for its twee inaccuracy). Ten 
of us chartered an air taxi to fly from there to Mt McKinley, at 20,320ft the 
highest peak in North America.

Why, apart from the fact that it's a great thing to do? Because we wanted to 
pick up some glacial ice for the drinks at the christening celebration the 
following day. And to do that, we would have to land on the Ruth glacier, in 
the shadow of Mt McKinley at 6,000ft.

So, after a gargantuan breakfast at the fabulous Snow City Cafe at 4th and L 
Street in Anchorage, we boarded a bus to take us on the two-and-a-half-hour 
journey to Talkeetna. It had been supplied by the Magic Bus company, but surely 
there had been some mistake; they seemed to have sent us a passion wagon left 
over from some long-forgotten Rolling Stones tour. Leather sofas hugged the 
interior. There was a bar and a surround-sound video screen. But no drugs or 
groupies.

The journey whizzed by. We saw moose, bald eagles and caribou but not, sadly, 
any brown or black bears. The landscape was frozen tundra with snow-peaked 
mountains on every hazy horizon.

We made just one stop, at a lonely service station where, outside, there was a 
freezer selling ice cubes. It was -25C and I wondered what would happen if I 
put my hand inside. Sure enough, it felt warm. The proprietor saw me and 
laughed. "Go ahead," he said. "Climb in and warm up." So I sat on the bags of 
ice, and, sure enough, it felt balmy in a joyful, ridiculous way.

Minutes later, Mt McKinley rose, harsh and foreboding and utterly beautiful. 
It is 50% higher than any other mountain in the Alaska range and it controls 
the region's weather patterns; thousands of tonnes of snow flowing from its 
peak form the raw material for the glaciers that weave between peaks like 
gigantic frozen rivers.

We arrived at the Talkeetna Air Taxi company and were briefed on our journey 
above the Ruth and Kahiltna glaciers to the Don Sheldon amphitheatre, a huge 
snowbound bowl cradled by mountain after stunning mountain. And it seemed 
impossible that an aircraft could land here.

Paul, our pilot, briefed us on our (1954!) DeHavilland Otter and its safety 
features (food, sleeping bags, blankets - I wanted to ask if he had lots that 
we could draw should we crash and have to start eating one other, but thought 
better of it).

Then we set off, the aircraft's skis launching us into the air in an 
unfeasibly short distance. And the views were breathtaking. Below, at first, 
were spruce, birch and alder forests and tundra, frozen creeks and the 
white-spaghetti tracks of trappers' snowmobiles. Then came the mouths of the 
glaciers, littered at the bottom with displaced rocks and trees and dirt.

But as they rose between the mountains and up to McKinley they became whiter 
than white, punctuated by aquamarine ice where shelves have collapsed and 
crevasses formed. For glacial ice, 100,000 years old, is blue. And here, below 
the surface of the Ruth glacier, it is several thousand feet thick.

After half an hour, we came in to land and it seemed we were heading straight 
for a mountain. But the Otter descended quickly, hit the snow and came to a 
smooth and fast halt. Visibility was seemingly endless and the silence truly 
moving. We climbed out and took in the view and it seemed inappropriate to 
break the peace with meaningless talk.

We had taken a bottle of vodka and mixed it with snow - just one to wet the 
baby's head. It was, after all, a celebration. But the glacial ice was too far 
beneath the snow and, even though there are millions of tonnes of it, we felt 
it would have been wrong to take even a bucketful.

Even with responsible winter gear, we began to freeze within minutes and it 
was time to go. Again, we rose steeply and in silence, awestruck.

The following day, the journey seemed to make the christening, and Bill's 
decision to bring up his children here, more poignant. It is a difficult place 
in which to live, but the air is clean, the inhabitants enjoy an unspoken 
collective togetherness and crime is almost non-existent.

And in a state with almost no major highways we must forgive them their use of 
aircraft and their carbon footprints. In every other respect, the people here 
fiercely guard their environment and constantly fight attempts to exploit its 
natural resources.

If you go, then, the principle of taking nothing but photographs and leaving 
nothing but footprints applies here as much as anywhere. And, anyway, your 
footprints will soon be covered in snow.

Getting there
BA (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies Heathrow-Anchorage via Seattle from 
Â£719.90 return inc tax. The Magic Bus Company (+907 268 6311,themagicbus.com 
<http://www.themagicbus.com>) has buses for 5-55 passsengers. The Talkeetna Air 
Taxi company (+907 733 2218,talkeetnaair.com <http://www.talkeetnaair.com>) 
offers flights to Ruth glacier for $200pp.

Where to stay
Dimond Center Hotel, Anchorage (+907 770 5000, dimondcenterhotel.com 
<http://www.dimondcenterhotel.com>) from $80. 

Further information
Country code: 001.
Flight time Heathrow-Anchorage : 15 hrs.
Time difference: -9hrs.
 