
Paul Stanistreet, policy lead on higher education, The National Institute of 
Adult Continuing Education <http://www.niace.org.uk> (NIACE)

Colleges need to be clearer about what makes them distinctive: Colleges, 
overall, have a weaker brand than other big players in the education sector and 
for that reason are sometimes excluded from debate. However, universities needs 
to recognise that the HE sector needs to change, that colleges bring something 
distinctive and valuable to the table, and that colleges are a positive part of 
that change, offering, in many cases, high quality teaching and flexible modes 
of study at a reduced cost.

The introduction of loans at FE level will put students off university: Level 
3 loans 
<http://www.feweek.co.uk/index.php/2011/08/17/consultation-report-outlines-plans-for-further-education-loans/>
, that allow FE students to take out a loan to pay for the upfront costs of 
their course, were introduced last year and their impact is a massive unknown 
quantity. Though there hasn't been much research done, there is clearly a risk 
that this new scheme will have a negative impact on the government's ambitions 
to widen participation and improve social mobility.

A particular worry is the impact on Access to HE courses 
<http://www.accesstohe.ac.uk/>. My feeling is that the prospect of having to 
pay off two sets of loans will act as a significant deterrent to students 
without more traditional entrance qualifications who are weighing up the costs 
and benefits of higher study. It's also worth noting that these will often be 
students who, because of their 'non-traditional' backgrounds, are more likely 
to be risk averse. I think the idea of writing off Level 3 loans on completion 
of a higher course is a useful one.

Barbara Edwards, assistant director, Quality Assurance Agency 
<http://www.qaa.ac.uk>

The Foundation Degree is proof that effective partnerships between HE and FE 
are possible: The process by which colleges build and strengthen their 
regulatory systems in preparation for awarding their own degrees, demonstrates 
how they are making use of the knowledge and experience of their validating 
partners, but developing their own brand, often based on responsiveness to 
local social and economic conditions. Similarly, HE seems to be learning a 
great deal from FE about how to be student centred. There has always been a 
strong student focus in colleges and higher education institutions are 
currently catching up with this aspect of their provision.

HE in FE can offer something different from the traditional university 
experience, but equally valuable: Last year QAA conducted over 150 summative 
reviews of HE in FE. This is the final stage of the Integrated Quality and 
Enhancement Review (IQER) process, and the outcomes show that FE colleges are 
very capable of maintaining standards. As such, they are of benefit to those 
students who do not want a traditional 'university experience'. Some want to 
study locally to fit in with busy lives as parents or carers; some need 
'front-loaded' skills development; and some want to remain in the institution 
where their gained their previous qualifications. Colleges, often in 
conjunction with employers, continue to be sufficiently flexible to meet these 
needs.

Steve Besley, head of policy, Pearson Centre for Policy and Learning 
<http://www.pearsoncpl.com>

Higher education institutions and further education colleges must be prepared 
to share expertise: FE already offers a lot of HE provision and from my 
perspective, has provided valuable HE provision for years. It therefore has a 
lot of experience and in my view is well placed to pick up a lot of the 20,000 
proposed margin places. The interesting question, however, is whether it can 
create a new channel of HE provision in the brave new world: vocationally 
focused, flexible, two year degrees, perhaps serving a distinctive market. 
Nevertheless, for HE and FE to work well in this new market, they must be 
prepared to do the following:

• Be prepared to share expertise.

• Where already working together, establish what the David Willetts calls 'the 
single membrane,' in other words a single framework of progression.

• See colleges as allies, able to offer complementary rather than competitive 
provision.

Consider the use of titling as a way of removing the snobbery in the system: 
Name changes are common in education, after all, many schools are now known as 
academies and even the title of university has been under discussion. The 
government providesguidance 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/policies/further-education-skills/guidance/fe-college-name-changes>
 for colleges but the question still remains: if you change the title do you 
change views about one type of institution being better than another, along 
with it?

Christa Appleton, e-learning advisor and HE co-ordinator, JISC Regional 
Support Centre <https://www.theguardian.com/international> West Midlands

Shared interest in standards and results are a good reason for collaboration: 
Where universities accredit college courses, good communications are key and 
where they work well they are a real boon. There is plenty of evidence of good 
connections such as the support University of Wolverhampton gives to 
Wolverhampton College, with shared meetings to clarify enrolment and new 
procedures. But this is not however consistent across the board.

As the university has control with regard to awarding powers perhaps the ball 
is in its court to check that everything is done to ensure all collaborative 
partnerships flourish to support FE college partnerships.

Technology can improve collaboration between HE and FE: There have never been 
better opportunities to use technology to communicate easily over distance and 
this brings with it scope to improve collaborations. I'm not sure where you 
would draw the line between new and old technologies, things develop so fast 
but many useful services have been around a while but may now also offer 
options via mobile devices – Skype for example. During the last year we have 
made increasing use ofSharepoint 
<http://sharepoint.microsoft.com/en-us/pages/default.aspx> here for sharing and 
collaborating among the team, this type of technology has huge potential I 
think because everything is linked to one place making it easy and logical to 
use. As well as make communications between partners more efficient, technology 
can also, of course, aid and enhance teaching and learning.

Resource: JISC has supported a number of HE in FE projects with useful outputs 
which shows that colleges can make a valuable contribution to research, 
especially related to practice and work. You can view these projects, which 
include enhancing e-assessment, e-portfolis and mobile learning,here 
<http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/elearningcapital/heinfe.aspx>

Steve Outram, academic lead for, change programmes and non-HEI provision, 
Higher Education Academy <http://www.heacademy.ac.uk>

The distinctive student learning experience offered by further education 
colleges can be seen as an opportunity or a threat: I have recently heard 
disquiet from some FECs that the local university at the heart of their network 
is ending their relationships because of a concern about competition. 
Conversely, I know of some universities who are seeing this as an opportunity 
to develop the relationships further such as Birmingham City who aredeveloping 
a virtual students union 
<http://www.bbcslln.ac.uk/Content/pdf/other/luke-millard.pdf> to support HE 
students in the college network they support.

Resource: For information on collaboration and use of technology, 
Staffordshire University is developing software to support APEL 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=staffordshire%20university%20is%20developing%20software%20to%20support%20apel&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCQQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fuplace.org.uk%3A8080%2Fdspace%2Fbitstream%2Fhandle%2F10293%2F1048%2Fpineapple%25203%2520combined%2520small.pdf%3Fsequence%3D1&ei=DegRT4KsKsue-Qb_kaTOAg&usg=AFQjCNE9wsaHQywTcevkV-_G6SfdfHnW7w&cad=rja>
 which can help not just individual institutions but also the articulation 
between sectors.

Rachel Smith, director of corporate development, College Marketing Network 
<http://www.m-network.org>

Priorities for colleges should include increasing access and maintaining 
cost-effectiveness: New ways of accessing HE are being developed such as the 
fast track honours degree at Farnborough 
<http://www.farn-ct.ac.uk/templates/pressrelease____557.aspx>, in collaboration 
with University of Surrey. An Association of Collges (AoC) survey showed that
students in FE graduated with an average of £17,500 less debt than HE 
<http://www.aoc.co.uk/en/newsroom/aoc_news_releases.cfm/id/2A53D90F-F22D-4925-84EF597CD19AF917>
 students, so trying to maintain their fee levels is key. Developing better 
links with employers is also seen as a unique selling point.City College 
Plymouth <http://www.cityplym.ac.uk/>was recently commended by QAA for its 
links to industry, which were seen as contributing significantly to the success 
of its HE programmes.

Greg Wade, higher education policy adviser, UniversitiesUK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/Pages/Default.aspx>

In a bigger market, the decision must be made about who regulates partnerships:
 I think the biggest challenge for HE and FE partnerships is defining and 
understanding the impacts of an increased 'market' and what this means for the 
role of government and agencies in supporting and regulating partnerships or 
whether HEIs and FE Colleges should be left to define their own partnerships.
 