
When Madeline Lindford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/aug/14/women-women> set up 
theGuardian women’s page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-s-page-resource-gnm-archive>
 in 1922female journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2015/jun/01/women-guardian-teaching-resource-gnm-archive-june-2015>
 were few and far between. However there were two, Helena Swanwick and Evelyn 
Sharp, who were already well known to readers.

Helena Swanwick  <http://spartacus-educational.com/Wswanwick.htm> (1864-1929) 
was the daughter of the artist Oswald Sickert. While at school she readThe 
Subjection of Women by John Stuart Mill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/02/subjection-women-john-stuart-mill>
 and became a supporter of women’s suffrage. She attendedGirton College 
<http://www.girton.cam.ac.uk/girtons-past>, Cambridge thanks to her sympathetic 
godmother - her father refused to pay her fees. She studied moral sciences and 
after graduating she lectured in psychology at Westfield College. At Cambridge 
Helena met Frederick Swanwick, a lecturer in Mathematics at Owens College. The 
couple married in 1888 and moved to Manchester. Frederick shared her liberal 
views and they became friends ofCP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott>, editor 
of the Manchester Guardian.

The Guardian archive at The Manchester University Library 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/search-resources/guide-to-special-collections/atoz/guardian-archive/>
 has a short letter from Helena Swanwick to CP Scott, dated 4 August 1899, 
asking if he “would make trial of me by sending me a book to review for the 
Manchester Guardian.” She encloses two essays “as specimens of my writing” and 
also notes that she is fluent in French and German. She went on to review books 
for the paper under the byline HMS (it was the convention at the time to use 
initials only). An analysis of her early work for the Manchester Guardian shows 
her as a contributor of book reviews, observational pieces and articles that 
reflected her love of gardening.

If I am in prison you will understand why I cannot send you any articles for 
the present: I think you have one in hand.
Evelyn Sharp, 22 November 1911 
Evelyn Sharp <http://spartacus-educational.com/Wsharp.htm> (1869-1955) was the 
daughter of a slate merchant. Although she passed several university 
examinations she was sent to finishing school in France. Against the wishes of 
her family, Sharp moved to London where she taught and wrote in her spare time. 
Her first novel was published in 1895.


In 1903 she began a relationship with the journalist Henry Nevinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/01/reporting-gallipoli>. He was a 
contributor for a number of newspapers including the Manchester Guardian and 
with his encouragement from 1906 Sharp started to submit articles to the 
newspaper. Unlike Helena Swanwick, most of Evelyn Sharp’s articles appeared 
with her byline in full on the Guardian’s back page. Her early articles mainly 
focused on fashion such as commentary on how to dress whensea bathing  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jul/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
in 1906. Like Swanwick she contributed observational pieces and articles on 
household management.


Both Swanwick and Sharp were influential in the women’s suffrage movement. In 
1903Emmeline <http://spartacus-educational.com/WpankhurstE.htm>, Christabel 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/WpankhurstC.htm> and Sylvia Pankhurst 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/WpankhurstS.htm> broke away from the main 
suffrage movementNational Union of Women’s Suffrage Societies (NUWSS) 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Union_of_Women%27s_Suffrage_Societies>. 
They were frustrated with the lack of results from years of ‘constitutional’ 
campaigning and set upWomen’s Social and Political Union (WSPU) 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women%27s_Social_and_Political_Union> with the 
slogan of “Deeds not words”. Swanwick joined the NUWSS in 1905.


In October 1906, after she had submitted a few articles for the Guardian, 
Sharp was asked by the Guardian to report on a suffrage rally in Tunbridge 
Wells where NUWSS leaderMillicent Fawcett 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/WfawcettM.htm> was speaking. The article 
(bylined “from our own correspondent”) relates a dramatic moment when actress 
and new WSPU memberElizabeth Robins  
<http://spartacus-educational.com/Wrobins.htm>stepped onto the platform and 
criticised the press for their coverage of the WSPU. Robins said she “found an 
earnest band of women working for a common cause without any of the unlovely 
qualities described in the press.” Sharp’s biographerAngela V John  
<http://www.angelavjohn.com/publications.php>cites this as a crucial turning 
point in her life. Following the meeting she joined the Kensington branch of 
the WSPU.


The Guardian editor CP Scott's unlikely role in the suffragette movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/28/guardian-editors-role-in-suffragette-movement-emmeline-pankhurst-feminism-charles-prestwich-scott>
CP Scott supported votes for women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/28/guardian-editors-role-in-suffragette-movement-emmeline-pankhurst-feminism-charles-prestwich-scott>
 but not the increasing militancy of the WSPU which he felt hindered the cause. 
He believed there was enough coverage of the issue in news and editorial so it 
was rare for Swanwick and Sharp to write articles on the issue. In July 1907 
Swanwick wrote a piece highlighting the work of the women’s suffrage movement 
thus far and on how she and her NUWSS colleagues petitioned voters, a yard away 
from the polling station, as a new law stated, in July 1909 . Sharp has an 
article on selling the WSPUVotes for Women 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/WvotesM.htm> magazine in Kensington in 
February 1908 and on the types of voters going to a polling station in December 
1910.

Swanwick and Sharp also appear in Guardian news articles and on the letters 
pages. In 1909 Swanwick moved to London and became editor of the NUWSS journal,
The Common Cause <http://spartacus-educational.com/Wcommoncause.htm>. Speeches 
she gave are reported in the Guardian. In November 1910 Liberal Prime Minister 
Herbert Asquith let a proposed Conciliation Bill giving a million women the 
vote run out of time. AWSPU delegation to Parliament 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Friday_(1910)> was met with heavy police 
resistance. Swanwick and Sharp have letters published on the same 
correspondence page on 25 November. Swanwick’s urges Scott to take issue with 
Asquith and his failed promises, Sharp’s criticises an editorial on the women’s 
subsequent actions and explains why a WSPU colleague vandalised Asquith’s car. 
Scott adds a footnote to Sharp’s letter reiterating the paper’s view.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440689627991%2F143ca18e-5d82-4d7d-af13-a6d0be6878d1-1256x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helena%20Swanwick%20and%20Evelyn%20Sharp%20-%20pioneering%20Guardian%20journalists%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20September%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helena%20Swanwick%20and%20Evelyn%20Sharp%20-%20pioneering%20Guardian%20journalists%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20September%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440689627991%2F143ca18e-5d82-4d7d-af13-a6d0be6878d1-1256x2040.jpeg>
 First page of a letter from Evelyn Sharp to CP Scott, 22 November 1911. 
Photograph: Courtesy of The University of Manchester and the Michael Ayrton 
Estate 
Swanwick and Sharp’s letters on correspondence page, 25 November 1910 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1440588729393/Swanwick-and-Sharp-on-corre.pdf>

In November 1911 Sharp became involved in WSPU militant action for the first 
time and was arrested for smashing the windows of the War Office in protest at 
demise of a new Conciliation Bill in the House of Commons. The Manchester 
University Library has a letter from her, dated 22 November, to CP Scott from 
Bow Street police court. She starts with: “ If I am in prison you will 
understand why I cannot send you any articles for the present: I think you have 
one in hand.” She then goes on to criticise Scott’s editorial on the militant 
action. She was imprisoned for 14 days. She continued to be involved in 
militant action and after her “in hand” article appeared, a book review on the 
history of the pin, did not have any more pieces in the Guardian until autumn 
1914.


Sharp continues to be mentioned regularly in news pieces; giving speeches at 
rallies and being arrested in July 1913 after being forcibly ejected from the 
House of Commons after failing to gain admittance to talk to MPs about the‘Cat 
and Mouse’ Act (Temporary discharge for ill health). 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/living-heritage/transformingsociety/electionsvoting/womenvote/case-study-the-right-to-vote/the-right-to-vote/winson-green-forcefeeding/cat-and-mouse-act/>


Sharp felt the Guardian’s editorial on the death of Emily Wilding Davison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/emily-davison-derby-coverage-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 at the Epsom Derby, in June 1913, insulted the efforts of the women’s suffrage 
movement.CP Scott footnoted her letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2013/jun/06/emily-davison-suffragette-death>
 reiterating the paper’s view of WSPU militancy. A similar footnote from Scott 
appears on Sharp’s letter defending the actions ofMary Richardson 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/WrichardsonM.htm> who vandalised Velazquez’s 
Rokeby Venus painting in the National Gallery in March 1914.

Emily Davison Derby coverage: teaching resource from the GNM archive June 2013
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/emily-davison-derby-coverage-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
In contrast, Swanwick resigned her editorship of The Common Cause in July 1912 
because she felt the NUWSS leadership was not critical enough of the WSPU 
increased militancy. In a letter to CP Scott dated 19 July 1912, in The 
Manchester University Library, she outlines her intention of resigning and 
explains: “ I have much sympathy for feminine rebellion. For their claptrap and 
dishonesty, for their persecution and terrorism, I have loathing”. Swanwick 
continued to write for the Guardian but only had eight articles published 
between January 1913 and August 1914 as she continued to campaign for women’s 
suffrage.

During the first world war both Sharp and Swanwick supported pacifism. 
Swanwick worked withRamsay MacDonald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/23/macdonald-first-labour-pm-1924>
 (later the first Labour Prime Minister) to set up theUnion of Democratic 
Control <http://spartacus-educational.com/FWWudc.htm>, which opposed conflict 
with Germany. Both Sharp and Swanwick were members of theWomen’s International 
League for Peace 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women%27s_International_League_for_Peace_and_Freedom>
 and the Labour party. Swanwick was attacked after pacifist meetings and was 
sent hate mail. She left the NUWSS as she did not agree with their support of 
the war.

Following the WPSU’s anti-male policy and the expulsions of Emmeline 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/Wpethick.htm> and Fredrick Pethick-Lawrence 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/TUpethick.htm>, Sharp and Nevinson joined the 
Lawrences to set up theUnited Suffragists 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/Wunited.htm> and Sharp became editor of Votes 
for Women. According to Angela V John, the United Suffragists were involved in 
behind the scenes negotiations with the government that lead to the 1918
Representation of the People Act 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/living-heritage/transformingsociety/electionsvoting/womenvote/parliamentary-collections/collections-the-vote-and-after/representation-of-the-people-act-1918/>
 which gave female householders over 30 the vote. Sharp continued to believe in 
“no taxation without representation” and in 1917 had her possessions removed by 
bailiffs, including her typewriter, for not paying tax for six years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e52d04e2c36c28066b132579ec219e7aebf1c4%2F847_270_849_750%2F849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helena%20Swanwick%20and%20Evelyn%20Sharp%20-%20pioneering%20Guardian%20journalists%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20September%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helena%20Swanwick%20and%20Evelyn%20Sharp%20-%20pioneering%20Guardian%20journalists%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20September%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2e52d04e2c36c28066b132579ec219e7aebf1c4%2F847_270_849_750%2F849.jpg>
 Helena Swanwick, Country Diary, 7 June 1920. Photograph: HMS/Guardian 
According to Martin Wainwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinwainwright>, Helena Swanwick’s motto 
was “don’t wait to be asked” and in 1915 she asked CP Scott if she could write 
a weekly gardening column. She initially wrote one for the Saturday edition and 
on the strength of this he asked her to become the first woman to write for the 
famouscountry diary column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/aug/30/wildlife> on a salary of 
a guinea and a half a week. Wainwright adds that her country diary “was often 
more of a gardening notebook with feminine touches.” Sharp resumed writing for 
the Guardian back page on a regular basis after the outbreak of the first world 
war although Scott asked to her to tone down any reference to pacifism.

In 1922 Swanwick and Sharp were the first contributors to the women’s page. 
Swanwick wrote mainly book reviews. Sharp covered a wide range of subjects 
including feminism, women’s achievements, education and responses to news items 
such asfood shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/feb/06/from-the-archives> in 
Germany caused by the occupation of the Ruhr in 1924 andfemale boxers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/from-the-archive-blog/2012/aug/05/first-women-boxing-london-olympics-2012>
 in 1926. An example of the women’s page from 7 November in 1923 has Sharp 
writing on unwanted gifts and Swanwick responding in a letter on the issue of 
washing up.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c306d60561e008d6fb4d330dcad3c0602dd2488%2F0_0_2128_2805%2F2128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helena%20Swanwick%20and%20Evelyn%20Sharp%20-%20pioneering%20Guardian%20journalists%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20September%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helena%20Swanwick%20and%20Evelyn%20Sharp%20-%20pioneering%20Guardian%20journalists%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20September%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fhelena-swanwick-and-evelyn-sharp-pioneering-guardian-journalists-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-september-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c306d60561e008d6fb4d330dcad3c0602dd2488%2F0_0_2128_2805%2F2128.jpg>
 Women’s page 7 November 1923 with articles from Evelyn Sharp and Helena 
Swanwick Photograph: Guardian 
Guardian Women’s page 7 November 1923 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1440589892880/Manchester-Guardian-Women's.pdf>

Between 1924 and 1937 Swanwick stopped writing for the Guardian. She left to 
edit the Union of Democratic Control’s magazine Foreign Affairs and she also 
became an official government representative at theLeague of Nations 
<http://www.bl.uk/reshelp/findhelpregion/internat/theleagueofnations/leagueofnations.html>
 campaigning on women’s rights and debating on foreign affairs. In 1931 she was 
made aCompanion of Honour 
<http://www.royal.gov.uk/monarchuk/honours/companionsofhonour.aspx>. She 
resumed writing for thecountry diary 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/8/26/1440590790473/27-July-1938-HMS-Country--001.jpg>
 in 1937, after she retired from her international work. Her last column for 
the country diary was written on 29 March 1939. On 16 November she committed 
suicide a couple of months after the outbreak of the second world war.


Sharp continued to write for the Guardian until 1943. The GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> has a congratulatory letter from her 
to the new editorWP Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2015/jan/02/foreign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014>
 on 7 May 1932 in which she writes “It is a great relief to know that the old 
tradition will be carried on, in the spirit of the issues the paper has 
sustained.” In 1933 she married Henry Nevinson. Also in the collection is a 
letter dated 16 April 1944 to the London editor James Bone on Crozier’s death 
noting that “circumstances have made me so negligible a contributor.” Evelyn 
Sharp died on 17 June 1955.

Correspondence of Swanwick and Sharp held in the Manchester Guardian archive 
at The University of Manchester Library can be viewed by contactingKaren Jacques
 <mailto:karen.jacques@manchester.ac.uk> for an appointment. An overview of the 
collection at UML, which makes up the majority of the Guardian’s archive from 
its foundation in 1821 up to its move to London in the 1960s, can be found on 
theUML website 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/search-resources/guide-to-special-collections/atoz/guardian-archive/>

Sharp’s letters in the Crozier 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=WPC>
 collection at theGNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> can be 
viewed in the reading room by appointment. Please seethis page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for further information 
on the archive collections and how to access them.

Further reading


Evelyn Sharp: Rebel Woman and War, Journalism and the Shaping of the Twentieth 
Century <http://www.angelavjohn.com/publications.php>


A Good Year for Blossom – women writers of the country diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/aug/30/wildlife>

Women at the Guardian in their own words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2015/jun/01/women-guardian-teaching-resource-gnm-archive-june-2015>

Guardian women’s page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-s-page-resource-gnm-archive>

The Guardian editor CP Scott’s unlikely role in the suffragette movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/28/guardian-editors-role-in-suffragette-movement-emmeline-pankhurst-feminism-charles-prestwich-scott>

Emily Davison Derby coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/emily-davison-derby-coverage-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 