
On the 15 December 1926, aviator John F Leeming attempted to land an Avro 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avro> plane on Helvellyn, a 950 metre high 
mountain with a restricted plateau in the English Lake District. Hoping to 
capture this historic event was photographer Walter Doughty, theManchester 
Guardian’s first photographer 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer>
 who accompanied the flight in a plane piloted by Bert Hinkler. Doughty was 
already an aerial photography enthusiast and had become the first newspaperman 
to photographBlackpool from the air in 1919 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer#img-11>
.

Unfortunately a combination of fog, hail and snow meant that the attempt had 
to be abandoned but, Doughty did manage to take theserare photographs of 
Leeming’s plane 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/2/2/1422896374643/Avro-16-December-1926-001.jpg>
. He also explained the process behind getting theaerial ‘snapshots’ 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/2/2/1422896445235/Doughty-copy-16-December--001.jpg>
.

Coming back we were in almost total darkness, and had to seek the aid of a 
compass. Towns could hardly be made out, but near Warrington we were able to 
pick up the Ship Canal, and followed its course until we landed over Irlam.

The inclusion of Doughty’s own words in the Guardian’s article about the 
failed landing 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/2/2/1422897343584/Driven-back-16-Dec-1926-001.jpg>
, credited only as the ‘Manchester Guardian Photographer’ outlines some of the 
enjoyment he must have had whilst taking these adventurous photographs.

After another failed attempt, Leeming finally managed to land his plane on the 
mountain summit on 22 December 1926. Ahiker signed a certificate as a witness 
of the feat 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/2/2/1422896279791/Helvellyn-26-Dec-1926-001.jpg>
 and Leeming tookphotographs of the plane atop Helvellyn 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/2/4/1423048854032/Helvellyn-23-Dec-1926-004.jpg>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fhelvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429096242984%2Fc02daf4b-a48f-482b-8b12-9bd59cc1619b-2060x583.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helvellyn%20from%20the%20air%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20July%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fhelvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helvellyn%20from%20the%20air%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20July%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fhelvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429096242984%2Fc02daf4b-a48f-482b-8b12-9bd59cc1619b-2060x583.jpeg>
 Three examples of John Leeming flying in his AVRO plane taken by Walter 
Doughty in December 1926. Photograph: Walter Doughty for the Guardian 
There are few examples of pristine vintage prints in the ‘Aircraft - Early 
Flights’ picture file (part of theManchester Picture Library 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f6%2f9%2f1%2f4&>
) now housed and preserved at theGNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>. This is because the reverse was 
often used to record interesting details, such as the photographer’s caption, 
dates of publication, picture editor’s notes and crop marks. These rarely-seen 
markings reveal a lesser-known history of the picture library and give a voice 
to those who contributed to them. It is unusual to come across a print in the 
collection that does not hold these details and in many cases the inscriptions 
provide valuable clues as to their context and origin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fhelvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429092140002%2Ff583e988-ba74-42d2-89e6-e65a929255d1-2060x1633.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Helvellyn%20from%20the%20air%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20July%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fhelvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Helvellyn%20from%20the%20air%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20July%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fjul%2F01%2Fhelvellyn-from-the-air-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-july-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429092140002%2Ff583e988-ba74-42d2-89e6-e65a929255d1-2060x1633.jpeg>
 Mr Leeming diving through the clouds to see where he is. Taken over the 
Cumberland hills, December 15 1926 Photograph: Guardian News & Media Archive 
for the Guardian 
Of the 21 prints that make up this picture file, four are of Leeming and his 
plane - each one an extraordinary example of aerial photography as seen through 
Doughty’s advantaged viewpoint. Not only are these pictures of historical 
value, they may well not exist elsewhere as, to our knowledge, no negatives of 
this set survive. Although discoloured, they have lasted well and outlived the 
printing blocks which first brought them to readers of the Manchester Guardian. 
These blocks, as recorded on each prints reverse had been destroyed by the end 
of that same year.

Further reading:

Walter Doughty: Manchester under one of the last skies of the old-year - 
teaching resource from the GNM Archive, December 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2014/dec/01/walter-doughty-manchester-guardian-photography-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>

Walter Doughty – the Guardian’s first photographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/walter-doughty-guardian-first-photographer>

A-Z of the Guardian News and Media Archive – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2014/nov/07/guardian-news-and-media-archive-a-to-z-in-pictures>

Tom Stuttard and the Guardian’s first picture library: teaching resource from 
the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/tom-stuttard-teaching-resource-photography-manchester-guardian-gnm-archive>

A Long Exposure: 100 years of Guardian photography: Guardian photographer 
Denis Thorpe and northern editor Martin Wainwright discuss an exhibition of 
pictures taken by the paper’s Manchester photographers. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/interactive/2008/oct/21/theguardian-pressandpublishing>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
 