
Rodin died on 17 November 1917, aged 77. Henry Moore 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/henry-moore> was then 19, a soldier serving 
on the battlefront in France. We began our conversation by talking of his 
earliest memories of Rodin. Moore has no recollection of learning of Rodin's 
death, though he was already well aware of the great sculptor's reputation.

Henry Moore: I certainly knew about Rodin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/nov/12/auguste-rodin-antony-gormley-bronze>
. I remember my father showing me some photographs of his sculpture, and this 
may have been as early as 1914. And when I was demobilised in 1919 and went to 
the Leeds School of Art, I remember making a figure influenced by Rodin, a 
figure of an old man with a beard. He was very thin and scraggy, but he 
cracked, because I didn't know enough about armatures. Miss Gostick at 
Castleford [Moore's art teacher at Castleford secondary school] had it in her 
house, on a shelf, until it disintegrated and fell apart. Then I did another 
piece influenced by Rodin, a head of a baby, also in 1919.

About this time in Leeds reference library I came across Rodin's book called 
Art – as simple as that – the conversations with Paul Gsell 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Art-Conversations-Gsell-Quantum-Books/dp/0520058879>. 
I read this book with great interest. I remember in it somewhere Rodin saying 
that when he got stuck with modelling a clay sculpture, he would sometimes drop 
it on the floor and have another look. Now this was for me, as a young 
sculptor, a tremendous revelation of how you can take advantage of accidents, 
and how you should always try and look at a thing over again, with a fresh eye.

Alan Bowness: What happened when you got to London, as a student at the Royal 
College?

HM: I met people who knew Rodin, and that interested me. I remember Eric 
Maclagan <http://www.dictionaryofarthistorians.org/maclagane.htm> [director of 
the Victoria and Albert Museum, 1924-45] talking about him, and to know that 
somebody like Rodin had been in London and had walked these same little streets 
that I was walking – that was a very real thing for me. And I saw the works 
that he'd given to the V&A, and could study them. I had a great admiration for 
them at the time, though I never made any conscious study of Rodin.

AB: There's usually a reaction against any great artist shortly after his 
death, and in Rodin's case this must have affected your generation in 
particular.

HM: I think we were all influenced by Rodin at first – even Brancusi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2004/jan/27/2>. And it's true that sculptors 
were interested in primitive art and that this profoundly altered sculpture. 
But Rodin himself, somewhere in one of his conversations, pointed to an early 
Greek or early Chinese sculpture, and said that this was what he would like to 
start from now. Towards the end of his life, he had come through to this point 
of view about sculpture.

But it's quite true that when I first went to Paris in the early 1920s I don't 
think I went to theMusée Rodin <http://www.musee-rodin.fr/>. I was much more 
interested in Cézanne and theMusée de l'Homme <http://www.museedelhomme.fr/>. 
It was the same withMichelangelo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/michelangelo> – when I won the 
travelling scholarship from the College, I did my best in the first two months 
in Italy to avoid seeing Michelangelo.

AB: That's just the opposite from Rodin, because when he went to Italy as a 
young sculptor, he was tremendously impressed by Michelangelo – as we can see 
from works likeThe Age of Bronze 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/07.127> and Saint John the Baptist.

HM: I agree, Rodin owes a tremendous amount to Michelangelo. But if you like 
something tremendously, you may react and think you're against it, but inside 
you can't get away from it. This is what happened to me over Rodin. 
Gradually, I began to realise that a lot of things one might be using and 
being influenced by – Negro sculpture for example, which gives you a simplified 
programme to work on – are, compared with Rodin, too easy, so as time has gone 
on, my admiration for Rodin has grown and grown.

AB: In some ways your own personal experience mirrors a change in the general 
reaction to Rodin. Don't you think it's easier for us to appreciate Rodin today 
than it was 30 years ago?
 Rodin's The Burghers Of Calais. Photograph: Mike Bruce 
HM: I doubt it. Perhaps for the general public, but I don't know about the 
young sculptors. And there's still that literary, pictorial side to Rodin's 
work, which we find in Victorian painting. This comes out particularly in the 
carvings, which weren't actually touched by him. Rodin wasn't a carver.

AB: Can you define this Victorian flavour?

HM: Well it consists of the sort of thing you associate with Victor Hugo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jan/26/hugo-manet-paris-poor-privilege> – 
what can one call it? – the expression of a philosophical outlook on life, 
moral, universal …

AB: You don't believe sculptors can be universal?

HM: Oh no, I think they can, but they don't consciously need to be. And Rodin 
is as universal in his fragments as in the big figures, because he understood 
the human body so well. This is, in my opinion, the greatness of Rodin, that he 
could identify himself with and feel so strongly about the human body. He 
believed it was the basis of all sculpture. And out of the body he could make 
these marvellous sculptural rhythms. It's interesting that he talks about 
sculpture being the art of the hole and the bump – all his sayings on sculpture 
are about physical reactions to it.

AB: I think perhaps Rodin didn't take the literary meanings of his sculptures 
as seriously as his contemporaries. He changes his titles all the time, as 
though he really didn't care what the work was called. It's all a part of the 
extraordinary interchangeability you find in Rodin. In making the selection for 
the exhibition [Rodin at the Hayward Gallery in 1970], we have tried to switch 
the emphasis to Rodin as a sculptor of the figure or part-figure. I am sure 
this is the kind of Rodin sculpture that interests us today.

HM: I think you're quite right. For example, the final grouping of The 
Burghers of Calais <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/1989.407> is an 
arbitrary affair. So far as I can follow the history of the commission, Rodin's 
idea was to make separate figures and place them one by one on the route that 
the Burghers took. The figures were all made separately, and he put them 
together afterwards.

AB: But this putting of things together is one of Rodin's most extraordinary 
qualities. He uses a figure fromThe Gates of Hell 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/gates-hell> in one context 
one minute, and in quite another the next. And then there's the way he will 
join separate pieces of the body together in almost arbitrary fashion. He 
manufactured hands and limbs for possible use on later occasions. Certain 
plasters – like the Burghers of Calais assemblage – show him making something 
completely strange and original out of all these fragments. And in your torso, 
the legs and trunk are taken from different works and then joined together.

HM: I'll tell you where the torso comes from: Michelangelo, from a drawing in 
the British Museum, I think; the legs from a striding man – they were done from 
a model. Rodin turned this figure intoSaint John the Baptist 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/saint-john-baptist>. There 
comes the literary addition.

AB: Probably most of us prefer the Walking Man 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/walking-man> without a 
head and without arms to the figure ofJohn the Baptist 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/saint-john-baptist> 
precisely because it hasn't got that literary association.

HM: I do, but I don't know how right we are in doing so. It's a problem of 
today, wanting to begin with the essence. A lot of young artists want to start 
with a simplified, boiled-down soup without ever having had the bones and stock 
to make it from. I don't think we can do that.

AB: But can't one argue that some of the very late works, like the Dancers 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Rodin+The+Dancers&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=SCxHUdLYNOm00QXf94HgCw&ved=0CDAQsAQ&biw=1712&bih=1025>
, are a kind of essential Rodin, when everything else has been distilled out?

HM: I don't believe the very late works are always the best. The little figure 
here on the table isn't, for me, as good as the striding man upstairs. That has 
a kind of tension and a hardness and a softness, a contrast of bone, soft flesh 
and tense muscle. But the later work is softer. I can see how he's done it – 
he's squeezed soft clay through his hands.

AB: Like many of the drawings, the Dancers and the Walking Man are all very 
much concerned with the idea of movement. This is clearly of the greatest 
importance to Rodin, and it links him with the impressionist painters, just 
as other aspects of his work link him with the symbolists, who were also his 
contemporaries. But how far do you think the representation of movement is a 
proper concern of sculpture?

HM: This is one of the ways in which my generation does stand for a reaction 
against Rodin. One of my points is that sculpture should not represent actual 
physical movement. This is something I have never wanted. I believe that 
sculpture is made out of static, immovable material.

AB: What about [The Monument to]Balzac 
<http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/collections/sculptures/monument-balzac> then? Do 
you think, as many do, that it's the culmination of Rodin's work, or do 
you find it less interesting, because it's clothed, for one thing? 

HM: No – because underneath one can see that there is the nude figure, and 
that it's been clothed. It's the same with the Burghers. What makes Rodin the 
great sculptor that he is, is his complete understanding of the body's internal 
structure, his ability to feel inside into the sculpture. This is so intense – 
even the late work has got behind it all that other observation and knowledge 
of the human figure. He couldn't have simplified the Balzac – he couldn't have 
started with the idea of a draped figure. Think of all the studies that he had 
to make first.

AB: This is something one appreciates only if one visits the other Rodin 
Museum at Meudon <http://www.musee-rodin.fr/en/museum/musee-rodin-meudon>, in 
the south-western suburbs of Paris, especially if one is shown the original 
moulds for bronze casting still carefully preserved and the plaster casts Rodin 
used to make of work in progress …

HM: Yes, it was visiting Meudon that made me understand one side of Rodin. 
Instead of the big official museum, one sees all the original plasters, and I 
found little terracottas and other small things done by his own hand with a 
freshness some of the later bronze casts have lost.

AB: Were you not very impressed by seeing the succession of plaster casts 
Rodin would take of a head or a figure as he worked at it?

HM: Yes, this was an eye-opener to me. Of course it meant that he could keep 
his original, and yet alter it, and then go back if he liked to the old one. 
Usually when you alter something in sculpture, you've lost it for ever. But 
Rodin's practice of taking casts meant that he could make his alterations and 
still keep the work that he started from.

AB: Have you ever done this?

HM: I have done it on occasion, yes. Though you can't do it with a carving, of 
course.

AB: There's another aspect of Rodin we haven't mentioned, that is his erotic 
side. This is something that matters very much for Rodin – he can revel in 
sensuality in a quite uninhibited way. What is your reaction to this?

HM: It is certainly very important for Rodin, though it doesn't excite or 
interest me very much, perhaps because one knows the human figure so well. But 
for Rodin I think this erotic excitement was a part of his rapport with the 
human figure. And he was unlike Cézanne, who had his erotic side but suppressed 
it. This doesn't make Cézanne less of a physical artist, and I don't think you 
ever need this obvious erotic element for a person to understand the human 
figure. You don't get it inRembrandt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/rembrandt>, and I would say that 
Rembrandt understands the human figure and the human character and the whole of 
its dignity and everything else.

AB: Are you making a connection between Rodin and Rembrandt?

HM: No, I don't see that at all. I can see a big connection between Rodin and 
Michelangelo. That is his greatest influence, without doubt. He's the 
one artist since Michelangelo who has understood Michelangelo best. Rembrandt 
has an entirely different attitude, and he understands human feelings just as 
deeply as Michelangelo does. But Rembrandt was a painter, and Rodin was a 
sculptor. He brought sculpture out of the doldrums.

AB: I remember that Herbert Read said somewhere that Rodin reinvented a lost 
art. <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbert_Read> Perhaps that's a little 
extravagant, but it's near to the truth.

HM: Well, it is an exaggeration, because if an art is lost it means that 
nobody appreciates it, and nobody can again. But I can remember as a young 
sculptor reading a review of a mixed exhibition when the writer said he didn't 
intend to talk about sculpture as it was a dead art, only something to bump 
into or to knock your head against. Now everything has changed, and I could 
reel off the names of a hundred sculptors in England alone. So something 
remarkable has happened, and to a great extent it is Rodin who is responsible.

• First published in Rodin: Sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture> and Drawings, The Hayward 
Gallery, London, 1970.
 