
The Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> broke the English 
monopoly in this Anglo-Welsh competition and could make a return trip across 
the road at Twickenham for the final next spring. Last night the Welsh region 
were given a semi-final tie against Saracens at the Millennium Stadium in March 
but they will need to play better than this if they are to reach the final for 
the second successive season.

Gavin Henson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gavin-henson> scored all their 
points, including a try in added time. But the Welsh visitors showed little of 
the form that had given them thumping victories over Worcester and London Irish 
to put them in pole position in Pool C.

Harlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> had to win and 
deny Ospreys a bonus point. Towards the end of the first half they looked as if 
they could make life uncomfortable for the Welsh side. The pantomime season 
came early to The Stoop as, for the last couple of minutes of the half, the 
Ospreys were reduced to 12 men. Paul James, Lee Byrne and finally Henson were 
shown yellow cards by the Welsh referee, Huw Watkins.

Harlequins had two possible tries ruled out by the video referee, David 
Matthews. The second was particularly contentious with the Quins flanker, Chris 
Robshaw, appearing to be obstructed by Sonny Parker before touching down. The 
video official ruled that the ball had been knocked forward but Quins had good 
grounds for believing they should have been awarded a penalty try.

After the break, and with Henson still off the field, Quins took the lead for 
the first and only time. From a scrum Adrian Jarvis chipped through and De Wet 
Barry touched down just before the ball rolled dead. The lead lasted barely 
three minutes: as soon as Henson returned to the field he kicked the third of 
his four penalties. In the dying seconds, as Quins tried to force the game, 
Henson intercepted a pass from David Strettle inside the Quins half to run in a 
try he converted himself from beneath the posts.

Henson did not know he was playing fly-half until Saturday, when James Hook 
finally acknowledged that the finger he dislocated in Wales's defeat by South 
Africa a week earlier would keep him out of the game. Henson, who returned to 
the Welsh side for that game, has seen his form improve throughout the autumn 
and that will not have gone unnoticed by Wales's incoming coach, Warren Gatland.

Lyn Jones, the Ospreys coach, said: "We were hoping that James's finger was 
going to improve but Gav is a good, instinctive rugby player and we had no 
qualms about him playing at No 10. His performances are improving all the time 
and his fitness levels and confidence have shot up in recent weeks. He is a 
different person at the moment. Those were a mad 20 minutes or so in the first 
half and to come through that without conceding a try was a minor miracle. We 
had to fight very hard and the fact we kept our line intact helped galvanise 
the side.

"We were delighted to go through to the final last year, although we were 
devastated to lose. We have never played Saracens and we're looking forward to 
it. But winning today was very important for the profile of this team and for 
Welsh rugby."

Harlequins Brown; Keogh (Williams, 68), Strettle, Barry, Monye; Jarvis 
(Turner-Hall, 76), Gomarsall (So'oiaolo, 53); Jones, Fuga (Botha, 53), Ross, 
Kohn, Spangh√©ro (Evans, 53), Robshaw (Hala'ufia, 68), Skinner, Easter (capt).

Try Barry. Pen Jarvis.

Sin-bin Barry 74.

Ospreys Byrne; Walker, Taylor (Connor, 71), Parker, Williams; Henson, 
Phillips; James (D Jones, 61), Bennett (Hibbard, 71), A Jones (Millard, 71), 
Wyn Jones, Evans (Bateman, 79), T-Pole (Lewis 68), Holah, Thomas (capt).

Try Henson. Con Henson. Pens Henson 4.

Sin-bin James 29, Byrne 33, Henson 38.

Referee H Watkins (Wales). Attendance 8,283.
 