
I read my first Agatha Christie mystery when I was nine or 10 years old. It 
was on a family holiday after I’d run out of my own reading material (this was 
in the days pre-kindle, when you had to ration the suitcase space you gave to 
books). I found a tattered copy ofDeath in the Clouds 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/death-in-the-clouds-2.html>, the one with a 
picture of a coffee cup on the cover, a dead bee crumpled on the saucer. 
Something about that bee sent a little thrill down my spine and I hurried back 
to my room before someone told me to put it down. I read the book in one 
sitting and became a murder mystery addict and an avid Hercule Poirot fan.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhercule-poirot-an-odd-sort-of-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8eb0e27450aea01f62f1214e8cecceca495ea3b%2F0_929_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hercule%20Poirot%3A%20an%20odd%20sort%20of%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhercule-poirot-an-odd-sort-of-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hercule%20Poirot%3A%20an%20odd%20sort%20of%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhercule-poirot-an-odd-sort-of-hero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8eb0e27450aea01f62f1214e8cecceca495ea3b%2F0_929_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Sarah Rubin 
 Poirot is an odd sort of hero, nothing like the rugged detective I was 
expecting. He isn’t strong or daring. He doesn’t carry a gun or chase after 
criminals in the night. Instead he is small, only five foot four, and walks 
with a mincing step. He likes things to be orderly, keeping his rooms at 
Whitehaven Mansions spotless, his books organised by height. He’s forever 
tidying and straightening and looking distastefully at dust. I can remember 
giggling as Poirot mourned the ruination of his patent leather shoes as he 
trudged along a beach to view a body, his discomfort diluting the bloodiness of 
the scene.

“It is enough for me to sit back in my chair and think.”

 Poirot is vain and egotistical, but despite being the opposite of an action 
hero, he never fails to save the day. As he says inThe Five Little Pigs 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/five-little-pigs.html>, “I do not need to bend 
and measure the footprints and pick up the cigarette ends and examine the bent 
blades of grass. It is enough for me to sit back in my chair and think.” From 
the comfort of his armchair, Poirot assembles the pieces of a crime like an 
intricate puzzle and then displays the solution, exposing the criminal to 
justice. Reading Death in the Clouds, it struck me that, even though I was just 
a child, if I could learn to use my own little grey cells, I could be just as 
much of a detective as Poirot.

 It was a striking thought.

My inspiration: Lauren Child on Alfred Hitchcock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/15/my-inspiration-lauren-child-alfred-hitchcock-ruby-redfort>
 I can often remember feeling powerless as a child. When you’re 10 you are not 
the master of your own fate. Homework must be done. Beds must be made. Dinners 
must be eaten. Because I was small I had to do as I was told. Poirot showed me 
a different kind of power. He showed me that the best way to get the better of 
someone (even if you are a child and they are an adult) is to out-think them. 
When I started to write Alice Jones: The Impossible Clue, I knew Alice had to 
be smart just like Poirot. She was up against some very devious and grown-up 
bad guys, and the best weapon I could give her was a razor sharp mind.

The top 10 Agatha Christie mysteries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/15/top-10-agatha-christie-novels> 
 Alice’s take on Order and Method comes from her love of maths. Where Poirot 
sees mysteries as puzzles, Alice sees them as equations: “Mysteries are a lot 
like maths, word problems specifically. Some are simple, some are complicated, 
but it’s the same process. There’s something you want to know, and a lot of 
information swimming around. The hard part is coming up with the right 
equation, figuring out what bits of information are important and what bits are 
just there to confuse you. Then it’s just a matter of solving for X.”

 Of course, Alice is a bit more reckless than Poirot, and he definitely 
wouldn’t approve of her fashion sense, or riding around Philadelphia on a bike (
quelle horreur), but the reason she can crack the case is because of her 
methodical mind. Poirot would be the first to congratulate her on her excellent 
choice of mentor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhercule-poirot-an-odd-sort-of-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf7da26529a01e8fd80a22f08e9e0286f9f16e22%2F0_0_1533_2364%2F1533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hercule%20Poirot%3A%20an%20odd%20sort%20of%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhercule-poirot-an-odd-sort-of-hero%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hercule%20Poirot%3A%20an%20odd%20sort%20of%20hero&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhercule-poirot-an-odd-sort-of-hero%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf7da26529a01e8fd80a22f08e9e0286f9f16e22%2F0_0_1533_2364%2F1533.jpg>
Alice Jones: The Impossible Clue by Sarah Rubin out now in paperback (£6.99, 
Chicken House).Buy it at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/367882/>.
 