
The takeover of Hewlett Packard Enterprise by Britain’s Micro Focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/uk-micro-focus-hewlett-packard-software-deal>
 will involve Hewlett-Packard offloading the final assets remaining from its 
2011 purchase of the UK software firm Autonomy.

After buying Autonomy for $11bn (£8.3bn), HP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> later wrote off 
three-quarters of the company’s value after uncovering what it claimed were 
accounting irregularities at the hands of the former management team –claims 
that have always been strongly rejected by the Autonomy co-founder Mike Lynch 
and colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/autonomy-founder-sues-hewlett-packard-for-150m-over-claims>
.

UK's Micro Focus and Hewlett-Packard agree £6.6bn software deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/uk-micro-focus-hewlett-packard-software-deal>
HP’s acquisition of Autonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> was supposed to form 
the central part of the US group’s move into software, but the plan fell apart 
after the disastrous deal cost HP shareholders billions of dollars in destroyed 
value. Since the acquisition, parts of Autonomy – which made corporate search 
software used by law firms and accountants – have been offloaded elsewhere, 
leaving Micro Focus to take on the remaining assets, about 20% of the original 
Autonomy deal.

However, the FTSE 100-listed Micro Focus is keen to stress that the deal will 
not be a reincarnation ofAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation> in the UK.

“Autonomy doesn’t really exist as an entity, just the products,” said Kevin 
Loosemore, executive chairman of Micro Focus. Loosemore said the Newbury-based 
business conducted due diligence across all of the products included in the 
deal, with no different approach taken for the Autonomy assets. No legal 
liabilities from Autonomy will be transferred to Micro Focus.

Neil Wilson, market analyst at ETX Capital, pointed out some of the obvious 
benefits of the $8.8bn deal for both Micro Focus and HPE: “It’s a big scalp for 
the FTSE 100 group, which has been on a buying spree of late, and marks the end 
of the Autonomy saga for HPE. HPE will no doubt be glad to see the back of 
Autonomy, which it acquired in 2011 in one of the worst deals in recent 
corporate history.”

Philip Carter at the technology research firm IDC said the deal was a good one 
for the European tech sector, at a time when European companies were being 
taken overseas.

“It’s a collection of assets that they will have, rather than a seamless 
business,” Carter added. The challenge will be in the integration of those 
assets, Autonomy and all.
 