
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> is being 
sued by MicroTech, a small software reseller it named in a $5bn fraud claim 
against the founders of the British software groupAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>.

MicroTech’s suit says the company is owed $16.5m by HP for Autonomy software 
that was never properly delivered. It is the latest twist in the battle between 
HP and the Autonomy founder,Mike Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2014/aug/14/hewlett-packard-autonomy-mike-lynch-clear-name>
, and his finance director, Sushovan Hussain.

The British executives are fighting accusations by HP that they used 
“improper” transactions with small software resellers, including MicroTech, to 
artificially boost their company’s revenues.

HP acquired Autonomy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>
 for $11bn in 2011 but subsequently wrote down its value.

Founded by the service-disabled US military veteran Tony Jimenez, 
Virginia-based MicroTech is a security-cleared contractor specialising in 
government computing. In a lawsuit filed with the US district court for 
northern California, the firm alleges breach of contract.

It claims Autonomy software, for which it had paid in cash, was never properly 
delivered, with the keys that would allow it to sell the software on to end 
users being withheld.

“Just because HP is a big company with billions in revenues doesn’t mean it 
can bully a small business owned by a veteran into not demanding our money back 
for something never delivered,” Jimenez said.

He has employed the attorney Lanny Davis, a former Bill Clinton adviser and 
White House spokesman, to bring the case.

Davis said: “HP is not entitled to keep both MicroTech’s money and Autonomy’s 
software that MicroTech duly purchased.”

The claims relate to two separate transactions, in which MicroTech signed 
contracts with Autonomy to buy its software for eventual use by two end 
customers, the Vatican Library and HP itself.

In the event, neither the Vatican nor HP bought Autonomy software from 
MicroTech or from Autonomy.

The Vatican deal, concluded in March 2010, saw MicroTech commit to purchase 
$11.6m of software. MicroTech said it paid $9.2m of that sum in cash to 
Autonomy. The balance was withheld after it became clear there were “issues” 
with the deal. MicroTech says it has received no money back, nor has Autonomy 
delivered the software purchased or the licence keys needed to activate the 
software.

The second transaction took place in June 2011, this time for an advance order 
of $7.35m of software which was due to be purchased by HP. “Autonomy again 
misrepresented to MicroTech that it had a deal in place with an end user for 
Autonomy’s software,” claim MicroTech’s lawyers. The deal never closed and no 
software or activation keys were issued.

MicroTech has offered a compromise: it is asking HP to relicense the software 
for a period of time to allow it to find an alternative buyer. Jimenez said: 
“We are confident a court will agree, the money or the software – you can’t 
keep both – under the law and principles of fairness.”

However, MicroTech features prominently in the fraud case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/05/hewlett-packard-unveils-details-of-5bn-autonomy-case>
 filed with the UK high court earlier this year, in which HP is seeking a 
record $5bn (£3.3bn) in damages from Lynch and Hussain.

HP alleges that MicroTech was in fact paid, with profits, for its purchases of 
software intended for the Vatican and HP. Its lawyers claim the payments were 
made using a series of reciprocal deals in which Autonomy bought software and 
services from MicroTech for a marginally higher value than the software it had 
agreed to sell to the smaller firm.

On 16 August 2011, Autonomy paid MicroTech $8.2m for the development of a “US 
Government Federal Cloud Platform for Autonomy Solution”. The platform, lawyers 
claim, was never delivered and it was never requested by Autonomy. A day later, 
on 17 August, Autonomy received $7.35m in cash from MicroTech, the claim 
alleges, some of which was logged as payment for software intended for resale 
to HP.

In the case of the Vatican, Autonomy paid MicroTech to set up an “Advanced 
Technology Innovation Center”, designed as a facility to display its 
technology. Lawyers claim that on 31 December 2010, Autonomy paid $9.6m for the 
centre – the entire cost of the project – in advance of its hiring its first 
member of staff. On the same date a payment of $6.3m was received by Autonomy 
from MicroTech.

HP’s claim lists nine transactions between MicroTech and Autonomy, worth a 
total of $33m, as questionable. One of those transactions was for $10m of 
software for use by another reseller, DiscoverTech.

Among MicroTech’s founding investors was David Truitt, the chief executive of 
DiscoverTech. This reseller was involved in $42m of “improper” transactions 
with Autonomy, according to the claim.

Truitt was also chief operating officer of Microlink. HP’s claim lists $22m of 
transactions between Autonomy and Microlink, before the reseller was purchased 
for $57m. Of the money owing, $9m was eventually written off after HP acquired 
Autonomy.

HP’s claim states that Truitt’s brother, Stephen, was chief operating officer 
of MicroTech, and that another of his brothers was an Autonomy employee. A 
spokesman for Truitt declined to comment.

According to HP’s claim, questionable transactions with a small group of 
resellers were designed “for the improper purpose of providing a pretext for 
the inappropriate or premature recognition of revenue”.

Lynch and Hussain reject the allegations and are contesting HP’s legal action.

A spokeswoman for HP said: “HP cannot comment as this is a pending legal 
matter.”
 