
Another defeat, another postmortem. This is when it really gets tough for 
players on tour. The series is decided; the date – 21 December – which is when 
the tour party flies home, keeps catapulting to the forefront of their minds, 
whether they like it or not.

Trevor Bayliss frustrated by speculation over Alastair Cook’s England future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/trevor-bayliss-frustrated-speculation-alastair-cook-england-cricket-captain>
Yet there remains another daunting trial ahead. An Indian side await in 
Chennai hungry to make it 4-0. Neither Virat Kohli nor Ravi Ashwin are minded 
to let up; they have experienced three consecutive series defeats against 
England and they obviously hurt. Now as captain and vice‑captain they will have 
no truck with anyone in their side wanting to relax. Quite right, too.

If England’s players consume the cricket reports as voraciously as Ashwin then 
they will see much speculation about the future of their captain, which can 
make for an uncomfortable dressing room. The fate of an individual has a 
certain magnetic attraction and, of course, the captaincy in cricket, unlike in 
most team sports, really matters. This helps to make it such a captivating game.

Someone usually goes after an unsuccessful expedition. If it is really bad 
there is also an emergency committee set up, headed by some external bigwig who 
is charged with the delivery of a very important, wide‑ranging report, but we 
are not yet in that territory.

The captaincy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/trevor-bayliss-frustrated-speculation-alastair-cook-england-cricket-captain>
 will be decided in January (with Joe Root the favourite to be in place by 
July) but there are other equally important topics up for debate in the 
postmortem – or, as the England and Wales Cricket Board will describe it, the 
post-tour review which is conducted every year as a matter of routine. Most 
obviously there is the thorny point of selection.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fjoe-root-could-be-future-england-captain-alastair-cook-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Root%20could%20be%20future%20England%20captain%3A%20Alastair%20Cook%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fjoe-root-could-be-future-england-captain-alastair-cook-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Root%20could%20be%20future%20England%20captain%3A%20Alastair%20Cook%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fjoe-root-could-be-future-england-captain-alastair-cook-video&media=>
Joe Root could be future England captain: Alastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/12/joe-root-could-be-future-england-captain-alastair-cook-video>
Hindsight is a wonderful thing for those of us who have a platform to 
pontificate without responsibility. Smugness is a less attractive quality, but 
never mind. Trawling back to 15 September, just before the Test squad was 
announced, it seems thata list of names of likely tourists for the winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/haseeb-hameed-lancashire-england-squad-tour-bangladesh>
 was required by the Guardian sports desk; that list did not include Gary 
Ballance, Ben Duckett, Zafar Ansari or Gareth Batty.

Before this becomes altogether too smug let us point out that the alternatives 
posted may not have done much better; the chances that they would have changed 
the outcome of the series in India are low. To save you time those names were 
Jason Roy, Tom Westley, Jack Leach and Mark Wood, who was subsequentlyunfit for 
selection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/mark-wood-ankle-surgery-england-cricket>
.

The first three would have been gambles, though there must have been some 
logic there. The batsmen are at least right-handed, which was always going to 
help a little when batting against India; Leach, albeit a novice, possessed the 
best figures of any spinner in county cricket (yes, I’m aware of turning 
pitches at Taunton, but was that really an obstacle?) For Leach touring this 
winter may have been an ordeal for which he was not ready but the principle 
that in India the best available spinner is required rather than a 
multidimensional support bowler remains intact after the evidence of the past 
six weeks. Actually we knew that after 2012, when Englandpreferred Samit Patel 
to Monty Panesar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/15/india-england-live-first-test> 
for the first Test in Ahmedabad before having the wit to change tack for the 
second in Mumbai.

Ravichandran Ashwin’s mastery lights path for India’s spell of dominance | Ali 
Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/12/ravi-ashwin-india-jadeja-jayant-dominance>
There are broader points regarding selection that Andrew Strauss must 
consider, which might even include giving himself a greater influence – and 
perhaps ultimate responsibility – since he is, at least, employed solely by the 
ECB. There has always been unease at having county cricket directors as 
selectors. Both Angus Fraser and Mick Newell are hugely respected on the 
circuit but there must occasionally be conflicts of interest when they sit 
around the selection table. Their main employers, after all, are Middlesex and 
Nottinghamshire respectively. Moreover, they are restricted by their primary 
jobs where they can go.

Inevitably other county directors will have an informal input, which makes 
sense but which should not be decisive since there is the understandable – and 
laudable – instinct to talk up your own men. At most counties Ansari and Batty 
would not be regarded as the best spinners in the country but that may well be 
the case at The Oval.

Most important of all, perhaps, is the role of Trevor Bayliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss>. So far he has barely had 
any role at all. Initially there was no other way. He came from outside with no 
great knowledge of county cricket and no network of contacts. He just had to 
trust the selectors – or Andy Flower with the Lions – to give him the best 
available. To his credit he has not disguised this. How often have we heard 
Bayliss say “I haven’t actually seen him play”? This was the system he was 
accustomed to when he was coaching Sri Lanka.

Bayliss is a damn good coach and he is well paid. There comes a time, like now 
perhaps, when his input into selection needs to expand. This is a difficult 
balancing act for a man whose family is still based in Sydney. In fact it is 
tough enough for an English-based coach since the international schedule is so 
hectic.

In 2017, though, there may be a benefit in Bayliss leaving the preparation for 
some of the many one‑day matches to his trusted deputies while he acquaints 
himself with the handful of likely lads on the county circuit. He is, after 
all, properly remunerated partly because he is reckoned to be a very good judge 
of a cricketer.
 