
This year has been a significant one for UK higher education, with the 
government rapidly moving the system away from a state-controlled sector 
towards a more marketised structure – to the applause of some and the growing 
malaise of others.

It culminated in the surprise removal of the long-standing student number 
controls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/05/university-places-restriction-lifted-student-loan-george-osborne>
, freeing up universities to recruit as many students as they wish. This comes 
50 years after the anniversary ofLord Robbins' seminal report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/oct/28/university-student-loans-robbins-report>
 on the expansion of higher education, with its vision that "courses of higher 
education should be available for all those who are qualified by ability and 
attainment to pursue them and who wish to do so."

If 2013 has been the year of marketisation, how far towards a fully marketised 
system has UK higher education actually come? Let's consider the statistics:

Market success: The year began with many worried that the drop in participation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/30/uk-university-applications-drop-ucas>
 experienced in 2012 as a result of the increase in tuition fees would 
continue. So the sector breathed a sigh of relief with the UCAS announcement 
that application rates for English 18-year-oldsincreased by one percentage 
point to 35% 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CDIQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ucas.com%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Fucas-demand-report-2013.pdf&ei=Yyi4Uqf_B6OQ7Abw6IDABQ&usg=AFQjCNHoUceaXL5lVnyDv5yRF6mI_k1eig&sig2=iGQBzQvWbVfkdD12J5r3Mg&bvm=bv.58187178,d.ZGU>
 in 2013. This was the first, albeit tentative, evidence that the university 
sector was still set for growth, despite the increasing costs faced by students.

Market failure: A feature of a healthy market is that price reflects the 
quality and demand of a product. Currently, this is not the case in England with
98 universities planning to charge <http://www.offa.org.uk/press/quick-facts/> 
a maximum fee of £9,000 for at least one of their courses. This, in spite of 
initial assurances from the government that universities would charge the 
maximum only in "exceptional circumstances" as they would be under "competitive 
pressure" to cut costs. Is this an attempt to convince students that student 
debt is not a problem, or that education isa Veblen good  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Veblen_good>(where price is a signal of quality)?

Market success: UCAS figures for 2013 showed that those from the most 
disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to enter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/19/record-number-new-undergraduates-2013-ucas>
higher education than previously. The free school meal entry rate to 
universities charging the full £9,000 fee increased by 22%. This suggests that 
the government's message that tuition fees are repaid after graduation on an 
income contingent basis has got through, and that poorer students are not being 
put off by concerns about debt, as many feared.

Market failure: Clearly, some students still do not understand the system. For 
example, the number ofEnglish students enrolling for courses in Scotland 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/education/fee-paying-english-enjoy-scottish-university-boom-1-3052893>
 saw another rise, despite the fact that many Scottish universities are more 
expensive than English ones. Scottish universities can charge English students 
£9,000 per year, but in Scotland a typical undergraduate course lasts for four 
years instead of three. So this surprising statistic seems to imply that many 
students still do not understand the finance system – or that demand for higher 
education increases with overall price, not just price per year.

Market success: Key to a marketised system is a flexible system, with 
different types of courses and institutions designed to meet the different 
needs of students. Accordingly, the government offered students on part-time 
degree courses subsidised tuition fee loans for the first time in 2013. This 
was intended to encourage more part-time and mature students into the sector 
and further develop their skills. Part-time study is highly popular in the UK, 
with nearlyhalf a million undergraduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/16/number-part-time-students-perfect-storm>
 choosing this method of study in 2011-2012.

Market failure: A Universities UK study on the issue of part-time students 
highlighted stark falls in part-time attendance, with numbers falling by40% 
between 2011 and 2012 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0CDUQFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.universitiesuk.ac.uk%2Fhighereducation%2FDocuments%2F2013%2FFundingEnvironmentForUniversities.pdf&ei=uS24UqzjOo3Q7Ab4rICwCg&usg=AFQjCNEKZfaXiSYnkIFjAd-SsCkqeg5nNw&sig2=VGpw7ksyDZQ1j8MX6jR0uw&bvm=bv.58187178,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
, and no likelihood of a recovery in 2013. A "perfect storm" of conditions were 
cited, including employer demand dampened by the recession, and the 2012 
changes to the funding system and associated fee increases.

Market success: For prices and information to be converted into a functioning 
market, supply must also become flexible. A further step towards marketization 
came in 2013 as the threshold for exclusion from thestudent number controls 
lowered to ABB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/24/uk-student-numbers-recover-tuition-fees>
 or equivalent at A-level, allowing universities to recruit as many of the most 
talented students (some 110,000 AAB students in 2013) that they were able to 
attract. This would allow universities at the "top end" of the sector in 
particular to expand.

Market failure: A threat to David Willetts' expansion plans 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10392360/David-Willetts-predicts-universities-will-expand-by-a-quarter.html>
 emerged as qualifications data for 2013 showed a further year of A-grade 
deflation, dampening the potential of this expansion measure. Rises in 
ABB-equivalent students came to the rescue of universities who sought to 
expand; surprisingly, some 30% of so-called ABB students do not, in fact, have 
A-levels, but some other kind of equivalent qualification, usually BTECs, and 
were therefore eligible for exclusion from number quotas. The universities able 
to expand due to these relaxations were not the traditional elite universities, 
but those that took on more vocationally-trained students.

Market success: The awkwardness caused by the quasi-market of ABB students 
finally came to an end in December 2013, when George Osborne made a surprise 
announcement that the cap on student places – in place since 1994 – would be
completely removed in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/dec/09/autumn-statement-student-numbers-loanbook>
. This is the biggest step towards marketisation the higher education sector 
has experienced, with universities set to be able to expand and contract based 
on demand for their services, rather than government controls.

Market failure: George Osborne announced that to fund the extra places that 
may be needed as a result of the reforms (the government estimate that 60,000 
students achieve the necessary grades each year but miss out on a degree place) 
would be paid for by thesale of the student loan book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/05/university-places-restriction-lifted-student-loan-george-osborne>
. This announcement was met with derision from the sector, with the Higher 
Education Policy Institute among others accusing Osborne of running a Ponzi 
scheme since the returns from the student loan book likely to diminish over 
time, while the cost of financing student places every year will inevitably 
increase. 2013 has also seen an upward revision in the cost of unpaid student 
loans from 30% (March 2011) to its most recent estimate of between 35-40%.

In summary, 2013 was the year when the government took big steps towards its 
goal of a marketised system, with the complete removal of student number 
controls the most significant yet. However, both its flagwavers and protesters 
will note that higher education is still far from a fully functioning market 
given the lack of price variation, the cost of funding student places and, 
perhaps most importantly, the inability of students to easily compare quality 
across universities.

Moreover, in the interests of equality of access, the government will always 
need to support the sector through subsidised student loans, meaning there will 
never be a truly free market in higher education. Whether or not this is good 
news will depend on your point of view.

What are your thoughts on the marketisation of higher education and the past 
year of education policy? Share them in the comments below

Gill Wyness is a researcher in education policy at LSE and the CentreForum 
think-tank

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 