
King: A Comics Biography of Martin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Jr, by Ho Che Anderson 
(Fantagraphics, £13.99)

Collected under one cover are the three parts of Anderson's breathtaking 
assessment of MLK's life. What's challenging and satisfying about Anderson's 
style is the way he pushes his artwork along, mixing black and white portraits 
with colourful street scenes and layered cityscapes and augmenting his own 
artwork with an inventive use of stock photography. The process brings to life 
the smoke and violence of the sanitation workers' march of 1968, and a 
recreation of the last moments of King's life reaches a dizzying climax in 10 
pages that push forward the capabilities of comic art. Anderson's dialogue is 
well honed and economical. It's loose and colloquial, never too reverential and 
sourced from memoirs of the supporting characters. Newsreel footage might 
preserve King's speeches. Anderson's artistry captures the crackle of optimism 
in the crowds at that time. This is one of the best comics of the year.

DC: The New Frontier, by Darwyn Cooke with Dave Stewart (Titan Books, £15.99)

Superheroes traditionally fight their supervillains in cities that remain in a 
safely alternate universe. They become far more interesting when attached to a 
real place and time. Darwyn Cooke's ambitious feat of what-if storytelling 
slips DC comic heroes and their friends into the postwar era, from 1945-57. We 
get Jimmy Olsen and Lois Lane in Seoul at the end of the Korean war. Details of 
Superman and Wonder Woman's involvement in "relief efforts in Indochina" are 
sent back to the US in an article by Clark Kent. It's a fantastic idea. 
Stripped of their otherworldliness, the caped heroes are made into communist 
scapegoats and forced to compete with American heroes who don't rely on 
superpowers. The problem is that the conceit begs to be pushed further. The 
real pleasure comes in the small details, such as a sequence where The Flash 
dashes around a hipster version of Las Vegas, dodging the crooners and 
sharp-suited gamblers at supersonic speeds.

The Plot: The Secret Story of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, by Will 
Eisner (Norton, $19.95)

With his emphatic, classy, black and white frames, Will Eisner recounts the 
history of "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion", allegedly a blueprint for a 
Jewish takeover of the globe. The book took Eisner 20 years to finish; he was 
intrigued by how this piece of fakery could live on after being skewered so 
many times. He focuses on the individuals who pushed it along over the years, 
from the young aristocrat Mathieu Golovinski, who produced the original forgery 
in 1898, to Henry Ford, who saw fit to publish sections of the Protocols in one 
of his newspapers. The Times unveiled the Protocols as a fraud in 1921. A Swiss 
court dismissed them as "ridiculous nonsense" in 1933. The US Senate condemned 
them in 1964. Eisner ends each of these sections with the optimistic idea that 
finally the Protocols will disappear. They never do. A fitting, serious and 
well-drawn end to Eisner's illustrious career.

American Splendor: Our Movie Year, by Harvey Pekar et al (Titan Books, £12.99)

Harvey Pekar's endless self-examination continues with this look back at the 
making of the film version ofAmerican Splendor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-splendor>, the comic based on his 
life. But shouldn't he be laughing by now? The film picked up prizes at the 
Cannes and Sundance festivals. Never fear, Harvey finds plenty to complain 
about in the details. Whingeing from a less practised professional would not be 
half as entertaining. Illustration for this recent batch of stories is provided 
by some old friends, such as Robert Crumb and Gary Dumm. Half the fun is 
watching how each artist interprets the sour looks on Pekar's face. There has 
been a progression in the Splendor comics over the years: the sheer bitterness 
of early issues has given way to something sweeter. Pekar has survived both 
lymphoma and the Hollywood treatment and he emerges at the end of this latest 
dispatch as a sort of superhero, albeit one who still worries about his pension.
 