
The women are smiling. The women ambling down the street, in sharp suits that 
now look fashionably vintage, look as if they’re off to a picnic or a show. In 
the next shot, their smiles have gone. In the next shot, thewomen from Weimar, 
who had known about Buchenwald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2008/apr/18/secondworldwar>, and been 
happy to make use of its labour, are staring at the shrunken heads of prisoners 
who tried to escape.

The women from Weimar were filmed by British soldiers in 1945. The soldiers 
were ordered by the British government to film some of the things they saw. 
At Bergen-Belsen, for example, they saw beautiful countryside and “well-stocked 
farms”, but then they smelled a strange smell. As the smell got stronger, they 
saw watchtowers and barbed wire. And then they saw the bodies. Piles and piles 
of bodies, but bodies which looked like skeletons wrapped in skin.

It was Sidney Bernstein who was commissioned by the Ministry of Information to 
create a documentary that would be “a historical record” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/09/holocaust-film-too-shocking-to-show-night-will-fall-alfred-hitchcock>
 and “a lesson for all mankind”. So he, and the editors he took on, and Alfred 
Hitchcock, whom he commissioned to oversee it, sat down to watch what the 
soldiers had filmed.

In all the camps they saw bodies. Naked, skeletal, disease-ridden bodies. In 
most of them they saw survivors too, though you couldn’t, said one American 
soldier, always tell who was dead and who was alive: “You would step over a 
body” and it might “suddenly wave at you or raise a hand”. It was, he said, 
“hard to imagine for a normal human mind”. And he was trying not to cry when he 
said it. “It’s not something you quickly forget.”

But the British people didn’t have the chance to forget, because they never 
got the chance to see the film. It had, according to one survivor, “become a 
political inconvenience”. In a climate of reconciliation, it didn’t help anyone 
to see warehouses full of hair, and teeth, and children’s toys, and shoes. It 
certainly didn’t help anyone to see children who had taken part in medical 
experiments roll up their sleeves to show the numbers on their arms. And so the 
film was shelved. But now, finally, it is being used as the basis for anew 
documentary, which will be shown on Channel 4 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/holocaust-night-will-fall/articles/all/about-the-film>
 on Saturday night. In the run-up to Holocaust Memorial Day next week, it will 
also be shown in 15 countries around the world.

It’s called Night Will Fall because, as the voiceover concludes, “unless the 
world learns the lessons these pictures teach, night will fall”. But “by God’s 
grace”, it adds, “we who live will learn”.

I don’t think anyone could watch Night Will Fall and not pray that the world 
learns. I don’t think anyone could see it and not wonder, asHannah Arendt did, 
about the “banality of evil” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/29/hannah-arendt-adolf-eichmann-banality-of-evil>
 that sometimes seems to be the hallmark of our race. I think the film will 
stand as one of the most powerful records of one of the most terrible episodes 
in human history. But that, I’m afraid, is not the same as saying that lessons 
will be learned.

When Bernstein was commissioned to make his documentary, hardly anyone in 
Britain owned a TV. A visual report of other people’s pain was, and was 
expected to be, a shock. People did not eat microwaved lasagnes in front of 
starving babies. They didn’t do their ironing over men who had just lost their 
limbs. Now we have Ebola with our first glass of wine, Isis with our pasta, and 
Boko Haram with our cup of tea.

We can’t get enough of other people’s suffering. We binge on it, and then go 
back for more. It would be nice to think we do this because we care more about 
other people than we ever have before. The trouble is that quite a lot of 
evidence seems to show that we care less. Empathy levels, according to 
extensive American research, and something called theInterpersonal Reactivity 
Index <http://www.eckerd.edu/academics/psychology/iri.php>, seem in recent 
years to have dropped. About 30% of people, according to a new report from the 
thinktank Civil Exchange,feel no sense of community 
<http://www.thirdsector.co.uk/civil-exchange-says-big-society-left-voluntary-sector-weakened/policy-and-politics/article/1329874>
 in their neighbourhood at all. If you don’t give a monkey’s about the people 
on your doorstep, what chance is there forYazidi slaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/aug/15/sexual-enslavement-iraq-minority-women-isis-slavery-rape>
?

In the past three years almost 200,000 Syrians have been killed. Some have 
been gassed. Some have been tortured. Many have been tossed into mass graves. 
Every day people risk their lives to tell their stories. And every night we 
watch more of them die.

Night Will Fall is being shown “in the hope that scenes like these will never 
be forgotten, or repeated”. Everyone should watch it, to find out who we are. 
We can hope. We can always hope. But hope doesn’t always go that far.
 