
Fashion designer Alexander McQueen, author and illustrator Beatrix Potter and 
Gerry Anderson, creator of the science-fiction puppet show Thunderbirds, are 
among hundreds of figures from the art world nominated to appear on the new £20 
note.

For the first time the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> asked for the 
public’s opinion on who should appear on the note – 436 eligible contenders 
emerged from around 19,000 nominations. The two-month public nomination period 
closed on Sunday.

Among the nominees to replace economist Adam Smith on the £20 note, who must 
come from the world of visual arts and no longer be alive, are comic actor
Charlie Chaplin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin> and Welsh 
fashion designer Laura Ashley.

Figures of note: the faces of Britain's banknotes – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2013/apr/26/banknotes-winston-churchill-predecessors-in-pictures>
Film director Alfred Hitchcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock>, whose works include The 
Birds and Psycho, and wax sculptor Marie Tussaud are also among the contenders.

Bank of England officials will now draw up a shortlist of three to five names. 
Its governor, Mark Carney, will make the final decision which will be announced 
in spring 2016, alongside a concept image showing the portrait as it will 
appear on the note.

Chief cashier Victoria Cleland said: “The fact that so many visual artists 
have been put forward underlines the extent of British achievement in the 
visual arts and reinforces why this field deserves to be recognised on the next 
£20 note.”

Among the 436 nominations, only 90 are women. 

In July 2013, Jane Austen was confirmed as the next face of the £10 note 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/24/jane-austen-appear-10-note 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/24/jane-austen-appear-10-note 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/24/jane-austen-appear-10-note> in 
a victory for campaigners demanding female representation – aside from the 
Queen – on the country’s cash.

The announcement to place Austen on the £10 note was aimed at quelling a 
three-month storm of protest unleashed when the former Bank governor, Sir 
Meryvn King, announced that the only woman to appear on an English banknote 
other than the Queen – the prison reformer Elizabeth Fry – would be replaced by 
Winston Churchill, probably in 2016.

Other female nominees for the £20 note include dressmaker Jean Muir, ceramic 
artist Jessie Tait and sculptor Barbara Hepworth.

However, the list is dominated by men, including film director Anthony 
Minghella, sculptor Henry Moore, actors Laurence Olivier and Richard 
Attenborough, comedian Mel Smith and documentary maker Tim Hetherington, who 
was killed in Libya in 2011 while covering the country’s civil war.
 