
The first new trial of a potential vaccine against HIV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/aids-and-hiv> in seven years has begun in 
South Africa, raising hopes that it will help bring about the end of the 
epidemic.

Although fewer people are now dying from Aids because 18.2 million are on drug 
treatment for life to suppress the virus, efforts to prevent people from 
becoming infected have not been very successful. The infection rate has 
continued to rise and experts do not believe the epidemic will be ended without 
a vaccine.

The vaccine being tested is a modified version of the only one to have shown a 
positive effect, out of many that have gone into trials. Seven years ago, the 
vaccine known asRV144 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/20/aids-vaccine-paris-trial> showed 
a modest benefit of about 31% in a trial in Thailand.

That trial was controversial because the vaccine was a combination of two, 
called AidsVax and ALVAC, which were already 15 years old when it began. One of 
them, AidsVax, had failed in a trial on its own. The RV144 trial was very large 
– more than 16,400 Thai men and women without HIV took part, randomly assigned 
to receive either the combined vaccine or a placebo injection. At the end of 
the three-year trial, 125 people had become infected – 51 who had received the 
vaccine and 74 who had not.

But researchers chasing the holy grail of a vaccine think they could have 
better success in South Africa, because of a number of modifications. The new 
trial, called HVTN 702, has just begun to enrol the first of 5,400 men and 
women aged 18-35.

“HIV has taken a devastating toll in South Africa, but now we begin a 
scientific exploration that could hold great promise for our country. If an HIV 
vaccine were found to work in South Africa, it could dramatically alter the 
course of the pandemic,” said Dr Glenda Gray, chief executive of the South 
African Medical Research Council, which is involved in the study.

“It’s an important trial to do. I’m very pleased that we were able to get it 
off the ground,” said Dr Anthony Fauci, director of theNational Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases <https://www.niaid.nih.gov/> in the US that is 
co-funding the trial.

HIV infecting 2m more people every year, warns UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/12/hiv-infecting-2m-more-people-every-year-warns-un>
The Thai trial’s modest success was in people at low risk of HIV infection. 
“We have always said that if a vaccine is going to be ultimately effective, it 
is going to have to prove itself in a relatively high-risk group. So we always 
had the intention of extending and extrapolating the principle of the RV144 
study to a setting such as southern Africa,” said Fauci.

The aspiration is to push the effectiveness up from 31% to between 50% and 
60%, he said. “Obviously we’d like it to be 90% but that is probably asking too 
much given the complexity of HIV and the body’s immune response to it,” he 
said. If they could get a vaccine of at least 50% efficacy for use in 
combination with other prevention tools, such as condoms, antiretroviral drugs 
and circumcision, “that will be a major, major advance”, he said.

The modified vaccine uses an isolate of the virus that circulates in southern 
Africa, called the C clade. There will be more booster shots of the vaccine and 
the use of an adjuvant to enhance the response of the immune system. Volunteers 
will get five shots of the vaccine and three boosters – a schedule that the 
researchers will look to slim down for use in the real world if it is 
successful.

Prof Linda-Gail Bekker, of the University of Cape Town and president of the 
International AIDS Society, who is also involved in the study, said the result 
from the Thai trial, although only 31% “made those of us in the HIV vaccine 
world quite excited”. For the first time, it looked as though a vaccine was 
possible.

“Pretty soon after the trial, the world started to galvanise to decide what we 
needed to do,” she said. The epidemic in Thailand was abating, so with a low 
rate of new infections, it was not the best place to study the vaccine further. 
“We recognised we had to come to southern Africa to do the trial, so we had to 
modify the vaccine product.”

HIV/Aids resurgence in Africa feared as Durban hosts conference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/18/south-africa-hosts-aids-conference-as-experts-warn-of-stalled-progress>
The aim of the new trial is to produce evidence for the regulators and obtain 
a licence for a vaccine. “Probably the magic number is 50% at three years,” she 
said. “I think nobody will be very interested in a vaccine that is less than 
50%.” A vaccine with lower efficacy could be a problem if people assume they 
are protected and take no further precautions against HIV. But a vaccine with 
50% efficacy could make a big impact, she said.

At least two-thirds of the participants will be women, who are more likely to 
get infected at that age than men. “The toolbox is in desperate need of 
something like this. We remain very optimistic,” said Bekker. “We are 
constantly aware of the desperate need and very excited that we are finally 
getting on and trying something again now.

“We’ve never treated our way out of an epidemic. There’s no doubt we have to 
have primary prevention alongside treatment in order to get HIV control, but we 
are not going to get HIV eradication without a vaccine. That is very clear.”
 