
Parliament's public accounts committee has said that HM Revenue and Customs 
(HMRC) has yet to establish how real time information (RTI) will affect people 
working in small companies that do not use electronic payroll.

In a report released today, the committee says the department must clarify how 
RTI, which is being developed by HMRC to support the introduction of the new 
universal credit, will affect small businesses and the self-employed who may 
not have such systems.

HMRC needs to develop an effective approach for those claimants and businesses 
that are likely to be outside RTI in order to try to prevent a repeat of the
problems that have affected tax credits in the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2009/dec/10/pac-report-it-tax-collection-10dec09>
, according to the report into means testing.

Means testing is used by the government to distribute at least Â£87bn of 
benefits each year, about 13% of total public spending. No one department has 
overall responsibility for means testing and for ensuring consistency of 
approach, however. Thirty different means tested benefits are currently being 
managed by nine departments and 152 local authorities in England.

The committee calls for a single body to be responsible for overseeing the 
interaction between different benefits, whether means tested or not, as well as 
ensuring consistency and value for money.

Margaret Hodge, chair of the public accounts committee, said: "The sheer 
complexity of the benefits system places a heavy burden on claimants.

"People claiming multiple benefits, such as housing benefit and child tax 
credit, deal with different public bodies. This can be confusing and 
potentially discourage legitimate applications. Departments responsible for 
means testing must work together to get a better understanding of the burdens 
placed on claimants."

The report says the Department for Work and Pensions has stated that it is 
ensuring the online claims system for universal credit will be easy for 
claimants to navigate.

But it points out that Tell Use Once, the project which aims to allow 
individuals to notify the government of a change in their circumstances by just 
informing a single agency, has only been introduced for the reporting of a 
claimant's death and its extension to other areas is no longer being pursued.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For updates on public 
sector IT, join the Government Computing Network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 