
Police are investigating 15 incidents of illegal radio transmissions with 
aircraft atMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> and 
Avalon airports, including hoax calls that forced at least one aircraft to 
abort its landing.

In a statement issued on Monday night, the Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> said 
there had been “unlawful interference with air traffic control broadcasts over 
several weeks”.

RAF jets scrambled as passenger plane makes emergency landing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/28/raf-jets-scrambled-passenger-plane-emergency-landing-prestwick>
Audio obtained by the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-07/afp-investigating-hoax-calls-made-to-passenger-plane/7995502>
 revealed that, during one of the calls, the hoax caller pretended to be the 
pilot of a light aircraft as he spoke to an air traffic controller.

“I can see you there now. Roger your mayday. Could you please advise what your 
situation is,” the air traffic control operator asks.

“Engine failure,” the hoax caller replies. “Descending passing through 4,500.”

In another incident a Virgin Australia flight en route from the Gold Coast to 
Melbourne was forced to change course under the instruction of the hoax caller 
transmitting from an unknown location, the ABC reported.

A Virgin Australia spokeswoman told Guardian Australia she could not comment 
on the incident as the matter was now under investigation by police.

While police said there was no threat to the safety of travellers, and that 
travellers did not need to change their plans, they have issued a call to the 
public to provide information. The police statement refers to one person being 
responsible for the calls.


British Airways flight makes emergency landing after crew fall ill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/british-airways-flight-vancouver-emergency-landing-after-crew-fall-ill>
The AFP’s head of crime operations, the acting assistant commissioner Chris 
Sheehan, said the incidents were being investigated with technical support from 
theAustralian Communications and Media Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/09/broadcasters-warned-against-using-childrens-photographs-from-social-media-sites>
.

“The airlines have been briefed to ensure the advice has been passed on to 
their pilots and to ensure appropriate measures are in place,” he said.

Airservices Australia, which provides traffic control and navigation advice, 
said at no time was public safety jeopardised as a result of the calls and that 
it was working closely with the airlines and the AFP.

Unauthorised transmissions on non-public channels are an offence under the 
Radio Communications Act and carries a jail term of up to 20 years.

Anyone with information about this matter has been urged to contact Crime 
Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
 