
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/video/2012/dec/07/the-hobbit-an-unexpected-journey-watch-six-clips-video>

We live in an era where big, bold and brash film-making is the model for 
Hollywood studios hoping to make megabucks by commissioning the nextThe Dark 
Knight <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/122806/dark.knight> or Avatar 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/131170/avatar>. For those who prefer 
intimate movies, this is a cause for dismay; for those who unashamedly like 
their cinema loud, bombastic and wedded to preposterous fantasy, mind-bending 
glimpses of the future and/or synapse-searing adventure, 2012 has been a 
vintage year.

Yes, the studio system continues to deliver expensive yet soulless 
brain-batterers such asBattleship 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146760/battleship> and Total Recall 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148835/total-recall> – but in the last 
year alone it provided the funds for weird and wonderful big budget productions 
like Ang Lee's offbeat, visually explosiveLife of Pi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149778/life-of-pi> and Laika's 
wonderfully Phillip PullmanesqueParaNorman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148980/paranorman>. It pumped $250m into 
the nailbitingly ambitious first-ever film adaptation of Edgar Rice Burroughs'
John Carter <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142787/john-carter> of Mars 
fantasy series (and looked on in horror as most of it disappeared down the 
toilet). It gave usPrometheus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145506/prometheus>, Ridley Scott's 
confused-but-thrilling return to the Alien universe, a movie which would have 
been worth the price of admission had it featured nothing more than two hours 
of Michael Fassbender's Teutonic android terror David shooting hoops.

None of these movies are on my list of the top five fantasy, science fiction 
films of the year, but they are well worth a mention because they have only 
been made possible by what remains a much-maligned current film-making climate. 
And hey, at least we got a welcome reprieve from Michael Bay's ongoing quest to 
batter filmgoers into mewling submission with clattering, jarring spectacle in 
2012.

Before I begin, let me make a few things clear: this is not a list of the top 
five films of the year - for that,let me point you to Guardian Film's recent 
rundown <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/series/10-best-films-of-2012>. It is a 
list of the top movies covered by this column, the scope of which I have 
detailed above, over the past 12 months. I have not considered outright horror 
movies but I would happily include so-called "dark fantasy" fare such as the
Twilight <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149066/twilight-saga> films or 
Tim Burton'sDark Shadows 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146520/dark-shadows>. Had I thought them 
worthy.

So counting down from fifth place, Week in Geek's best films of 2012 are:

5. The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/125622/hobbit>
 A still of Gollum from Peter Jackson's The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey 
Photograph: PR 
Almost all reviews of Peter Jackson's return to Middle Earth have focused on 
its flaws, and they are many. But those of us who went out and bought the 
extended versions of all three Lord of the Rings movies can only blame 
ourselves for encouraging an approach to film-making which tends towards the 
expansive. In any case, there are so many fine scenes in the first instalment 
of the Hobbit trilogy that a little padding is entirely forgivable. The 
"riddles in the dark" segue in which Bilbo Baggins meets and outwits the 
creature Gollum is unmatched by anything in Jackson's entire fantasy canon, and 
while many of the book's other great chapters - the journey through Mirkwood 
and Bilbo's encounter with the great wyrm Smaug - are yet to come, the debut 
film's final frame still came too soon for me. The Hobbit: An Unexpected 
Journey remains an example of the kind of good-hearted, warm and bracing 
film-making that only Jackson is capable of. And contrary to what you may have 
been told, it looks fantastic in 48 frames per second - gloriously hyperreal in 
the frenetic action scenes, if perhaps a little bright and sparkly in the early 
Shire sections.

4. Dredd <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/149147/dredd>
 Rough justice … Karl Urban as the eponymous Judge in Dredd 
It bombed in north America but was a hit in the UK; something we Brits should 
all pat ourselves on the back for. Wiping out memories of the appalling 1995 
Sylvester Stallone depiction of 2000AD's taciturn future lawman, Alex Garland 
and Pete Travis's Judge Dredd movie was as furrow-browed and humourless as its 
central protagonist (something of a pity given that a closer reading of the 
comic book might have given birth to a bombastic, satirical Paul Verhoevenesque 
take). Nevertheless, it had drive and conviction in spades, as well as several 
standout effects-laden 3D sections like nothing seen before on the big screen. 
Rather than simply telling us that a new drug, Slo-Mo, had taken over the 
streets of Mega City One, Garland and Travis attempted to build refracted 
visions of the effects of the substance into the very fabric of the film 
itself, resulting in a magnificent reimagining of cinema as mind-expanding 
experience – LSD for the eyeballs, asi it were. The film-makers are rumoured to 
have fallen out over the final cut: whoever got it managed to fashion something 
entirely original and unexpected while delivering a cinematic Dredd that fans 
of the comic book would be more than satisfied with. What a pity Karl Urban's 
pitch-perfect, Eastwoodesque take on the character is unlikely to get a second 
run out.

3. The Dark Knight Rises 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/141046/dark-knight-rises>
 Bane in The Dark Knight Rises Photograph: Allstar/WARNER BROS./Sportsphoto 
Ltd./Allstar 
Christopher Nolan's fond, surprisingly sentimental farewell to Batman was a 
fitting conclusion to the most impressive comic book trilogy ever seen on the 
big screen – even if it could not quite match its predecessor for firepower or 
playfulness. Tom Hardy's Bane made for a perfectly serviceable villain, and the 
caped crusader's against-the-odds comeback to rescue his beloved Gotham from 
the forces of evil gaveChristian Bale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale> the chance to deliver perhaps 
his iconic performance of the series. While the absence of the late Heath 
Ledger's Joker left a huge gap, the final film's storyline managed to make 
sense of the three movies as a perfectly-formed triptych, even if the thematic 
furniture required to do so occasionally felt a little clunky. Despite all 
these caveats, we may never see a Batman as good as this in the cinema again, 
and that is something Nolan can be duly proud of.

2. The Avengers <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/144027/avengers>
 Scarlett Johansson as the Black Widow in The Avengers Assemble. Photograph: 
Disney/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
In which director Joss Whedon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joss-whedon>
 put to rest forever the idea that superhero movies must necessarily be "dark" 
in order to work in the modern era. Marvel studio had been building up to The 
Avengers ever since the first Iron Man film in 2008, but the much-hyped 
denouement in which Tony Stark came together with the Hulk, Thor, Captain 
America and various other minor heroes might easily have been a bloated, 
tangled mess. In the end, Whedon's genius was to turn a negative into a 
positive by zeroing in on the inevitable clash of egos likely to emerge when a 
platoon of self-important, superpowered demigods came together for the first 
time. Never mind the real enemy (a rather forgettable bunch of reptilian 
extra-terrestrial interlopers named the Chitauri), the true battle for 
supremacy centred on which Avenger could deliver the greatest bellylaughs: 
Stark with his description of a showdown with Thor as "Shakespeare in the park" 
or The Hulk with his tendency to smash everything in sight, friend or foe. 
Humanising his cast of colourful titans with that legendarily sharp ear for a 
smart line, Whedon gave us a movie that was fun without being camp, gripping 
without being doom-laden. The fact that the creator of Buffy the Vampire Slayer 
and Firefly is now likely to have millions of greenbacks thrown at him by 
Hollywood for future (likely rather less orthodox) projects is a very welcome 
side-effect.

1. Looper <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/148727/looper>
 Smooth riders ... Joseph Gordon-Levitt (foreground) and Paul Dano in a scene 
from Looper. Photograph: Alan Markfield/AP/Sony Pictures 
It was billed as this year's The Matrix 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77528/matrix>, but ended up feeling 
rather closer to Christopher Nolan's cerebellum-twistingInception 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/135706/inception>. Written and directed 
by Rian Johnson, whose stylish high school neo-noirBrick 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/112157/brick> brought Joseph Gordon 
Levitt to the attention of many in 2005, this unorthodox yet wholly original 
vision of the future's only slight mis-step was to use the year's breakout star 
as a prosthetically-enhanced younger version of Bruce Willis's jaded hitman. 
Elsewhere it was all on-button stuff: Johnson posited a tightly-wound world in 
which the invention of time travel had become a tool for mobsters to dispose of 
the bodies of their enemies, a nightmarish, wired and hopeless dystopia where 
China led the world financially and the only Americans with money were the 
killers waiting at the end of a time vortex for their next victim to be 
delivered on a plate. The movie's genius was the sudden twist - signposted 
early, but difficult to spot except via repeated viewing - that seemed to send 
the whole film into an unsettling tailspin before righting itself at the very 
last and flying true all the way to the final frame. Like a conjurer who 
distracts the audience with his left hand while his right carries out the vital 
intervention, Johnson left us awestruck and dumbfounded by the intricacies of 
his magic trick and the verve with which he delivered it.

Honourable mentions this year must go to The Hunger Games 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142857/hunger-games>, even if subsequent 
instalments are likely to have us wishing we'd never delved into this 
particular dystopia, andBrave 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/146821/brave>, a beautifully-drawn Pixar 
instalment that oozed with hearty Scots charm. On the indie front, Benh 
Zeitlin's outrageously leftfield vision of life down on the flood-threatened 
Louisiana bayou,Beasts of the Southern Wild 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/145827/beasts-of-the-southern-wild>, is 
well worth a look, and I also liked Leos Carax's sublime and mesmeric sci-fi 
pieceHoly Motors <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/147447/holy-motors>.

Which movies top your "best of" list of fantasy, sci fi and comic book fare 
for 2012, and which should be allowed to sink into the mire of celluloid 
history? All thoughts below.
 