
Sale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> kept their hopes of 
qualifying for the semi-finals alive by bringing Bath's five-match unbeaten run 
to a juddering halt. The Sharks welcomed back a raft of World Cup personnel, 
although SÃ©bastien Chabal lasted only 23 minutes.

However, Charlie Hodgson, who missed the tournament through injury, had the 
biggest impact. He landed five penalties, a drop-goal and a conversion for a 
haul of 20 points which saw his side home.

In a disjointed contest Hodgson's kicking was to prove crucial while his 
opposite number Shaun Berne could manage a solitary penalty and conversion.

Sale opened the scoring after five minutes with a Charlie Hodgson drop-goal. 
They should have gone further ahead minutes later when Scott Lawson made a fine 
break down the middle but his pass to Hanley, who had a clear run to the line, 
was forward. But the home side kept up the pressure and forcedBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> into conceding consecutive penalties 
which Hodgson kicked to give his side a 9-0 lead.

The visitors finally stirred themselves, pinching a Sale lineout and launching 
a promising attack which culminated in the Sharks being caught offside and 
Berne landing the penalty.

Just before half-time Sale struck a decisive blow. Hodgson landed another 
penalty before a poor kick from Berne out of defence was scooped up by Hanley 
in his own half. The wing chipped over the advancing defence, collected the 
ball and passed to the supporting Chris Bell who finished brilliantly in the 
corner. Hodgson converted from the touchline to send his side in at half-time 
with a 19-3 lead.

Hodgson increased the lead with another penalty four minutes into the second 
half but Bath hit back, Steve Borthwick claiming a lineout and being driven 
towards the Sale line. Lorne Ward eventually touched down and Berne converted 
to bring his side right back into the game.

Sale, though, turned up the pressure, won another penalty which Hodgson duly 
kicked before leaving the field with the satisfaction of a job well done.

Sale Foden; Laharaggue, Mayor, Bell (Keil, 63), Hanley; Hodgson (Martens, 66), 
Wigglesworth; Sheridan, Lawson (Bruno, 57), Turner (Bourrust, 56), I Fernandez 
Lobbe (Cox, 66), Day, JM Fernandez Lobbe, Hills (Cliff, 77), Chabal (Tait, 23).

Scorers: Try Bell. Con Hodgson. Pens Hodgson 5. Drop-goal Hodgson.

Bath Stephenson; Banahan (Cuthbert, 65), Crockett, Cheeseman, Davey 
(Abendanon, 26); Berne, Walshe (Baxter, 61); Flatman, Hawkins (Mears, 57), 
Ward, Borthwick, Purdy (Beattie, 60), Faamatuainu, Scaysbrook, Feaunati 
(Goodman, 65).

Sin-bin Baxter 79min

Scorers: Try Ward. Con Berne. Pen Berne.

Referee P Allan (SRU). Att 8,782
 