
LBC will look to repeat the success of its Call Clegg phone-in show featuring 
the deputy prime minister with a new show featuring Metropolitan police chief 
SirBernard Hogan-Howe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bernard-hogan-howe> 
called Call The Commissioner.

Hogan-Howe, who has been battered by recent revelations about the Stephen 
Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lawrence> case and the "Plebgate" 
affair, has made occasional appearances on the talk station, which went 
nationwide on digital radio last month.

The new show would be hosted by the station's breakfast presenter, Nick 
Ferrari, who presents Call Clegg and has also hosted phone-ins on the station 
with London mayor,Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>.

LBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc> is understood to be in discussions 
with Hogan-Howe about a regular phone-in show with the working title Call the 
Commissioner.

It follows the success of Call Clegg, Ferarri's weekly phone-in show featuring 
the deputy prime minister, which made radio history when it began last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/10/nick-clegg-lbc-radio-show>.

Ferarri told the Guardian: "[Hogan-Howe] is mired with a few problems and it 
will be interesting to see how he goes on his first appearance. He's keen to 
get the message across and this is the way to do it."

Hogan-Howe has come under fire following fresh revelations in March about Met 
undercover officers spying on the family of murdered teenager Lawrence in the 
1990s. The Met commissioner described the Ellison report which contained the 
revelationsas "devastating" and said it marked one of the worst days of his 
career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/07/met-counter-terrorism-chief-moved-lawrence-scandal>
.

The Met police chief came in for sustained criticism from MPs last month who 
accused him of losing his grip on corruption in the force.

Ferrari added: "I have a good relationship with him. I have done the police 
bravery awards, my late mother was in the force, albeit not in the Met, so I 
have a sort of hook into the police. We have a good professional relationship."

Call Clegg was viewed as a gamble by the Lib Dem leader, a regular hour-long 
broadcast featuring callers from members of the public.

Although the deputy prime minister has faced regular criticism over the role 
the Lib Dems have played in the coalition, it has served to boost his profile 
and been a regular source of headlines in the media.

Such was its success that London mayor Boris Johnson has also become a regular 
on the London talk station, which went national on digital radio earlier this 
year andlast week hosted the first leaders' debate on Europe featuring Clegg 
and UKIP leader Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/mar/26/nigel-farage-vs-nick-clegg-the-debate-for-europe-live>
.

A spokesman for the Metropolitan police said: "The MPS is not, and never has 
been, in talks with LBC regarding proposals for more regular appearances on the 
Nick Ferrari show by the commissioner.

"We committed late last year to four appearances on the show during 2014. We 
have a similar commitment with BBC London Radio. These numbers of appearances 
are in line with those of previous years."

Ferarri said the party leader debates, which took place for the first time 
before the last general election but are still to be confirmed for next year, 
should be extended to a radio phone-in. Channel 4 is also petitioning to hold 
one of the debates, which were last year hosted by the BBC, ITV and Sky News.

"Of course there is room for a radio debate, I would love to see that where 
the calls are coming in live," he said.

"The number of times I have seen people caught out, prime ministers, mayors, 
police commissioners … it's the regular people, my callers. As brilliant as 
David Dimbleby is, Adam Boulton, Alastair [Stewart], if you have someone who is 
affected by Helmand Province, by the spare room subsidy, that is going to make 
for a much more powerful question."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 