
Mixed martial arts’ Ultimate Fighting Championship has come to town and, 
though it’s Sunday daytime, the darkened interior of Melbourne’s Etihad Stadium 
evokes an enormous nightclub. Suspended from the rafters, spotlights trace the 
crowd like police searchlights, and amid these mazy beams and other flashing 
lights there’s a doof doof beat loud and incessant enough to defibrillate a 
stopped heart and ensure that everyone, not only the day’s fighters, will be 
going to sleep with a ringing in the ears.

It’s quite a sight, however, to see the playing arena filled with fans and, 
raised up in the middle of them, as far away from the cheap seats as a 
life-changing lottery win, the octagon, a black, head-high, cushion-edged, 
chain-link enclosure that is the UFC’s signature piece. Despite the brutality 
some believe it embodies it looks about as dastardly as a pool fence. And given 
what will turn out to be a recordUFC <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ufc> 
crowd of 56,214 and a gate of $9 million, you can bet the Victoria Government 
is pleased it overturned, in March this year, its previous ban of the octagon – 
having been convinced by stakeholders, and perhaps some aspirational 
accounting, that the octagon, while not exactly subtle, was safer for 
competitors than a boxing-style ring.

Holly Holm shocks Ronda Rousey for UFC title in historic upset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/15/holly-holm-stuns-ronda-rousey-for-ufc-womens-bantamweight-title>
The end of the ban opened the doors for yet another big event to bring its 
caravans into Melbourne, although this one has what feels like a significant 
point of difference. Not because it’s the first time the UFC has come to the 
shores of Port Phillip Bay but because the event – one that many associate, 
quite reasonably, with hyper masculinity – is headlined by four women: US 
bantamweight world championRonda Rousey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ronda-rousey>, strawweight world champion 
Joanna Jedrzejczyk from Poland, and their respective challengers, American 
Holly Holm and Canadian Valerie Letourneau.

Of the four, however, it’s Rousey whose name is first on the marquee and on 
everyone’s lips. Four years ago UFC president Dana White said women would never 
fight in the octagon. Today the former Olympic judo bronze medallist is the 
UFC’s biggest and best-paid star and draw card having put together a 12-0 
unbeaten record by mowing down her opponents with the ruthlessness of a cougar 
attacking a hen house. Throw in her photogenic looks, her brash confidence and 
somequotable straight-talking <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TiTJJ7R5KDQ>, 
Rousey, with the help of a media culture not known for circumspection, has 
transcended MMA to the point she’s been invited to sit on talk show couches and 
take turns in popcorn movies like Expendables 3 and Fast and Furious 7. Any 
moment now, surely, Mattel will attempt to cash in with Arm-Bar Barbie.

But at the risk of labouring the point, it’s not just women Rousey has won 
over, but men. This seems fairly obvious on an early lap of the inside 
concourse. More men than I could bother counting were wearing T-shirts 
emblazoned with “Rowdy Ronda Rousey”. These men form part of a crowd that 
appears to me to be distinctly different from an Australian football crowd and, 
perhaps needless to say, an antiques roadshow crowd. Its number is made up, 
overwhelmingly, of males between about 15-40, some of whom brought their kids 
(and to think my dad just took me the library on a Wednesday afternoon). To 
speculate wildly, I’d say that as the event took place you could swing a cat 
around the weights rooms, boxing rings and dojos of Melbourne safe in the 
knowledge you wouldn’t hit anyone who might enjoy hitting you back.

There are also a good number of women in attendance, about 20% of the crowd 
I’d estimate, and I ask two of them what’s brought them to the event. As it 
happens the two, sisters in their 30s, were brought up in a karate-loving 
family and one of them, Amy, teaches the martial art. But they say they’ve been 
drawn by the spectacle that is the UFC, although Jen admits that the promise of 
blood also has its appeal. “We want some good blood and gore,” she says, only 
half-jokingly I’d say. “A knock-out or an arm-bar would also be nice. We also 
love a good chick fight.”

They’ll have to wait a bit for that, however, what with 11 bouts to get 
through before the two women’s title fights commence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff5fe1e218b7805c6e16d957f454f96beb2e3805%2F0_55_5082_3050%2F5082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%20Holm%20and%20Ronda%20Rousey%20leave%20mark%20in%20UFC's%20Australian%20foray%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%20Holm%20and%20Ronda%20Rousey%20leave%20mark%20in%20UFC%27s%20Australian%20foray%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff5fe1e218b7805c6e16d957f454f96beb2e3805%2F0_55_5082_3050%2F5082.jpg>
 Etihad Stadium was packed to the rafters for UFC 193 with crowd figures 
setting new records. Photograph: Scott Barbour /Zuffa LLC/Zuffa LLC via Getty 
Images 
I take my seat four fights in after Australian Daniel Kelly – a four-times 
Olympian judoka – wins his middleweight bout against American Steve Montgomery. 
While I missed the fight I do catch part of Kelly’s press conference in the 
media room afterwards and I’m struck for the first of many times on this day by 
the thoughtfulness and articulacy of the most of the competitors. It’s a 
reminder that, however you feel about blood sports, to write off these 
competitors as some kind of brawling brutes is lazy and wrong. These are 
highly-trained professional athletes who enter the ring not with a red mist 
over their eyes but a clarity of vision and purpose.

After two further preliminary bouts – one of which sees veteran Sydney fighter 
Anthony Perosh flattened by a straight right to the mouth – we’re ready for a 
welterweight bout between Peter Sobotta of Germany and Kyle Noke of Dubbo. As 
will occur before every fight, both competitors enter the ring separately, 
serenaded at blistering volume by a song of their choice. Sobotta has chosen 
the fairly predictable Bad Boys by Inner Circle, while Noke goes for the even 
more predictable Down Under. But his song choice plays to the home crowd and it 
gets veteran fight announcer Bruce Buffer, wearing a crooner’s tuxedo, 
lip-synching and pumping his right knee to the reggae beat as he awaits his 
turn to rip into his introductions with all the subtlety of the Las Vegas 
Strip. “Iiiiiiiiiiiiiit’s tiiime!” he screams into his microphone and the crowd 
laps up the theatrics. I’d like to hear Buffer at a McDonald’s drive-thru.

Buffer having done his bit, one of two “octagon girls” sitting nearby rises 
from her seat, drops her full-length gown, and steps up and onto the apron of 
the octagon. Then, holding up a card on which is written “round 1”, she 
circumnavigates the octagon wearing only a tiny red halter top, barely there 
red shorts, and a smile. A lonely wolf whistle cuts the air and I wonder about 
the juxtaposition between the “octagon girls” and the progressiveness of 
today’s proceedings being hung on the skills of four female fighters.

The fight begins and Sobotta and Noke circle each other cagily before 
striking, and the slap of foot on thigh is distinctive from the thud of fist 
into head. Then, midway through the opening round, Noke snaps forward and heels 
Sobotta in the midriff with a front kick. The American yelps and cracks like 
the top of a crème brûlée before Noke piles on top of him, hammering Sobotta’s 
head with his hands as Sobotta desperately tries to protect himself. This is 
known as ground and pound, and is perhaps the least palatable part ofMMA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mma>, although referees are usually quick to 
end proceedings if enough blows get through a prone fighter’s defences. Sure 
enough, less than 10 seconds later, the referee has seen enough and stops the 
fight.

Next up, a 21-and-looks-it local lad, Jake Matthews, arrives in the ring to We 
Will Rock You, a song that on its own will keep the members of Queen in perms 
for the rest of their lives. His opponent is Mexican Akbarh Arreola who is as 
lean and fit as a greyhound. At first it appears Arreola has too much 
experience but, in the second round, after the two men are locked on the canvas 
in a human pretzel, Matthews extricates himself and grounds and pounds Arreola, 
opening up a deep cut above the Mexican’s right eye. It’s bad enough for the 
referee to call in the doctor and to then end the fight early on his advice. 
The Mexican drops his head to his areolas while Matthews performs a backflip on 
the canvas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbebd00d585b64e6e20b755267a7a138ec9e3f4e2%2F0_0_2832_4256%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%20Holm%20and%20Ronda%20Rousey%20leave%20mark%20in%20UFC's%20Australian%20foray%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%20Holm%20and%20Ronda%20Rousey%20leave%20mark%20in%20UFC%27s%20Australian%20foray%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbebd00d585b64e6e20b755267a7a138ec9e3f4e2%2F0_0_2832_4256%2F2832.jpg>
 A spent Valerie Letourneau reacts after her strawweight fight with Joanne 
Jedrzejczyk. Photograph: Joe Castro/AAP 
There are three more fights before the headline acts. In the first, American 
Jared Rosholt starts on the back foot what with his entrance song being Phil 
Collins’s In The Air Tonight. But bringing his wrestling skills to the fore he 
wears down his much taller opponent, Dutchman Stefan Struve, in the day’s most 
underwhelming bout. The following fight is much livelier and though Jamaican 
Uriah Hall shows he has all the moves and a roundhouse kick as dangerous as a 
scorpion’s strike, Australian Robert Whittaker proves a tough and canny 
opponent and he does enough to win on points over three rounds. UFC commentator 
Joe Rogan steps into the octagon to interview him after the bout, as he does 
all the victors, and Whittaker delights the crowd with his laconic explanation 
of tactics: “My default plan A was to throw a lot of punches.”

The penultimate fight before the main events is between Sydney-based Kiwi Mark 
Hunt, a man with a chin harder than logarithms, and a Brazilian known as Big 
Foot De Silva. Though he has short legs relative to his long torso, he still 
stands 6ft4in and with an Easter Island head and a back as square and wide as 
the rear of a lorry he’s a formidable sight. But if the fans are hoping for a 
bloody, drawn-out epic like the two put on in Brisbane in 2013 they are 
disappointed. In the first round Hunt catches a crabbing De Silva on the right 
ear and he falls like a giant redwood. Hunt manages another shot with De Silva 
crumpled on the ground before yet another fight is stopped early.

The crowd, it feels at this point, has been entertained but it won’t be 
walking away thinking it’s been a memorable occasion. That’s the nature of 
sport. You have to have run of the mills days like ths against which to measure 
the sublime. But then the women arrive into the octagon and any ho-humming is 
quickly forgotten.

In the first title bout strawweight champion Jedrzejczyk and Letourneau put on 
a bruising, five-round slugfest that leaves both women battered, though still 
standing. Though built like pixies compared to the behemoths they’ve followed 
the two give and take enormous punishment but it’s the corn-rowed Jedrzejczyk 
who controls the fight and lands the more telling blows, the most vivid among 
them a front leg kick that hits the game Letrourneau flush on the left cheek 
bone, spinning her head on its axis. Letourneau manages a takedown in the 
opening round but it’s the punishing output of Jedrzejczyk – 220 “significant 
strikes” according to stats – that wins her the bout by unanimous decision. As 
she has her title belt fitted Letourneau, her left eye all but swollen shut, 
turns away, grasping the fence with her head hanging low.

And so, finally, to the main event. The noise within the stadium increases, if 
that’s possible, and all eyes and camera phones turn to greet the arrival of 
Rousey and Holm. The challenger, a former world boxing title holder, arrives 
first to adriving Celtic beat <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GsozE_fQ3G0> 
before Rousey, dressed in black like the Grim Reaper, walks menacingly to the 
octagon. Such is Rousey’s aura I see one of the octagon girls morph into a fan, 
and she holds up her phone (where was she hiding that?) to delightedly capture 
Rousey’s arrival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F748c96cdf44c573fc6f2727b9265bd51947f8f04%2F0_0_3000_1900%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holly%20Holm%20and%20Ronda%20Rousey%20leave%20mark%20in%20UFC's%20Australian%20foray%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holly%20Holm%20and%20Ronda%20Rousey%20leave%20mark%20in%20UFC%27s%20Australian%20foray%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fholly-holm-and-ronda-rousey-leave-their-mark-in-ufcs-australian-debut%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F748c96cdf44c573fc6f2727b9265bd51947f8f04%2F0_0_3000_1900%2F3000.jpg>
 Many came to see Ronda Rousey, who cut a confident figure upon her arrival in 
the stadium. Photograph: Josh Hedges/Zuffa LLC/Zuffa LLC via Getty Images 
In the octagon now Rousey and Holm, both impressively fit and muscular, bounce 
and pace through Buffer’s all-cards-on-the-table introduction –“Rooooooooowdy 
Ronda Rousey!…. Holly ‘The Preacher’s Daughter’ Holm!” – before they are 
invited to touch gloves. Rousey with a look that could curdle milk declines, 
playing up to her “bad ass” reputation that has drawn so many punters here 
tonight.

The horn goes to start the fight and from the outset we get a hint that 
something remarkable could be on the cards. With her mouth agape and eyes 
bugging out of her head Rousey pursues Holm around the octagon. Holm, 
back-peddling, keeps her nerve and Rousey at bay by landing shots that soon 
begin to redden Rousey’s nose and mouth and elicit gasps from the crowd. A 
right left combination here, a left elbow to Rousey’s face there. There’s a 
moment in the first round when Rousey pins Holm to the fence and you wonder if 
it’s the prelude to a take down, thereby allowing Rousey the opportunity to 
manipulate Holm’s joints in a way joints are not meant to be manipulated. But 
Holm gets out of the clinch and the pattern of the fight is resumed.

The break between the first and second rounds does not prompt Rousey into a 
re-consideration of her tactics, despite it being the first round she has lost 
in her UFC career. So it is that Rousey continues her relentless advancing. As 
a result, a minute in, she is spun about and knocked off kilter by a straight 
left from Holm. As Rousey rises unsteadily and turns back to face Holm the 
challenger kicks her under her right ear and Rousey blacks out, falling 
sideways and hitting the canvas shoulder and head first. Smelling blood, and 
victory, Holm pounces and delivers two hammer fist blows before she’s pushed 
off the battered and prone Rousey by the referee. Holm wins, holding her hands 
to her head, as incredulous as everyone else.

As the crowd goes mad, officials swarm into the ring and medical staff rush to 
the aid of a bloody Rousey. After she rises to her feet the official 
announcement is made and Rogan then interviews an eloquent respectful Holm as 
Rousey is steered out of the octagon and out of the spotlight. She begins the 
long lonely walk of the vanquished fighter.

Melbourne’s first foray into the UFC has its headline.

 