
Tributes across Hollywood have continued to pour in for actor Anton Yelchin, 
who hasdied in a car accident at the age of 27 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-star-trek-actor-dies-car-crash>
.

Anton Yelchin: actor of cherubic charm who inspired huge affection | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-cherubic-charm-star-trek-like-crazy-green-room>
The star, known for roles in the rebooted Star Trek franchise and acclaimed 
indie horror Green Room, has been remembered by those who worked with him and 
those who knew him.

Jodie Foster, who directed Yelchin in the 2011 comedy The Beaver, has released 
a statement 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/06/jodie-foster-anton-yelchin-death-the-beaver-1201690418/>
 to remember the actor.

“What a rare and beautiful soul with his unstoppable passion for life,” it 
read. “He was equal parts serious thinker and the most fun little brother you 
could ever dream of. I am so honoured to have been able to direct such a deep 
actor, so committed and genuine. I will forever be grateful for all of those 
little exchanges we shared, his contagious enthusiasm, his questions, his 
company. My heart breaks for his mom and dad who were a part of every anecdote. 
He carried their love into everything he touched.”

Justin Lin, who directed Yelchin in this summer’s Star Trek Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-trek-beyond>, tweeted to highlight the 
actor’s “passion and enthusiasm”.
Justin Lin (@trailingjohnson) 
Still in shock. Rest in peace, Anton. Your passion and enthusiasm will live on 
with everyone that had the pleasure of knowing you.
 <https://twitter.com/trailingjohnson/status/744611358734352384> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/trailingjohnson/status/744611358734352384> 
Yelchin worked with director Paul Schrader in the 2014 thriller Dying of the 
Light, which also starred Nicolas Cage, and the pair shared a tribute via 
Facebook.

On Twitter, stars from Elijah Wood to William Shatner also shared their 
condolences.
Elijah Wood (@elijahwood) 
Absolutely shocked and deeply saddened to hear of Anton Yelchin’s passing.
 <https://twitter.com/elijahwood/status/744716527019057152> June 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elijahwood/status/744716527019057152> olivia wilde 
(@oliviawilde) 
Anton Yelchin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anton-yelchin> was a bright, 
brilliant talent, and a truly kind person. I was so taken by him, and won't 
ever forget his sweet smile. RIP
 <https://twitter.com/oliviawilde/status/744607098475057153> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/oliviawilde/status/744607098475057153> William Shatner 
(@WilliamShatner) 
Sad news for such a talented young man. Condolences to the family of Anton 
Yelchin.
 <https://twitter.com/WilliamShatner/status/744690349474357249> June 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/WilliamShatner/status/744690349474357249> edgarwright 
(@edgarwright) 
Anton Yelchin. Gone way too soon. So sad.
 <https://twitter.com/edgarwright/status/744647487814799360> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/edgarwright/status/744647487814799360> Mark Hamill 
(@HamillHimself) 
So very sad to hear the awful news about Anton Yelchin. Such a fine actor with 
his whole career ahead of him. He will be remembered always.
 <https://twitter.com/HamillHimself/status/744653912842571776> June 19, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HamillHimself/status/744653912842571776> 
Yelchin was involved in a freak parking accident at his Los Angeles home on 
Sunday morning. He has a number of projects still to be released, including 
this summer’s Star Trek Beyond and sci-fi mystery Rememory with Peter Dinklage.
 