
Skeletal figures, too weak to move, wait limply for help. At gunpoint, 
blank-faced SS officers manhandle the twisted bodies of the prisoners they 
starved to death, slinging them into gigantic burial pits that will eventually 
be filled with thousands of corpses. Bullet-riddled bodies and skulls smashed 
into grotesque shapes line country roads. Having frantically tried to dig his 
way out of a barn where hundreds were being burned to death, a man’s body lies 
wedged under a wall where he was shot by German troops.

The catalogue of horrors uncovered by the film German Concentration Camps 
Factual Survey is unremitting, but they remained unseen for decades.

After production got under way in 1945, it was never completed and simply 
shelved. Only extracts have previously emerged,notably in the 1985 TV film A 
Painful Reminder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/27/belsen-footage-is-a-stark-reminder>
. The story of the film, perhaps best known for the involvement of Alfred 
Hitchcock, was recently told in the documentaryNight Will Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/night-will-fall>, released in cinemas last 
September and screened on Channel 4 in January. Now, however, German 
Concentration Camps Factual Survey, restored and completed to the film-makers’ 
original specifications, has gone on public release for the first time, with a
two-week run 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=7EA2B9F5-A0EA-439E-B9E5-31513E367AD4&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=9EEF280E-18DE-480A-B05D-AFE0A221A3A3>
 at the BFI Southbank in London, and further screenings in May through the 
Picturehouse chain of cinemas.

Speaking after a special screening on 16 April, the restoration team, led by 
Toby Haggith, senior curator in film at the Imperial War Museum, outlined the 
process to finish the film, which was originally the brainchild of producer 
Sidney Bernstein (who went on to found Granada Television). Haggith explained 
that the film was commissioned by Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary 
Force with the intention of confronting German civilians and prisoners of war 
with indisputable evidence of the atrocities committed in their midst, and was 
compiled from footage shot by British, US and Russian camera crews that 
accompanied troops as they liberated hundreds of camps and subcamps inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, Austria and eastern Europe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da8ViLt5Xjgk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da8ViLt5Xjgk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da8ViLt5Xjgk&media=>
 Watch an excerpt from the documentary German Concentration Camps Factual 
Survey – video 
Hitchcock “gave crucial advice on how the film should be shaped”, Haggith 
explained, but worked on it for only a month, in July 1945, while editors tried 
to make sense of hours of footage that were continually being sent to London 
from the front. “We believe he looked at rushes, and discussed them with editor 
Peter Tanner, as well as possibly having a hand in the writing of the first 
treatment.” The film begins at Bergen-Belsen, liberated on 15 April 1945, and 
moves east through Germany and Poland, culminating in short sequences filmed at 
Auschwitz and Majdanek.

The restoration team watched the original raw footage and discovered shots of 
bulldozers shovelling corpses into the burial pits that was too gruesome even 
for such a shocking film. “They clearly had to work fast, for reasons of 
sanitation.”

There remain conflicting opinions as to why the project had been shelved. 
After the screening, Rainer Schulze, a history professor at the University of 
Essex, said he theorised that the failure of earlier concentration camp films, 
such as the Billy Wilder-directed Death Mills, had failed to dent what he calls 
the “denial” and “amnesia” of the German population in the immediate postwar 
period.

Another issue that may have contributed to the original film not being 
completed are errors in the lyrical voiceover script, written by future cabinet 
minister Richard Crossman. Chief among these were the figure of 4 million 
deaths at Auschwitz (based on contemporary Soviet estimates, but later revised 
to 1.1m) and the failure to establish that Jews were the central target of Nazi 
persecution. Schulze says: “All sorts of things had become clearer by the end 
of 1945, as a result of the Nuremberg trials, that the film-makers hadn’t known 
in the summer – and so the whole humanitarian argument of the film could have 
been undermined.”

The Holocaust film that was too shocking to show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/09/holocaust-film-too-shocking-to-show-night-will-fall-alfred-hitchcock>
The restoration team, however, chose to leave the script – recently recorded 
by actor Jasper Britton – exactly as written, to preserve the film’s 
authenticity as a historical document.

The film has been given an 18 certificate by the British Board of Film 
Classification, which cited its “graphic footage”, thereby restricting its 
ability to be screened in schools. The Imperial War Museum’s Holocaust 
education officer, Rachel Donnelly, thinks the certification is appropriate. 
“To show something like this in schools would be a huge challenge. Teachers 
have six lessons, on average, to teach theHolocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust>, and if we want children to think 
of the victims as real people, with real lives – and more than piles of dead 
bodies, which is how the Nazis would have wanted it – this film is not where 
young people should be engaging with it for the first time. Undergraduate 
courses are the place the film should be, not a year-nine classroom with 13- 
and 14-year-olds.”

Even so, the content of the film is so gruesome that the team insisted that a 
panel discussion be held after every screening, to help with what Haggith 
describes as the “shock and trauma” it induces. With the film going on general 
release, the restorers have appended a short video introduction and epilogue 
that outline the issues involved.

Haggith is also prepared for the inevitable snipes and counter-claims that are 
a contemporary feature of any discussion of the Holocaust. “Deniers are already 
saying what we’ve done is wrong,” he says. “We were accused in Australia that 
the Imperial War Museum was doing this to deflect attention from Israeli 
foreign policy in Gaza. Like we had done this in two months. You can worry too 
much about deniers.”
 