
Q Now that the summer seems to finally have ended, I realise I have draughty 
doors and windows. What could I do to avoid forking out for expensive 
replacement windows?
 Ann, Bath

A If you hold your hand up to a window or door and feel cold air, this means 
that heat is escaping from your home and, as it's estimated that up to 20 per 
cent of your home's heat loss is from draughts, your money is literally seeping 
out of those little gaps. Look at the Energy Saving Trust -www.est.org.uk 
<http://www.est.org.uk> - for information about draught proofing and possible 
grants, or the Draught Proofing Advisory Association (yes it really does 
exist!) for a list of approved fitters. That said, there are lots of simple DIY 
methods you can achieve, from fitting self-adhesive foam strips to windows, and 
brushes to the base of doors. Look atwww.focusdiy.co.uk 
<http://www.focusdiy.co.uk> for solutions. While you still need to ventilate 
your home and particularly the kitchen or areas close to a naked flame, draught 
proofing your home will save you money and cut down on those carbon emissions.

Q  I want to put up some shelves, but not the minimalist floating kind which 
seem very 'in' at the moment. I'm having trouble finding some 
vintage/antique-looking brackets in sufficient quantities.
Mike Jones, Exeter

A Time was when your humble designer/author could be caught climbing in and 
out of skips digging out treasures such as ornate Victorian cast-iron brackets. 
Alas my days as Brighton's Stig of the Dump are now over as the world has seen 
the value in reclamation and salvage. That fact combined with the sad truth 
that many cast-iron foundries have closed down, means that finding anything 
other than the current trend in interior fixtures and fittings is getting 
harder. However, luck is in store: if you are after ornate brackets and friezes 
in cast iron, aluminium or ornate brass, check outwww.andythornton.com 
<http://www.andythornton.com> for an impressive selection. Decorative brackets 
will add a romantic touch to bedrooms and lounges, and can look wonderful in 
conservatories with ivy tendrils growing about their curves.

Â· If you have a decorating/design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 