
Amelia Gentleman (Rough sleeping returns to streets in full force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/09/rough-sleeping-rise-london-homelessness-every-day-struggle>
, 10 March) paints a grim picture of the situation in London. But it is not 
new. Back in the early 1970s, the Conservative social services secretary Sir 
Keith Joseph was so concerned about rough sleeping in London that on a cold, 
dark night, incognito and without any departmental officials, he did a full 
evening shift accompanyingSt Mungo’s <http://www.mungos.org/> workers as they 
made their way round the West End. This was a truly good and rare act by a 
minister of the crown. Can any of today’s ministerial breed be envisaged doing 
likewise? I rather think not.
Robin Wendt
(Keith Joseph’s principal private secretary, 1970-72), Chester

• In 1998 the social exclusion unit set up by Tony Blair commissioned a report 
called Coming in from the Cold. This led to the establishment in 1998 of the 
rough sleepers unit headed by Louise Casey, which I joined in 2000 as 
a homelessness specialist adviser.

A 1999 national snapshot count found 1,850 people sleeping on the streets. By 
2002 that number had reduced to 585.This was achieved through three key 
elements. The first and most crucial one was cabinet-level focus by ministers 
from key departments to reduce numbers on the streets. This resulted in funding 
for homeless organisations, and later for local authorities, targeted at 
specific outcomes, which were monitored and reported to ministers. Finally, the 
team of specialist homeless advisers I led for 10 years offered support and 
advice to frontline staff and their managers, sharing best practice and 
encouraging creativity and new ways of working.

In 2010 under the coalition, the adviser team was disbanded in the name of 
localism, and public funding cut in the name of austerity. The resulting tidal 
wave of poverty and despair was, as you say, predicted by those of us in the 
sector but ignored by government.

Crisis estimates that average life expectancy for male rough sleepers is 47 
and for females, 43, the same as in the 1800s. With further cuts to public 
funding expected and a lack of any coherent government strategy on homelessness 
generally, this situation can only get worse.
Helen Keats 
Shorwell, Isle of Wight

• Lord Adonis’s claim that London will grind to a halt without Crossrail 2 (
Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/10/londoners-should-pay-at-least-half-of-crossrail-2-bill-lord-adonis-says>
, 11 March) is overblown. The truth is that without Crossrail 2 London will 
just become a bit slower to cross if the commuter population increases as he 
anticipates. No big shakes.

But more importantly this wouldn’t happen at all if the ongoing expulsion of 
the working classes to the outer reaches of London were to be brought to a halt 
by more sensible housing and planning policies. They would then not need
Crossrail <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> 2 to get to work.

So Adonis would be better advised to address the current housing madness in 
innerLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. He could then stop 
worrying about London’s service workers being late for work. At the same time 
much money would be saved and the destruction of local communities by the 
colossal impact of building Crossrail 2 can be averted.
Adam Hart
London

• By unintentionally coupling people who oppose immigration on racist grounds 
with his support of those who are rightly concerned about the immigration 
crisis and its impact on the UK (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/reasonable-fear-colossal-migration-crisis-justin-welby-archbishop-canterbury>
, 11 March), the archbishop of Canterbury has distracted us all from a 
connected and equally serious crisis. It has been created by parliament’s lack 
of affordable housing policies since the 1980s. Then lending was deregulated, 
rent controls abolished and national and international finance, some of it 
controlled by the church commissioners, allowed to speculate in UK land for 
private gain. The result is a catastrophic shortage of affordable homes for the 
current citizens of the UK, which exacerbates reasonable fears about 
immigration. There are no policies on offer from any political party promoting 
the common good in the use of land which will remedy that growing crisis 
whether the UK is in or out of the EU; that is where the archbishop should next 
aim his outrage.
Rev Paul Nicolson
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 