
A campaign to pardon nearly 50,000 men convicted under a 19th-century law for 
homosexual activity is being delayed amid concerns in Whitehall that a small 
number of paedophiles could be included.

Campaigners who had hoped that the royal pardon for the Enigma codebreaker 
Alan Turing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> would be extended 
across the nation have been dismayed by a warning from Whitehall officials that 
a blanket pardon could benefit gay men who had sex with a minor.

“There is huge frustration that the deal breaker now appears to be a fear that 
a general pardon might see what are being described as some paedophiles 
pardoned,” one source familiar with the Whitehall negotiations told the 
Guardian. “This sounds like an excuse and is driving people to despair.”

Simon Hughes, the justice minister, will on Saturday pledge that the Liberal 
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> would demand 
in any future coalition negotiations that a pardon is offered to the estimated 
49,000 men convicted of gross indecency before homosexuality was decriminalised 
in 1967. Hughes will say that the men, of whom 15,000 are believed to be alive, 
are “morally innocent” of any crime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhomosexual-pardon-delayed-whitehall-fears-paedophiles-simon-hughes-alan-turing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425058580616%2Fff8cb9e7-285d-408f-a79e-11599d031787-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Homosexual%20pardon%20delayed%20as%20officials%20say%20it%20could%20benefit%20paedophiles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhomosexual-pardon-delayed-whitehall-fears-paedophiles-simon-hughes-alan-turing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Homosexual%20pardon%20delayed%20as%20officials%20say%20it%20could%20benefit%20paedophiles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fhomosexual-pardon-delayed-whitehall-fears-paedophiles-simon-hughes-alan-turing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425058580616%2Fff8cb9e7-285d-408f-a79e-11599d031787-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Simon Hughes, the justice minister. Photograph: David Jones/PA 
The former Lib Dem deputy leader, who will indicate that the Tories have yet 
to agree to the pardon, will speak up after concerns were raised in Whitehall 
that paedophiles could benefit from the proposed pardon. Officials have said 
that there may be no record of whether a minor was involved in a pre-1967 
prosecution because homosexuality was illegal regardless of age. Homosexuality 
was initially decriminalised in 1967 for consenting adults aged 21 and over. 
The age of consent was eventually equalised in Great Britain in 2001.

Campaigners believe that the objections about benefiting paedophiles could be 
overcome by introducing two amendments to the relevant legislation to make 
clear that the men would have acted wholly lawfully under today’s law. The 
amendments would say that the sex took place between men aged over 16 and that 
they were both consenting adults.

Turing’s relatives have presented a petition to Downing Street, signed by more 
than half a million people 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/my-great-uncle-alan-turing-was-just-one-of-49000-gay-men-who-had-their-lives-ruined-by-the-government--where-are-their-pardons-10071744.html>
, calling for a pardon for the estimated 49,000 men prosecuted for homosexual 
activity. Turing was prosecuted for gross indecency under section 11 of the 
Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1885, which imposed a maximum prison sentence of 
two years, after he admitted to having sex with a man. The mathematician, 
played by Benedict Cumberbatch in the film the Imitation Game, was believed to 
have taken his own life two years later after avoiding a prison sentence by 
agreeing to the process known as chemical castration. He was granted a 
posthumous pardon in 2013 under the Royal Prerogative of Mercy by the Queen 
after a request from Chris Grayling, the justice secretary.

Hughes will say that the time has come for gay men who did nothing wrong under 
the law of today to be pardoned. Speaking at a Pride event at Westminster 
University in central London, the justice minister will say: “There are 
thousands of men, just like Alan Turing, who have convictions for consenting 
activity between adults which were only taken to the courts because of the laws 
of the time which criminalised homosexuality. They are morally innocent of 
crime and it is time we righted that wrong.”

The justice minister will indicate that the Tories have yet to agree to the 
pardon. He will say: “If we cannot reach agreement across government before the 
election, Liberal Democrats will make a commitment in our election manifesto to 
grant an official pardon to all those convicted in the past of sexual activity 
which today would be perfectly legal.”

Grayling has supported Hughes as he works with officials in the Ministry of 
Justice on drawing up plans for a change in the law. Hughes has praised the 
work of the officials although some campaigners believe that Downing Street is 
dragging its feet.

Downing Street has pointed out that the coalition changed the law – in the 
Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 – to allow men convicted of homosexual activity 
to apply for a “disregard” to make their conviction “spent”. But campaigners 
say it is wrong that the onus should be on people who committed no offence 
under today’s law to make an application to the state.
 