
Trees in a Somerset estate have survived ash dieback for far longer than 
previously thought possible – suggesting there may be potential to slow the 
spread of the disease in the British countryside.

The National Trust said 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/article-1355808576468/> only 10% of the 6,000 
ash trees at its Holnicote estate, near Minehead, are showing any signs of the 
disease, despite having been infected for five years longer than any other tree 
in the UK so far.

Ash dieback, known as chalara fraxinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/interactive/2012/nov/06/ash-dieback-spread-uk-map>
, is present in one other small plantation nearby but does not appear to have 
spread any further, which the trust said was at odds with government 
predictions suggesting it should have spread further and infected more trees in 
this time.

The findings suggest tackling the disease in the UK is not a lost cause and 
control measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/07/ash-dieback-fungus-stopped-government>
 could slow the spread from south-east England, where the disease appears to 
have been wind-blown from mainland Europe.

With an estimated 80 million ash trees in the UK – making up one-third of the 
country's tree cover – this could be good news for the British landscape, which 
would be radically changed if the disease spread in the coming decades.

Dr Simon Pryor, natural environment director at the National Trust, said: 
"It's important that the disease has not appeared to have spread very far.

"Even the trees affected have not suffered as much as we'd have expected, and 
very few have died, despite apparently having had the disease for nearly a 
decade.

"Whilst we don't want to be too optimistic on the basis of this one outbreak, 
this does confirm the view we've held from the outset that it is worthwhile 
removing infected trees in order to try to slow the spread – especially in 
places like this so far from the south-east.

"We will be asking the government to look again at its control strategy in the 
light of this new evidence – which to us does not appear to fit well with 
current modelling."

The National Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/national-trust> discovered 
the outbreak of ash dieback at Holnicote in September when undertaking routine 
inspections for the disease. The trees were planted back in 2001 to mark the 
millennium and pre-date other outbreaks of the disease by five years.

It is likely that these trees – like thousands of others imported to the UK at 
the time –1 § were infected whilst being grown in central Europe.
 