
After decades of stigmatisation on our movie screens, robots are getting a new 
deal from the newSteven Spielberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> film AI, just released in 
the US. Most science fiction cinema - obsessed with enraged robots, demonic 
supercomputers, killer cyborgs and human-hating androids - taps into our 
anxieties about losing our evolutionary status, human identity and moral values 
to artificially intelligent machines. From the destructive mechanical witch in 
Metropolis (1927) to the parasitic life-sucking machines of The Matrix, the 
technologised humanoids of science fiction have sought to destroy or enslave 
humanity throughout the history of film.

AI: Artificial Intelligence was inspired by a Brian Aldiss short story, 
Super-Toys Last All Summer Long, and the resulting movie represents the 
collaboration of two master film-makers: Stanley Kubrick, who spent several 
years developing the project, and Spielberg, who took it over after Kubrick's 
death. Sympathy for robots is AI's central preoccupation, and in that respect 
it marks a new direction for the treatment of intelligent machines in our 
culture.

But not so new, perhaps - the obscure 1962 B-movie Creation of the Humanoids 
is a key cinematic predecessor to AI; it's the story of empathetic robots who 
carry out a plan to save humanity, and seems to contain several of AI's themes. 
This slow-paced, funny, complex film shows robots capable of love and sex, 
robots oppressed by human hate groups, and robots who are morally superior to 
humans. Time for a history lesson. In the silent and early sound eras, robots 
took on a frightening aura. It's generally held that the earliest fully 
realised cinematic robot is Maria, from Metropolis, Fritz Lang's classic 
dystopian vision. Lustful mad scientist Rotwang (Rudolf Klein-Rogge) creates 
Maria (Brigitte Helm) to reflect his vision of the perfect submissive woman. 
But Maria rebels against her creator and provokes a worker revolt that 
threatens to destroy the entire city. At the end, she is burned at the stake as 
a kind of witch.

Similar anti-technological themes pervade James Whale's 1931 Frankenstein, 
which combines Gothic horror and science fiction with a monstrous artificial 
human that goes berserk. A few years later, evil mechanical men appeared in the 
Flash Gordon science fiction serials.

Although a killer alien robot - Gort - incinerates dozens of soldiers in The 
Day the Earth Stood Still, Robert Wise's 1951 classic is actually a harbinger 
of the new docile robot of the 1950s - the reflection of a more docile era at 
ease with technology. In the wake of Isaac Asimov's newly formulated laws of 
robotic obedience, Forbidden Planet (1956) offered Robby the Robot - superior 
to humans, yet their benevolent and tireless servant. Prototype of the cute, 
lovable robot and the first robot celebrity, Robby inspired decades of meek, 
servile machines such as Huey, Dewie and Louie in Silent Running, C-3PO and 
R2-D2 in the Star Wars movies, and, most recently, Andrew (played by Robin 
Williams) in Bicentennial Man, adapted from an Isaac Asimov story.

At the same time, however, the dawning of the computer age meant that 
artificial intelligence temporarily replaced robotics as an object of 
technological terror. Forbidden Planet imagines an evil supercomputer with the 
power to materialise murderous monsters from the human id. Kubrick's vision of 
artificial intelligence gone awry, in 2001: A Space Odyssey, conceives a more 
human, highly emotional computer. HAL 9000 suffers a nervous breakdown and 
murders several humans before being unplugged; humanity survives its technology 
in the symbolic spiritualism of the Star Child. Fears of out-of-controlAI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ai> achieve hysterical expression in Demon 
Seed, in which mad scientist Dr Harris creates Proteus IV, the greatest 
artificial brain ever. Wanting to be fruitful and multiply, the typically male 
supercomputer electronically rapes Harris's estranged wife, Susan, who gives 
birth to a supersmart, metallic cherub.

Androids - human-looking robots endowed with artificial intelligence - emerge 
in 1973's Westworld, set in a Wild West theme park populated by animal and 
humanoid robots. Purposefully mocking Asimov's laws of obedience, the robots - 
led by gunslinger Yul Brynner - run amok in this bizarre extension of 
Disneyland.

Fusing cybernetic machine with biological organism, cyborgs rampage through 
1980s films such as Robocop, The Terminator and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. 
These macho machine-men embody the fear and awe of technology, visualised as 
massive mechanised bodies that overpower frail human characters. This 
science-fiction technophobia continues in recent films such as The Matrix, in 
which artificially intelligent machines control and exploit humanity.

While most science-fiction films show artificially intelligent machines as 
emotionless, power-mad, murderous and morally inferior to humans, a few fasci 
nating exceptions buck this trend. Like AI, these movies portray robots as more 
capable of empathy, generosity and love than humans. In Android (1982), robot 
Max - a kind and gentle soul - floats in a laboratory spaceship with snarling 
Dr Daniels (Klaus Kinski), a cruel, mad scientist. On a quest to create the 
perfect robot slave, he builds sex worker android Cassandra and terminates Max. 
But, recoiling from Dr Daniels' lustful touch, Cassandra resists her 
programming, recharges Max and together they escape to provoke an android 
revolution. Equally unconventional is classic cyberpunk movie Blade Runner, 
which imagines beautiful, life-loving android "replicants" - the workers, 
entertainers and soldiers of the future - revolting against their cold-hearted 
human creators. Bounty hunters - the "blade runners" - are sent to kill these 
humanoids, whose chief crime is asserting their desire to live and love.

Blade Runner captures the ambiguity between man and machine that the best 
sci-fi movies aspire to. Here, too, Creation of the Humanoids, nearly 40 years 
old and created by forgotten film-makers, was years ahead of its time. Creation 
of the Humanoids - promoted as Andy Warhol's favourite movie - describes a 
post- apocalyptic world where the dividing line between human and robot no 
longer exists. As in AI, humans despise robots. "The more we become like men, 
the more they hate us," says one robot. Disparagingly calling robots 
"clickers", Cragis and his Order of Flesh and Blood - a kind of future Ku Klux 
Klan - lobbies for anti-robot laws and harasses the robots relentlessly.

Declaring that "Humanity doesn't always know what's in its best interest," the 
Robot Central Committee for the Preservation of Mankind carries out a secret 
plan to save dying, radiation-poisoned humans by transferring their minds into 
immortal, mechanical humanoid bodies. Cragis and his girlfriend turn out to be 
highly sophisticated robots, with artificial souls and recently designed 
reproductive technology. The revelation stuns them into accepting their roles 
as Adam and Eve to a new robot generation. The film has stilted, often 
hilarious, philosophical dialogue that eerily echoes the present-day theories 
of artificial intelligence experts Ray Kurzweil (The Age of Spiritual Machines) 
and Hans Moravec (Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind), but among its 
sci-fi cinematic brethren, Creation of the Humanoids is unusual in that it - 
like the upcoming AI - dares to suggest that robots may be the next stage in 
human evolution.

 AI is released in the UK on September 21. © 2001 Salon.com 
<http://www.salon.com>.
 