
The sun had yet to rise when missiles launched by CIA drones struck a clutch 
of buildings and vehicles in the lower Kurram tribal agency of Pakistan, 
killing four or five people and injuring another. It was February 22, 2016, and 
the American drone campaign had entered its second decade. Over the next weeks, 
officials in Washington and Rome announced that theUS military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> would use the Sigonella air 
base in Sicily to launch strikes against targets in Libya. American strikes in 
Yemen killed four people driving on a road in the governorate of Shabwah and 
eight people in two small villages in the governorate of Abyan. A strike in 
Syria killed an Indian citizen believed to be a recruiter for the self-styled 
Islamic State, and another strike killed a suspected Islamic State fighter in 
northern Iraq. A particularly bloody series of drone strikes and airstrikes in 
Somalia incinerated some 150 suspected militants at what American officials 
described as a training camp for terrorists. In south-eastern Afghanistan, a 
series of drone strikes killed 12 men in a pickup truck, two men who attempted 
to retrieve the bodies, and another three men who approached the area when they 
became worried about the others.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b3b84249c60ea969a6a8d4c360d115f887e7005%2F0_0_1650_2475%2F1650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20US%20justifies%20drone%20strikes%3A%20targeted%20killing%2C%20secrecy%20and%20the%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20US%20justifies%20drone%20strikes%3A%20targeted%20killing%2C%20secrecy%20and%20the%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b3b84249c60ea969a6a8d4c360d115f887e7005%2F0_0_1650_2475%2F1650.jpg>
 The Drone Memos by Jameel Jaffer. Photograph: Handout 
Over just a short period in early 2016, in other words, the United States 
deployed remotely piloted aircraft to carry out deadly attacks in six countries 
across central and south Asia, north Africa, and the Middle East, and it 
announced that it had expanded its capacity to carry out attacks in a seventh. 
And yet with the possible exception of the strike in Somalia, which garnered 
news coverage because of the extraordinary death toll, the drone attacks did 
not seem to spark controversy or reflection. As the 2016 presidential primaries 
were getting under way, sporadic and sketchy reports of strikes in remote 
regions of the world provided a kind of background noise – a drone in a 
different sense of the word – to which Americans had become inured.

Senior officials in the administration of President Barack Obama variously 
described drone strikes as “precise,” “closely supervised,” “effective,” 
“indispensable,” and even the “only game in town” – but what they emphasized 
most of all is that the drone strikes they authorized were lawful.

In this context, though, “lawful” had a specialized meaning. Except at the 
highest level of abstraction, the law of the drone campaign had not been 
enacted by Congress or published in the US Code. No federal agency had issued 
regulations relating to drone strikes, and no federal court had adjudicated 
their legality.Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> officials insisted 
that drone strikes were lawful, but the “law” they invoked was their own. It 
was written by executive branch lawyers behind closed doors, withheld from the 
public and even from Congress, and shielded from judicial review.

The US was carrying out lethal strikes not only on actual battlefields, but in 
places far removed from them

Secret law is unsettling in any context, but it was especially so in this one. 
For decades the US government had condemned targeted killings, characterizing 
them as assassinations or extrajudicial executions. On its face, the drone 
campaign signified a dramatic departure from that position – a departure that 
demanded explanation, at the very least. It was far from obvious what 
distinguished American drone strikes from the targeted killings the United 
States had historically rejected as unlawful. Nor was it clear how these 
targeted killings could be reconciled with international human rights law, with 
a decades-old executive order that bans assassinations, with the constitutional 
guarantee of due process, or, for that matter, with domestic laws that 
criminalize murder.

The scale of the drone campaign, and the human cost of it, made government 
secrecy even more disquieting. The United States was carrying out lethal 
strikes not only on actual battlefields, but in places far removed from them as 
well. The first strike President Obama authorized killed at least nine people 
in the tribal areas of Pakistan. An early strike in Yemen, albeit one carried 
out with cruise missiles rather than drones, killed two families, including as 
many as 21 children – and,according to the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/29/world/obamas-leadership-in-war-on-al-qaeda.html>
, “left behind a trail of cluster bombs that subsequently killed more 
innocents.” By the end of President Obama’s first term, American strikes had 
killed several thousand people in Pakistan, Yemen, and Somalia, including many 
hundreds of civilian bystanders. The deaths of innocents raised sharp moral 
questions, and the moral questions gave urgency to the legal ones.

Early in 2010, American media organizations began to report that Anwar 
al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, an American, had 
been added to “kill lists” maintained by the CIA and JSOC – the US military’s 
Joint Special Operations Command. Awlaki had once been a preacher at a mosque 
near Falls Church, Virginia. He had condemned the September 11 attacks, 
encouraged “interfaith dialogue,” and been invited to dine at the Pentagon. In 
the weeks after the attacks, however, the FBI became suspicious of Awlaki’s 
earlier contact with several of the hijackers. FBI agents interviewed Awlaki 
repeatedly and placed him under constant surveillance. In 2002, citing a 
“climate of fear [and] intimidation,” Awlaki left the United States for the 
United Kingdom. Two years later he returned to Yemen, where he had spent much 
of his childhood and where most of his family still lived.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35218e3187940c571a172dfc9e314f026693d8f0%2F0_155_2472_3090%2F2472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20US%20justifies%20drone%20strikes%3A%20targeted%20killing%2C%20secrecy%20and%20the%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20US%20justifies%20drone%20strikes%3A%20targeted%20killing%2C%20secrecy%20and%20the%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35218e3187940c571a172dfc9e314f026693d8f0%2F0_155_2472_3090%2F2472.jpg>
 Anwar al-Awlaki, a US-born Yemeni cleric and recruiter for al-Qaida in the 
Arabian Peninsula, in Yemen in 2008. Photograph: AP 
But Awlaki’s past followed him to Yemen. Soon after he arrived there, the 
United States pressured the Yemeni government to detain him. He was imprisoned 
without trial. By the time he was freed 18 months later – the FBI having been 
unable to provide the Yemeni government with evidence to justify his continued 
imprisonment – his views toward the United States had hardened. In online 
videos, and in an English-language magazine called Inspire, he became an 
unforgiving critic of US policies and, in some instances, an apologist for 
attacks against Americans. In 2009, a Nigerian, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, 
tried to detonate plastic explosives on a Christmas Day flight from Amsterdam 
to Detroit; American intelligence officials came to suspect that he had been 
equipped by al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, a Yemen-based group, and that he 
had been instructed by Awlaki. By early 2010, American intelligence officials 
were describing Awlaki as the “Bin Laden of the internet” and “the most 
dangerous man in the world” – and they had marked him for death.

Intelligence officials’ claims about Awlaki were exceptionally grave ones, but 
the astonishing revelation that the government intended to carry out the 
deliberate and premeditated targeted killing of one of its own citizens – 
something the United States had not done since at least the civil war – brought 
the debate about the government’s drone campaign into American courtrooms. I 
traveled to Sana’a, Yemen’s capital, in the spring of 2010 with Ben Wizner, one 
of my colleagues at the American Civil Liberties Union, to meet with Nasser 
al-Awlaki, Anwar’s father. At the offices of a Yemeni human rights 
organization, Dr Awlaki, an American-trained economist who had gone on to 
become a minister in Yemen’s government and then the president of Yemen’s 
largest university, asked us, disbelievingly, whether the US constitution could 
possibly permit what the government was proposing to do. When Ben and I 
returned to New York, we worked with Pardiss Kebriaei and Maria LaHood at the 
Center for Constitutional Rights to develop a challenge to the lawfulness of 
the government’s kill lists.

It was a bizarre death penalty case in which there was no indictment, the 
accused was in hiding overseas, and the prosecutors, who had already pronounced 
the sentence, were apoplectic at the suggestion that there should be anything 
resembling a trial. In the fall of 2010, John Bates, a federal district court 
judge, presided over a hearing in which justice department lawyers argued that 
the constitution permits the government to kill suspected terrorists without 
judicial process, and we argued in response that if the constitution meant 
anything at all, it surely meant that the government could not kill its own 
citizens without ever justifying its actions to a court. In his subsequent 
ruling, Bates wrote that the case was “unique and extraordinary,” and he 
conceded that it raised profound questions about “the proper role of the courts 
in our constitutional structure,” but he nonetheless dismissed the case on 
procedural and jurisdictional grounds. Nine months later, with the court having 
declined to intervene, a drone strike in Yemen’s northern al-Jawf governorate 
killed Awlaki and three others, including Samir Khan, the 25-year-old American 
who published and edited Inspire.

Anwar al-Awlaki's death greeted by scepticism in streets of Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/30/anwar-al-awlaki-death-yemen> 
Less expected – and more shocking – was the US government’s killing, two weeks 
later, of Anwar’s American-born son, Abdulrahman. A gangly, bookish 
16-year-old, Abdulrahman had set out from his grandparents’ home in Sana’a 
determined to find his father. Not knowing where to look, he traveled by bus to 
the southern governorate of Shabwah, where his extended family lived. He 
learned there of the drone strike that had killed his father hundreds of miles 
to the north. While President Obama was at Fort Myer in Virginia describing the 
killing of Anwar al-Awlaki as “a tribute to our intelligence community,” 
16-year-old Abdulrahman was in the remote province of Shabwah struggling to 
come to terms with his father’s death. One evening he and his cousins stopped 
by the side of the road at the kind of informal, open-air restaurant that is 
common in Yemen. A group of men already gathered there were roasting lamb over 
an open fire. Abdulrahman and his companions set out a blanket on the ground. 
They would probably have heard the buzz of drones overhead; perhaps they would 
have seen a flash of light. Hours later, when other family members arrived at 
the site, they found only a crater, scattered body parts, and the remnants of 
American missiles.

We filed another suit, this time on behalf of the estates of Anwar and 
Abdulrahman al-Awlaki and Samir Khan. Judge Bates had rejected our earlier 
effort, but we hoped another judge might be more receptive to a case that 
sought after-the-fact judicial review of the government’s actions – especially 
because those actions had resulted in the death of a 16-year-old boy. Hina 
Shamsi, my colleague who argued the case, pressed the court to consider the 
implications of closing the courthouse door. But this second case was also 
dismissed, with the government contending again that the lawfulness of drone 
strikes was for the political branches to decide, and with Judge Rosemary M 
Collyer ultimately holding that legal remedies that would have been available 
in other contexts were not available in this one.

They would probably have heard the buzz of drones overhead; perhaps they would 
have seen a flash of light

The litigation relating to the strikes that killed the three Americans in 
Yemen prompted a degree of public reflection about the drone campaign and 
forced the government to clarify and defend some of its positions. It also 
compelled courts to confront (if not answer) important legal questions relating 
to the government’s policies. But the debate generated by the litigation was a 
narrow one, focusing mainly on the scope of the US government’s authority to 
kill its own citizens, and even that debate was distorted by secrecy and 
selective disclosure. Government officials declared that Anwar al-Awlaki had 
been an “operational terrorist,” but they declined to disclose the evidence 
that supported this charge. They withheld memos in which the justice department 
concluded that the government could kill terrorism suspects without justifying 
its actions to a court. They intimated that the killing of 16-year-old 
Abdulrahman had been inadvertent, but they declined to supply an on-the-record 
account of the strike that resulted in his death, and they withheld the results 
of their post-strike investigations. They controlled most of the information 
and disclosed only what they chose to.

This book is possible because the secrecy surrounding American drone strikes 
has begun, at the margins, to erode. The documents collected here shed light on 
how a president committed to ending the abuses associated with the Bush 
administration’s “war on terror” came to dramatically expand one of the 
practices most identified with that war, and they supply a partial view of the 
legal and policy framework that underlies that practice. But while many of the 
documents collected here were meant to be defenses of the drone campaign, 
ultimately they complicate, at the very least, the government’s oft-repeated 
argument that the campaign is lawful. To be sure, even the existence of these 
documents is an indication of the extent to which the drone campaign is 
saturated with the language of law. Perhaps no administration before this one 
has tried so assiduously to justify its resort to the weapons of war. But the 
rules that purportedly limit the government’s actions are imprecise and 
elastic; they are cherry picked from different legal regimes; the government 
regards some of them to be discretionary rather than binding; and even the 
rules the government concedes to be binding cannot, in the government’s view, 
be enforced in any court. If this is law, it is law without limits – law 
without constraint.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0f229b93d7e90a43267c48efc385e9a3f6003db%2F0_0_5536_3319%2F5536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20US%20justifies%20drone%20strikes%3A%20targeted%20killing%2C%20secrecy%20and%20the%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20US%20justifies%20drone%20strikes%3A%20targeted%20killing%2C%20secrecy%20and%20the%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Ftargeted-killing-secrecy-drone-memos-excerpt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0f229b93d7e90a43267c48efc385e9a3f6003db%2F0_0_5536_3319%2F5536.jpg>
 Barack Obama talks about national security at the National Defense University 
at Fort McNair in Washington in 2013. Photograph: Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP 
There is something ironic, and even sad, in the fact that the expansion and 
normalization of the drone campaign was overseen by President Obama, a onetime 
professor of constitutional law who was elected after promising to end the 
lawless national security policies of the administration that preceded his. 
Perhaps it is also true, though, that only President Obama could have overseen 
it. When President George W Bush left office, he was unpopular and distrusted. 
The evidence he had cited to justify the invasion of Iraq had been exposed as a 
fiction. His administration’s torture policies were widely viewed as an 
embarrassment and an outrage. The supreme court had repeatedly rejected his 
policies relating to military detention and prosecution. It is doubtful that 
the courts or the public would have allowed him to expand the drone campaign.

But many Americans who were appalled when Bush ordered extrajudicial detention 
were untroubled when Obama ordered extrajudicial killing. If they appreciated 
the breadth of the power Obama had claimed, they assumed he would use the power 
wisely. Equally significant, some of the scholars and human rights lawyers who 
might otherwise have been expected to harshly criticize Obama’s 
targeted-killing policies were part of Obama’s administration and deeply 
involved in developing the policies.

Several months before the 2012 presidential election, when it appeared that 
Americans might not give President Obama a second term, administration 
officials began to worry privately that the powers they had claimed for 
themselves might soon be in the hands of another president. They began to 
consider ways of narrowing the powers they had asserted. By this point, though, 
the administration had already persuaded a federal judge that the courts had no 
role to play in determining whether (or when) an American citizen could be 
targeted by his own government. The administration was already on its way 
toward persuading another judge that the government should not have to present 
evidence even after a targeted killing had been carried out. The powers claimed 
by the Obama administration had become entrenched – so entrenched that they 
could not readily be surrendered. This was even more true in early 2016, when 
Obama administration officials turned once again to the question of what legacy 
they would leave to their successors.

Now the lethal bureaucracy whose growth Obama personally oversaw will be 
turned over to a new administration. The powers Obama claimed will be wielded 
by another president. Perhaps as significant is the jarring fact that the 
practice of targeted killing – assassination, as it would once have been 
called, without a second thought – no longer seems remarkable, and the fact 
that the United States now boasts a legal and bureaucratic infrastructure to 
sustain this practice. Eight years ago the targeted-killing campaign required a 
legal and bureaucratic infrastructure, but now that infrastructure will demand 
a targeted-killing campaign. The question the next president will ask is not 
whether the powers Obama claimed should be exploited, but where, and against 
whom.

 * Copyright © 2016 by Jameel Jaffer. This excerpt originally appeared in The 
Drone Memos: Targeted Killing, Secrecy, and the Law, published by The New Press 
in the United States . Reprinted here with permission.
 