
It started with a 24-character message on a quiet Tuesday evening in San 
Francisco.Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> has exploded 
from its humble beginnings in 2006 to become the rapid-fire social network at 
the heart of major world events.

From spawning revolutions in the Middle East to disseminating Justin Bieber's 
latest aperçu, the 140-character network has established itself as a hotline to 
the world for 200 million people.

Its co-founder, Jack Dorsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jack-dorsey>, may never have imagined 
subverting the worlds of newspapers and showbusiness when he sent the first 
ever tweet on 21 March 2006. "Just setting up my twttr," he wrote into a silent 
corner of cyberspace.

That single tweet has since become a cacophony, with 1bn sent every 48 hours 
by an unlikely mix of Hollywood A-listers, world leaders and ordinary people.

It was 2009 when the site rocketed in popularity. Stephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-fry> used Twitter to tell the 
world he was trapped in a lift – he had a modest 113,000 followers at the time, 
compared to today's 6.1 million – and a succession of dramatic events unfolded 
in a way that made the social network a beating pulse of global news.

Within minutes of US Airways flight 1549 ditching in New York's Hudson river 
in February of that year, observers weretweeting pictures of what become known 
as "the miracle on the Hudson" <https://twitter.com/jkrums/status/1121915133>. 
Later that year, Twitter was asked by the US state department to delay 
maintenance work so that Iranian protestors could continue using the service.

It has also made waves in showbusiness, with Lady Gaga pitted against Britney 
Spears and Ashton Kutcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/aug/20/lady-gaga-twitter-britney-spears-followers>
 in a frenzied race to become the most popular person on Twitter – a PR-fuelled 
battle that saw the site's users rocket from five million to 71.3 million in 
2009 alone.

The role of Twitter in the Arab Spring will be scrutinised by historians for 
decades to come, but industry experts credit the site's burgeoning influence 
with its perception as a key destination for breaking news and off-message 
celebrity missives.

"It has become phenomenally integrated into our culture in a way that very few 
internet companies are," said Nick Thomas, a digital media analyst at Informa 
Telecoms & Media.

"It has grown way beyond its techy roots to become part of the fabric of life 
for hundreds of millions of consumers worldwide. This is a platform where 
you've got Stephen Fry and Justin Bieber, and then an acceleration of news that 
is serving our desire for instant updates, so there's a diversity that is its 
strength."

Such an unfettered platform will bring its own challenges as a public company, 
Thomas said, as Twitter will have to resolve its commitment to being an open 
platform with renewed pressure from advertisers and shareholders to clean up 
the more "unhygienic" aspects of the site, not least in light of the latest 
trolling controversy.

He added: "The rules of engagement are changing and Twitter has been at the 
heart of that. It has allowed all sorts of celebrities, companies and brands to 
talk to people in a direct way. We're still at the early days of learning how 
powerful this can be."
 