
There’s a scene in Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/07/victoria-director-sebastian-schipper-one-take-heist-film>
 in which the camera follows a girl from a dancefloor to the bar, to the 
street, to a corner shop, to a rooftop, to a car, to a bank robbery, to a 
shootout. You wait for the cut. But, throughout the German thriller’s two-hour 
running time, it never comes. In Victoria, a scene isthe scene. All of it – the 
setup, the action, the climax – is one continuous take.

Shot by a solo cameraman across multiple locations on the streets of Berlin, 
Victoria is an amazing achievement. It’s being sold on a USP that isn’t (Mike 
Figgis <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mikefiggis> pulled off the first 
genuine one-take film with his sprawlingsplit-screen experiment 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KQidFlpYlDw>, Timecode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/aug/20/philipfrench>, in 2000), but it’s 
singular in the way it glides between genres, morphing from aRichard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater>-style walk-and-talk to a 
heist film nail-biter. The cast, improvising from a skeleton script by 
writer-director Sebastian Schipper, ride the outlandish plot (girl meets boy, 
boy woos girl, then quickly coaxes girl into a violent crime) hard. The action 
is propulsive, but not too slick. During a chase scene, actor Laia Costa, who 
plays Victoria, forgot where she was supposed to drive and nearly cruised into 
the film’s backstage production hub. Only Schipper, yelling at her from the 
boot of the car, stopped her ploughing through the fourth wall. The cock-ups 
remind you that what you’re watching is happening in real time. That, not the 
single take, says Schipper, is the point.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6QzAA4qEGqs&media=>
 Watch a trailer for Victoria here. 
“The job of art is always to give us the white noise that your brain needs,” 
he says. “The digital age lets us erase all of the mistakes. I think we’re only 
starting to find out how that is taking something substantial away from us. 
We’re so good at decoding voices and expression that we need to feel the stuff 
that is not optimised.”

After premiering at last year’s Berlin film festival, Victoria got some 
celebrity synapses crackling.Darren Aronofsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/27/1> accosted its camera operator 
and cinematographer Sturla Brandth Grøvlen after its first screening, demanding 
to know how many hidden cuts there were (Aronofsky insisted to Grøvlen there 
were three). At this year’s Berlinale, John Cusack spent a significant chunk of 
the press conference for his new film,Chi-Raq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/25/chi-raq-review-spike-lees-urgent-angry-and-very-sexy-midlife-masterpiece>
,raving about Schipper’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HXJspgimoUw> movie. 
He, too, couldn’t believe it was shot all in one. Schipper, wary that the 
speculation could “cannibalise” the movie, is tired of questions about 
Victoria’s authenticity. He’s even less enamoured of people who call it a 
gimmick.

“How could something that crazy be a gimmick?” he asks. “Dear sirs and ladies: 
it’s not a gimmick. It’s insane to use that word for it.”

If you feel a film-maker is lying than you feel betrayed. If you believe [the 
lie], then you feel excited
Sebastian Schipper 
In fact, to fake Victoria would have been almost as tricky. There are few 
moments when the camera is still enough to make a cut that wouldn’t be 
conspicuous, and fewer still when something in the foreground completely 
obscures the lens. That was how Hitchcock’s psychological thriller Rope was 
sold as a “single-take” film shot in “real time”. In fact, 35mm film wouldn’t 
let Hitch shoot for more than 10 minutes, sothere are five clear and five 
“hidden” cuts in his film <https://vimeo.com/76087987>. A zoom into a table 
that’s being overturned by Jimmy Stewart is the most spectacular. Alejandro 
González Iñárrituhid a multitude of cuts 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oqb6kpRSxEY> in Birdman using CGI. Same deal 
with the Spice Girls, whose romp through the St Pancras hotel for the video for 
Wannabe contained at least two edits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fsebastian-schipper-thriller-victoria--interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12159bc6ae95110df0ce406255b77e46d85fa73e%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Sebastian%20Schipper%20created%20a%20one%20take%20thriller%20that%20surpassed%20Hitchcock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fsebastian-schipper-thriller-victoria--interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Sebastian%20Schipper%20created%20a%20one%20take%20thriller%20that%20surpassed%20Hitchcock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fsebastian-schipper-thriller-victoria--interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12159bc6ae95110df0ce406255b77e46d85fa73e%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Victoria director Sebastian Schipper. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Schipper’s point is that mocked-up “single-take” films – whether they show 
Michael Keaton ranting backstage in a double Oscar-winning director’s treatise 
about the state of modern cinema, or Baby Spice tottering around singing about 
a “zig-a-zig-ah” – feel false. As Schipper puts it: “The camera smells if you 
lie.”

The Victoria we see was the third full take. The first was lame (“Really 
boring,” says Schipper); the second was crazy (“All of a sudden, the actors 
felt like they had to vent”). Then, in the early hours of 27 April 2014, 
Schipper and Grøvlen got what they were looking for: a structured film that had 
flow (“Like jazz!” says Schipper). Even then, the pair didn’t know they’d 
caught it completely until they watched it back. They were too high on 
adrenaline to see it in the moment. It was, says Schipper, a “total loss of 
control”. That’s what made it exciting and true.

“There’s no art form that denies being art the way film does,” he says. “Film 
always meets you saying: ‘This is the real deal.’ If you feel a film-maker is 
lying then you feel betrayed. If you believe [the lie], then you feel excited: 
‘This is the best lie I’ve ever seen!’”
 