
Apple launched the iPhone 7 on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones>
, the first of its waterproof devices, which joins a collection of similar 
water resistant smartphones fromSamsung’s Galaxy S7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
 toSony’s Xperia XZ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/01/sony-boost-smartphone-batteries-people-are-not-replacing-phones>
. But just how waterproof is “waterproof”?


How waterproof is it?

Waterproof, water resistant and splash resistant may have meant something 
once, but their meanings have been blurred into marketing speak.

Broadly speaking, if it’s waterproof or water resistant, a dunk in the toilet 
isn’t going to kill the phone. But along with the marketing messages should be 
what’s called an IP rating – a number that donates the level of water and 
dustproofing to the IEC standard 60529.

What do the IP ratings mean?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56dc4dcb38b42c7e80ff69043d58a5d05f2ef4ce%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20waterproof%20are%20the%20iPhone%207%2C%20Samsung%20Galaxy%20S7%20and%20smartwatches%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20waterproof%20are%20the%20iPhone%207%2C%20Samsung%20Galaxy%20S7%20and%20smartwatches%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56dc4dcb38b42c7e80ff69043d58a5d05f2ef4ce%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Splashes, submersions and water jets - it’s all about pressure. Photograph: 
Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
International Protection Marking, or IP Code, consists of two numbers. The 
first marks how resistant to dust getting it into the inner workings of the 
device, the second how resistant to water ingress it is.

Typically written as IP67 or similar, there are various levels of resistance 
typically marked by a depth and time rating for water, and size of particles 
for dust.

For dust:

 * 4 = particles great than 1mm in width

 * 5 = prevention of dust interfering with satisfactory operation

 * 6 = no ingress of dust at all for at least eight hours 
For water:

 * 4 = splashing water won’t harm the device

 * 5 = protection from water jets from a 6.3mm nozzle

 * 6 = protection from more powerful water jets from a 12.5mm nozzle (6K is 
higher pressure rated)

 * 7 = protection from immersion in up to 1m of fresh water (typically for 30 
minutes)

 * 8 = protection from immersion in at least 1m fresh water (typically 1.5m 
for 30 minutes)

 * 9K = protection from close-range high pressure water jets 
How does the iPhone 7 compare with the many other waterproof smartphones?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe51452f1c99a196d51d8609ffb9a62b8fd2f85a%2F0_221_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20waterproof%20are%20the%20iPhone%207%2C%20Samsung%20Galaxy%20S7%20and%20smartwatches%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20waterproof%20are%20the%20iPhone%207%2C%20Samsung%20Galaxy%20S7%20and%20smartwatches%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe51452f1c99a196d51d8609ffb9a62b8fd2f85a%2F0_221_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Water and phones now mixes slightly better than it used to. Photograph: 
Stephen Lam/Getty Images 
The iPhone 7 and 7 Plus are rated to IP67 standards, marked at 1m of fresh 
water for 30 minutes. Samsung’s latest top-end smartphones theGalaxy S7, S7 Edge
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
 and thetroubled Note 7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/05/samsung-galaxy-note-7-official-recall-us-watchdog-consumer-reports>
 are rated to IP68 standards, and so are technically more protected against 
water ingress.

Sony’s Xperia Z line, launched in 2013, was one of the first widely available 
top-end handsets that claimed to be waterproof with an IP57 rating at 1m depth 
for 30 minutes. Sony’s latest range feature waterproof models including the 
Xperia XZ that is waterproof to IP68 standards.

To muddy the water a little, there are also water resistant nano coatings that 
can be applied to smartphones. Motorola’s initial Moto G models were a good 
example; the nano coating meant that accidental spills wouldn’t ruin the phone. 
Water might get into the phone, but it wouldn’t destroy the electronics if 
dealt with quickly.

Can I go swimming with them?

Yes, and no. When something is rated to IP67 standards what it really means is 
that a device will resist water ingress up to the pressure of being stationary 
under 1m of water for 30 minutes. IP68 is rated at a higher pressure, but is 
dependent on the testing. It could only be a slightly higher pressure 
equivalent to that of being stationary under 1.5m depth of water for 30 minutes.

When moving through the water or impacting with it, say when you jump into a 
pool, the pressure can be a lot higher than simply being immersed in it. It 
might survive, but it also might break a seal, and at that point it’s probably 
game over for your £600+ smartphone.

What about watches, they’re waterproof, right?

Before electronics ventured into the water, watches were the gold-standard for 
waterproofing. From the simple “water resistant” watches that didn’t mind a 
splash when washing your hands, to diving watches capable of surviving in 
depths of 100m or more.


While 50 or 100m under water might seem a bit extreme for most, it means that 
the seals on the watch will resist relatively high pressures and pretty much 
anything that your average person gets subjected to on a day-to-day basis.

As Apple’s chief operating officer, Jeff Williams, put it when talking about 
thenew Apple Watch series 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-launch-apple-watch-2-gains-gps-longer-battery-life>
 that’s waterproof to 50m depth: “You can wear it whether you’re swimming, 
surfing or just doing the occasional cannon ball.”

And smartwatches, fitness trackers?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12cf60fa5022300c00b5a895fb2e5b7255877272%2F208_0_1385_831%2F1385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20waterproof%20are%20the%20iPhone%207%2C%20Samsung%20Galaxy%20S7%20and%20smartwatches%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20waterproof%20are%20the%20iPhone%207%2C%20Samsung%20Galaxy%20S7%20and%20smartwatches%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-waterproof-iphone-7-samsung-galaxy-s7-smartwatches%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12cf60fa5022300c00b5a895fb2e5b7255877272%2F208_0_1385_831%2F1385.jpg>
 Apple says you can swim with its new Watch series 2. Photograph: 
Xinhua/REX/Shutterstock 
Most smartwatches are waterproof to some extent. Apple’s new Watch series 2 is 
rated to depths of 50m, but many others, including the Android Wear-powered
Huawei Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/huawei-watch-review-best-android-wear-smartwatch-iphone>
 are only rated to IP67 standards.

Rugged smartwatches often have higher ratings. Android Wear-powered Casio 
WSD-F10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/06/casio-launches-android-wear-smartwatch-lasts-month-per-charge>
 is waterproof to 50m, while the Nixon The Mission is waterproof to depths of 
100m.Pebble’s Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/28/pebble-time-review-simple-effective-answer-apple-watch>
 and Time 2 smartwatches are water resistant to depths of 30m.

While many fitness trackers are “sweat proof”, which is the equivalent to 
splash proof in most respects, some fitness trackers are also waterproof. 
Misfit’s Shine 2 Speedo, for instance, is waterproof to 50m and designed to 
track swimming activity.

Is it covered under warranty?

This is where waterproofing becomes tricky. Some manufacturers guarantee some 
of their products against water ingress, but normally only if there are no 
signs of other damage. Impacts and other shocks can break seals and then it’s 
game over.

Others simply don’t cover water damage under warranty, despite IP ratings. 
Neither Apple’siPhone 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-7> nor 
Samsung’s Galaxy S7 are covered as standard for water damage. So while it’s 
meant to be waterproof, if it’s not, it’s your fault.

 * Apple reveals waterproof iPhone 7 with new camera ... and no headphone jack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-apple-launches-new-waterproof-smartphones-camera-airpods-headphones>

 * Apple Watch 2 brings GPS, waterproofing and faster processing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/07/iphone-7-launch-apple-watch-2-gains-gps-longer-battery-life>

 * Samsung Galaxy S7 Edge review: this is the smartphone to beat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/11/samsung-galaxy-s7-edge-review-android-smartphone-phablet-marshmallow>
 * Pebble Time review: the simple but effective answer to Apple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/28/pebble-time-review-simple-effective-answer-apple-watch> 