
For people living with HIV, antiretroviral treatment (ART) has been a 
life-saver. ART stops HIV from making copies of itself and prevents HIV from 
attacking the body’s immune system.

At the end of 2015, 17 million people were taking ART around the world 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/fact-sheet> and Aids-related deaths had 
fallen by 45% since the peak in 2005.

But those who don’t stick to the ART regimen set out by their doctor or health 
worker might become resistant to the drugs. Resistance occurs when ART regimens 
are not taken as prescribed, which allows HIV to make copies of itself and 
increases the risk that the virus will mutate and produce drug-resistant HIV. A 
person who is on a drug such as Efavirenz can develop resistance after as 
little as a two-day interruption of treatment 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15127346>.

Globally, HIV drug resistance is on the rise. The World Health Organisation 
(WHO) reported that up to 2010, HIV drug resistance levels remained at 7% in 
developing countries. However, recently, some countries have reported levels at 
or above 10% among those starting ART, and up to40% among people restarting ART 
<http://www.who.int/hiv/mediacentre/news/warning-hiv-drug-resistance/en/>.

The time to act is now. If we don’t, we may find ourselves with a new global 
pandemic of drug-resistant HIV.

At the beginning of the epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, there was fear among the 
international community that people living with HIV in resource-limited 
settings would not be able to adhere to their treatment due to a lack of 
education and resources. Would they be able to keep time well enough to take 
their ART at the same time every day?

However, studies have demonstrated 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16896111> that people in sub-Saharan Africa 
may be better than people in the west at taking their ART as prescribed. The 
issue in developing countries is that people lack the resources to get to a 
clinic and pick up their pills. I’ve worked in Namibia since 2009, and whenever 
I visit ART clinics, there are long queues stretching out the door. People 
often have to wait all day and many can’t afford to take this time off work 
every month.

The stigma associated with being seen waiting in a queue to pick up medication 
is also a factor in people not adhering to their treatment plans. To avoid 
this, some people on ARTs travel to a clinic many kilometres away from their 
town, so they can receive treatment without anyone recognising them. And if you 
took a whole day off work, borrowed money for the transport and stood in a 
queue all day, only to learn that the clinic had run out of your pills, what 
would you do?

ARTs and HIV drug resistance

As the use of ART increases, so does the risk of HIV drug resistance. It’s no 
surprise, then, thatglobal HIV drug resistance is on the rise 
<http://www.who.int/hiv/mediacentre/news/warning-hiv-drug-resistance/en/>, both 
among those already on ART and those just starting on it.


What could happen if levels of drug resistance reached critical levels? Their 
ART regimens would no longer be able to stop the HIV in their bodies from 
making copies of itself and they would then have to be switched to second-line 
regimens, if available.

But second-line regimens are more expensive. For countries already struggling 
to provide ART to those who need it, this would is likely to mean that fewer 
people could be started on ART.


Can WHO’s new ‘test and treat’ HIV policy reach those who need it most?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/03/aids-hiv-antiretroviral-drugs-treatment-prevention>
Second-line regimens may also have more negative side effects, such as nausea, 
vomiting, headache, weakness or changes in the shape or location of body fat. 
These plans can also be more challenging because of the large number of pills 
that need to be taken. As a clinician, I’ve seen patients who’ve reached the 
point where they have to take more than 10 pills a day.

Drug resistance <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drug-resistance> has been 
a problem since the beginning of the HIV epidemic. In the west the problem was 
usually limited to individual patients. But in resource-limited settings, if a 
high percentage of the population develops drug resistance we could see large 
increases in Aids-related deaths and higher healthcare costs.

We must act now to help people adhere to their treatment plans, before it’s 
too late. Globally, there has been a huge focus on getting more people on 
treatment, but the quality of how it’s delivered has fallen by the wayside.

Drug resistance will rise when ART is not delivered in a well thought-out way. 
That requires strong drug supply systems with zero tolerance for an 
interruption of ART drug supply, strong and locally appropriate counselling to 
promote adherence, support for patients who don’t have the resources to access 
care, re-engagement of patients who have stopped going to the clinics, 
alternative ways to deliver care such as community-based ART groups, and strong 
medical record systems.

As we strive to end Aids as a public health threat by 2030 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/documents/2014/90-90-90>, greater attention 
must be focused on identifying and correcting gaps in the quality of ART 
service delivery. Many lives depend on it and the time to act is now. If we 
don’t, we may find ourselves with a new global pandemic of drug-resistant HIV 
and be faced with a deadlier enemy than we started with.

Steven Hong is an assistant professor of public heath and community medicine 
<http://medicine.tufts.edu/Education/Academic-Departments/Clinical-Departments/Public-Health-and-Community-Medicine/Faculty/Secondary%20Faculty/Hong-Steven>
 at the Tufts University School of Medicine.



Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 