
Here's my recipe for academic success: mix two parts student effort to one 
part teacher/institutional effort, liberally sprinkle with attentive parenting 
and mix vigorously. Bake for 13 or 14 years in a stable, nurturing environment 
with an expectation that students will succeed (rather than end up in jail) and 
the chances are that they will. Seems simple enough, but is it?

Let me give you some context for this theorising on social mobility and 
academic success: on 9 September, theTelegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/9530337/Cambridge-rejects-call-for-universities-to-admit-poorer-students-with-lower-grades.html>
 ran a story about the universities (namely Cambridge and Reading) who were 
resisting pressures to make "adjusted offers to working-class candidates", as 
requested by Les Ebdon, the new head of the Office for Fair Access (Offa).

Ebdon said universities should take contextual evidence into consideration 
when making their admissions decisions; former director of admissions for the 
Cambridge colleges, Geoff Park, said doing so would be a "cruel experiment". 
Speaking to the Sunday Telegraph, Park said: "Our bottom line would be that it 
actually would be a really, really cruel experiment to take a bunch of students 
and hypothesise that they have what it takes to thrive at Cambridge and then 
see them fail because they don't."

Today has seen a follow-up piece 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/9538764/Cambridge-admissions-chief-rejects-social-engineering.html>
, this time quoting the current director of admissions, Mike Sewell, as saying 
that "lowering entry requirements for students from poor-performing 
comprehensives would undermine standards".

But does it?

Consider the evidence from medical schools, which have some of the highest 
entry requirements of all undergraduate courses. With its extended medical 
degree programme (EMDP) Kings College London could be said to engage in 'social 
engineering' - the programme admits students who may have not reached their 
potential in state schools - yet areport into widening participation published 
by the British Medical Journal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/may/30/teaching-hospitals-students-lower-grades>
 found that students from underperforming schools, without AAB grades, were 
just as likely to succeed as other medical students.

Despite the evidence, this debate is likely to run and run and while there 
might be no single right answer, we'd like to hear your views - both national 
and international perspectives: how should universities improve access for 
disadvantaged students without compromising their standards?

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 