
Ahead of the Activate Johannesburg Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-johannesburg>, Ory Okolloh, 
director of investments, Omidyar Network Africa, spoke to us about how 
technology is changing the spread of information in Africa and helping to 
amplify citizens' voices.

Could you briefly tell us about your role at Omidyar Network?
I currently lead Omidyar Network's government transparency 
<http://www.omidyar.com/initiatives/government-transparency> work in Africa. My 
role primarily involves investing in innovative organisations that use 
technology and media platforms to provide access to information and to increase 
government responsiveness and citizen participation. Recent investments include
Africa Check <http://africacheck.org/>, Livity South Africa 
<http://livityafrica.com/> and the Africa News Innovation Challenge 
<http://africannewschallenge.org/>. I also spend time making connections 
between organisations and individuals in the burgeoning civic tech space in 
Africa and helping others think about how they can best leverage technology in 
their advocacy work.

How is technology changing the spread of information in Africa – not only from 
central authorities to the people but also peer-to-peer?
It is enabling information to spread much faster, in real-time; the rapid 
adoption of new tools is also quite interesting to watch. A year or two ago, 
BBM [BlackBerry Messenger] was king, now it is WhatsApp. Tools that drive 
social engagement are particularly interesting to track. In response, those 
central authorities that want to prevent this are increasingly having to be a 
lot more repressive in order to do so such asEthiopia 
<http://www.ifj.org/nc/news-single-view/backpid/32/article/new-crackdown-on-media-is-step-towards-authoritarism-in-ethiopia-says-ifj/>
.

You co-founded Mzalendo <http://www.mzalendo.com/blog/>, a pioneering civic 
website that tracks the performance of Kenya's parliament and its 
parliamentarians. How did the government feel about this and has its stance 
changed?
The government was initially dismissive towards the website as the internet 
penetration rate at the time (2006) was low and they didn't think it would 
impact their perceptions among voters. Over time, as web penetration has grown 
and as the voting demographic gets younger, they are paying a lot more 
attention. For instance, they are very quick to send corrections or protest if 
they feel their contributions in parliament are not being reflected on 
Mzalendo. We are also seeing greater interest from the local media in 
partnering with the Mzalendo team to report on the performance of parliament.

What impact is the internet having on citizen journalism and activism in 
Africa?
I think the internet is having an impact in very diverse ways anchored around 
amplifying voice, from enabling what I like to refer to as micro-activism. For 
instance when Kenyan citizens recently expressed displeasure with a 
presidential appointment on his Facebook page forcing his team to take the 
Facebook post down and scramble to find ways to explain away the phenomenon; to
#bringbackourgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/07/twitter-hashtag-bringbackourgirls-nigeria-mass-kidnapping>
, which started out of Nigerians' frustration with an unresponsive government 
on the crisis around the kidnapped girls from Chibok, and has gone on to become 
a global galvanising force. You are also seeing citizens take to the internet 
to tell their own stories, whether through images (Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>), and in collaboration with 
media (Daily Maverick <http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/> and Mail & Guardian 
Africa <http://mg.co.za/>).

How big a challenge is access to internet-connected devices in Africa – and do 
you see the situation changing soon?
It is still a big challenge but is changing rapidly as smartphone and tablet 
prices come down and used phones begin to enter the secondary market, the sweet 
spot as far as pricing appears to be at about $50. Just this month in South 
Africa sales of smartphones topped feature phones for the first time, and I 
suspect Kenya is not far-behind. One bigger challenge is electricity, most 
smartphones have crappy battery-life and that becomes a bigger issue than 
affordability as power/electricity infrastructure has yet to catch up with the 
needs in most African countries.

Finally, what is your message to the people attending the Guardian's Activate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> Johannesburg Summit?
Be prepared to connect, learn, challenge yourself and others – and to be 
inspired.

Ory Okolloh is a speaker at this year's Activate Johannesburg Summit, 26 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-johannesburg>. Apply for 
your free placehere. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2014/apr/15/activate-johannesburg-apply-now>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 