
As winter sets in, A&Es are preparing for what could be one of the most 
difficult periods in recent history.

Across the country, patients are having to wait longer than ever to be seen in 
A&E. Between October and December of 2014, the NHSrecorded the worst four-hour 
waiting time figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/06/hospital-a-and-e-waiting-times-worst-record-nhs-england>
 since the target was introduced 10 years ago, with several hospitals being 
forced to declare a “major incident” as A&Es struggled to cope with demand.

There are a several reasons for this: our ageing population; an increasing 
number of elderly patients with multiple complex conditions entangled with 
challenging social care needs; therecruitment and retention crisis of staff 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/health/news/11883559/A-third-of-AandE-doctors-leaving-NHS-to-work-abroad.html>
; and of course, there is the financial squeeze, with trusts facing what
regulators have described as “the worst financial crisis in a generation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/09/nhs-trusts-in-england-run-up-almost-1bn-deficit-in-three-months>
.

Prepare for a catastrophic NHS winter meltdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/sep/23/nhs-winter-meltdown-staffing-standards-money>
It is estimated that between 15 and 30% of A&E patients could be treated in 
the community 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/one-in-three-aampe-patients-dont-need-to-be-there-says-top-nhs-doctor-8802594.html>
, but policymakers continue to grapple with ways of diverting patients to more 
appropriate service providers.

At St George’s University hospital in south-west London, we’ve developed an 
innovative service that puts GPs at the forefront of making sure patients are 
seen by the right service. The triage and redirection system was developed 
collaboratively by Care UK (which funds the service and employs theGPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps> running it), A&E consultants at the 
trust and Wandsworth clinical commissioning group. So far the system has proved 
to be safe, effective and well-liked by patients.

The way it works is simple. The triage part of A&E– the “front door” where 
patients are first seen – is manned by triage nurses and a GP, who identifies 
patients who may potentially not need A&E treatment, and be more suitable for a 
primary care service, such as their usual GP practice, an out of hours GP, or 
non-doctor services such as podiatrists, dentists or opticians.

If they can be safely redirected to a primary care service, the GP will 
explain why that service would be more appropriate. The team administrator will 
book an appointment with the appropriate service, unless it operates on a 
walk-in basis. We ensure that all patients are seen on the same day, so there 
is no delay in diagnosis and treatment. Patients who insist on being seen in 
A&E, even after we explain that this would not be appropriate, are always 
allowed to do so.



This system has a number of benefits. It helps the A&E department because it 
reduces the number of patients seen who should have been treated in a primary 
care setting. This reduces the number of patients being seen in the trust, and 
improves adherence to the four-hour waiting time target.

Reduced waiting times also benefit those patients in A&E who are acutely sick, 
and for whom a delay in treatment may lead to poorer outcomes.

It also benefits patients who are redirected. A study to evaluate the service 
found the most common categories of symptoms were musculoskeletal (such as back 
pain) and dermatological (skin conditions such as eczema and psoriasis). GPs 
are equipped to treat such chronic and non-acute conditions, unlike A&E doctors 
who are trained primarily to treat emergencies. Continuity of care is of 
paramount importance in these conditions, and can be best deliveredin the 
community through GPs, rather than on an ad-hoc basis in A&E.

Satisfaction ratings for the patients we redirect to primary care services are 
very high; 83% of patients in our study rated the service as “very good” or 
“excellent”. It is also much more cost-efficient to treat patients in primary 
care than in A&E.

 The redirection service also helps educate patients about the most 
appropriate health service for their needs, and helps counter the notion some 
people have of A&E being the default solution for their problems.

A&E is broken – but it can be fixed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/sep/22/ae-is-broken-but-it-can-be-fixed>


There are several reasons for the A&E crisis and the increasing waiting times 
seen over the course of the last year. GP led streaming is one of the key 
solutions in helping us tackle this problem, and should be implemented in every 
hospital. At the same time, it is important for policymakers to appreciate that 
this can only work if primary care is funded properly. In order for patients to 
be redirected back to primary care, its infrastructure must be properly 
resourced and staffed.

In our study, difficulty in accessing their GP was cited as the biggest reason 
for A&E attendance by patients who were redirected back to primary care . This 
demonstrates the deep impact the GP crisis is having on A&E – and policymakers 
will only be able to solve the A&E crisis if they address and solve the GP 
crisis. Education to help patients appreciate the full extent of services and 
facilities available through their own GPs and other primary care services is 
also crucial. It is clear that many of our patients lacked awareness of 
alternative services beyond their own GPs.

I believe that GP-led streaming is one of the key measures helping us tackle 
the A&E crisis, and should be implemented in every hospital. But it is 
important to appreciate this can only work if primary care is funded properly. 
In order for patients to be redirected back to primary care, its infrastructure 
must be properly resourced and staffed. In our study, difficulty in accessing 
their GP was cited as the biggest reason for going to A&E by patients who were 
redirected back to primary care. Patient education to help patients appreciate 
the services and facilities available through their own GPs, as well as other 
primary care services is crucial. It is clear that many of our patients lacked 
awareness of alternative primary care services beyond their own GPs.

An interesting, and rather concerning finding in our study was that 
“convenience” was one of the most common reasons for patients attending A&E 
rather than their GP. This confirms fears many of us have about the consumerist 
ethos that seems to be encroaching on expectations of the health service. 
Politicians who use theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as a 
political football and prioritise populist initiatives geared towards 
convenience rather than need must also be held to account for this.

Do you work in the NHS? We want to hear your thoughts about how well prepared 
the health service is for winter, the impact of five years of financial 
squeeze, and your job. Pleasetake our survey 
<https://surveys.theguardian.com/R.aspx?a=598&as=YU8Zc3OB9r> and tell us. It 
should only take a few minutes.

Join our network <https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/> 
to read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 