
When most of the UK is winding down for Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, tucking into mince pies 
and unwrapping presents, how can jobseekers stay motivated while job hunting 
and continue to be productive during the Yuletide slump?

It may appear the number of job postings dip over the winter period, however 
in realityUK job vacancies outstripped jobseekers 
<http://www.onrec.com/news/statistics-and-trends/advertised-vacancies-outstrip-jobseekers-for-first-time-the-recession>
 in November for the first time since the recession – with the total advertised 
vacancies rising to just under a million in October 2014.

This is good news for jobseekers. But while most people are taking a break 
from work over Christmas and New Year, the holiday can be a great time to 
search for jobs, prepare applications and perfect your interview skills.

Other ways jobseekers can stay productive during the festive period, for 
example, is to chat to recruiters informally on Twitter and LinkedIn, andtake 
advantage of the Christmas spirit by attending networking events in your sector 
<http://www.prospects.ac.uk/features_job_hunting_at_christmas.htm>. Similarly, 
avoid scheduling week-long trips in case you are called to an interview, and
keep your schedule flexible over the holidays 
<http://www.careerbuilder.co.uk/article/cb-269-job-search-rev-up-your-job-search-during-christmas-time/>
.

Another tact for Christmas-time jobseekers is to use the end of 2014 to set 
employment goals for the year ahead 
<http://www.prospects.ac.uk/features_job_hunting_at_christmas.htm>. As the year 
draws to a close, it is the perfect time to evaluate your career achievements 
over the past year and find out what you want to change going forward.

So, what can you do to beat the Christmas slump and make sure you start your 
dream job in 2015? How can you stay productive over the holidays without 
shutting yourself away? Join us on Wednesday 10 December from 1-3pm GMT for a 
live chat with the experts. We'll be discussing:

• How to stay productive with your job hunt over the Christmas holidays

• How to manage your time effectively during the winter period

• Tips on preparing for your New Year applications

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you cancreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can 
tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
 who can post them for you.

Our panel

Nadim Choudhury is head of careers and employability at the London School of 
Business and Finance (LSBF) <http://www.lsbf.org.uk/>. He holds a MSc in Human 
Resources Management and has vast experience in career coaching as well as 
graduate employability.

Kylie Cook is the project coordinator at Gradconsult 
<http://www.gradconsult.co.uk/>, a Sheffield-based consultancy who have 
recruited for some of the biggest corporations and some of the smallest SMEs 
across the UK. Gradconsult has also recently launched the graduate recruitment 
festival –Gradstock 2015 <http://www.gradstock.co.uk/>.

Sarah Archer is a qualified Career Coach, and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>. She specialises in helping people change 
career to find work they love, and regularly advises clients on effective job 
search strategies.

Craig Stovold is co-founder of Jobulo.com <http://www.Jobulo.com>, a free CV 
writing web application designed to guide users in creating a professional 
level CV. Stovold has advised jobseekers on the design and copy of their CVs 
for the past six years.

Dasha Amrom is a founder and managing director of Career Coaching Ventures 
<http://www.ukcareercoaching.com/>. Career Coaching Ventures provides 
consultations and advice on increasing clients' chances of landing a job.

Lisa LaRue is a qualified and registered Career Coach with over 15 years' 
experience helping people take control of their careers. She runsCareerWorx 
<http://www.careerworx.co.uk/>, a career consultancy providing career coaching, 
interview coaching, outplacement support and job skills training.

Lis McGuire is a professional CV writer and the founder of Giraffe CVs 
<http://www.giraffecvs.co.uk/>. Lis provides useful tips and advice through a 
weekly blog, as well as The CV Confidence Coach podcast series.

Oliver Meager is head of the permanent hiring division at Capita IT Resourcing 
<http://www.capitaresourcing.co.uk/it-resourcing>. Oliver has extensive 
experience in recruitment, working closely with individuals to help them 
improve their CVs and cover letters.

Jon Gregory edits win-that-job.com <http://www.win-that-job.com>, an online 
resource providing free individual help and general advice on the latest job 
search, application and interview techniques. He is also the author of Winning 
That Job: A kill or be-killed guide.

Lydia Fairman is an HR and resourcing specialist, who owns HR and recruitment 
consultancy,Fairman Consulting <http://www.fairmanconsulting.co.uk/>. Lydia 
also offers free CV advice, interview guidance and careers blogs, to help all 
job seekers stand out and succeed.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 