
In a noisy London pub, former NME editor Conor McNicholas stops mid-sentence 
to point out a man standing at the bar. It’s Dominic Mohan, the former Sun 
editor who ran the paper’s Bizarre column from 1996 to 2007. McNicholas resumes 
talking about two upward blips in the otherwiseever-declining curve of NME sales
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/13/nme-sales-falling-off-charts-music-magazine-circulation>
: punk in 1977 and – under his editorship from 2002 to 2003 – when the Strokes, 
the White Stripes and the Libertines reigned. “The thing that joins those two 
things,” he explains, “is that we owned the fucking scene.”

Not Britpop? “The problem with Britpop is that Mohan owned it as much as 
everyone else – Blur v Oasis was a tabloid conversation. We were the only place 
who knew what the Libertines meant. We owned the conversation around guitar 
music. That’s what changed in 2005 – we didn’t any more.Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> always felt to me like the 
band that killed the NME.”

But they didn’t do it by design. At first they didn’t do anything by design, 
beyond writing songs and gigging around Sheffield, distributing homemade demo 
CDs at shows. Their canny friends burned copies to leave on buses, but more 
importantly, uploaded them to filesharing sites and set up a MySpace page. By 
the time the press latched on in spring 2005, fans were already swapping 
bootlegs and gossip on Monkeys messageboards that they had started themselves 
in the absence of official avenues.

Having unwittingly soared online, the band disappointed clamouring major label 
executives when they signed with indie label Domino that June. McNicholas 
recalls strolling up to their Reading festival set in August, five minutes 
before they were due on, only to find the crowd eight-deep outside the tent. 
“We’d done virtually nothing, and there was this instant fanbase.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpK7egZaT3hs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpK7egZaT3hs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpK7egZaT3hs&media=>
Ten years ago, on 23 October 2005, Arctic Monkeys’ debut single I Bet You Look 
Good on the Dancefloor went straight in at No 1. Although Alex Turner was often 
compared to Sheffield forebear Jarvis Cocker, here he wasn’t doling out social 
commentary. The song is one boy’s ardent gaze on a girl whose stiff shoulders 
mean she probably can’t dance, but whose movements hypnotise him anyway. It’s 
romantic and modern, shy and brash, run through with a rich sense of pop 
history, with references to electro pop and girls named Rio, funk syncopation 
and a stark punk riff.

The band’s novel internet-spawned success was reported on the national news. 
They weren’t fussed, according to their then-PR manager Anton Brookes, but it 
was genuinely significant for the music industry, which was moving into a more 
stable era following the lawlessness of Napster at the turn of the century. In 
June 2004, iTunes had launched in the UK, and downloads went on to account for 
17.9% of that year’s singles chart. (Digital sales weren’t even tracked in 
2003.) By 2005, that number had more than doubled to 36.6%. Singles were 
regaining vitality, and Arctic Monkeys proved that giving away music for free 
wasn’t career suicide, but a smart move.

A decade on, I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor’s legacy is one of 
creation, destruction and transition. It’s one of the few songs from that era 
that’s still a regular fixture on Arctic Monkeys’ setlists. Producer Alan Smyth 
recalls hearing it for the first time in July 2004, as the band recorded it 
during the fourth of their five sessions together at Sheffield’s 2fly Studios. 
“They were very excitable,” he says. “Every time they recorded, they’d just go 
hell for leather, faster and faster. I decided to use a click track for the 
beginning of the song. I said, stick to that and I’ll let you go after the 
second chorus. Then I’ll let you get fast. It gets more exciting because of 
that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Farctic-monkeys-debut-single-i-bet-you-look-good-dancefloor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a94cecaa5e490fc10362c369263c243c98a0d83%2F0_0_3556_3556%2F3556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Arctic%20Monkeys%E2%80%99%20debut%20single%20changed%20the%20music%20industry%20and%20%E2%80%98killed%20the%20NME%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Farctic-monkeys-debut-single-i-bet-you-look-good-dancefloor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Arctic%20Monkeys%E2%80%99%20debut%20single%20changed%20the%20music%20industry%20and%20%E2%80%98killed%20the%20NME%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Farctic-monkeys-debut-single-i-bet-you-look-good-dancefloor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a94cecaa5e490fc10362c369263c243c98a0d83%2F0_0_3556_3556%2F3556.jpg>
 The cover of I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor. 
Dancefloor was such a phenomenon that it became perceived as indie’s death 
knell, something that couldn’t be topped. “I couldn’t imagine a better guitar 
band coming out of the UK,” says Mike Smith, who signed them to EMI Publishing 
for a rumoured £1m (he declines to confirm the figure). Still, labels put 
zealous effort into finding heirs, especially once Arctic Monkeys’ first album, 
Whatever People Say I Am, That’s What I’m Not, became thefastest-selling 
British debut of all time in January 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/jan/30/arts.artsnews>. (Leona Lewis 
overtook them in 2007 and Susan Boyle in 2009.)

“It gave the impression that a return to the Britpop boom time was upon us,” 
says music writer Tom Ewing, who runs the blogPopular 
<http://freakytrigger.co.uk/popular/>, which analyses the UK’s No 1 singles. 
“The industry was full of people who wanted that to be true. So you quite 
quickly got a huge glut of indie music – the tipping point between this quite 
gradual, organic build-up of indie as a chart force, and the“landfill indie” 
bubble of 2007/8 or so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jan/17/florence-and-the-machine-indie>. 
Even in less perilous times labels would have tried to copy a success story 
that big. There weren’t enough bands as good as Arctic Monkeys. Hence the 
bubble, and it bursting.” New British indie bands are still sold on their 
similarity to Arctic Monkeys, whether through attempts to paint the Vaccines’ 
first Reading performance in similarly frenzied terms, or by the repeated 
reminder that Royal Blood are managed by the same team. There’s arguably been 
no heir yet.

Arctic Monkeys may have left the press and other bands eating dirt, but their 
internet-abetted rise reinvigorated the industry that their success was meant 
to have made redundant. “There was a degree of poison towards MySpace as the 
second killer of the record industry after Napster,” says music business 
journalist Eamonn Forde. “This was supposedly proof that bands didn’t need 
record companies. Arctic Monkeys proved that a good label is still really 
important.” It was a legitimising moment for Domino, too, which had achieved 
success with Franz Ferdinand a year earlier, “but there was a degree of 
scepticism that said maybe it was a fluke,” says Forde. “Then Arctic Monkeys 
came along and Domino roared into prime position.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Farctic-monkeys-debut-single-i-bet-you-look-good-dancefloor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F852f9fdda9ad8a3f2dfd3c049f1db88688de91f6%2F39_34_1244_887%2F1244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Arctic%20Monkeys%E2%80%99%20debut%20single%20changed%20the%20music%20industry%20and%20%E2%80%98killed%20the%20NME%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Farctic-monkeys-debut-single-i-bet-you-look-good-dancefloor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Arctic%20Monkeys%E2%80%99%20debut%20single%20changed%20the%20music%20industry%20and%20%E2%80%98killed%20the%20NME%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F22%2Farctic-monkeys-debut-single-i-bet-you-look-good-dancefloor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F852f9fdda9ad8a3f2dfd3c049f1db88688de91f6%2F39_34_1244_887%2F1244.jpg>
 Arctic Monkeys at the Astoria in 2005. Photograph: Suki Dhanda for the Observer
Forde describes “a disconnect between the internet as a sales-and-distribution 
channel and the internet as a social space. Arctic Monkeys were one of those 
acts, certainly at the mainstream level, that brought those two things 
together”. Labels quickly learned how to work the internet to their advantage. 
After Sandi Thom’sI Wish I Was a Punk Rocker (With Flowers in My Hair) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BaGJSlbWyOo> tanked on its original release in 
October 2005, she started web-streaming gigs from her basement, supposedly to 
millions of fans. Sceptical critics pointed out that she could never have 
afforded her server costs on her own, but the spin worked. The song was 
re-released through BMG in May 2006 and topped the charts. In November 2005, 
Lily Allen (signed to Regal) started posting demos on MySpace.

“Arctic Monkeys created a model that’s absolutely dominant today,” says Smith. 
“The fact that you’re clicking on music to listen to as you did with them – 
they heralded what we’ve come to live in now.”

Beyond Dancefloor’s unintentional revolution, there’s lingering resonance in 
its bridging of two eras. “If they’d come out 10 years earlier or 10 years 
later – now – none of that magic would have happened,” says Alison Howe, who 
booked the band for their first Later … With Jools Holland – coincidentally, 
the week that Dancefloor was No 1. “It felt like a moment that a generation 
would remember for the rest of their lives.”

• This article was amended on 23 October 2015 to amend the location referred 
to in the photo caption.

 