
The year’s biggest rap story has been the beef between Drake and Meek Mill, 
with the latter accusing the former of using a ghostwriter. It prompted a 
one-two punch of retaliatory tracks fromDrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake>, with Meek cowed by the line “you 
getting bodied by a singing nigga”. The lesson was clear: yes, a singing rapper 
was once fey and effeminate, but in 2015, the song is king. Drake’s win also 
showed audiences don’t care about spurious notions of authenticity and realness 
– what counts is hooks, storytelling and talent, even if you’re a middle-class 
former child actor from Toronto.

This imperial phase from Drake has shifted the landscape of rap accordingly, 
with the schism between glute-fixated pop rap and “real” hip-hop closing up.
Fetty Wap’s Trap Queen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_kF4zLNKio>, the 
biggest and best track of 2015, is about getting your girlfriend to cook crack 
for you(ie as real as it gets) – and yet it’s built from two different gigantic 
pop choruses. Three equally sing-song follow-ups (including one with Drake 
himself) have made Fetty’s album hugely anticipated ahead of its release on 25 
September.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Frae-sremmurd%2Fthrow-sum-mo-music-video%2F2378333%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Frae-sremmurd%2Fthrow-sum-mo-music-video%2F2378333%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Frae-sremmurd%2Fthrow-sum-mo-music-video%2F2378333%2F&media=>
Also subverting gangsta cliches is Young Thug, whose album Hy!£UN35 is out the 
same week. His larynx sounds like it has been scrunched up like a ball of paper 
– bone-dry words creak and squeak as if puberty never really did its job. Lines 
like “I boned her, I leave an aroma” aren’t boasts, but rather ghostly coos. 
But again, melody remains paramount, and his proclivity for tutus and calling 
friends “hubby” pricks the traditional macho pose. The other kings of hook rap 
are Rae Sremmurd, who arrive in the UK for a five-date tour in December. Tracks 
like No Type, Throw Some Mo and This Could Be Us are masterful earworms, and 
the puppyish pair covet Céline handbags rather than snapbacks.

As pop-rap gets clever, so the underground dumbs down. Father is an Atlantan 
rapper who is playing an unmissable showcase for his label Awful Records in 
London in November – his album Who’s Gonna Get Fucked First? is, as you might 
expect, not full of men opening doors for their girlfriends and remembering 
coconut water during the weekly shop. Instead, it’s all wonderfully grotty sex 
rap. His already-classic single Wrist is a catchy conjuring of the monotony of 
selling coke; its guest rapper, the chorus fiend iLoveMakonnen, is expected to 
release his own album in October.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG8hocwWPuXM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG8hocwWPuXM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG8hocwWPuXM&media=>
A$AP Rocky strides into this new middleground slinging the usual lyrical 
cliches into psychedelic forms. He recently said “no disrespect to the people 
making 10 times more money as me, but I hate your fucking songs” – but he wants 
to have his cake and eat it, touring the UK next month with the mega-selling 
Wiz Khalifa. We can suppose any awkwardness on the tour bus will go up in smoke.

After exceptional 2015 albums from Kendrick Lamar, Dr Dre, YG and Vince 
Staples, Los Angeles is once again dominant. Eyes are now on The Game, who 
never delivered on the promise of The Documentary 10 years ago; calling his new 
album The Documentary 2 is a clear attempt to correct that . And what of the 
UK? While we’re waiting for Skepta’s album to arrive, Lady Leshurr’s viral 
Brummie snark will truly shutdown her short October tour, and grime’s mournful, 
dystopian side gets aired in staggeringly good instrumental albums from Rabit 
and Visionist.

Hovering behind them all is Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>, whose album Swish will likely 
appear without warning, and, yes, Drake – if he releases the hinted-at LP Views 
from the 6, it will be the coronation for rap’s ruling entertainer.
 