
Q I am a first-time buyer who is sick of renting and wants to get on the 
property ladder. I've seen quite a few flats that I like but when I went to see 
a mortgage company I realised that the only way that I could afford even a 
one-bedroom flat is to take out a loan for 35 years. But that way it feels like 
I'll be almost at retirement age before I own the flat myself. What should I do?

DL

A The dilemma you face in affording property in the capital is one shared by 
many graduates and first time buyers as property values have soared. Although 
the traditional term for a mortgage is 25 years, there has been a rise in the 
number of people opting for longer term loans in order to buy property in 
London and other city hotspots.

While there is nothing intrinsically wrong with extending your loan, you will 
find yourself in trouble if you stretch your finances so far that you have 
virtually no spare money once you have paid your mortgage every month.

Houses and flats are expensive things to own - you are likely to want to 
redecorate, and you will need new furniture Don't forget that you will have to 
budget for stamp duty and solicitors' fees, which first-time buyers often 
forget about until they receive the bill. You also need to have an emergency 
fund in case the boiler blows up or you need to make urgent repairs to your 
property.

Bear in mind too, that if you can raise a 10% deposit you are likely to get a 
better deal from the mortgage company as it demonstrates that you have some 
spare money and are able to save. One option to ease the cost of buying in 
London is to share with friends. You will need to make sure that you take 
proper legal advice and think about what would happen if one of you wanted to 
sell up in the future, but it may be a more cost-effective option than trying 
to buy on your own.
 