
When Twitter tells me to ask my MP to sign an early day motion 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Early_day_motion>, I am always filled with 
scepticism. I doubt the impact of the EDM. It's quite good on small things that 
one MP cares about passionately and the rest don't (measures to protect a 
kipper smokery from EU legislation), but if it seriously attempts to subvert or 
quicken a mainstream policy, parliament will find a way to put it in its place. 
Plus there is a video to watch of a kitten with a cigarette.

And with those caveats in mind, you should still ask your MP to sign the EDM 
binding private companies with NHS contracts to the Freedom of Information Act 
<http://www.parliament.uk/edm/2012-13/773>. It won't stem the haemorrhage of 
public money into private hands, and for sure it will do nothing to salve this 
bitter experience of seeing the nation's defining institution under attack with 
no defenders, just the odd clutch of Labour MPs amassing like aMaginot line 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maginot_Line>. Transparency of government 
contracts is a careful-what-you-wish-for demand – if you ask to read them, 
there's always the risk that you might have to read them.

Nevertheless, we're awash with precedent here, services the government has 
been commissioning from the private sector for some time. The things you cannot 
discover, due to "commercial confidentiality 
<http://www.cfoi.org.uk/cc291097pr.html>", will make your eyes pop out. Take 
the topical example of probation services. Justice secretary Chris Grayling 
announced today thatprivate and voluntary agencies would be taking these on 
wholesale on a payment-by-results basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jan/09/chris-grayling-probation-privatisation-reoffending>
. I predict reduced services, voluntary organisations edged out by private 
firms who have realised how lucrative it is, faked "results", massive profits, 
and lots of crimes committed by prisoners on parole, which the Daily Mail will 
report merely as indicative of their savage, irredeemable natures. Call me 
pessimistic; I give it five years.

The first of these contracts went to Serco last July: it was worth £37m, and 
was won in conjunction with theLondon Probation Trust 
<http://www.london-probation.org.uk/>. The Ministry of Justice announced that 
the bid was saving it £25m, or 37%, on its previous costs. However, it was 
impossible to discover how much lower the Serco bid was than the next one – 
rumour said it was as much as 60% lower. Harry Fletcher, from the National 
Association of Probation Officers, said at the time: "Everybody thinks that 
Serco are doing this as a loss leader in order to get their hands on more 
lucrative contracts later on." This is a pattern observable in a lot of 
government commissioning – in the Work Programme, the winning groups underbid 
incumbents by impossible amounts, but I know this for a fact in only one case – 
Ingeus, beating the Wise Group, undercut them by 65%. That information came out 
of a parliamentary inquiry. If you put in an FOI request, it would be trumped 
by commercial confidentiality.

Well, so what? The private sector is meant to underbid the public and third 
sectors. The whole point is that it's more efficient. Not altogether so: if a 
system is stacked in favour of firms that can afford to take a loss, it 
squeezes out smaller enterprises and suffocates market diversity. It's no 
accident that the prison service is dominated by four companies – G4S, Serco, 
Sodexo and Capita. It's not a coincidence that the UK Border Agency is 
controlled by three (G4S,Serco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup>
 and Clearel) – nor, for that matter, that there are four big supermarkets and 
five dominant waste management outfits. Business conducted like this is 
expansionist and inexorably cannibalistic. If that's the way our public 
services are to be conducted, we need to be able to prove it, and draw a 
consequential line between the bidding process and the erosion of a mixed 
market. We can't be left to guess.

In the welfare market there is this pitiful situation where all the contracts 
are published on the government'sContracts Finder 
<https://www.gov.uk/tendering-for-public-sector-contracts/using-contracts-finder>
 web page – huge numbers, sitting there unabashed like the flags of a modern, 
accountable democracy – and yet you can't find out how much profit each company 
is making. If you're lucky, it might crop up as part of some other 
investigation – A4e was asked what it thought was a "reasonable rate of return" 
in a Commons public accounts committee hearing on the efficacy of its last raft 
of contracts. It replied, "about 10%". Very few insiders believe that Work 
Programme providers take less than 15% in profit. Besides which, A4e holds 
contracts worth £428m in this field alone. "About 10%" isn't good enough, when 
one percentage point either way is worth £4m.

But again, you cannot make the argument that any given company makes too much 
profit when you don't know what their relative profits are. We end up in a 
situation where the most solid point in the argument is to complain that the 
CEOs of these companies get paid too much, while the rest of their staff are on 
minimum wage. It's not irrelevant – it marks them out as self-interested 
people, using a pro-social programme for their own, ultimately antisocial ends. 
But it's not enough, if we want to make a case that the profit motive is 
damaging to markets that are mainly about relationships.

There is so much wrong with the privatisation of the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> that the contractual nitty-gritty may 
seem like a side issue. But in fact it's the only possible starting point. When 
you relinquish the right to know what happens to public money, in the finest 
possible detail,, you lose your stake in it. You become no more than the victim 
of bandits. Do ask your MP to sign this EDM. The kitten can wait.

Twitter: @zoesqwilliams <http:>
 