
Open journalism has turned all of us into experts, each with our own unique 
experience, skills and perspective that contribute to the global story.Guardian 
Activate Johannesburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-johannesburg> was the first 
of its kind in Africa, focusing specifically on how innovations in technology 
can enhance journalism, increase transparency and make activism more effective. 
Looking back, what will it take to make open journalism a reality for South 
Africa and the continent at large?

Reaching citizens
For news to even reach citizens we have to get creative. Smartphone 
penetration is just 12% 
<http://www.telecoms.com/209421/africa-gets-smart-continent-prepares-for-device-revolution/>
 in Africa. So what are we doing to ensure the content that matters to people 
is actually reaching them?

Innovation born out of necessity thrives in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/video/2014/jul/04/stuff-toby-shapshak-innovation-africa>
. Services for "feature phones" (low-end phones with basic internet and 
multimedia functionality) are emerging across the continent and many of the 
best solutions are home-grown.iCow <http://icow.co.ke/> provides farmers in 
Kenya with critical information that has increased milk yields and reduced 
disease outbreaks via SMS. In South Africa,FunDza <http://www.fundza.co.za/> 
publishes novels based on the reality of township living viaMxit 
<http://get.mxit.com/>, helping to popularise reading among hard-to-reach teens.

Radio and TV shouldn't be ignored as channels for reaching the majority. 
Political satire such as theXYZ show <http://buni.tv/shows/1/> contribute to 
lively debate and platforms such asTRAC FM <https://www.tracfm.org/> enable 
community radio stations to gauge the opinions of their listeners via SMS, 
stimulating more participatory dialogue.

Those already online matter too and social media mustn't be forgotten. When 
people get online, they're going here first. This technology has given all 
online a voice. It's levelling the playing field, making it impossible for the 
powers that be to control the narrative. Traditional media can help verify and 
amplify stories breaking on these platforms so they reach those offline.

Creating relevant and engaging content
Content needs to be fun and locally relevant. Most people are far more 
interested in their local school or hospital and entertainment than some of the 
more traditional headline stories.

Nairaland <http://www.nairaland.com/>, Nigeria's leading discussion forum, 
lures in over a million users with snippets of entertainment, politics and 
celebrity gossip, things that people really care about. And media is starting 
to move beyond the role of information provider to amplify the voices of the 
marginalised.

Gathering and amplifying citizen voices
For the Activate event, Talk About Local <http://talkaboutlocal.org.uk/>, in 
association with The Guardian,trained citizen journalists 
<http://talkaboutlocal.org.uk/amplifying-citizen-stories-africa/> to create 
stories about issues really affecting their communities. They spoke about 
families wrecked by the highly addictive drugwhoonga 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whoonga>, secret rent boys in townships, the 
misappropriation of orphanage funding in Lesotho and gentrification in 
Johannesburg. They pitched their stories to Alan Rusbridger, editor of the 
Guardian, and maybe soon their voices will be heard across the world.

Opening up innovative news sources
Open journalism also creates new sources for professional journalists. 
Activists using technology are providing remarkable on-the-ground raw material 
for news stories.

Citizen reporting platforms, largely built on an Kenyan innovation Ushahidi 
<http://www.ushahidi.com/> allow mapping of SMS messages from citizens on 
issues as far ranging as election-related violence, disaster management and 
service delivery monitoring. This real time reporting provides a completely new 
window into the efficiency of civic bodies.People's Assembly 
<http://www.pa.org.za/> is also opening up the proceedings of the South African 
parliament. Â 

Sites like Global Voices <http://globalvoicesonline.org/> compile breaking 
stories from a network of citizen bloggers where readers can access 
hard-hitting stories from regions largely uncovered in the mainstream press.

Can the press use these tools to highlight citizens' concerns and hold 
government to account?

What's next?
Technology can support journalists by joining the dots and enabling greater 
scrutiny. Citizens globally have raised their expectation of government. It can 
also help us amplify important messages and reach citizens more rapidly, at 
greater scale and lower cost than ever before.

But this is just the beginning. As Ory Okkoloh of Omidyar Network 
<http://www.omidyar.com/> reminded us, we can't forget the hard work it takes 
offline to translate journalism into activism. Technology works best when it's 
in the hands of passionate, organised activists who understand change processes 
and work hard to make things happen. There's also a need for good storytelling, 
if you want the world to listen to what you have to say.

Maximising the impact of journalists won't be easy. Many at the conference 
viewed the press in South Africa and the continent at large as under threat, 
with commercialisation and government interests controlling content and 
concentrating ownership. A lack of revenue is shrinking their ability to do 
investigative journalism and innovate fast. Civil society finance is drying up 
too.

Data costs are prohibitively high. On average across Africa, those living on 
less than $2 a day must pay almost 40% their monthly income if they want to get 
online (pdf) 
<http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf>
. Would you? Policy and regulatory reform is critical to get the continent 
connected.

But there is much cause for hope. The digital world has connected us all in 
ways never conceivable a decade ago. If journalists, activists and 
technologists combine their skills and passions, through the power of 
information, they can inspire citizens the world over to work together to 
create the change they want to be a part of.

Loren Treisman is the executive at The Indigo Trust 
<http://indigotrust.org.uk/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 