
One dusty black car that pulled up to a toll at Stone Mountain park on 
Saturday looked like any other about to sputter into theGeorgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia> park, but its driver had 
a plan: she handed the attendant a penny, then a second and a third, on her way 
to $15. At three tolls nearby, drivers did the same, locking cars in traffic as 
far as the eye could see.

As planned, that’s when the protest against “pro-white” and pro-Confederate 
demonstrators began.

Nearly 50 activists affiliated with Black Lives Matter and progressive groups 
jumped out of cars, unfurled banners against white supremacy, and passed out 
flyers to exasperated drivers, who honked horns and shouted obscenities.

“It’s 2016,” Shanda Neal, a 28-year-old activist said before the 
demonstration. “We should not be dealing with this same BS of racism, and 
prejudice. There’s no room for it. It should just be over.”


Neal was a part of a coordinated effort to block visitors and a long-planned 
“pro-white” rally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/23/pro-white-rally-prompts-protests-and-arrests-at-confederate-monument>
at the park, which is best known for a massive granite monument to three 
Confederate heroes, each of whom owned slaves. The population of Stone 
Mountain, the city that shares a name with the nearby park, is three-quarters 
black.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67c615e157712283d0271529fbbab002accc50b3%2F0_67_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Atlanta%20protesters%20shut%20down%20'pro-white'%20demonstrators%20in%20Georgia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Atlanta%20protesters%20shut%20down%20%27pro-white%27%20demonstrators%20in%20Georgia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67c615e157712283d0271529fbbab002accc50b3%2F0_67_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 A man waves a Confederate flag in front of riot police. Photograph: Max Blau 
Dueling demonstrations between people waving the Confederate flag and 
anti-racism protesters led to nine arrests and numerous clashes on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/23/pro-white-rally-prompts-protests-and-arrests-at-confederate-monument>
, and marked a new chapter in a struggle over the symbols of the south. Since 
South Carolinaremoved the Confederate battle flag  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
from its statehouse grounds last summer, supporters of the divisive symbol have 
rallied around Stone Mountain, one of their most treasured reminders of their 
heritage.

A “pro-white” activist named Andrew, who declined to give his last name, 
travelled for 45 minutes from McDonough, Georgia, with his family to wave an 
oversized Confederate battle flag in a parking lot at the foot of the mountain. 
He said he did not hate people who are not white, though he conceded that some 
of his fellow demonstrators likely do.

But he argued that Confederate monuments must be preserved to protect his 
heritage, and that they could co-exist with memorials to civil rights heroes, 
like one of Martin Luther King Jr that was recently proposed for the top of 
Stone Mountain.

Is the Confederate flag a racist symbol? After Charleston, the debate rages on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/22/charleston-killings-confederate-flag-debate>
“Enough is enough,” he said. “They took the rebel flag out of the [Stone 
Mountain] laser show and put Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King in it. I have no 
problem with them putting civil rights leaders in there. There’s nothing wrong 
with that. Make all the history you want to. Just don’t take my rebel flag out.”

He was one of about two dozen who rallied in sympathy for the Confederate 
cause, which organizers had hoped would draw more than 1,000 – organizer John 
Estes blamed the police and the media for the low turnout. The small rally did 
draw unaffiliated crowds, however: besides the counter-protesters, more than a 
hundred law enforcement officials, many in riot gear, were called to protect 
the protesters from each other.

For the counter-protesters, the rally seemed to be a key moment for their 
cause, considering how it came together. Like other cities around the country, 
Atlanta has a long history of civil rights work but found itselftorn between 
the old and new guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/blacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement>
. In recent years, young people have led some of Atlanta’s largest protests, 
including several that shut down the city’s main interstate. Often, though, the 
greater public has failed to hear a singular message due to disunity and a lack 
of planning.

Stone Mountain would be different, activists decided. They would coordinate a 
plan to thwart the rally as effectively as possible.

The progressive advocacy group Rise Up Georgia, for instance, not only opted 
to block the park entrance but wanted to inform visitors that the park’s board 
had permitted white supremacists to rally in the heart of a majority-black town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac1d5f30f00d19893c48818f7cd0817ab3d82d82%2F0_59_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Atlanta%20protesters%20shut%20down%20'pro-white'%20demonstrators%20in%20Georgia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Atlanta%20protesters%20shut%20down%20%27pro-white%27%20demonstrators%20in%20Georgia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac1d5f30f00d19893c48818f7cd0817ab3d82d82%2F0_59_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Officers in riot gear dodge an exploding firework at Stone Mountain Park. 
Photograph: Max Blau 
The morning of the rally, roughly 50 activists gathered inside a nondescript 
warehouse in Atlanta to run over the nuts and bolts of their demonstration. In 
the center of the room, Rise Up Georgia cofounder Nelini Stamp divvied out the 
roles – penny handlers, sign holders, legal watchers, medics and even traffic 
directors – and ran through the responsibilities of each. The group was diverse 
not just in terms of race, but in age too, spanning at least five decades.

No detail was spared: organizers handed out yellow armbands to identify 
members of their group, encouraged participants to write down a legal hotline 
number on their arms in case of arrest, practiced hand signals to communicate 
amid the chaos, and doled out bags of change to the drivers. Once they 
finished, nearly two dozen drivers caravanned, staying in constant contact on a 
conference call line, to ensure they were all in sync.

“We will be there as long as possible,” Stamp told protesters.

Both protests disrupted the plans of Georgians who wanted to enjoy the natural 
beauty of their state park. A month ago, the faculty of Peachtree Ridge high 
school, a diverse, 1,500-student school in Suwanee, relocated its prom from a 
hotel in the park for fear of the rallies. Visitors who arrived on Saturday 
left disappointed: officials shut down tours and the park’s gondola lift and 
the gift shop, and canceled the laser light show on that giant Confederate 
sculpture.

“We’ve never had this issue before,” said Stone Mountain police spokesperson 
John Bankhead, who could not recall a time when another protest had shut down 
the park. “We want to keep people safe.”

After driving an hour from Dallas, Georgia, Brittany Buchanan had hoped to 
arrive at the park early to prepare for her son’s sixth birthday party. She got 
stuck outside due to the protesters, and shouted her frustrations at the Black 
Lives Matter activists who blocked her way.

The pro-Confederate protesters “are wrong”, she yelled from the passenger seat 
of her car, but nothing, not even “the KKK”, would stop her family from having 
its weekend.

“You know what?” she asked the activists. “Your life matters, my life matters, 
the Mexican lives matter, Chinese lives matter. Every single one of them. You 
need to be screaming all lives matters. Nobody is above anybody!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f753aa63075109ec15542e59af28fa7f267f0f4%2F0_67_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Atlanta%20protesters%20shut%20down%20'pro-white'%20demonstrators%20in%20Georgia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Atlanta%20protesters%20shut%20down%20%27pro-white%27%20demonstrators%20in%20Georgia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fpro-white-confederate-rally-atlanta-protesters-stone-mountain-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f753aa63075109ec15542e59af28fa7f267f0f4%2F0_67_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 A protester gives two middle fingers to police officers in riot gear. 
Photograph: Max Blau 
Khalid Kamau, an organizer with Black Lives Matter’s Atlanta chapter, said 
such moments make a protest successful. By shutting down one of Georgia’s 
biggest attractions – the park draws nearly 11,000 people on an average day – 
Georgians can no longer ignore the debate over symbols of hatred.

“Either you support white supremacist groups having rallies here at this 
memorial to the Confederacy or you don’t,” he said. “If you’re not fighting 
against Stone Mountain park, then you’re automatically supporting it.”

In that regard, the careful coordination of Saturday’s counter-protest was 
evidence of the burgeoning movement’s maturation.

“Everyone has a role to play,” Neal said. “Us being out there, confronting 
them, calling them on their bullshit, it may change some people’s minds. We’re 
all human beings who want to live comfortably, have a good life, and live the 
‘American dream’. People have to wake up.”
 