
In early 2016, I met a group of female sex workers (FSWs) in Bagalkot district 
in Karnataka, India. The campaign statement for theirOrange Day 
<http://www.un.org/en/women/endviolence/orangeday.shtml> event calling for an 
end to violence against women in December 2015 was “Violence is not love 
<http://www.whatworks.co.za/resources/project-resources/item/100-samvedana-plus-orange-day-2015-celebrations-infographic-report>
”. I was curious about what this meant because the women had framed it in the 
context of intimate relationships with their male partners.

Just a year earlier, the results of a formative study 
<http://www.whatworks.co.za/resources/presentations/item/93-2015-samvedana-plus-svri-rct-presentation>
 by researchers from theKarnataka Health Promotion Trust <http://www.khpt.org/> 
among 620 female sex workers (FSWs) in the same district had revealed that 51% 
of them faced emotional, physical or sexual abuse from their intimate partners. 
Almost half the FSWs reported humiliation, threat of harm or intimidation, 33% 
were either kicked, choked, burnt on purpose, forced to engage in humiliating 
sex acts or threatened with a weapon, and 7% were raped by their partners in 
the six months prior to the survey.

If we don’t beat them, the mistakes done by women will become visible, and 
then the public will question my manhood
Kiranmay, sex worker's partner 
Tara, one of the FSWs I met, shared the story of a long raised scar on her 
right arm. On a Friday evening in August 2014, her partner came home to find 
her with a client. She defended herself when he accused her of cheating: “What 
will happen if I continue sex work? You don’t earn and give me money. How 
should I earn my livelihood? I need to eat. What do you expect me to do?” 
Seething with rage, he kicked and pinned her to the ground with his legs on her 
chest. The pocketknife meant to slit her neck instead slashed her arm raised in 
an act of self-protection.

A majority (64%) of sex workers surveyed for the study met their current 
partners as clients. The men, before they transitioned into a lover/partner, 
were just one of the many clients the women serviced. So there is something 
deeper than an act of betrayal that triggers violence in these relationships.

In early 2014, a qualitative study 
<http://strive.lshtm.ac.uk/resources/understanding-masculinities-gender-norms-and-intimate-partner-violence-affecting-female>
 with FSWs and their partners quoted Kiranmay, a 24-year-old study participant 
who justified hitting his lover, saying: “If we don’t beat them, the mistakes 
done by women will become visible, and then the public will talk about me and 
question my manhood.”

Men reported using violence to assert dominance, correct perceived 
transgressions and lack of obedience, and maintain their public image of being 
in control of the household and family.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F247f9b6da5700371931939af8f6f5acbab020b87%2F0_0_5456_3632%2F5456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20sex%20workers%20negotiate%20condom%20use%20with%20their%20romantic%20partners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20sex%20workers%20negotiate%20condom%20use%20with%20their%20romantic%20partners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F247f9b6da5700371931939af8f6f5acbab020b87%2F0_0_5456_3632%2F5456.jpg>
 A sex worker gets ready to receive clients in her home. Photograph: Priya 
Pillai 
In a society where roles and expectations from women and men are gendered and 
fixed, sex workers act out the norms so that they can belong to the mainstream. 
According to interviews with FSWs, they feel they are more deserving of 
respect, love and care with a man in their lives and children from him. They 
expect their partners to treat them as they do their wives, and fear that they 
are loved less if they are not hit.


Rates of condom use fall further when the relationship is violent

The norms governing these relationships have significant implications for 
public health interventions, particularly for HIV/Aids programmes. Women’s 
unquestioning acceptance of masculinity norms and trust in their partners 
create barriers to condom use and uptake of health services by both women and 
men.

An overwhelming 91% of FSWs in the survey reported trust as the main reason 
for not using condoms with their partners. Unlike with their clients, FSWs 
hesitate to insist on condom use with their partners for fear of being 
perceived as disloyal, losing their partners or experiencing violence. Rates of 
condom use fall further when the relationship is violent. Only 24% of FSWs who 
had experienced violence reported consistent condom use with their partners, as 
compared with 49% of sex workers who did not face violence.

Love, loss and unsafe sex

How do they navigate this seemingly impossible matrix of violence, love and 
loss, and unsafe sex?Samvedana Plus 
<http://strive.lshtm.ac.uk/projects/samvedana-plus-reducing-violence-and-increasing-condom-use-intimate-partnerships-female-sex>
 is a violence reduction intervention that aims to reduce the risk of HIV in 
FSWs by addressing partner violence in their intimate relationships. Since 
early 2015, a total of 800 FSWs in the district have been learning to better 
negotiate violence and condom use with their partners.

Individual and group sessions inform FSWs about protective laws and teach them 
to better communicate with their partners. Peer support groups, outreach 
workers and a crisis management team froma sex worker’s collective 
<http://www.chaitanyamahilasangha.org/> work to guide them about how to better 
resist violence from their partners. The programme provides access to HIV 
services and distributes male and female condoms. Outreach workers offer 
counselling to the FSWs and their partners when there is a fight.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf36eeb4546b7dde31ff9583046a8e965944d63%2F0_0_5456_3632%2F5456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20sex%20workers%20negotiate%20condom%20use%20with%20their%20romantic%20partners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20sex%20workers%20negotiate%20condom%20use%20with%20their%20romantic%20partners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbf36eeb4546b7dde31ff9583046a8e965944d63%2F0_0_5456_3632%2F5456.jpg>
 An outreach worker meets sex workers in the village. Photograph: Priya Pillai 
Group sessions with men discuss gender, condom use, HIV/Aids and laws against 
violence. The sessions are safe spaces for men to open up about the burden of 
supporting many families, measuring up to society’s expectations of being a man 
and the fear of being considered weak if they do not keep their women in check. 
They are seen not just as the aggressors, but also as individuals in equal need 
of support and potential allies in preventing violence. The FSWs say violence 
continues to happen but at a lower rate.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb723d206d22ece4fc6e85e4eb72371c895c4fc7c%2F0_0_5456_3632%2F5456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20sex%20workers%20negotiate%20condom%20use%20with%20their%20romantic%20partners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20sex%20workers%20negotiate%20condom%20use%20with%20their%20romantic%20partners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffemale-sex-workers-india-safer-romantic-relationships-violence-condoms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb723d206d22ece4fc6e85e4eb72371c895c4fc7c%2F0_0_5456_3632%2F5456.jpg>
 A female condom sachet used by sex workers. Photograph: Priya Pillai 
Giving these women and men information, condoms and legal aid doesn’t address 
the complex drivers of unsafe sex and violence in these relationships – 
patriarchal gender norms that lead men to believe that women are deserving of 
violence and that their honour is conditional upon her subservience.

Gender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> roles need to evolve so that 
women believe in their right to safe sex and men can define themselves without 
violence. This is critical not only to the fight against HIV/Aids and violence 
against women, but to create an equal society.

Additional reporting from Bharathi Gurav, Lata Kulkarni and Kavitha DL.

All names in this article have been changed to protect confidentiality of FSWs 
and their partners.

Priya Pillai is an independent consultant and former lead – research uptake 
and partnerships at theKarnataka Health Promotion Trust <http://www.khpt.org>. 
Follow@hivdrivers <https://twitter.com/hivdrivers> and @WhatWorksVAWG  
<https://twitter.com/whatworksvawg>on Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#SheMatters <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SheMatters&src=typd>.
 