
In a shanty town perched in the hilly outskirts of Lima, Peru, people were 
dying. It was 1994, and thousands of squatters – many of them rural migrants 
who had fled their country’s Maoist guerrilla insurgency – were crammed into 
unventilated hovels, living without basic sanitation. They faced outbreaks of 
cholera and other infectious diseases, but a government austerity program, 
which had slashed subsidised health care, forced many to forgo medical 
treatment they couldn’t afford. When food ran short, they formed ad hoc 
collectives to stave off starvation. A Catholic priest ministering to a parish 
in the slum went looking for help, and he found it inJim Yong Kim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jim-yong-kim>, an idealistic 
Korean-American physician and anthropologist.

In his mid-30s and a recent graduate of Harvard Medical School, Kim had helped 
foundPartners in Health <http://www.pih.org/pages/our-founders>, a non-profit 
organisation whose mission was to bring modern medicine to the world’s poor. 
The priest had been involved with the group in Boston, its home base, before 
serving in Peru, and he asked Kim to help him set up a clinic to aid his flock. 
No sooner had Kim arrived in Lima, however, than the priest contracted a 
drug-resistant form of tuberculosis and died.

Kim was devastated, and he thought he knew what to blame: the World Bank. Like 
many debt-ridden nations, Peru was going through “structural adjustment”, a 
period of lender-mandated inflation controls, privatisations and government 
cutbacks.President Alberto Fujimori 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/07/alberto-fujimori-peru> had 
enacted strict policies, known collectively as “Fujishock”, that made him a 
darling of neoliberal economists. But Kim saw calamitous trickledown effects, 
including the tuberculosis epidemic that had claimed his friend and threatened 
to spread through the parish.

So Kim helped organise a conference in Lima that was staged like a teach-in. 
Hundreds of shanty town residents met development experts and vented their 
anger with the World Bank. “We talked about the privatisation of everything: 
profits and also suffering,” Kim recalls. “The argument we were trying to make 
is that investment in human beings should not be cast aside in the name of GDP 
growth.” Over the next half-decade, he would become a vociferous critic of the
World Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank>, even calling for 
its abolition. In a 2000 book, Dying for Growth, he was lead author of an essay 
attacking the “capriciousness” of international development policies. “The 
penalties for failure,” he concluded, “have been borne by the poor, the infirm 
and the vulnerable in poor countries that accepted the experts’ designs.”

Kim often tells this story today, with an air of playful irony, when he 
introduces himself – as the president of the World Bank. “I was actually out 
protesting and trying to shut down the World Bank,” Kim said one March 
afternoon, addressing a conference in Maryland’s National Harbor complex. “I’m 
very glad we lost that argument.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc45d1476f4a5ff00795421402ac1aceca278b6c8%2F188_0_4495_2696%2F4495.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc45d1476f4a5ff00795421402ac1aceca278b6c8%2F188_0_4495_2696%2F4495.jpg>
 Medical staff treat people with Ebola in Kailahun, Sierra Leone, 2014. 
Photograph: Carl de Souza/AFP/Getty Images 
The line always gets a laugh, but Kim uses it to illustrate a broader story of 
evolution. As he dispenses billions of development dollars and tees off at golf 
outings with Barack Obama – the US president has confessed jealousy of his 
impressive five handicap – Kim is a long way from Peru. The institution he 
leads has changed too. Structural adjustment, for one, has been phased out, and 
Kim says the bank can be a force for good. Yet he believes it is only just 
awakening to its potential – and at a precarious moment.

Last year, the percentage of people living in extreme poverty dropped below 
10% for the first time. That’s great news for the world, but it leaves the 
World Bank somewhat adrift. Many former dependents, such as India, have 
outgrown their reliance on financing. Others, namely China, have become lenders 
in their own right. “What is the relevance of the World Bank?” Kim asked me in 
a recent interview. “I think that is an entirely legitimate question.”

Kim believes he has the existential answers. During his four years at the 
bank’s monumental headquarters on H Street in Washington, he has reorganised 
the 15,000-strong workforce to reflect a shift from managing country portfolios 
to tackling regional and global crises. He has redirected large portions of the 
bank’s resources (itissued more than $61bn in loans and other forms of funding 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2016/07/12/world-bank-group-support-tops-61-billion-in-fiscal-year-2016>
 last year) toward goals that fall outside its traditional mandate of 
encouraging growth by financing infrastructure projects – stemming climate 
change, stopping Ebola, addressing the conditions driving the Syrian exodus.

Yet many bank employees see Kim’s ambitions as presumptuous, even reckless, 
and changes undertaken to revitalise a sluggish bureaucracy have shaken it. 
There have been protests and purges, and critics say Kim’s habit of enunciating 
grandiose aspirations comes with a tendency toward autocracy. The former bank 
foe now stands accused of being an invasive agent, inflicting his own form of 
shock therapy on his staff. “The wrong changes have been done badly,” says Lant 
Pritchett, a former World Bank economist.

Pritchett argues that, beyond issues of personality and style, Kim’s 
presidency has exposed a deep ideological rift between national development, 
which emphasises institution-building and growth, and what Pritchett terms 
“humane” development, or alleviating immediate suffering. Kim, however, sees no 
sharp distinction: he contends that humane developmentis national development – 
and if the bank persists in believing otherwise, it could be doomed to 
obsolescence.

The hardest thing to learn is mud-between-your-toes, on-the-ground development 
work
Jim Yong Kim 
Kim likes to say that as a doctor with experience of treating the poor, his 
humanitarian outlook is his strongest qualification for his job – an opinion 
that probably vexes critics who point out that he knew little about lending 
before arriving at the bank. “Finance and macroeconomics are complicated, but 
you can actually learn them,” he says. “The hardest thing to learn is 
mud-between-your-toes, on-the-ground development work. You can’t learn that 
quickly. You can’t learn that through trips where you’re treated like a head of 
state. You have to have kind of done that before.”

Kim talks fast and he walks fast. Following him – a lithe, balding 56-year-old 
surrounded by a deferential, suited entourage – you can easily imagine him in a 
white coat as a physician making his rounds. He has a doctor’s diagnostic 
mindset too; he talks about ascertaining “the problem”, or what public-health 
experts call the “cause of the causes”. He thinks of poverty as an ailment and 
is trying to devise a “science of delivery”. It’s a philosophy built on a 
life-long interest in the intersection of science and humanities. Born in Seoul 
in 1959 to parents displaced by the Korean war, Kim emigrated to the US with 
his family when he was a child, eventually ending up in Muscatine, Iowa. His 
was one of two Asian families in the small town. His mother was an expert in 
Confucian philosophy, his father a dentist. Kim excelled at his studies while 
playing quarterback in high school. He attended Brown University in Providence, 
Rhode Island, where he studied human biology. His father wanted him to be a 
doctor, but he gravitated toward anthropology. Because Harvard let him pursue a 
medical degree and a PhD simultaneously, he landed there. Kim struck up a 
friendship with Paul Farmer, a fellow student, over shared interests in health 
and justice. In 1987, they formed Partners inHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>.

The two came of age when the World Bank’s influence was arguably at its most 
powerful and controversial. Conceived along with the International Monetary 
Fund at the1944 Bretton Woods conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/nov/14/bretton-woods-1944-keynes-imf>
, the bank was meant to rebuild Europe. However, it found its central mission 
as a source of startup capital for states emerging from the demise of colonial 
empires. The bank could borrow money cheaply in the global markets, thanks to 
the creditworthiness of its shareholders (the largest being the US government), 
then use that money to finance the prerequisites for economic growth – things 
such as roads, schools, hospitals and power plants. Structural adjustment came 
about in response to a series of debt crises that culminated in the 1980s. The 
Bretton Woods institutions agreed to bail out indebted developing states if 
they tightened their belts and submitted to painful fiscal reforms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6918ae2ba835a5d2251add70bdb43a6524b0728%2F0_155_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6918ae2ba835a5d2251add70bdb43a6524b0728%2F0_155_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A wall dividing shanty towns and rich neighbourhoods in Lima, Peru, where 
Kim’s journey to the World Bank began. Photograph: Oxfam/EPA 
To Kim and Farmer, the moral flaw in the bank’s approach was that it imposed 
mandates with little concern for how cutting budgets might affect people’s 
health. They thought that “the problem” in global health was economic 
inequality, and in Haiti Partners in Health pioneered a grassroots methodology 
to tackle it: improve the lives of communities by training locals to provide 
medical care (thus creating jobs) and by expanding access to food, sanitation 
and other basic necessities. Though hardly insurgents – they were based at 
Harvard, after all – the friends passionately argued that policy discussions in 
Geneva and Washington needed to be informed by ground truths, delivered by the 
people living them.

Farmer’s impressive work ethic and pious demeanour made him famous – and the 
subject of Tracy Kidder’s acclaimed bookMountains Beyond Mountains 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/14/books/a-season-in-hell.html?pagewanted=all> 
– but Kim was the partner with systemic ambitions. “For Paul, the question is, 
‘What does it take to solve the problem of giving the best care in the world to 
my patients?’” Kim says. “But he doesn’t spend all his time thinking about, ‘So 
how do you take that to scale in 188 countries?’” (Both men, who remain close 
friends, have wonMacArthur Foundation “genius grants” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/us-news-blog/2012/oct/02/how-to-win-macarthur-award>
 for their work.)

Kim’s desire to shape policy landed him at the World Health Organisation (WHO) 
in 2003, overseeing its HIV/Aids work. The job required him to relocate to 
Geneva with his wife – a paediatrician he had met at Harvard – and a son who 
was just a toddler. (They now have two children, aged 16 and seven.) In the 
vigorously assertive style that would become his hallmark – going where he 
wants to go even if he’s not sure how to get there – Kim pledged to meet an 
audacious goal: treating three million people in the developing world with 
antiretroviral drugs by 2005, a more than sixfold increase over just two years. 
The strategy, in Kim’s own words, was, “Push, push, push.” The “three-by-five 
pledge,” as it was known, ended up being impossible to reach, andKim publicly 
apologised for the failure on the BBC 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/health/4476978.stm>. But the world got there in 
2007 – a direct result, Kim says, of the pledge’s impact on global-health 
policymaking: “You have to set a really difficult target and then have that 
really difficult target change the way you do your work.”

Kim left the WHO in 2006. After a stopover at Harvard, where he headed a 
centre for health and human rights, he was hired to be president of Dartmouth 
College in New Hampshire. He arrived in 2009, with little university management 
experience but characteristically high hopes. With the global recession at its 
zenith, however, Kim was forced to spend much of his time focused on saving 
Dartmouth’s endowment.

He hardly knew the difference between hedge funds and private equity, so a 
venture capitalist on the college’s board would drive up from Boston 
periodically to give him lessons, scribbling out basic financial concepts on a 
whiteboard or scratch paper. His tenure soon turned stormy as he proposed 
slashing $100m from the school’s budget and clashed with faculty members who 
complained about a lack of transparency. Joe Asch, a Dartmouth alumnus who 
writes for a widely read blog about the university, was highly critical of Kim. 
“He is a man who is very concerned about optics and not so concerned about 
follow-through,” Asch says now. “Everyone’s sense was that he was just there to 
punch his ticket.” Soon enough, a surprising opportunity arose.

The way Kim tells it, the call came out of the blue one Monday in March 2012. 
Timothy Geithner, another Dartmouth alumnus who was then the US treasury 
secretary, was on the line asking about Kim’s old nemesis. “Jim,” Geithner 
asked, “would you consider being president of the World Bank?”

When the government contacted him, Kim confesses, he had only the foggiest 
notion of how development finance worked. He had seen enough in his career, 
however, to know that running the bank would give him resources he scarcely 
could have imagined during his years of aid work. Instead of agonising over 
every drop of water in the budgetary bathtub, he could operate a global tap. 
“When I really saw what it meant to be a bank with a balance sheet, with a 
mission to end extreme poverty,” Kim says, “it’s like, wow.” His interest was 
bolstered by the bank’s adoption, partly in response to 1990s-era activists, of
stringent “safeguards” 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/PROJECTS/EXTPOLICIES/EXTSAFEPOL/0,,menuPK:584441~pagePK:64168427~piPK:64168435~theSitePK:584435,00.html>
, or lending rules intended to protect human rights and the environment in 
client states.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F292db484c6a953f264f1c4e79eb483f541c55a98%2F0_700_5533_3319%2F5533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F292db484c6a953f264f1c4e79eb483f541c55a98%2F0_700_5533_3319%2F5533.jpg>
 Barack Obama nominates Kim for the presidency of the World Bank, Washington 
DC, 2012. Photograph: Charles Dharapak/AP 
By custom, the World Bank had always been run by an American, nominated by the 
US president for a five-year term. But in 2012 there was a real international 
race for the post. Some emerging-market nations questioned deference to the 
United States, and finance experts from Nigeria and Colombia announced their 
candidacies. After considering political heavyweights such as Susan Rice, John 
Kerry and Hillary Clinton – who were all more interested in other jobs –Obama 
decided he needed an American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/apr/16/world-bank-president-jim-yong-kim>
 he could present as an outsider to replace the outgoing president, Robert 
Zoellick, a colourless former Goldman Sachs banker and Republican trade 
negotiator. Clinton suggested Kim and “championed Jim as a candidate”, says 
Farmer. (Partners in Health works with the Clinton Foundation.)

Embedded within the dispute over superpower prerogatives was a larger anxiety 
about what role the World Bank should play in the 21st century.Extreme poverty 
had dropped 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/what-does-it-mean-eradicate-extreme-poverty-and-halve-national-poverty-2030>
from 37% in 1990 to just under 13% in 2012, so fewer countries needed the 
bank’s help. With interest rates at record lows, the states that needed aid had 
more options for borrowing cheap capital, often without paternalistic ethical 
dictates. New competitors, such as investment banks, were concerned mainly with 
profits, not safeguards. As a result, whereas the World Bank had once enjoyed a 
virtual monopoly on the development-finance market, by 2012 its lending 
represented only about 5% of aggregate private-capital flows to the developing 
world, according to Martin Ravallion, a Georgetown University economist. And 
while the bank possessed a wealth of data, technical expertise and analytical 
capabilities, it was hampered by red tape. One top executive kept a chart in 
her office illustrating the loan process, which looked like a tangle of 
spaghetti.

At Kim’s White House interview, Obama still needed some convincing that the 
global-health expert could take on the task of reinvigorating the bank. When 
asked what qualified him over candidates with backgrounds in finance, Kim cited 
Obama’s mother’s anthropology dissertation, about Indonesian artisans 
threatened by globalisation, to argue that there was no substitute for 
on-the-ground knowledge of economic policies’ impact. Two days later, Obama 
unveiled his pick, declaring that it was “time for a development professional 
to lead the world’s largest development agency”.

Kim campaigned for the job with the zeal of a convert. In an interview with 
the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/10/business/global/jim-yong-kim-sketches-vision-for-world-bank.html?_r=0>
, he praised the fact that, unlike in the 1990s, “now the notion of pro-poor 
development is at the core of the World Bank”. He also embarked on an 
international “listening tour” to meet heads of state and finance ministers, 
gathering ideas to shape his priorities in office. Because votes on the bank’s 
board are apportioned according to shareholding, the US holds the greatest 
sway, and Obama’s candidate was easily elected. Kim took office in July 2012, 
with plans to eradicate extreme poverty. Farmer cites a motto carved at the 
entry to the World Bank headquarters – “Our dream is a world free of poverty” – 
that activists such as Kim once sniggered at. “Jim said, ‘Let’s change it from 
a dream to a plan, and then we don’t have to mock it.’”

Kim still had to win over another powerful constituency: his staff. Bank 
experts consider themselves an elite fraternity. Presidents and their mission 
statements may come and go, but the institutional culture remains largely 
impervious. “The bank staff,” says Jim Adams, a former senior manager, “has 
never fully accepted the governance.” WhenRobert McNamara 
<http://www.biography.com/people/robert-s-mcnamara-9394201> expanded the bank’s 
mission in the late 1960s, doing things such as sending helicopters to spray 
the African black fly larvae that spread river blindness, many staffers were 
“deeply distressed to see the institution ‘running off in all directions’”, 
according to a history published in 1973. WhenJames Wolfensohn 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/ORGANIZATION/EXTPRESIDENT/EXTPASTPRESIDENTS/PRESIDENTEXTERNAL/0,,pagePK:139895~theSitePK:227585,00.html>
 arrived in the mid-1990s with plans to move away from structural adjustment 
and remake the bank like a consulting firm, employees aired their gripes in the 
press. “Shake-up or cock-up?” asked an Economist headline.Paul Wolfowitz 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/05/17/AR2007051700216.html>
, whose presidency was marred by leaks, was pushed out in 2007 after 
accusations of cronyism resulted in a damning internal investigation.

Recognising this fraught history, Kim went on a second listening tour: he met 
representatives of every bank department and obtained what he describes, in 
anthropologist-speak, as “almost a formal ethnography” of the place. What he 
lacked in economic knowledge, he made up for in charm. “Dr Kim is personable, 
Dr Kim is articulate, Dr Kim looks very moved by what he has to say,” says Paul 
Cadario, a former bank executive who is now a professor at the University of 
Toronto.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9372de131fd371017f8be3fb0a3544567ff2c0f%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9372de131fd371017f8be3fb0a3544567ff2c0f%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 The funeral of a woman who died of Aids on the outskirts of Kigali, Rwanda. 
Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
The initial goodwill, however, vanished when Kim announced his own structural 
adjustment: a top-to-bottom reorganisation of the bank. It wasn’t so much the 
idea of change that riled up the staff. Even before Kim took office, respected 
voices were calling for a shakeup. In 2012, a group of bank alumni published a 
report criticising an “archaic management structure”; low morale was causing 
staff turnover, and there was an overreliance on consultants, promotion on the 
basis of nationality, and a “Balkanisation of expertise”. Where Kim went awry, 
opponents say, was in imposing his will without first garnering political 
support. “One famous statement is that the World Bank is a big village,” says 
Cadario, now a Kim critic. “And if you live in a village, it is a really bad 
idea to have enemies.”

The bank had been designed around the idea that local needs, assessed by staff 
assigned to particular countries and regions, should dictate funding; 
cooperation across geographical lines required internal wrangling over 
resources. So Kim decided to dismantle existing networks. He brought in the 
management consulting firm McKinsey & Co, which recommended regrouping the 
staff into 14 “global practices”, each of which would focus on a policy area, 
such as trade, agriculture or water. Kim hired outsiders to lead some 
departments and pushed out several formerly powerful officials with little 
explanation. To symbolise that he was knocking down old walls, he had a 
palatial, wood-panelled space on the World Bank’s executive floor retrofitted 
as a Silicon Valley-style open-plan office, where he could work alongside his 
top staff.

Kim also announced that he would cut $400m in administrative expenses, and 
eliminate about 500 jobs – a necessary measure, he said, because low interest 
rates were cutting into the bank’s profits. Kim says he “made a very conscious 
decision to let anyone who wanted… air their grievances.” His opponents 
detected no such tolerance, however, and their criticisms turned ad hominem. 
Around Halloween in 2014, a satirical newsletter circulated among the staff, 
depicting Kim as Dr Frankenstein: “Taking random pieces from dead change 
management theories,” it read, “he and his band of external consultants cobble 
together an unholy creature resembling no development bank ever seen before.” 
Anonymous fliers attacking Kim also began to appear around bank headquarters.

Kim portrayed internal dissent as a petty reaction to perks such as travel per 
diems being cut. “There’s grumbling about parking and there’s grumbling about 
breakfast,” he told the Economist. Meanwhile, bank staffers whispered about 
imperial indulgences on Kim’s part, such as chartering a private jet. (Kim 
claims this is a longstanding practice among bank presidents, which he only 
uses when there are no other options.)

A French country officer named Fabrice Houdart emerged as a lead dissenter, 
broadcasting his frustrations with Kim in a blog on the World Bank’s intranet. 
In one post, he questioned whether “a frantic race to show savings… might lead 
to irreversible long-term damages to the institution.” (This being the World 
Bank, his sedition was often illustrated with charts and statistics.) The staff 
went into open rebellion after Houdart revealed that Bertrand Badré, the chief 
financial officer, whom Kim had hired and who was in charge of cutting budgets, 
had received a nearly $100,000 bonus on top of his $379,000 salary. Kim 
addressed a raucous town hall meeting in October 2014, where he told furious 
staffers, “I am just as tired of the change process as all of you are.”

A few months later, Houdart was demoted 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/lesterfeder/world-bank-demotes-lgbt-employee-leader-following-investigat?utm_term=.tvR1QoOWGR#.bpkr6AR1kd>
 after being investigated for leaking a privileged document. The alleged 
disclosure was unrelated to Kim’s reorganisation – it had to do with Houdart’s 
human rights advocacy, for which he was well known at the bank – and Kim says 
the investigation began before Houdart’s denunciations of his presidency. 
Critics, however, portray it as retaliatory. “Fabrice has become a folk hero,” 
Cadario says, “because he was brave enough to say what many of the people 
within the bank are thinking.” (Houdart is currently disputing his demotion 
before an internal administrative tribunal.)

In the heat of the staff revolt, Kim was devoting attention to a very 
different crisis: Ebola

“It’s never fun when large parts of the organisation are criticising you 
personally,” Kim admits. Yet he maintains that his tough decisions were 
necessary. “In order to do a real change, you have to put jobs at risk,” he 
says. “And completely understandably, people hate that.”


In the heat of the staff revolt, Kim was devoting attention to a very 
different crisis: Ebola. In contrast with the bank’s historically cautious, 
analytical approach, Kim was pushing it to become more involved in emergency 
response. He committed $400m to confront the epidemic immediately, a quarter of 
which he pushed out in just nine days. He dispatched bank employees to 
afflicted west African countries and reproached the head of the WHO for the 
organisation’s lack of urgency. “Rather than being tied up in bureaucracy, or 
saying, ‘We don’t do those things,’ Jim is saying that if poor people’s lives 
are at risk… then it is our business,” says Tim Evans, whom Kim hired to run 
the bank’s new global practice for health.

Some bank veterans disagreed, vehemently. Nearly two years on, they still 
worry that in trying to save the day, Kim runs the risk of diverting the bank 
from its distinct mission. “Pandemic response is important – but it’s not the 
WHO, it’s the World Bank,” says Jean-Louis Sarbib, a former senior 
vice-president who now runs a nonprofit development consultancy. “I don’t think 
he understands the World Bank is not a very large NGO.” Referencing Kim’s work 
with Partners in Health, Sarbib adds, “The work of the World Bank is to create 
a system so that he doesn’t need to come and create a clinic in Haiti.”

In reply to this critique, Kim likes to cite a study co-written by a former 
World Bank economist, Larry Summers, that found that 24% of full-income growth 
in developing countries between 2000 and 2011 was attributable to improved 
public health. Put simply, Kim says, pandemics and other health deficits 
represent enormous threats to economic development, so they should be the World 
Bank’s business. The same goes for climate change, which the bank is fighting 
by funding a UN initiative to expand sustainable energy. As for violent 
conflicts, rather than waiting until the shooting has stopped and painstakingly 
preparing a post-conflict assessment – as the bank has done in the past – Kim 
wants to risk more capital in insecure zones.

“We… bought into this notion that development is something that happens after 
the humanitarian crisis is over,” Kim said at a recent event called the
Fragility Forum <http://live.worldbank.org/fragility-forum-2016>, where he sat 
next to representatives of various aid groups and the president of the Central 
African Republic in the World Bank’s sun-soaked atrium. “We are no longer 
thinking that way.”

After the forum, amid a whirlwind day of meetings and speeches, Kim stopped at 
a hotel cafe with me to unwind for a few minutes. As a counterweight to his 
life’s demands, he practices Korean Zen-style meditation, but he also seems to 
blow off steam by brainstorming aloud. Goals and promises came pouring out of 
him like a gusher. Besides eliminating extreme poverty, which he has now 
promised will be done by 2030, Kim wants to raise incomes among the bottom 40% 
of the population in every country. He also wants to achieve universal access 
to banking services by 2020.

Long past our allotted interview time, Kim told me he had just one more idea: 
“Another huge issue that I want to bring to the table ischildhood stunting 
<http://unicef.in/Whatwedo/10/Stunting>.” At the Davos World Economic Forum 
this year, he explained, everyone was chattering about a “fourth industrial 
revolution”, which will centre on artificial intelligence, robotics and other 
technological leaps. But Kim thinks whole countries are starting out with a 
brainpower deficit because of childhood malnutrition. “These kids have fewer – 
literally fewer – neuronal connections than their non-stunted classmates,” he 
said. “For every inch that you’re below the average height, you lose 2% of your 
income.”

“This is fundamentally an economic issue,” he continued. “We need to invest in 
grey-matter infrastructure. Neuronal infrastructure is quite possibly going to 
be the most important infrastructure.”

To World Bank traditionalists, addressing nutrition is an example of the sort 
of mission creep that makes Kim so maddening. Despite its name and capital, the 
bank can’t be expected to solve all the world’s humanitarian problems. (“We are 
not the UN,” is an informal mantra among some staffers.) Poor countries may 
well prefer the bank to stick to gritty infrastructural necessities, even if 
Kim and his supporters have splashier goals. “The interests of its rich-country 
constituencies and its poor-country borrowers are diverging,” Pritchett says. 
“It’s like the bank has a foot on two boats. Sooner or later, it’s going to 
have to jump on one boat or the other, or fall in the water. So far, Jim Kim is 
just doing the splits.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49aba7c0b6c94d44e0ba25d7f7b024efb233c7fd%2F0_0_2200_1479%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20World%20Bank%E2%80%99s%20biggest%20critic%20became%20its%20president%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fworld-bank-jim-yong-kim%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49aba7c0b6c94d44e0ba25d7f7b024efb233c7fd%2F0_0_2200_1479%2F2200.jpg>
 The World Bank headquarters in Washington. Photograph: Lauren Burke/AP 
Kim’s defenders insist the bank hasn’t abandoned its core business. In fact, 
as private investment in emerging markets has contracted recently, due to 
instability in once-booming economies such as Brazil, countries have found more 
reasons to turn to the World Bank. Its primary lending unit committed $29.7bn 
in loans this fiscal year, nearly doubling the amount from four years earlier. 
“There is so much need in the world that I’m not worried we’re going to run out 
of projects to finance,” Kim says. He also hopes the worst of the tumult within 
the bank is over. A few elements of his reorganisation have been scaled back; 
after the new administrative structure proved unwieldy, the 14 global practices 
were regrouped into three divisions. Some of his more polarising hires have 
also left.

A five-year term, Kim says, is hardly sufficient to implement his entire 
agenda, and he has conveyed his desire to be reappointed in 2017. Though 
internal controversies have been damaging, and America’s domination of the bank 
remains a source of tension, the next US president (quite possibly Kim’s friend 
Hillary Clinton) will have a strong say in the matter. If he keeps his job, Kim 
wants to show that the World Bank can serve as a link between great powers and 
small ones, between economics and aid work – retaining its influence as old 
rules and boundaries are erased and new ones are scribbled into place.

Kim thinks he can succeed, so long as he keeps one foot rooted in his 
experiences as a doctor with mud between his toes. But he also wants to share 
his revelations about capital with his old comrades. “I really feel a 
responsibility to have this conversation with development actors who, like me 
10 years ago, didn’t really understand the power of leverage,” Kim says with a 
guileless air.

“God,” he adds, “it is just such a powerful tool.”

• This article first appeared in Foreign Policy <http://foreignpolicy.com> 
magazine.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 