
‘The studio wanted Demi Moore’

Kristin Scott Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/31/kristin-scott-thomas-interview>, 
actor

I’d read the novel and fallen totally in love with it. The poetry of the 
writing just swept me away. So when I heard there was going to be a film, I 
thought: “God, I have to get on it.” I went to seeAnthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, whom I’d never met before, 
and we had a disastrous lunch. I was so nervous, so touched by the story, so 
overwhelmed. I knew they were thinking of me for Katherine, but that I would be 
a leftfield choice. I’d just had my second child and had zero confidence. I 
gabbled away and could see Anthony’s eyes glazing over. So afterwards I wrote 
him a letter saying: “Please just forget that terrible lunch. I am the K in 
your film.”

I got an audition and it was extraordinary. I went into a room and there was 
Ralph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/ralph-fiennes-i-wish-id-been-more-of-a-punk-but-its-not-in-my-dna-to-be-truly-anarchic>
. The only thing I remember about him was that he was wearing very squeaky 
trainers and was devastatingly good looking. We sat down and read – and it all 
just fell into place. Then, when we got to the end, Anthony said: “Can we do it 
all again?”

Afterwards, they said I’d got the part. Then there was just this radio 
silence. I thought they’d forgotten about me or had found someone else. I was 
too scared to phone in case I was told: “No, sorry, we are not doing it with 
you after all.” I went on holiday and by the time I came back in August I still 
hadn’t heard. So I finally rang the studio in Italy. It just rang and rang. 
Eventually, someone picked up and said: “Oh yes, you’re arriving on 4 
September.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F643811b5057f48857b5f68d23713d39afdcc2011%2F0_0_3187_1913%2F3187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F643811b5057f48857b5f68d23713d39afdcc2011%2F0_0_3187_1913%2F3187.jpg>
 ‘Our relationship was prickly’ … Anthony Minghella and Kristin Scott Thomas on 
location. Photograph: Alamy 
What I didn’t know was that the delay was caused by the production falling to 
bits. At one point, very early on in casting,Demi Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/demi-moore>’s name had come up, and the 
studio wanted her. Anthony wanted me and Willem Dafoe. He stuck to his guns – 
and the studio pulled out. In the end, Harvey Weinstein stepped in and saved it.

It was my first big part in a big movie. And the studio hadn’t wanted me! So I 
felt a lot of pressure. I had to do a good job. My relationship with Anthony 
was quite prickly. He didn’t know how to approach me and I didn’t know how to 
be approached. He was a brilliant director, though: he gave the best 
instructions and was gentle and kind. But I felt very defensive. I loved 
playing Katherine but I wanted everyone to back off telling me how to play her. 
Anthony wanted me to cry a lot but I felt she shouldn’t weep so much. He won of 
course – directors always win.

Ralph and I were both very young and passionate about our roles. But love 
scenes are really hard. It’s like jumping stark naked into an icy swimming 
pool. You just have to plunge right in. Then suddenly something will bring you 
back and you realise you are stark naked in a room with people who aren’t and 
they are all gawping at you.

A hot water bottle doesn't do the trick when it's 4am and you're in a thin 
dress

My favourite scene in the film is when Katherine is saying goodbye to Almasy, 
Ralph’s character. As she walks away she says: “Do you miss me yet?” He says: 
“Not yet.” And she says: “Ha! You will.” Then she haughtily turns on her heel – 
and walks into a pole. And they wanted to cut it! Saul Zaentz, the producer, 
and I fought so hard to keep it. I loved that bumbling quality when she is 
trying so hard to keep her dignity.

A lot of the filming was pretty uncomfortable. We were shooting in the 
Tunisian desert –the same spot where Star Wars was filmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/mar/06/luke-skywalker-house-ra-di-martino>
 – but it was November and freezing at night. Someone would rush over with a 
hot water bottle and a down jacket, but it doesn’t do the trick when it’s 4am 
and you’re in a thin dress. But it really was the most gorgeous place: you’d be 
bumping along, going to work in a Land Rover at five in the morning through 
these beautiful landscapes, listening to the call to prayer. It was wonderful.

Being nominated for a best actress Oscar was stressful to be truthful. I think 
I would feel differently today, but at that age I was so anxious and I felt 
under scrutiny. The success of the film was thrilling, though. I watched it not 
long ago. It was definitely one of my favourite films to do. It was made from 
the heart, with integrity, and it’s beautiful.

‘Lift Juliette! Make her swing!’

Gabriel Yared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/mar/11/abbeyroadfilmfestival.festivals3>
, composer

I met Anthony Minghella at a big publicity meeting in London in 1994. He had 
invited me along as he wanted us to work together on an advert for one of the 
first mobile phones. We had an immediate connection: we used to say we were 
engaged on an ad first, before getting married on a film! Not only was Anthony 
a great writer and director, he was also a talented and eclectic musician who 
loved pop, jazz and classical. In particular, we shared a great love forJS Bach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jsbach>. He liked my music for the film 
Betty Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/26/patsy-kensit-betty-blue>, and 
knew I always liked to compose from the beginning, even before shooting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F903a6c5f923fc716526a33078670a8bc054cc48e%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F903a6c5f923fc716526a33078670a8bc054cc48e%2F0_0_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 ‘I’m toast’ … Fiennes as Almasy being nursed by Hana, played by Juliette 
Binoche. Photograph: Alamy 
In 1995, Anthony gave me the script for The English Patient. He had three 
clues for the score: the first was an oriental/mid-eastern feeling; the second 
was Puccini for his melodic and harmonic elegance; the third, JS Bach. Anthony 
also had the idea of usingSzerelem <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sTBMYf9Zt7A>
, a Hungarian folk song with an oriental flavour, sung byMárta Sebestyén 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/03/muzsikas-fly-bird-fly-review>.

I was living on an island in Brittany called Île-aux-Moines, or The Island of 
Monks, but travelled to San Francisco to play my music to Anthony,Walter Murch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/walter-murch>, and the producer, Saul Zaentz. 
One of my great memories is trying my best to recreate the orchestral score in 
front of them using just the piano and my voice! After some very encouraging 
feedback, I went back to work on my island.

Of course, it was harder to communicate at the time, but over the course of 
six months we exchanged faxes and phone calls, and I sent my demos via special 
courier. Often they’d be edited to the picture, sometimes chopped, and I would 
go back and recompose accordingly. Even though we were a very long distance 
from each other, everyone was on the same page, working in harmony.

During editing, I realised I had to replace the Aria from Bach’s Goldberg 
Variations as the original, which Anthony planned to use, didn’t fit any more. 
This was one of the most challenging things I’ve ever done. It took me a long 
time to write a piece of music, a piano prelude in three voices. This theme was 
used, among others, forthe famous scene where Juliette Binoche is hoisted up by 
rope in the torch-lit church <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dp-9C3FDaRY>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0ca1aea504383e816be179d62e06d3eadeb4f0d%2F0_45_1833_1100%2F1833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0ca1aea504383e816be179d62e06d3eadeb4f0d%2F0_45_1833_1100%2F1833.jpg>
 Nine Oscars … The English Patient. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Miramax 
I sent Anthony the piece but he called me up saying: “Gabriel, I want you to 
lift her! I want you to swing her!” So I rewrote the piece completely, adding 
pizzicati strings and mandolins, but each time Anthony would give me the same 
response. It became a joke between us. Of course, once it was recorded, he 
loved it – as it was finally “lifting and swinging her”. At the Oscars, whenThe 
English Patient <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-english-patient> won nine 
awards, we were still joking about this.

Anthony took my imagination, creation and composition to another level. He 
inspired me to be bold, to achieve my full potential for all our projects. It 
was Anthony’s vision musically that hugely benefited our collaborations, and I 
am truly grateful to have had the opportunity to work with both him and Walter. 
He was, and still is, my soulmate.

 ‘If I could wave a magic wand…’

Walter Murch <https://www.theguardian.com/film/walter-murch>, editor

Once a film has been put together for the first time, the quickest way to 
answer the music question is this: just try something! Take a likely piece of 
pre-recorded music, sync it with the film at a possible start point, and press 
play. The amazing thing about this process is that it works as well as it does 
– sometimes brilliantly – even though the music may have been composed decades 
or centuries before. If you’ve seen 2001, you’ll have heard the pre-recorded 
music Stanley Kubrick was working with: the opening, with Richard Strauss’sAlso 
Sprach Zarathustra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-QFj59PON4>, is a 
now-iconic fusion of image and sound.

In fact, the music for the whole film is made from pre-recorded music by 
Richard Strauss, Johann Strauss, György Ligeti and Aram Khachaturian. In 
Kubrick’s opinion, this eclectic soundtrack worked so well that he threw out 
the specially composed score by Alex North. Unfortunately, he did not have the 
courage to tell North, and it was only at the New York premiere that the 
composer learned what had happened to his music.

Temp-tracking, as the use of pre-recorded music is called, can be a devil’s 
bargain. Film-makers can become so enamoured with the track they have chosen to 
provide mood and atmosphere until the soundtrack is added, that they find it 
painful to let it go. Composers are often asked to imitate the temp track, in 
the hope of maintaining the musical DNA.The “shark threat” music in Jaws 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BX3bN5YeiQs>, for instance, was inspired by 
Spielberg’s use of Stravinsky’sRite of Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/12/rite-of-spring-stravinsky> in 
his temp track. Is this the right way to go about doing music for film? I have 
mixed feelings: without question, there are some successes, such as the use of
Wagner’s Valkyries in Apocalypse Now 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TqtehtSB0LI>. But as an overall approach, it 
has the danger of introducing a subtle poison into the creative process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b53b533619fbc413850509658c061163e2fb72c%2F81_0_3191_1914%2F3191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20The%20English%20Patient&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F20%2Fhow-we-made-the-english-patient-kristin-scott-thomas-gabriel-yared-walter-murch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b53b533619fbc413850509658c061163e2fb72c%2F81_0_3191_1914%2F3191.jpg>
 ‘Directors always win’ … Minghella on the shoot Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
So I felt great relief when Anthony Minghella told me in 1995 that he didn’t 
want to use any temp music for The English Patient. Instead, he would ask 
composer Gabriel Yared to write several test themes and variations based on the 
screenplay. Similarly, Francis Ford Coppola had asked David Shire to begin 
writing the music forThe Conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/conversation-crime> in 1972, even 
before the film was shot. This had ultimately worked so successfully that I 
thought it would soon be standard practice, but it was more than 20 years 
before we tried it again on The English Patient. It helped greatly that Anthony 
was himself a musician: the logistical and artistic communication between him 
and Gabriel was as easy and deep as I have ever seen between director and 
composer.

If it can be arranged, this way of working sets up a creative feedback between 
composition and film which energises and informs each of them as they evolve in 
their yin/yang way. The themes that Gabriel recorded in France in the spring of 
1996 were sent to us in Berkeley and tried out on various scenes. Gabriel’s 
music helped certain scenes find their footing; in other cases, we would recut 
Gabriel’s music to fit a new arrangement of scenes. These selections would be 
sent back to Gabriel, triggering, I am sure, a complex mix of emotions, 
resulting in a new set of compositions sent to us a few weeks later.

Ideas would flow from Berkeley to France and vice versa, and so it would 
continue for the next six months, refinement upon refinement, until the 
finished score was recorded in London in the autumn of 1996. Consequently, 
there was never that terrible moment when the musical DNA of The English 
Patient had to be extracted and replaced with something else: it was an 
evolution from beginning to end. If I could wave a magic wand, I would work 
this way every time.

• Gabriel Yared will be taking part in a Q&A after a screening of The English 
Patient on 20 April at the Barbican in London 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/film/event-detail.asp?ID=19412>. Kristin Scott 
Thomas interview by Homa Khaleeli.
 