
First it was former National Security Agency director General Keith Alexander. 
He was asked if he would favour renaming the intelligence agency Mr Tiggles 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k8lJ85pfb_E>. Then came General Motors, 
criticised for endangering customers; then the idiocy of denying climate 
change; the death penalty; net neutrality (the principle that all data on the 
internet should be treated equally);Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad's love of 
Right Said Fred's I'm Too Sexy <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3lKYPp2Kp6s>; 
then, last week,a 12-minute rant about Fifa,  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DlJEt2KU33I>calling it "cartoonishly evil" and 
comparing it to a stomach-turning internet video clip, Two Girls One Cup.

It's only six weeks since HBO unleashed Last Week Tonight with John Oliver and 
with each late Sunday evening edition the 37-year-old comedian, born in 
Birmingham, brought up in Bedford, educated at Cambridge, and who made his name 
onThe Daily Show with Jon Stewart, has become more established as the star of 
TV counterculture. Friends say that he is a prankster, but he might be more 
than that: pundits are talking about a new, more calls-to-arms direction for US 
political satire.

Two weeks ago, in an attempt to stir outrage over net neutrality  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fpbOEoRrHyU> – two words, he conceded, more 
boring than "featuring Sting" – he invited viewers to register their opposition 
to a two-speed internet, which would allow enhanced speed for certain users, 
with the Federal Communication Commission. The following morning the 
commission's website overloaded with traffic and crashed.

Oliver's remarkable success runs counter to recent trends. After former 
tabloid editor Piers Morgan was fired from CNN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/piers-morgans-us-talkshow-axe-cnn>
, there were warnings that the US media was now poisoned to British accents and 
supposed superciliousness. But Oliver's self-deprecation is disarming and 
serves him well. Four million viewers tune in to the show every week and two 
million more watch online the next day. Oliver's comic diatribes are becoming 
Monday's workplace conversation.

"We didn't crash their website, Charlie – that's a huge accusation," Oliver 
told CBS host Charlie Rose after the commission edition. "We merely pointed 
people to their website and told them why they should be angry about it, and 
they went in droves."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDlJEt2KU33I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDlJEt2KU33I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDlJEt2KU33I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Oliver says it's a work in progress – the show's writers haven't settled on a 
format. But the basic idea is fixed: to take topics from the week's news and 
turn it into agitprop comedy that serves no agenda so much as laughter.

"It's not a surprise," says one TV executive familiar with the US late-night 
comedy business. "He's got a traditional Englishman's gift for telling 
Americans what to do and he's very good at it. He's lovable with a wonkish 
quality that let's him get away with some strident talk."

But for many TV viewers, it is Oliver's willingness to push boundaries that is 
setting him apart from the political punditry class. "He's offering an explicit 
call to action that's unique," saysDannagal Young 
<http://www.udel.edu/communication/people_young.html>, who teaches satire and 
the psychology of political humour at the University of Delaware
. "He's interacting with a topic, not just commenting or issuing a broad 
judgment."

Young says contemporary satirists have been reluctant to compromise their 
status as outsiders. Political satire, she points out, is an art that 
traditionally lies outside the political spectrum. But she says people on the 
left have grown frustrated with satirists such as Stephen Colbert and (Oliver's 
former boss)Jon Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jon-stewart> who are 
adept at identifying problems but rarely cross over into agitation.

Four years ago, in 2010, Colbert and Stewart hosted the Rally to Restore 
Sanity, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/30/jon-stewart-rally-restore-sanity>
 which attracted 250,000 to the Washington Mall. But where rightwing radio 
jocks would be likely to use a stage for political grassroots action, the two 
TV hosts passed. "It was really just a music and comedy festival," says Young. 
"People were frustrated. They wanted to be asked to do something. Stewart and 
Colbert had tapped into something people were yearning for – a voice of reason, 
talking truth to power – but without being asked to do something, people felt 
they'd been hung out to dry."

With a career path characterised by fortuitous timing, Oliver arrived at HBO 
after seven years atThe Daily Show that included three months standing in for 
Stewart as host last summer. "He learned at Stewart's knee," says the TV 
executive. "Oliver is a little bit more of a prankster than Jon – a prankster 
who is enjoying using his soapbox to steer his viewers toward mischief." 
Oliver's performance as host so impressed HBO bosses that they offered him a 
slot (after the hit dramaGame of Thrones) with none of the restrictions over 
content that typically come with TV.

Last Week Tonight has made television so surreal that it only just qualifies 
as comedy. Oliver and General Alexander seemed equally startled to be facing 
each other. It was an extraordinary "get" for Oliver, as well as an odd choice 
of venue for a public official who'd guided the NSA through the Edward Snowden 
affair to appear on.

Oliver might be able to get away with more, not only because he is on HBO but 
because as a foreigner – an outsider – he is considered neither from the left 
nor right. Oliver's playfulness gives him licence to criticise that which in 
hosts Bill Maher or Piers Morgan comes off as aggressive, preachy or so 
politically skewed as to be pandering to one cause or another. "It's part of 
his strength," says Young. "He doesn't trigger people's immediate ideological 
responses. He's about people and power, not about politics."

Last year, at The Daily Show, Oliver told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jun/07/john-oliver-the-daily-show>
 he did not consider what he did as journalism or social criticism but 
something on the borderline. Three weeks ago he broadcast a prolonged shot of 
male genitalia he said symbolised the Republican Senate minority leader, Mitch 
McConnell. "HBO is the moral wild west," Oliver said. Then he went after 
General Motors over its failure to report ignition problems in its cars that 
appear to be behind a dozen fatalities. "To do a very aggressive piece on 
[General Motors] before a congressional investigation, that's potentially a 
problem on commercial TV."

In a recent interview with the Hollywood Reporter, Oliver, the eldest of four 
children of schoolteachers, described himself as a child of the Thatcher era. 
"I think it's hard to be apathetic when you're raised under Margaret Thatcher; 
you're going to get pushed one way or the other," he said. At Cambridge, he 
joined the Footlights, where, he has said, he "learned how to fail". Later 
moving to London withfellow comedian Richard Ayoade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/mar/23/richard-ayoade-making-films-exhilarating-terrifying-submarine>
, Oliver supported himself with odd jobs, including working for a man who 
fenced stolen kitchen equipment. On one occasion, he was sent across London in 
a cab with about £5,000 and a knife. "I said, 'If anyone tries to rob me, I am 
giving him the money and the knife,'" he has recalled. "I think he just found 
me amusing to have around. Our lives were not supposed to intersect in any way."

Oliver had not even been to America when he got the job on The Daily Show, 
apparently on the recommendation of Ricky Gervais. Gervais knew him from his 
work with Armando Iannucci, who hired Oliver in 2003 to write forGash, a 
week-long radio programme that coincided with British local elections. Oliver 
proved himself a sharp cultural critic. On radio, you learn to write with focus 
and make each word count,Iannucci recently told the Hollywood Reporter. 
<https://movies.yahoo.com/news/john-oliver-luxurious-freedom-hbo-complicated-relationship-nyc-050000430.html>
 "And John was fantastic at that. He would throw out these comments and 
observations. I instantly relaxed because I knew I was with someone who was 
completely comfortable in the topical world of comedy."

Oliver made his first appearance on American television almost immediately 
after he arrived. "I remember my legs going a little bit wobbly, and then 
thinking, 'What the fuck are you doing? You're about to get found out in a big 
way.'" That has not happened yet. He has settled in the United States and 
married an American battlefield trauma surgeon.

"His power is in his ability to be playful, make the citizen feel smart, bring 
attention to things they perhaps haven't paid attention to before, and give 
them credit for doing it," says Young. "He's on to something, and people are 
going to want to get on that train. We're going to be surprised who shows up – 
I feel like he's going to become important."
 