
Education secretary Michael Gove unleashed another political storm this week 
when he saidhe would vote against EU membership in a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/may/12/michaelgove-conservatives>. 
The question of whether the UK could quit the EU is well and truly back on the 
table.

Those in favour of quitting Europe tend to argue that by leaving the EU the UK 
would save on costly membership fees, cut down on migration, and no longer be 
subject to EU legislation, while those who want to stay in Europe argue that 
leaving could threaten trade and investment and damage Britain's global 
standing.

But what impact would leaving the EU have on the UK's higher education sector? 
Research suggests a departure could lead to declining quality and standards in 
UK universities, and could actually increase higher education costs to the 
taxpayer.

HESA figures from 2011 
<http://www.hesa.ac.uk/dox/pressOffice/sfr183/6995_SFR183_Student_2011_12_Table_1.xls>
 reveal that there are 73,660 full-time undergraduate students from the EU 
currently studying in British universities. These students enjoy many of the 
benefits available to British students. Their tuition fees are capped at £9,000 
a year (while fees for overseas students can be much higher) and, unlike 
overseas students, they can access our generous fee loan system, meaning their 
fees are deferred until after they graduate and are repayable only once they 
get a job.Recent evidence <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-22500989> suggests many 
of these loans remain unpaid .

EU students would almost certainly become financially worse off if Britain 
were to leave the EU. Universities could charge them as much as overseas 
students since their fees would no longer be subject to government regulation, 
and what's more, they would no longer be able to access UK government backed 
fee loans so would have to find the money up-front. The likely outcome is that 
many EU students would decide to undertake their studies elsewhere.

This could be good for UK students. Because of our quota system, demand far 
outstrips supply in UK universities with around1.3 applicants to every 
acceptance <http://www.ucas.com/documents/End_of_Cycle_Report_12_12_2012.pdf> 
in 2012, leaving many UK students unable to obtain a place at university. A 
fall in EU students would free up scarce places and mean more UK students could 
get onto the course of their choice.

What about the consequences for UK universities? A fall in EU student numbers 
should leave UK universities no worse off financially. Judging by current 
demand, those universities impacted could easily make up the numbers of lost EU 
students with UK students paying at the same rate, and they might even be able 
to squeeze a few thousand pounds more out of those EU students who decide to 
stay.

But there would be negative effects too – those UK students who were beaten to 
a place by an EU rival presumably failed to get on their course because they 
weren't as academically able– thus a fall in EU students could be accompanied 
by a fall in the quality of the student intake. Moreover, EU nationals make up 
a large proportion of teaching and research staff at many UK universities, and 
there could be serious consequences for the university environment as a whole 
if it becomes harder for them to gain employment here.

There might also be negative consequences for the taxpayer. While EU students 
have access to government tuition fee loans, they cannot apply for maintenance 
loans or grants. UK students can access more taxpayer-funded benefits, so 
increasing their numbers at the expense of EU students will be costly.

There are many other drawbacks to having fewer EU students on courses. For 
example, visiting foreign students spend significant amounts of money on goods 
and services, improving the balances of payments and raising GDP (gross 
domestic product). Once students complete their studies many stay in the 
country, contributing to the UK economy. There is also the potential benefit 
that international students who return to their home countries are more likely 
to consume goods and services from companies they became acquainted with during 
their time studying in the UK.

Perhaps most importantly, it would result in domestic students having less 
exposure to different cultures and ways of life during their time at 
university. Depriving our students of the chance to meet and work with students 
from different backgrounds seems ill advised.

Gill Wyness is an education researcher at LSE <http://www2.lse.ac.uk/home.aspx>
 and research associate of the liberal think tankCentreForum 
<http://www.centreforum.org/> – follow it on Twitter @CentreForum 
<http://twitter.com/centreforum>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 