
Hewlett-Packard <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hewlettpackard> and 
lawyers representing its shareholders have agreed to settle litigation over its 
troubled $11.1bn acquisition of software company Autonomy, according to a 
source familiar with the negotiations.

Under the terms of the settlement, involving three lawsuits, lawyers for the 
shareholders have agreed to drop all claims against HP's current and former 
executives, including chief executive Meg Whitman, board members and advisers 
to the company, the source said.

The exception to that will be former officials at Autonomy. As part of the 
agreement, the shareholders' lawyers will assist HP in pursuing claims against 
Autonomy's co-founder and former CEO Michael Lynch, its former chief financial 
officer Sushovan Hussain and potentially others related toAutonomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/autonomycorporation>, the source said. 
The precise nature of such claims and when HP might file them could not be 
learned.

The company said: "HP is in serious discussions to settle the shareholder 
derivative litigation related to Autonomy, but no final deal has been reached 
yet." The settlement, which followed mediation, is expected to be announced as 
soon as Monday.

HP took an $8.8bn impairment charge in November 2012 for its purchase of 
Autonomy just over a year earlier, with more than $5bn of that linked to what 
HP said at the time were "serious accounting improprieties, misrepresentation 
and disclosure failures".

The size of the loss, and the speed with which it occurred, mark the deal as 
one of the most disastrous done by a major company in recent years.

Sources close to HP's investigation into the matter say the technology firm 
believes Autonomy's results and prospects were made to look much better than 
they were.

Lynch has consistently denied HP's allegations, saying it is blaming him for 
its own failure to manage Autonomy after the acquisition. A spokesman for Lynch 
said: "We continue to reject HP's allegations."

He said it appeared that Whitman would spend a large amount of HP money to 
avoid explaining in court why she made the November 2012 allegations about 
Autonomy.

"We hope this matter will now move beyond a smear campaign based on selective 
disclosure and HP will finally give a full explanation," the spokesman added.

Hussain has not responded to calls and emails. His lawyer, John Keker, did not 
respond to requests for comment.

Shareholders had sued HP board members and executives, accusing them of 
breaching their fiduciary duties and wasting corporate assets. The lawsuits 
sought corporate governance changes at HP, legal fees and the ability to pursue 
damages claims against those responsible for the acquisition.

HP has shared the results of its investigation into accounting questions at 
Autonomy with lawyers representing the shareholders, the source familiar with 
the negotiations said.

One of the law firms representing shareholders in the settlement, Robbins 
Geller Rudman & Dowd, declined to comment. The other firm, Cotchett Pitre & 
McCarthy, was not immediately available for comment.

Lawyers representing shareholders will receive fees for helping HP pursue any 
further claims, the source said. Additional terms of HP's settlement with 
shareholders are unclear.

HP's allegations of accounting improprieties, misrepresentation and disclosure 
failures at Autonomy have prompted an investigation by the US securities and 
exchange commission and the FBI, as well as the Serious Fraud Office. The FBI 
and SEC declined to comment. The SFO said its inquiry was "very much in 
progress".

It is unclear if the investigations by the authorities in the US and UK will 
lead to action against any parties involved in Autonomy or HP's deal to acquire 
it. At the end of March, HP also settled a lawsuit that accused the computer 
maker's former management of defrauding shareholders by abandoning a business 
model it had long touted. In that case, the company agreed to pay shareholders 
$57m.

The lawsuit was filed after former HP chief executive officer LÃ©o Apotheker 
shocked investors in August 2011 by announcing plans to refocus the company on 
business services and products, which included the Autonomy purchase.
 