
Passionate encounters between ancient humans and their burly cousins, the 
Neanderthals <https://www.theguardian.com/science/neanderthals>, may have left 
modern people more prone to sneezes, itches and other allergies, researchers 
say.

The curious legacy comes from three genes that crossed into modern humans 
after their distant ancestorshad sex with Neanderthals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2011/aug/25/neanderthal-denisovan-genes-human-immunity>
, or their close relatives the Denisovans, more than 40,000 years ago.


The prehistoric couplings left all non-Africans today carrying 1-6% of 
Neanderthal DNA. People whose ancestors never left the continent would not have 
crossed paths with Neanderthals or theDenisovans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/dec/22/fossilised-finger-human-relatives-denisovans>
, a mysterious group of humans who lived in and around Siberia at the same time.


The three genes are among the most common strands of Neanderthal and 
Denisovan-like DNA found in modern humans, suggesting they conferred an 
evolutionary advantage. They probably boosted the immune system, since the 
genes are involved in the body’s first line of defence against pathogens such 
as bacteria and fungi.


Neanderthals and me: we go back a long way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/mar/23/neanderthals-and-me-go-back-a-long-way-alice-roberts>
But people who carry the three genes seem to pay a price in the form of an 
overly-sensitive immune system.One study 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3753407/> by the US genetics 
company 23andme found that carriers of the genes were more likely to have 
asthma, hay fever and other allergies.


The genes are thought to have spread through modern humans when small groups 
of pioneers who left Africa met and had sex with Neanderthals already long at 
home in Eurasia. Unlike the new arrivals, the Neanderthals had spent 200,000 
years adapting to life in the region, and their immune systems had become tuned 
to the new infections they faced.

“A small group of modern humans leaving Africa would not carry much genetic 
variation,” saidJanet Kelso 
<http://www.eva.mpg.de/genetics/bioinformatics/group-staff.html>, who led the 
research at the Max Planck Institute for evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig. 
“You can adapt through mutations, but if you interbreed with the local 
population who are already there, you can get some of these adaptations for 
free.”

Kelso’s team scanned the genomes of modern day humans for evidence of 
Neanderthal or Denisovan genes and then looked at how common they were in 
people from around the world. Among the three immune system genes that stood 
out, two closely matched Neanderthal DNA. The most common was found in all 
non-Africans, the other only in Asians. The third gene was more similar to 
Denisovan DNA and much rarer, found in only a handful of people from Asia who 
took part in the study.


Discovery of oldest human DNA in Spanish cave sheds light on evolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/04/oldest-human-dna-discovered-spanish-cave>
The findings suggest that modern humans inherited Neanderthal and Denisovan 
genes in three waves depending on where and when the groups met. The genes 
proved so beneficial that they remain in our genomes to this day. The study is 
reported in theAmerican Journal of Human Genetics 
<http://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(15)00486-3>.


The work is backed up by separate research 
<http://www.cell.com/ajhg/abstract/S0002-9297(15)00485-1> published in the same 
journal by scientists at the Pasteur Institute in Paris. GeneticistLluis 
Quintana-Murci 
<https://research.pasteur.fr/en/team/human-evolutionary-genetics/> analysed DNA 
from participants in the1000 Genomes Project <http://www.1000genomes.org/> and 
compared their DNA with ancient human genomes. He focused specifically on 1500 
immune genes and found that most adaptations occurred in the past 6,000 to 
13,000 years, when humans shifted from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle to farming.


But Quintana-Murci said the most striking discovery was of the same three 
genes that Kelso found. In his study, the trio of genes were among the most 
common Neanderthal or Denisovan DNA found in modern people.


“Interbreeding with archaic humans does indeed have functional implications 
for modern humans,” Kelso said. “The most obvious consequences have been in 
shaping our adaptation to our environment - improving how we resist pathogens 
and metabolise novel foods.”


For all the benefits they bring, the downsides of Neanderthal genes might not 
be so bad. “They might have increased our susceptibility,” said Kelso. “But I 
wouldn’t go so far as to say Neanderthals gave us allergies.”

 