
Further to my blog yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/17/three-journalists-beaten-and-detained-by-hungarian-border-police>
, more information has come to light about journalists being ill-treated by 
Hungarian police while covering the refugees crisis on the country’s border 
with Serbia.

It appears, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists 
<https://www.cpj.org/2015/09/in-hungary-police-beat-journalists-covering-refuge.php>
 (CPJ), that at least seven journalists were beaten by police, four of whom 
were detained or questioned.

The assaults occurred when Syrian refugees streamed past police to enter 
Hungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> at the Horgoš-Röszke border 
crossing.

Jovana Djurović, from Radio Television Serbia, said police attacked her along 
with the station’s cameraman, Vladan Hadži Mijailović, and sound engineer 
Miroslav Đurašinović,and all three required medical treatment. 
<http://bbj.hu/politics/serbian-tv-news-team-beaten-by-hungarian-police-at-border_104219>

Djurović, with a bandaged arm, later gave a TV interview in which she 
described the attack 
<http://www.rts.rs/page/stories/sr/story/125/Dru%C5%A1tvo/2040290/Pretu%C4%8Dena+ekipa+RTS-a+na+Horgo%C5%A1u.html>
, saying that they told police they were journalists.


Jacek Tacik, a reporter for Poland’s public broadcaster TVP, was struck in the 
head with a baton by police 
<http://www.b92.net/eng/news/region.php?yyyy=2015&mm=09&dd=17&nav_id=95461> and 
detained for 13 hours on the accusation that he had crossed the border 
illegally.

Tímea Beck, a reporter for the Slovakian daily paper, Denník N, said police 
struck her with batons and handcuffed her 
<https://dennikn.sk/242839/sef-osn-je-sokovany-ako-madari-zautocili-na-utecencov-slznym-plynom/>
after she tried to help a family of refugees. She wasdetained by police and 
questioned 
<http://spectator.sme.sk/c/20060480/hungarian-police-assault-and-detain-slovak-journalist-in-anti-migrant-operation.html>
 before being released hours later.

Australian photographer Warren Richardson was kicked in the head and chest by 
police. Swedish photographer Meli Petersson Ellafi, who works for Swedish 
newspaper Expressen,was knocked to the ground. 
<http://www.keloland.com/news/worldusnews/?id=178863> 


An Associated Press cameramen, Luca Muzi, said he identified himself to police 
as an AP journalist but wasforced to delete footage that showed a police dog 
knocking down a Syrian refugee 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/d8239eca70e94605904e4013769bb40d/ap-hungary-police-forced-journalist-delete-footage>
.

Hungarian police issued a statement - reported by AP 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/17/the-associated-press-human-rights-group-demands-hungary-stop-harassing-reporters.html>
 - in which it “categorically” denied reports that its officers had beaten 
journalists. And Hungary’s foreign Minister, Peter Szijjarto, said police 
neither threatened nor obstructed journalists.


The CPJ’s Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and central 
Asia programme coordinator, Nina Ognianova, said: “We are appalled by the 
police violence against journalists covering this world story. The Hungarian 
government must make a clear and unequivocal statement that it will not 
tolerate such behaviour.”

Sources: CPJ 
<https://www.cpj.org/2015/09/in-hungary-police-beat-journalists-covering-refuge.php>
/Budapest Business Journal 
<http://bbj.hu/politics/serbian-tv-news-team-beaten-by-hungarian-police-at-border_104219>
/RTS 
<http://www.rts.rs/page/stories/sr/story/125/Dru%C5%A1tvo/2040290/Pretu%C4%8Dena+ekipa+RTS-a+na+Horgo%C5%A1u.html>
/b92 <http://www.b92.net/eng/news/region.php?yyyy=2015&mm=09&dd=17&nav_id=95461>
/Dennik 
<https://dennikn.sk/242839/sef-osn-je-sokovany-ako-madari-zautocili-na-utecencov-slznym-plynom/>
/Slovak Spectator 
<http://spectator.sme.sk/c/20060480/hungarian-police-assault-and-detain-slovak-journalist-in-anti-migrant-operation.html>
/Keloland <http://www.keloland.com/news/worldusnews/?id=178863>/Associated Press
 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/d8239eca70e94605904e4013769bb40d/ap-hungary-police-forced-journalist-delete-footage>
/AP via CNBC 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/09/17/the-associated-press-human-rights-group-demands-hungary-stop-harassing-reporters.html>
 