
 The promise for hyperlocal's place in UK news is there, the boundless optimism
 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-as-newspapers-flounders-local-bloggers-unite-to-fill-the-gap/>
 is not in doubt and there's evenhints 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-a-local-ad-network-for-local-people-addiply-raises-its-hand/>
 of a local business model emerging.But the delivery of quality postcode-level 
news across most of the country is still a long way off, and sustainable 
revenues and – dare we say it – profits are even further.

There wasn't much at the AOP's Microlocal Forum 
<http://www.ukaop.org.uk/events/microlocalmediaforum.obyx> on Wednesday to 
suggest that either semi-amateur, entrepreneur-led start-upsor big-league 
newspaper publishers will make real successes of hyperlocal in 2010. But that 
won't stop them from trying…

—Birmingham University media academic Paul Bradshaw, also co-founder of the 
DIY muck-raking siteHelp Me Investigate 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-new-4ip-handouts/>, said local sites 
should avoid being "handicapped" by an old-media, mass-reach-chasing ad model 
and instead sell products and services and organise events. "Are we expecting 
margins online that are coloured by our print experience? Why are we expecting 
to make as much money?"

—As I've said before 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-how-grassroots-media-must-finally-save-us-from-the-death-of-local-paper/>
, local grassroots news businessesneed partnerships to survive: whether it's 
via a nation-wide movement—through groups likeTalk About Local 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-as-newspapers-flounders-local-bloggers-unite-to-fill-the-gap/>
—or through relationships with mainstream publishers. But Bradshaw warns that 
big media schemes aiming to work with local bloggers—like ITN's proposed 
post-2012 part-publicly funded consortiums—were considered by bloggers to be 
"partnerships on someone else's terms". Exactly how bloggers could be involved 
in the IFNC set-up is yet to be clear by any of the potential partners.

—And if you're going to ask Newsquest to hear your hyperlocal partnership 
proposition,you better have a good proposition. The company's digital managing 
director Roger Green spoke with refreshing honesty by sayinghe's sick of 
upstart local businesses—or "zero-revenue publishers" as he calls them—looking 
for a free ride from the Gannett-(NYSE: GCI 
<http://finance.paidcontent.org/paidcontent?Page=QUOTE&Ticker=GCI>)owned 
publisher's commercial mass. "You should sit in on some of the joke meetings 
I've been in with with people from no-name start-ups who say we should help 
them start their business and pay them for the privilege … I'm glad bloggers 
are starting to suffer from this sort of thing." He's open to "reasonable" 
offers, but warns hyperlocal start-ups that they should either "work with us or 
take us on".

—David Higgerson, head of multimedia at Trinity Mirror Regionals, has a more 
measured view. As hetold me in an interview afterwards 
<http://audioboo.fm/boos/81833-paidcontent-uk-david-higgerson-trinity-mirror-regionals-head-of-multimedia-on-hyperlocal-partnerships>
, Trinity journalists have made overtures to local bloggers to build 
relationships—he admits reporters have been guilty of using bloggers' stories 
without attribution (it happens in reverse too, of course)—and he's thinking of 
ways to make relationships more concrete. Does Trinity make any money from its 
own hyperlocal projects such as the one in Teesside? Yes—it's not much—but 
Higgerson says it reaches the kind of advertisers thatregional sites can't. 
Here's the audio:

Public money could play a role: ITN, Press Association, Trinity Mirror, Ten 
Alps and all the other companies that have signaled their interest in running
part-publicly-funded news consortia 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-multimedia-news-consortia-bidders-have-until-christmas/>
 will be keen to involve grassroots news sites as part of the regional 
publishing mix—as per the original blueprint in Digital Britain—but there are 
moreifs and maybes surrounding that than certainties and the project won't be 
fully up and running until 2012.

In short, 2010 will not be the year of hyperlocal—these are the foothills, the 
beginnings of localised online publishing. But the signs are auspicious: 
increasing levels of online literacy and broadband connections mixed with more 
inevitable local newspaper closures mean it's natural that readers—and 
advertisers—will shift to new outlets. Whether anyone will be making a real 
living from it—as a mainstream publisher or a start-up—seems unlikely in the 
near future…

Related Stories


 * A Local Ad Network For Local People: Addiply Raises Its Hand  
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-a-local-ad-network-for-local-people-addiply-raises-its-hand/>
 * As Newspapers Flounder, Local Bloggers Unite To Fill The Gap  
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-as-newspapers-flounders-local-bloggers-unite-to-fill-the-gap/>
 * The New Journalism Recruitment Drive: Charity Funding And Student Interns 
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-the-new-journalism-recruitment-drive-charity-funding-and-student-intern/>
 * The Time Must Finally Be Now For Grassroots Media  
<http://paidcontent.co.uk/article/419-how-grassroots-media-must-finally-save-us-from-the-death-of-local-paper/> 