
Apologies to Stephenie Meyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/stephenie-meyer> and her sparkly 
crew of vampires; bad luck toAnne Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/anne-rice> and her bloodthirsty 
Lestat. Richard Matheson's story of a world overrun by the undead,I Am Legend, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9780575094161/i-am-legend>
 has been named vampire novel of the century.

The one-off prize was dreamed up by the Horror Writers Association in 
conjunction with the Stoker family estate to mark the centenary of Dracula 
creator Bram Stoker's death, and saw a jury chaired by Dracula expert Leslie S 
Klinger pick Matheson's 1954 novel over titles includingStephen King's Salem's 
Lot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/horror/9781444708141/salems-lot>
and Rice's Interview with a Vampire. The 86-year-old author could not attend 
the Bram Stoker awards ceremony in Salt Lake City this weekend due to ill 
health, but sent a video message thanking his fellow horror authors for the 
award, and revealing how his thrice-filmed story of a man alone in Manhattan 
battling hordes of vampires was first inspired by Stoker's own story.

"I am certainly honoured and delighted that you have chosen I Am Legend as the 
vampire novel of the century, which is a rather dubious but interesting 
distinction," said the author. "When I was a teenager I went to see Dracula 
with Bela Lugosi and at that time, even as a teenager, the thought occurred to 
me that if one vampire is scary, what if all the world were full of vampires?"

Matheson read Stoker's novel, he said, on nightly trips to the toilet while he 
was a soldier. "When I was in the army and the infantry during basic training I 
would go down to the latrine at night while the other soldiers were sleeping, 
and I would sit there reading Dracula: why, I don't know. I was pretty tired, I 
should have gone to sleep," he said. "I enjoyed it at the time, never knowing I 
was going to write a book about vampires and certainly not that it would be 
derived from the idea I had when I first saw Bela Lugosi."

Rice posted congratulations to Matheson on her Facebook page 
<http://www.facebook.com/annericefanpage>, describing his novel as "legendary", 
and saying the writer had "been an inspiration to me and to so many. He is a 
legend himself". The Interview with a Vampire author added that she didn't mind 
losing "to a man whose stories were inspiring me when I was still a kid writing 
everything with a ball point pen in a school notebook". King has previously 
said that Matheson was "the author who influenced me the most as a writer", and 
that I Am Legend was "an inspiration to me".

The ceremony also saw the Bram Stoker award for superior achievement in a 
novel handed toJoe McKinney's Flesh Eaters, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/horror/9780786023608/flesh-eaters> 
about a zombie plague, with authors including Alan Moore, Peter Straub, King 
and even Joyce Carol Oates also snapping up prizes. Oates won the horror gong 
for superior achievement in a fiction collection forThe Corn Maiden and Other 
Nightmares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/short-stories/9781611746013/the-corn-maiden-and-other-nightmares>
, six tales of suspense in which the title story sees an 11-year-old child kept 
in a basement by an older girl from her school, and told the world has ended.
 