
I can’t wait for Vice-President Joe Biden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden> to leave office. I can’t wait 
for that day, in just a few months, when he hands over the reigns of the 
vice-presidency and moves the hell out and on.

But let me back up a moment – I’m a lifelong Democrat who voted for him twice. 
I’m a fellow Catholic who’s been inspired by how Biden’s used his faith to 
inform his compassion – but not to dictate how other Americans conduct their 
private lives. I’m a hardscrabble north-easterner, and I’ve spent the past 
eight years watching the man from Scranton blossom and mature before our eyes.

Barack Obama and Joe Biden meet with families of Orlando massacre victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/barack-obama-meets-orlando-shooting-victim-families>
It’s go time. Biden – much like Democratic predecessor Al Gore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore> – is a man who seems destined to 
do great things after his tenure in office.

Gore has used his post-White House incarnation to become a leading champion of 
environmental awareness and action. Freed from the constraints of running for 
and maintaining political office, he’s been able to effect change with greater 
gusto. Biden has likewise already earmarked his next big thing: an ambitious 
cancer “moonshot” initiative to,in his words 
<https://medium.com/cancer-moonshot/inspiring-a-new-generation-to-defy-the-bounds-of-innovation-a-moonshot-to-cure-cancer-fbdf71d01c2e#.m4ogf3iie>
, “accelerate our efforts to progress towards a cure, and to unleash new 
discoveries and breakthroughs for other deadly diseases”.

As a Stage 4 cancer survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/29/mri-fears-claustrophobia-migranes-cancer-treatments>
 whose life was saved by an innovative treatment, I couldn’t be happier to be 
alive for this breakthrough moment, and to see what the future will bring. (But 
if Donald Trump somehow actually becomes my nation’s 45th president, I’ll be 
asking Biden if we can use that moonshot of his to depart this planet for the 
real moon.)

Biden’s profound investment in spending the next phase of his career advancing 
the prevention and treatment of cancer is heartbreakingly understandable. Last 
year, his eldest son Beau died of brain cancer. In a candid and emotional
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/sep/11/joe-biden-death-son-interview-late-show-stephen-colbert-video>
 last fall with Stephen Colbert, the veep – who in 1972 lost his first wife and 
baby daughter Naomi in a car accident – spoke on the subjects of loss and 
making meaning of tragedy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fjoe-biden-death-son-interview-late-show-stephen-colbert-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Biden%20on%20running%20in%202016%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20be%20lying%20if%20I%20said%20that%20I%20knew%20I%20was%20there%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fjoe-biden-death-son-interview-late-show-stephen-colbert-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Biden%20on%20running%20in%202016%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20be%20lying%20if%20I%20said%20that%20I%20knew%20I%20was%20there%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fjoe-biden-death-son-interview-late-show-stephen-colbert-video&media=>
Joe Biden talks about death of son in emotional interview on the Late Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/sep/11/joe-biden-death-son-interview-late-show-stephen-colbert-video>
He said that as his son neared the end of his life, Beau had told him, “Dad, I 
know how much you love me. Promise me you’re going to be all right.” For Biden, 
“all right” has clearly come to mean something different than it did when he 
ran for president in 1988, or as the inevitable speculations about his 
ambitions for the White House have arisen throughout his second term. Just as 
his earlier tragedy galvanized his public and private sense of duty, this more 
recent loss seems to have done much the same.

He’s also lately been laying the groundwork for his future as an advocate for 
women and the LGBT community. This month alone he penned aheartfelt declaration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/09/stanford-sexual-assault-joe-biden-victim-letter-brock-turner>
 of support to the Stanford sexual assault survivor, and he delivered an
impassioned speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/16/white-house-summit-women-obamas-oprah>
 on rape culture at at the recent White House Summit on the United State Of 
Women.

Biden endorsed marriage equality before Obama did, telling David Gregory on 
Meet the Press he was “absolutely comfortable” with it on March of 2012. Obama 
then issued his support three days later.

Joe Biden to Stanford sexual assault victim: 'I am in awe of your courage'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/09/stanford-sexual-assault-joe-biden-victim-letter-brock-turner>
Biden, the occasionally foul-mouthed 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2010/03/wtf_did_biden_just_say.html>
,frequently hot-headed 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2015/9/7/1419224/-Joe-Biden-I-am-hot-I-am-mad-I-am-angry>
 caller ofmalarkey <https://youtu.be/JfcQWrfkmRI> and all around loose cannon 
to Obama’s sophisticated good cop, is a career politician who has spent much of 
his time looking like the guy you can’t believe has made a career in politics. 
He’s a Democrat who’s made feminists chafe at histrack record toward Anita Hill 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/09/biden-anita-hill-women-senate-clarence-thomas-213864>
 during the Clarence Thomas supreme court confirmation hearings, and at his 
tendency to be what’s beendescribed 
<http://time.com/3713264/joe-biden-stephanie-carter-shoulder-rub/> as 
cluelessly “handsy”. His history of generously borrowing other people’s words 
has meanwhile earned him the description of “unusually creepy 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/press_box/2008/08/what_kind_of_plagiarist_is_joe_biden.html>
” from Slate.

Yet in life, as we grow up and grow older, we can choose to make our hardships 
and tragedies an excuse to become cynical and guarded, or an opportunity to 
become kinder and wiser. This flawed loudmouth from Pennsylvania has spent more 
than seven decades on this planet learning his lessons, and making his choices. 
Maybe he could have, at one time, been the president. But I think he’s got a 
much better job lined up next.

 * This article was amended on 18 June 2016 to reflect that Jill Biden did not 
tweet about Joe Biden running down the halls with a “rainbow flag tied on like 
a cape high-fiving everyone”.  