
A s with the Baader-Meinhof phenomenon 
<http://science.howstuffworks.com/life/inside-the-mind/human-brain/baader-meinhof-phenomenon.htm>
, in which one encounters something new and then cannot escape it,Pokémon Go 
has seemingly come from nowhere and is now everywhere.

Pokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> No. I’ve felt great 
cynicism towards adults clutching phones and waving their arms about outside 
disused public lavatories or my garden. It used to be that going round the 
houses looking for something was just shorthand for when you lose your glasses, 
not an actual way to spend an evening.

Quick game precis, because when I told my boss there was a Pokémon in her 
office she said: “I haven’t seen it. Who put it there?”Pokémon Go 
<http://www.pokemongo.com/en-uk/> is an augmented reality game. It uses GPS to 
place Pokémon in various locations. When you’re in range of a Pokémon (“those 
weird dinosaur things?”), then pointing the phone camera at the spot means the 
critter appears on screen. You then have to catch it. Hence the waving around 
of phones.

The locations of Pokémon change and the ones you collect can battle. There are 
also PokéStops. Think of these as the Pokémon version of the 24-hour garage you 
visit to stock up on cigarettes and booze at 3am.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fis-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%20good%20for%20your%20health%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fis-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%20good%20for%20your%20health%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fis-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video&media=>
Is Pokémon Go good for your health? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/12/is-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video>
I should be a sitting duck for the Pokémon Company, the game’s maker (a third 
of it is owned by Nintendo, shares in which have risenmore than 100% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/nintendo-market-value-doubles-on-pokemon-go-mania>
 since the game’s release). I was at school in the 00s during peakPokémon 
popularity. Cards were swapped in the playground. We watched the cartoon 
version on the TV. There was evenDigimon 
<http://digimon.wikia.com/wiki/Digimon_Wiki>, which was a crap competitor to 
Pokémon. (We were, as kids are wont to be, very mean towards Digimon. Digimon 
was Sindy.Digimon was the tick on your trainers going in the wrong direction.) 
But, reader, I am not a natural anime nerd or collector and I grew out of 
gaming. AsPokémon faded, I forgot it ever existed. Then, boom: 2016 and the 
spinning red and white ball is lobbed back into public consciousness.

Dismissive attitudes towards the game, including mine, are partly down to the 
fact we disparage that which we don’t understand. But players with the spatial 
awareness of a rucksack wearer on the underground haven’t helped. I’ve also 
been aghast at developer Niantic’s myopia. It seems obvious that certain 
locations should have been excluded from gameplay. Both the United States 
Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington and Arlington National Cemetery in 
Virginia have had to (overly politely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-us-holocaust-museum-asks-players-to-stay-away>
, in my view) ask gamers to desist. It seems obvious, too, that people would 
use the game for unscrupulous means. Kids have beenrobbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/10/pokemon-go-armed-robbers-dead-body>
. People beaten up. On Thursday, the firstPokémon Go death was reported in 
Guatemala: an 18-year-oldshot dead <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-36854074> 
playing the game. Initial reports suggested the app tipped off the killer about 
the teen’s location.

Then there are general privacy concerns that tech consumers, with the onset of 
the sharing economy and the internet of things, are increasingly aware of. In 
Germany, aprivate case 
<http://fortune.com/2016/07/20/pokemon-go-germany-privacy/> is threatened 
against Niantic over third-party information sharing. Cut to Theresa May 
crossing out “snooper’s charter” on her to-do list. Scribbling in “mandatory
Pokémon Go”.

It is cool to point your camera at a space and see something pop up on the 
screen that isn’t there

But wait, what’s this? Reports that Pokémon Go users have found the game has a 
positive effect on theirmental health 
<http://psychcentral.com/blog/archives/2016/07/11/pokemon-go-reportedly-helping-peoples-mental-health-depression/>
, encouraging them to get out and about? The part of me that melts into Munch’s
The Scream every time tried-and-tested mental health services are cut wants to 
call bullshit on this. But another part of me thinks: great. Whatever helps 
people.

And wait again. What’s this? Reports that Pokémon Go users have found the game 
has a positive effect onphysical health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/is-pokemon-go-the-answer-to-obesity-america>
. A scientist, presumably from the University of Gillian McKeith, goes too far 
in suggesting the game might be the solution to childhood obesity but, of 
course, people walking for many miles is going to improve physical fitness. 
Players are being quoted in articles saying things like: “Man, I hadn’t got up 
from the couch since ’84. I have a drone bring me pizza. But yesterday I walked 
seven miles!”

And it is cool to point your camera at a space and see something pop up on the 
screen that isn’t there; the potential for augmented reality is genuinely 
thrilling. I must admit, too, that in the current political climate I have been 
grateful for the silliness ofPokémon Go news stories.

Next iterations of the game must do better on privacy and security settings 
(though you can’t legislate for people’s stupidity) and it really shouldn’t be 
hard to demarcate no-go areas. Whether or notPokémon Go’s popularity will last 
is a moot point, but it has yet to be released in many markets, including its 
home ofJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/pokemon-go-japan-launch-delayed-mcdonalds-sponsorship-gyms>
. Can I really argue thatmore daily users  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-becomes-global-phenomenon-as-number-of-us-users-overtakes-twitter>
than Twitter and Tinder are wrong?Pokémon, Go on then. For a bit at least.
 