
Nobody ever asks me what it felt like. They never ask what it was like to spend
three of my teenage years in secure psychiatric units 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/02/link-media-and-eating-disorders>
 for severe anorexia nervosa; how it felt to be so undernourished I could 
hardly walk; how it feels now to be able to picture the doctors’ and nurses’ 
faces more clearly than I can those of my late grandparents; how it feels to 
have spent my formative years with young women who are now, in so many cases, 
dead; how this experience changed my personality for ever. No, no one asks 
that. Instead they ask why: “Why were you anorexic? Why?”

What is the link between the media and eating disorders? | Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/02/link-media-and-eating-disorders>
Eating disorders <https://www.theguardian.com/society/eating-disorders> are 
the only mental illness that people still assume is caused by something 
identifiable and external. No sensible person would ask anyone why they became 
schizophrenic, why they suffer from clinical depression. But eating disorders 
are different, and this is partly because of the behaviour of those who suffer 
from them. In the grip of the disorder, your world shrinks to the size of a 
pinhole: your brain fixates entirely on weight, calories; and, if you’re 
underweight, being so cold it feels like you have icicles for bones.

Asking a person with an eating disorder why they are behaving like that is not 
going to elicit a sensible answer, any more than asking an alcoholic why he or 
she drinks. There will be talk of wanting to be thin like this model, pretty 
like that friend, slim enough to wear nice clothes. But none of these reasons 
are why the person developed an eating disorder.

This, however, has yet to be understood by an extraordinary number of people. 
It was announced this week that France will probably pass a billbanning models 
under a certain body mass index from appearing in fashion shows and shoots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/17/france-likely-to-ban-fashion-models-deemed-to-be-too-thin>
. News stories like this – and they crop up almost annually – always get an 
enormous amount of coverage because they allow newspapers to run photos of 
fashion models, an opportunity no media outlet ever passes up.

Yesterday the Times kept this story 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/world/europe/article4384124.ece> – with 
accompanying requisite photo of a pretty, thin model – on the front of its 
website all day, which is quite some play for a story about a law that may 
happen in a foreign country, and has yet to be shown to have any efficacy. 
Truly, it’s only the fashion industry that promotes images of skinny women, 
right?

France likely to ban fashion models deemed to be too thin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/17/france-likely-to-ban-fashion-models-deemed-to-be-too-thin>
Laws similar to the French one have already been passed in a handful 
countries, includingItaly, which announced its ban on skinny models back in 2006
 <http://www.cbsnews.com/news/italy-bans-too-thin-models/>. Speaking as someone 
who covered the fashion shows in Milan for this paper between 2002 and 2008, 
some of the most painfully thin models I ever saw were on Milan’s catwalks, and 
that did not change after 2006.

The fashion world’s expectations about how models should look is completely 
sick, andlaws like this, if they were ever actually enforced 
<http://jezebel.com/5574448/australia-kinda-cracks-down-on-skinny-models-tom-ford-making-another-movie>
, are long overdue for the sake of models themselves. But to suggest that this 
will have any impact on the rates of eating disorders is tantamount to saying 
that eating disorders are essentially about silly women wanting to look like 
models, which is precisely the kind of condescension I long ago learned to 
expect from people when they talk about a mental illness that largely affects 
women and girls.

That looking at photos of skinny models makes a lot of girls and women feel 
bad about themselves is not in doubt; and for that reason, again, these 
well-intended laws are perfectly welcome. But can we please make the overdue 
distinction between women suffering from body image issues andactual eating 
disorders, which are a specific mental illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/02/child-anorexia-size-zero>
?

Social issues do come into play with eating disorders: when, as a young woman, 
you realise how much value society places on your body, it makes sense to use 
that as the instrument with which to express your unhappiness. But believe me, 
it’s not just fashion that sends women this message, and it’s not even about 
thinness. It’s about the way women are still valued primarily by their physical 
appearance. Which brings me to my next point.

At the far more stupid end of the spectrum, a certain Dr Aric Sigman – whom 
readers of a certain vintage will remember asthe agony uncle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iXn57OTn7NY> on the kids’ TV show Live & 
Kicking <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/feb/18/pressandpublishing.bbc> 
– gave a speech at a teachers’ conference in London this week, in which he 
suggested thatthe real key to fighting eating disorders among women 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/11477512/Schoolboys-should-tell-girls-their-idea-of-a-perfect-woman-says-expert.html>
 is – can you guess? Can you? – men. “Men are an untapped army … Knowing what 
men think can serve as an antidote to the prevailing assumptions that feed body 
dissatisfaction,”Dr Sigman claimed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/31942988>, 
sounding thrillingly as though he was reading Alan Partridge’s take on eating 
disorders.

It turns out, Dr Sigman exclusively revealed, that men like female curves. 
This changes everything, ladies. “Men are an untapped army who need to become 
aggressively vocal,” he concluded. Because if there’s one thing women around 
the world have been lacking, it’s men telling them exactly what they find 
attractive in a lady.

Dr Sigman ignores the obvious possibility that behind eating disorders in 
women is a fear of being sexualised

Dr Sigman – who is, amazingly, described as “a leading educational 
psychologist” – seems not to have considered the perfectly obvious possibility 
that one potential factor behind eating disorders in women, especially 
anorexia, is a fear of being sexualised, which is just one reason why it tends 
to take root during puberty. If men had told me when I was starting to get ill 
at the age of 13 that they really dug womanly hips, I would have begged to be 
locked up in a psychiatric ward for life out of sheer terror.

So why did I stop eating? Because I was unhappy. Because I didn’t know how to 
express it vocally. Because I didn’t understand I was allowed to respond to my 
own needs. Because I was scared of growing up. The specific causes of eating 
disorders are varied, but those factors are pretty common.

If experts really want to help those with eating disorders, they should look 
at why so many people are so unhappy; they should teach schoolkids how to talk 
about their feelings without resorting to masochism; they should look at why so 
many girls and women feel they ought to put themselves last; and, most of all, 
they should look at the causes of self-loathing as opposed to the 
manifestations of it.

But as even those without eating disorders know, it’s hard to deal with 
complicated issues – far easier just to obsess about fashion models.
 