
This week, my Facebook news feed has been really hard to take. Ever since the 
death of 49 people at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando, my gay brethren have 
reacted with sadness, anger and compassion. I’ve seen friends talk about their 
struggles with being gay in religious families, memes sharing memories of first 
visits to gay bars, and countless outpourings of emotion.


But among all these expressions of mourning there has been one constant: 
Anderson Cooper. Every day since Sunday’s tragedy, people have shared stories, 
videos and comments about the gay anchor’s coverage of the massacre, and how 
powerful his interventions have been. First, it was histearing up while reading 
the names of the victims 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/06/13/us/anderson-cooper-reads-orlando-shooting-victims-names/>
. Then, it washis confrontational interview 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/us/2016/06/14/florida-attorney-general-bondi-orlando-shooting-nr.cnn>
 with Florida’s anti-gay attorney general, Pam Bondi. Finally, it washis 
response to Bondi 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/us/2016/06/15/florida-ag-bondi-fires-back-anderson-cooper-response-ac.cnn>
 claiming she either misunderstood him or was lying in an interview she gave to 
a radio show that was critical of his interview tactics. Each time, people 
cheered his coverage, as if it was one of the few victories of this especially 
dark time for the gay community.

Cooper has proven himself to be the public face of the Pulse shooting, and I 
believe it is right that a gay man could hold this position. In fact, I don’t 
think he could have done such a good job if he hadn’t been out. Which is why 
being proud of Cooper is a little bit strange for me.

Years ago, when I was a journalist at Gawker, Cooper, then living in a glass 
closet, was my bête noir. In 2009, I wrote a story titledAnderson Cooper Is a 
Giant Homosexual and Everyone Knows It 
<http://gawker.com/5392766/anderson-cooper-is-a-giant-homosexual-and-everyone-knows-it>
. I was not the first person to out Cooper but I was very persistent, regularly 
posting stories pleading with him to come out and show America that there is 
nothing shameful about being gay.

I was not the first person to out Cooper but I was persistent, regularly 
posting stories pleading with him to come out

Cooper’s rationale for keeping his sexual orientation concealed was that he 
didn’t want his personal life interfering with his journalistic integrity. In 
2005,he told New York magazine 
<http://nymag.com/nymetro/news/features/14301/index3.html>: “The whole thing 
about being a reporter is that you’re supposed to be an observer and to be able 
to adapt with any group you’re in, and I don’t want to do anything that 
threatens that.”

Instead of taking his outing into his own hands, he left it to journalists. 
Eventually, after much criticism, Cooper came out himself in a letter to gay 
journalist Andrew Sullivan, saying: “It’s become clear to me that by remaining 
silent on certain aspects of my personal life for so long, I have given some 
the mistaken impression that I am trying to hide something – something that 
makes me uncomfortable, ashamed or even afraid. This is distressing because it 
is simply not true.”

In the same letter, Cooper insisted that he was “not an activist” – as if he 
was afraid that being known as gay would hurt his integrity, that he would be 
expected to don a cape made of rainbows.

In fact it has proven the opposite. Watching Cooper well up while reading the 
names of the Orlando victims is especially powerful because viewers know that 
the tragedy feels personal for him, as it is for all gay Americans. Watching 
Cooper stand up to Bondi is even more meaningful because not only is she being 
forced to answer for her anti-gay speech in the past, but she’s being held 
accountable for it by a gay man. His very existence, standing there in front of 
her in one of his dozens of tight black polo shirts, disproves her claim that 
gay people can do “harm”.

His coverage of Orlando proves that the perceived threat to his journalism 
before coming out was only in his imagination

The impact of his coverage proves that the perceived threat to his journalism 
before coming out was a figment of his imagination. The New York Timesrecently 
wrote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/16/us/anderson-cooper-covering-orlando-shooting-with-touch-of-empathy.html?_r=0>
: “Mr Cooper, who is gay, has seemed to embrace an advocacy role rarely seen 
among top network anchors, blending on-the-ground reporting with a distinctly 
personal and empathetic touch.”

Contrary to what many closeted gay people think, being more personal won’t 
hurt your career, especially in a job like journalism — it will only help it.

Cooper is obviously an excellent journalist in his own right, but now that he 
can be fully himself in front of the camera, acknowledging that this event has 
an especially deep impact on him, makes him even better. Cooper might have come 
out eventually if everyone agreed to keep his secret, but who knows how long it 
might have taken had the media not sped up the process.

I’ve always been a proponent of outing public figures, especially those that 
live in a so-called glass closet, where many people know that they’re gay but 
they won’t acknowledge it publicly. I think it’s a disservice to gay people and 
leads to negative attitudes toward homosexuality within our culture – something 
that mighthave played a part in the Pulse shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/14/orlando-shooter-omar-mateen-was-a-regular-at-nightclub>
.

Nick Denton, the owner of Gawker, feels the same way, or at least did when I 
worked for him at Gawker. He encouraged outing not only Cooper but any public 
figure. This is especially ironic now sinceGawker Media filed bankruptcy 
protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/10/gawker-media-bankruptcy-auction-hulk-hogan-lawsuit>
 afterlosing a $115m lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/19/hulk-hogan-lawsuit-win-takedown-gawker>
 for posting snippets of a sex tape made by professional wrestler Hulk Hogan. A 
substantial part of Hogan’s legal bills werepaid by gay billionaire Peter Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/26/paypal-co-founder-peter-thiel-admits-bankrolling-hulk-hogan-gawker-lawsuit>
, who carries a grudge against Gawker because they outed him once upon a time.

Maybe Thiel can learn something from this (and maybe put away his checkbook). 
Being outed has proven to be a boon for Cooper as well as Apple CEO Tim Cook, 
whom Gawkeralso outed 
<http://gawker.com/5736917/meet-apples-new-boss-the-most-powerful-gay-man-in-silicon-valley>
. Cookgave his own tribute 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/cnnmoney/2016/06/13/tim-cook-orlando-tragedy-cnnmoney.cnn>
 to the victims in Orlando this week. That out leaders in tech and media are 
making these statements is not only powerful to unify the gay community after 
being ripped apart by senseless violence, but also for the acceptance of gay 
people in every corner of life.

Before outing him, seeing Anderson Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anderson-cooper> in my Facebook feed used to 
fill me with rage. This week, seeing him doing his job made me happy. Happy to 
see a gay man doing some good in this world.
 