
Looking at Raqib Shaw’s painting is like entering a Wunderkammer – it is 
gloriously opulent, intricate and highly crafted, full of miniscule detail and 
delirious colours. Shaw is a conjuror of magical worlds, whose visual language 
of exotic flora and fauna, and human-animal hybrids is derived from the 
mythologies and artefacts of his native Kashmir.

Shaw left India in 1998 to study art in London and has lived here since. He 
developed a personal and unique style that fuses an eclectic spectrum of 
iconographic motifs from Eastern and Western sources, ranging from English 
Romanticism to Old Master paintings, medieval illuminated manuscripts and 
Persian miniatures to the art and literature of Kashmir and India.

For his new works painted especially for White Cube at Glyndebourne Shaw, a 
passionate opera fan, has taken inspiration from two operas staged at this 
year’s Festival: Wagner’s Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg and Britten’s A 
Midsummer Night’s Dream. In Self Portrait as Bottom (A Midsummer Night’s Dream) 
(2016), (pictured) a lavish nocturnal picnic feast laid out by the side of 
Glyndebourne’s lake features the eponymous hero in a richly embroidered gold 
kimono, at the moment when a darkly erotic fairy drips the love potion into his 
proffered champagne glass. The scene is a perfect trigger for Shaw’s passion 
for decorative details - the woven cranes and chrysanthemums of the kimono, the 
glittering patterns of flowers, mushrooms and pomegranates spread across the 
ground like a carpet. In Shaw’s interpretation the moonlit Midsummer Night 
becomes a transgressive paradise whose bucolic Dionysian feast is infested with 
snakes and cavorting horned fairies. A far cry from their Victorian cousins, 
these fairies are inspired by the famous wrestling scene in Ken Russell’s film 
Women in Love as well as by paintings of Rubens and Carracci.

No illustration of Shaw’s work can compare with the almost hallucinatory 
impact of experiencing the paintings in the flesh. Every object and its parts 
are outlined in embossed gold, meticulously and painstakingly, similar to 
medieval cloisonné techniques. The enclosed areas are then coloured in with 
enamel paint, using porcupine quills. The result is a surface as bright and 
sparkling as a jewel, an effect further enhanced by appliqued shards of 
glistening crystals. Thus Raqib Shaw illuminates, literally and metaphorically, 
an exuberent phantasmagorical world, far from the everyday.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

Raqib Shaw’s paintings can be viewed at White Cube at Glyndebourne 
<http://whitecube.com/exhibitions/raqib_shaw_glyndebourne_2015/> until 28 
August 2016 and at White Cube Bermondsey from 13 July to 11 September 2016.

 