
 Why: It looks exactly like you'd hope - it has all these ridiculous, 
odd-shaped rocks sticking up in the air, mountains that are funny shapes and 
verdant valley floors. I first went there about two years ago, and then I liked 
it so much I went back again a year ago. We went into a bar and started playing 
pool and ended up playing with the bar owner. He was so nice and we got on so 
well, we ended up staying in his house which was great - a round house with a 
hot tub. It was weird because in America it's quite hard to find people to get 
on with - people are either incredibly straight, or they're a heroin addict. 
It's hard to find people in between.

 The best thing: The scenery and the people. This one bar has live rock, which 
sounds terrible, but because it's close to LA you get great bands. And, of 
course, you can easily go to Las Vegas and Colorado.

 A perfect day: Get up, go and have coffee in this place called the Happy 
Bean. Then I'd wander off into the Zion Valley itself and walk around for a 
bit. If I was feeling really energetic, I'd hire a mountain bike and go out for 
a ride. In the evening, I'd play pool and get drunk.

 My advice: Go off-season and talk to people. If you go in the winter, you can 
go to the Grand Canyon and there's no one there. Hire a car - a convertible. 
There's no point banging about in a hard top car. Get a convertible, put a 
woolly hat on and go in January.

 Getting there: A seven-night fly-drive to Los Angeles with British Airways 
Holidays (0870 2424243) costs from £440 per person (inclusive of taxes) for 
departures until April 30 based on two sharing, including return scheduled 
flights from Heathrow, hire of a convertible for the duration and free UK 
connecting flights from most regional airports.

 Miranda Sawyer's book, Park and Ride, is published by Abacus, £6.99, and is 
out now.
 