
Since last Wednesday morning I've been battling to prove who I am. The first 
sign of trouble ahead came from my brother, who emailed to ask about my spying 
activities, and sent me a link to the story (I was on holiday in Cornwall at 
the time). Alongside his message I was surprised to see dozens ofFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> friend requests from people I 
had never heard of, often with Russian surnames.

I vetted them carefully. The profile pictures mostly belonged to sleazy men 
with foreign surnames but also included several women, some babies, a line 
drawing of a cowboy on a horse and even a princess. Some are braver than others 
and have sent messages. Kadir asks: "Want to meet you accept my bid you fix". 
While Patrick writes: "I want you to know that u have a lovely and welcoming 
smile. I love women who always put on smiles just like yours . . . you can 
visit my page and see to know more about me you will love it . . . Peace to 
you."

Anna Chapman the alleged spy has red hair; mine is brown. She is a 28-year-old 
diplomat's daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/30/anna-chapman-russian-spy-ring> 
who posts raunchy photos on her Facebook profile and claims that her online 
real estate firm is worth $2m. Our lives couldn't be more different. I'm a 
38-year-old mother of two who gave birth less than six weeks ago. My nights are 
sleepless due to breastfeeding rather than partying with Philip Green at 
Annabel's.

But it's not just strangers – 73 and counting – who are contacting me. Friends 
and former colleagues are delighting in my case of mistaken identity. I have 
even been the subject of a group email called "OMGAnna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman> – Russian spy" which features 
the line: "the new baby thing is just a cover".

But I'd be lying if I said I wasn't enjoying the attention. Pretending to be a 
James Bond glamourpuss, in however small a way, has shifted my focus from 
changing nappies. Living a double life has its attractions.
 