
Sometimes, Ian McEwan <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianmcewan> wonders if 
he will be shot. He pictures the scene at a public book signing. “Someone’s 
going to come up, especially in the States, shooting at my chest, you know. It 
would be quite easy. It has often crossed my mind, especially after there’s 
been some kind of mass shooting.”

Has he ever had cause for alarm? “Occasionally someone comes towards me and I 
think, uh-oh, where’s the guard? Some glowering, frowning guy who’s somewhat 
overweight shambles up to the table, and you think, yes, he’s got something on 
his mind.” And? He smiles. “And he turns out to be utterly charming. Yes, so I 
always get those wrong.”

McEwan’s other worry about doing a book tour is that he will end up repeating 
himself. “I start out all right. But then you get a bit tired of your own 
voice. And then this feeling begins to creep in. You begin to feel a bit like a 
sort of brush salesman of old, selling encyclopedias or double glazing. It’s a 
sort of feeling of repeating yourself, and disliking yourself for it. It’s a 
certain kind of self-loathing.”

I hadn’t imagined him prone to self-loathing. “I’m not generally,” he agrees, 
and begins to chuckle. “We made up a medical syndrome, [my wife] Annalena and 
I, for people who are too bumptious and fond of themselves. It was called 
Self-loathing Deficiency Complex.”

Nutshell <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/429145/> is 
McEwan’s 17th book, in a career that is practically a publishing industry all 
of its own. He is the leading light today in a circle of friends (Martin Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis>, Salman Rushdie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/salmanrushdie>, the late Christopher Hitchens
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/christopher-hitchens>) whose early promise 
in the 1970s established their reputation as Britain’s golden generation of 
writers. To many fans they remain, to this day, literary royalty. To their 
critics they became a smug, misogynistic clique with a bad case, you might say, 
of Self-loathing Deficiency Complex.

I’d wondered which version I would find. The fastidious figure I meet in a 
discreet London hotel is polite and rather formal at first, but soon relaxes 
into gentle self-deprecation, and is the only person I have ever known to 
interrupt one of his own anecdotes to ask, “Is this interesting?” There is no 
particular need for him to keep mentioning Annalena, but he does, and each time 
makes me like him more. At one point he observes, “Without women readers the 
novel would be dead,” but it is perfectly obvious that economic self-interest 
is not why he has no problem with women. If McEwan has a prejudice against 
anyone, I think it may be against men – or, rather, a certain type of man. The 
first glimpse comes in an anecdote he tells with evident pleasure, about what 
happened when he once tried to give away unwanted books to strangers in a park.

“The women were all, ‘Oh lovely, thank you.’ And the men were,” he adopts a 
lumpen cockney accent, ‘Nah, you’re all right, mate. Nah, sorry mate, nah.’” He 
laughs in wonderment. “Not one book.”

More than one of McEwan’s earlier novels features an uneducated but 
dangerously virile man (Tarpin inSolar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/mar/14/solar-ian-mcewan>, Jed Parry in 
Enduring Love <https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/sep/07/fiction.reviews>
)who imperils the comfortable middle-class world of an intellectually highbrow 
fellow. In his new book – a short, crisp work of 199 pages – we meet a 
sweet-natured, romantically minded but fatally passive poetry publisher called 
John, married to a beautiful young wife called Trudy, who is heavily pregnant 
with his child and having an affair with his boorishly unsophisticated but 
sexually irresistible brother Claude. The adulterous pair conspire to murder 
John and inherit the £7m marital home, in a plot that borrows heavily from 
Hamlet and Macbeth – save for one radical innovation. The story is narrated by 
the foetus inside Trudy’s womb.

He apologised for remarks about trans people. 'I might as well have said, 
‘Hitler was right’, for the storm I got into'

To McEwan’s knowledge, no story has ever been written from the perspective of 
a foetus before. “And yet it seemed obvious once I started it.” The idea came 
to him one day from nowhere, while he was daydreaming. “Suddenly there appeared 
before me the opening sentence of the novel, which I don’t think I’ve changed, 
apart from adding ‘So’ in front of it: ‘So, here I am upside down in a woman.’ 
I thought, who on Earth would say such a thing? Then I immediately thought it 
would be a lovely rhetorical challenge to write a novel from the point of view 
of a foetus. The idea struck me as so silly that I just couldn’t resist it.”

The only person he could think of who was more helpless than a foetus was 
Hamlet (“able to think a lot, but trapped”) which gave McEwan his plot. He 
solved the problem of how a foetus could know enough about the outside world to 
make sense of what he overheard by making Trudy an avid listener to Radio 4 and 
podcasts. “But really, once you start asking one question, you think, well how 
did he get all this grammar? Who’s he talking to? Where’s his computer?” McEwan 
breaks off into laughter.

“I said to Annalena, ‘I might have to go abroad when this is published, far 
away.’ I just thought, I’m going to get such a kicking for this. But, the more 
I thought that, the more I enjoyed it. I was committed from the first sentence. 
I just had so much fun. I’ve written novel after novel rooted in a shared and 
plausible world. I have researched novels, and I’m very committed to a form of 
social realism, so this was like a holiday of the senses. I didn’t have to 
research a thing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F954f07f34ad6157bb19139bc92a67d7a550a1f80%2F322_479_3028_3784%2F3028.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F954f07f34ad6157bb19139bc92a67d7a550a1f80%2F322_479_3028_3784%2F3028.jpg>
 McEwan in Cambridge in 1980. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
The research McEwan undertakes is legendary. He spent two years shadowing a 
neurosurgeon for the novel Saturday, and had theCentre for Quantum Computation 
at the University of Cambridge <http://www.qi.damtp.cam.ac.uk/> check his 
physics in Solar. In fact, the novelist is so famous for his research that 
everyone always assumes he is gathering material, “even when I’m just having 
dinner”, and are “crushed and disappointed” to be told he isn’t, so these days 
he finds it easier just to say he is. Personally, I find the research 
distractingly clunky, and feel Nutshell is all the better for its absence. But 
I’m charmed to learn that he keeps an archive of all the letters readers write, 
alerting him pedantically to some obscure error or other… “Oh yes, I love 
that.” He always writes back and thanks them, and corrects the mistake in 
future editions. When I suggest he won’t be getting any letters like that about 
Nutshell, he looks doubtful. “Oh yes, I may get a letter from someone saying, 
‘Excuse me, those foetuses can’t say a word.’”

McEwan’s work is a staple fixture of the English A-level syllabus, but 
“Nutshell won’t make it,” he grins, “because all those speculations from my 
narrator about what it means to have your father’s rival’s penis inches from 
your face.” If students were asked for an explanation of what the novel is 
about, however, what would it be? “You mean is there a hidden message in there 
for us? Well, I hope it’s about the communication of pleasure, which is not 
sufficiently discussed, I think, nor sufficiently central to the way we talk 
about books.” I assume he is making some complicated subtextual reference, 
until he explains that the only real point of this book is to bring pleasure to 
its reader. “My best hope for it would be that. That’s its key.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b5d508ea3247114823b6b148825fa4edb9889f1%2F674_156_3784_4730%2F3784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b5d508ea3247114823b6b148825fa4edb9889f1%2F674_156_3784_4730%2F3784.jpg>
 Photograph: Kate Peters for the Guardian 
I had flattered myself that I’d found its purpose buried in a chapter towards 
the end, when Trudy rids herself of the disagreeable sensation of guilt by 
deciding that as she never really meant to do anything bad, that meant that she 
hadn’t, and therefore everything must logically be Claude’s fault. This leads 
into a dissertation on the contemporary trend for any dimension of identity – 
race, gender – to be reclassified as a matter of personal choice, determined 
not by objective facts but an individual’s feelings. From there the chapter 
goes on to marvel at university campuses where “trigger warnings” must be 
issued to protect students from any information they might conceivably find 
distressing, and any speaker wishing to express an opinion its audience might 
not share must be no-platformed. From all this, I infer that Nutshell is really 
an allegorical indictment of our post-factual age, in which feelings matter 
more than the truth.

I’m rather impressed by McEwan’s nerve, given all the trouble he got into 
earlier this year when he told an audience, “Call me old-fashioned, but most 
people with a penis are men.” The transgender community erupted in fury, and 
McEwan had to issue a public apology. “I might as well have said, ‘Hitler was 
right’, for the storm I got into,” he remarks ruefully.

This may or may not explain why, in Nutshell, “I have my foetus say how very 
disappointing [that] there are only two options here, pink or blue as it were.” 
But McEwan takes care to explain that he has no problem with gender 
reassignment. “What does it matter to me if people’s identity suddenly finds 
new routes to express itself? Where I get a little critical of it is where 
selfhood becomes all of your politics, in a world in which we are more troubled 
than at any point I can remember in my adult life.”

Do identity politics look like decadent narcissism to him? “It feels like 
that, coming to the university aspect of it. These children have grown up in an 
era of peace and plenty, and nothing much to worry about, so into that space 
comes this sort of resurgence that the campus politics is all about you, not 
about income inequality, nuclear weapons, climate change, all the other things 
you think students might address, the fate of your fellow humans, migrants 
drowning at sea. All of those things that might concern the young are lost to a 
wish for authority to bless them,” he says, “rather than to challenge 
authority.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40d16f2d436a215ae3fb0560105a8b1d0c189640%2F60_65_839_503%2F839.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40d16f2d436a215ae3fb0560105a8b1d0c189640%2F60_65_839_503%2F839.jpg>
 McEwan with his wife Annalena McAfee. Photograph: courtesy Ian McEwan 
There is another possible interpretation of Nutshell, one I venture somewhat 
tentatively. In 2002McEwan discovered that he had an older brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/jan/17/books.booksnews>, born out of 
wedlock when his parents had a wartime affair while his mother was married to 
someone else, and given up for adoption. Their mother’s husband subsequently 
died in battle, McEwan’s parents married, and by the time McEwan met his 
brother, a bricklayer, their father had died and their mother was in the late 
stages of dementia. Has McEwan anticipated, I ask, that some people may see 
parallels between McEwan and Nutshell’s cultured poet, John, and wonder if 
there is anything of McEwan’s brother, David, in Claude – who covets the woman 
and the wealth which is rightfully John’s.

“I hadn’t thought of that.” McEwan looks surprised, and considers it in 
silence. “I mean, I can’t go anywhere with that. It never crossed my mind, and 
it would be quite a perverse reading, I think.” Fearing he will take offence, I 
apologise for the impertinence of the question, before asking if his mother’s 
estate was shared with David, but he doesn’t appear to mind at all. “Yes, yes, 
but there was hardly any estate.”

Prior to David’s appearance, McEwan’s personal life had been broadly 
unexceptional. The apparently only child of a not very happily married Scottish 
sergeant major and English housewife, he spent his early childhood in east Asia 
and north Africa, and his adolescence at a state boarding grammar school. After 
studying English at Sussex University he became an early graduate of Malcolm 
Bradbury’screative writing course 
<https://www.uea.ac.uk/literature/creative-writing> at the University of East 
Anglia, where he met his first wife, Penny Allen. The couple lived in London 
and had two sons, but divorced in 1995; unusually for the time, the sons stayed 
with their father, and two years later he marriedAnnalena McAfee 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Annalena_McAfee>, then a Financial Times arts 
journalist he met when she came to interview him. They split their time between 
a Bloomsbury flat and a country home in Gloucestershire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5833feb5056003dca7d1e94a7f3a955ed8b02534%2F162_13_2670_1602%2F2670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5833feb5056003dca7d1e94a7f3a955ed8b02534%2F162_13_2670_1602%2F2670.jpg>
 McEwan with his brother David; Ian didn’t know he existed until 2002. 
Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
I’m curious to know if he feels a sense of fraternal connection with his 
unexpected brother.

“I do, but it’s a bit abstract when you haven’t grown up together. I spoke to 
him yesterday and we had a long chat on the phone.” He pauses for a moment to 
think. “Well, I wouldn’t be doing this with another bricklayer from 
Wallingford.”

Which brings us to the aspect of McEwan’s work some readers, myself included, 
find troubling. The uneducated men of his novels often portray a caricature of 
menacing masculinity – not unlike, in fact, the “frowning, glowering, somewhat 
overweight” gunman he dreads appearing in a book signing queue to shoot him. 
The contempt and fear with which he can seem to regard men less educated than 
himself – men who say “Nah, mate” when offered a free book – makes me wonder 
how many he actually knows.

I don't care about sales. The dopamine moment is finishing the novels.

“Fewer and fewer. Like, I knew so few people who wanted to leave the EU. I 
just love ideas and I love reading books and I live in a world of constant 
curiosity about ideas, so my characters tend to be people who are like that on 
the whole. Not all characters, but on the whole that’s what I am. And I think 
that you just have to pursue your interests. My interests are generally having 
articulate characters, because I can explore the things that I’m interested in, 
that’s all.”

Does he ever worry that he comes across as a snob?

“Well. There’s always this word ‘elitism’. I think that elitism means having 
read some books, which I can’t possibly see as elitism… this is one of life’s 
pleasures. I don’t go to football matches. People I know do get enormous 
pleasure from them; I wouldn’t think of them as elitists. We seek our pleasures 
in accordance with our personalities and backgrounds. I came from a very 
unlettered home, which meant that my adolescence – fortunately, I think, as I 
look back on this now – was about all the things the friends I then got to know 
at university couldn’t bear. Their mum played the harpsichord, or their dad was 
a well-known philosopher. I was running towards these harpsichords. They for me 
were the light, so I haven’t really changed from that, so there are some 
advantages in not having a book-filled, classical music-filled home which you 
have to rebel against. So my rebellion was to go to all these new places where 
no one in my family ever trod, and I haven’t really stopped.” His parents had 
been working class, as are all of his aunts and uncles, “But I probably don’t 
know them well enough to write novels about them. I could do it, but what it’s 
like to be a manual labourer just doesn’t interest me enough. That’s the 
problem.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4119fdadd1323ddf6d6c3a278546ea15a40dc4dc%2F85_117_3772_2264%2F3772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20going%20to%20get%20such%20a%20kicking%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fian-mcewan-author-nutshell-going-get-kicking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4119fdadd1323ddf6d6c3a278546ea15a40dc4dc%2F85_117_3772_2264%2F3772.jpg>
 James McAvoy and Keira Knightley in Joe Wright’s film adaptation of Atonement. 
Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
He expects reviews of Nutshell to be “wildly varied”, but says he’s so used to 
no critical consensus that he no longer reads reviews. Annalena provides edited 
summaries instead, but the wild divergence of opinion can be “hilarious”. 
Solar, for example, enjoyed “fairly good” reviews in the UK, but “In the States 
it was disastrous. It was just unbelievable. I remember sitting on the edge of 
a hotel bed with Annalena, and she said, ‘Well, I advise you not to read the 
Boston Globe, or the New York Times, or the Washington Post. And don’t go 
anywhere near the Chicago Tribune, and stay away from the LA Times and the San 
Francisco Chronicle’.” The only newspaper she advised him to read, he laughs, 
was theModesto Bee <http://www.modbee.com/>. Modesto is a small city in central 
California.

I’m not entirely convinced by McEwan’s tendency to declare any slight 
“hilarious”. For example, “I saw this phrase and had to turn my head away, but 
again it made me smile. Some troll-like person on The Spectator wrote thatThe 
Children Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/11/the-children-act-ian-mcewan-review-novel>
 was ‘unforgivably bad’. When I told Julian Barnes, he fell about laughing. I 
mean, how bad can I get?”

Moments later he offers a more convincing response. “‘Unforgivably bad?’ Well, 
fuck you.”

If not critical acclaim, for what then does he now write? “Ah, the dopamine 
moment is finishing them. It’s, you know, when you’re thinking you’ve got it to 
where you wanted it to be.” What about sales? “No. I don’t care about sales. I 
mean, it’s nice to have them. I wouldn’t go looking for low sales, but no.” His 
books still earn back their advance, but nowadays this can take five to 10 
years, and he doesn’t mind if they don’t. “I don’t think The Innocent did, 
actually… ever.” He always knows a chair of an event has consulted Wikipedia 
when he is introduced with “the same sentences I hear all the time, remarking 
on my colossal sales. And it’s just not the case. That’s not it.” It only says 
so on Wikipedia, he assumes, because, “I think they’re talking about Atonement 
[which was adapted byJoe Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/feb/10/oscars2008.baftas2008> into an 
Oscar-winning film <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0783233/> in 2007]. Which was a 
dreamy experience. But I’ve never had it again since on anything like that 
scale.” Does he think he may yet write his best novel? He gives a wan smile. 
“That’s a really good question, because recognising the moment when you won’t 
is really difficult, and sad. There’s that often-used trope, ‘His best work is 
behind him.’” He cites it with a sadness that makes me wonder if it haunts him.

“Yes. Inevitably, you’re going to get less word rich, less thought rich. 
You’re not as clever as you were when you were 38.” But he hopes the trope 
doesn’t yet apply to him. “I just don’t know when I reach that point. I mean, 
at some point you’re going to reach it. Even if your best novel was your last 
one, you don’t know of course it’s your last one.”

Would he stop writing if he did? “That’s what I wonder about. It’s a bit like 
politicians; it always ends in tears. They never know when to get out.” Would 
he? “Well if I was Federer now, I’d stop.” He pauses. “It’s a question I can’t 
answer, but it’s painful to contemplate that you reach that moment when it’s 
just one long decline.” How would he know when he had? “Exactly. I don’t know 
how I’d know.”

I wonder if, at 68, he feels his generation of writers fulfilled their golden 
promise. The predictions of dazzling genius were never, he points out, made by 
them, least of all by himself. “But I think that, if you were to stack up all 
the novels, I think it’s a really substantial volume of work. Yes. But we made 
no claims. And we’re not dead yet.”

• This article was amended on 27 August 2016. Ian McEwan mistakenly said 
Modesto was a little town in southern California. This has been corrected.

• Nutshell is published next week by Jonathan Cape at £15.99. To order a copy 
for £13.11, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/nutshell.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846.
 