
We all know the independence of the legal profession from government is 
robust, right?

Last summer I was speaking to Carolyn Lamm, the then president of the American 
Bar Association <http://www.americanbar.org/aba.html>, about alternative 
business structures.

When I asked if we had covered all of her concerns, she surprised me by 
raising the independence issue.

She highlighted worries over the fact that a government body – which is how the
Legal Services Board <http://www.legalservicesboard.org.uk/> (LSB) is seen – 
has such power over the legal profession. "Part of the issues we're analysing 
is whether lawyers can truly maintain their independence and objectivity where 
there's this kind of oversight board," she said.

Such concerns have not been part of the conversation over here for some years.

The fact is that even before the LSB, the government played a significant role 
in the oversight of lawyers; in fact, the lord chancellor had much more direct 
involvement than he does now.

It is worth remembering that at heart the LSB represents the consolidation of 
oversight roles previously held by a range of others. It was more a case of 
co-regulation than true self-regulation (in the US, the courts regulate 
lawyers).

When the Legal Services bill was going through parliament in 2006-07, lawyers 
and consumer groups were both talking about independence but in very different 
ways.

As Lady Hayter – who chairs the Legal Services Consumer Panel 
<http://www.legalservicesconsumerpanel.org.uk/> – has recognised, while lawyers 
were lobbying over the LSB's and by extension the profession's independence 
from government, consumer groups had taken this for granted and focused instead 
on the independence of regulation from the profession.

But perhaps you actually cannot take such things for granted.

The issue has come back on to the agenda for three reasons: the inclusion of 
the LSB in theinfamous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/17/lord-judge-attacks-quango-plans>
 schedule 7 of the public bodies bill, which enabled its abolition by 
ministerial order alone; merging the statutory consumer panel into Citizens 
Advice (a very different beast); and shutting down the websites of the LSB, the 
panel and the legal ombudsman as part of a Whitehall-wide reduction in 
government websites, migrating them on to the Ministry of Justice's site. It 
would seem especially odd for an independent ombudsman to have a .gov web 
address.

The public bodies bill threat has now abated after the government backed down, 
but the other two are still alive.

Speaking in the Lords last week, Hayter described the order 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/lords/?id=2011-03-09a.1689.2&s=speaker%3A24973#g1732.2>
 to shut the websites by the end of this month as "a quite serious swipe" at 
the three given the importance of their and the profession's independence from 
government.

She said they had strongly protested against the direction 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/government-under-fire-for-closing-lsb-ombudsman-and-consumer-panel-websites>
 to use "an approved government website", adding: "Our three websites cost 
nothing to the public purse as they are funded by lawyers, so there is no 
public expenditure rationale for this.

"However, it raises serious constitutional issues about the independence of 
the governance of those bodies, something to which the government seems a 
little deaf."

A website address might just be symbolism, but symbolism is important, not 
least on the international stage, where the likes of Lamm have genuine 
concerns, while others use the pretext of a lack of independence of the English 
and Welsh profession as a way to keep the formidable competition that City law 
firms represent out of their jurisdictions.

And let us not forget the influence the UK has around the legal world, and the 
Commonwealth in particular, including countries where democracy is less robust.

In India, the government is planning to create a super-regulator modelled on 
the LSB, as well as a legal ombudsman to deal with complaints.

A quick glance at the snappily named draft Legal Practitioners (Regulations 
and Maintenance of Standards in Professions, Protecting the Interest of Clients 
and Promoting the Rule of Law) Act 2010 shows that it has drawn heavily on the 
Legal Services Act 2007.

I strongly suspect that in all three of these instances, the legal world has 
been caught up in much wider debates where the particular issues they raise in 
the law were not properly considered.

No one seriously expects the current political establishment to attack the 
independence of the legal profession, but undermining it – even inadvertently – 
is a dangerous path to start down.

It may seem an esoteric issue to many, but a world without lawyers independent 
from government, whatever some of thecommenters on my piece last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/mar/08/sick-miners-compensation-solicitors#start-of-comments>
 might believe, would not be a happier place.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 