
Like many fitness trends, this one began in America. Urban hiking is based on 
the idea that the city can be as exciting – and strenuous – a place to go for a 
walk as hills or mountains. It all started with stairs. In San Francisco, there 
are more than 600 outdoor stairways. One hiker plotted a seven-day, 110-mile 
route that connected them all, including 42 hills and more than 5,000ft of 
climbing. Another hiker spent six days hiking 200 miles and 300 staircases 
around Los Angeles. There are even more stairs to climb for hikers in 
Pittsburgh: 45,000 steps in 700 stairways.

Now urban hiking is coming to the UK – but don’t worry, it’s aimed at 
beginners. Anja Phoenix, a mountain leader from Cumbria, has plotted a gentle 
5km hike around Covent Garden, central London (download a map at 
regatta.com/urbanhike). I joined her to recce the route, which starts with a 
pulse-raising 193 steps up from the tube station. The trail is designed to 
reveal secret parts of the city: hidden passages, quiet courtyards and quirky 
finds, such as an old policeman’s hook in Great Newport Street and a pair of 
life-sized ears on the wall in Floral Street. It is a great way to combine 
exercise with exploration.

If nature calls “the only problem with urban hiking is you can’t have a wee in 
a bush,” says Phoenix – though at least you can nip into a cafe. She is 
plotting more routes in other UK cities but, in the meantime, you could always 
plan your own.Ramblers.org.uk <http://www.ramblers.org.uk/> has more than 2,500 
suggested hikes, including lots of city ones.Walkit.com <http://walkit.com/> is 
a handy urban route planner: simply enter your start and end points to reveal a 
route, journey time, number of calories burned and steps taken. Failing that, 
just head outside and start walking – and if you see some stairs, climb them. 
Who needs mountains?
 