
Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> in western Europe 
became significantly more sympathetic towards migrants and refugees immediately 
after the publication of photographs of the lifeless body of Alan (aka Aylan) 
Kurdi on a Turkish beach.

But within a week of the pictures of the three-year-old boy having been 
published most of the papers had reverted to their original editorial stance.

And, according to research carried out by the European Journalism Observatory 
<http://en.ejo.ch/observatory> (EJO) network, by the end of the month all were 
less positive towards migrants than at the beginning.*

The finding emerged in a detailed analysis of the press coverage in eight 
countries of the flight of Syrian refugees:How European newspapers covered the 
migration crisis 
<http://en.ejo.ch/research/research-how-europes-newspapers-reported-the-migration-crisis>
. (This posting is based on a report of the study by Caroline Lees).**

It revealed distinct national trends in how the story was reported; political 
bias in some newspapers that transcended national boundaries; and the fact that 
most papers in easternEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
and the Baltic states did not publish the photographs and barely covered the 
story.

Researchers looked at how three newspapers in each country - representing 
broadly left, right and tabloid newspapers - covered three pivotal events 
concerning migrants in September.

These events were the photographs of Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-kurdi> (2 September); the day Germany 
introduced border controls (13 September); and the EU summit aimed at agreeing 
a common European approach to the crisis (23 September).

Then they graded the coverage as positive (compassionate, sympathetic, 
humane), negative (describing migrants as economic or “illegal”, possibly 
infiltrated by terrorists, violent, “mobs”, being a “drain on society”) or 
objective (neutral factual reporting).

Newspapers in Britain - the Guardian, Daily Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph> and Daily Mail - in Germany, 
Italy and Portugal devoted considerable space to the crisis and covered it in 
more detail than elsewhere.


In Germany, Italy and Portugal positive humanitarian stories about migrants 
increased three-fold immediately after the photographs were published. In the 
UK the number of positive humanitarian stories across the three newspapers 
studied also increased, but were fewer (althoughI detected a genuine change of 
heart at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/sep/04/so-aylan-kurdis-picture-did-make-a-difference-to-the-refugee-debate>
).

But, in all four countries, the number of positive humanitarian stories had 
decreased by 12 September to nearly the level they had been before the Kurdi 
photographs.

This demonstrates, says the report, that the surge in sympathetic coverage 
after the photographs did not signify a long-term shift in media opinion, but 
appeared to be - as some analysts had suspected - a short-term emotional 
reaction to the boy’s death.

As for newspapers in eastern European and the Baltic, they devoted 
significantly less space to the crisis. Only three newspapers of the 12 studied 
in this group published the Kurdi images and some criticisedGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and the EU for being “too 
emotional” over the crisis.

None of the Latvian papers in the study published the pictures or mentioned 
the story, apart from one negative comment about children being used as a 
propaganda tool. Only oneUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> 
newspaper published the photographs.

In the British newspapers, the number of “domestic positive” articles (those 
urging the government to take in more refugees and lamenting that not enough 
was being done) increased from zero in the two days before the Kurdi 
photographs to seven in the two days after. But the situation reverted to only 
two positive stories one week later, and was back down to zero two weeks later.


Stories about the migrants as a domestic issue in Germany – the country that 
agreed to accept the highest number - were already overwhelmingly positive 
before the Kurdi photographs and remained so throughout September. However, by 
the end of the month, the number of positive articles had begun to decline in 
Germany.


Unsurprisingly, the study found that conservative newspapers across Europe 
were significantly more negative when covering the impact of migrants on their 
own countries. They were also more critical of the European Union’s response to 
the crisis.

In Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, the right-leaning Il 
Giornale was particularly negative towards the migrants in a domestic context. 
The right-leaning UK titles, the Telegraph and Mail, in company with Germany’s 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, the Czech Republic’s Mlada fronta Dnes and 
Poland’s Rzeczpospolita, also tended to be more negative in their coverage of 
the domestic consequences of the migration crisis and their government’s 
handling of it.


Again unsurprisingly, left-leaning newspapers, such as Guardian in the UK, die 
Tageszeitung (taz) in Germany and La Repubblica in Italy carried more 
sympathetic, pro-refugee coverage in general.

Analysts were surprised, however, by initial coverage in the German tabloid, 
Bild, which is often equated with the Sun in Britain.

Throughout September, despite a traditional editorial line that has stoked 
anti-migrant prejudice, it published a large number of sympathetic humanitarian 
stories.

Tina Bettels-Schwabbauer, editor of the EJO’s German site, said this prompted 
scepticism from many in the media who wondered how long Bild’s enthusiasm for 
migrants would last.

“Their scepticism was justified,” she noted “By the beginning of October, 
Bild’s headlines had reverted to reflect their more typical stance” which 
“could be one of the first hints that the tabloid is changing sides again.”

The second key event - Germany’s reintroduction of border controls - also 
provoked strongly negative reactions from some countries, but also divided 
opinion along political lines.

And an analysis of EU-related stories in the UK revealed that its papers 
carried several negative articles about the EU’s handling of the crisis after 
13 September, and of the ability of its members to solve it.


On 11/12 September, the three UK titles ran a total of only two negative and 
two positive stories about the EU and its response to the crisis. But on 14/15 
September, there were no positive stories; 12 were negative and only two were 
objective.

According to the study, coverage in the British press remained overwhelmingly 
negative towards the EU’s handling of the crisis after this date until the end 
of the month.

Notably, say the researchers, the Guardian changed from generally positive to 
generally negative coverage of the EU after 13 September. Writing about 
“disarray” in the EU, one Guardian columnist acknowledged the crisis had 
“played into the hands of the Eurosceptics”. (NB: this was an article by Hugo 
Dixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/22/eu-borders-eurosceptics-britain-refugee-crisis-europe>
, who is a freelance contributor to the Guardian, and not a regular columnist).

Elsewhere, there was a significant increase in negative stories about the EU in
Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> and the Czech Republic after 
the 13 September introduction of border controls.

Czech papers, reflecting the impact of Germany’s decision to reinstate 
controls at the Austrian border, remained overwhelmingly negative towards 
Angela Merkel and EU policies from the 13 September for the rest of the month.

German newspaper coverage remained positive towards the migrants even after 
introduction of the border controls but newspapers became more negative towards 
the EU after that date.

All German outlets published negative articles about how other EU countries 
were handling the crisis, their reluctance to collaborate and accommodate more 
migrants.

*Eight websites, all part of the EJO network, collaborated in the study. The 
researchers wereCaroline Lees, England; Roman Hajek, Czech Republic; Tina 
Bettels-Schwabbauer and Anna Carina Zappe, Germany; Philip Di Salvo, Italy; 
Adam Szynol and Michal Kuś, Poland; Ana Pinto Martinho, Portugal; Liga Ozolina, 
Latvia;Halyna Budivska, Ukraine.

Among the studied newspapers were: UK: Telegraph, Guardian, Mail; Germany: 
Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (FAZ), Bild, taz.Italy: Corriere della Sera, La 
Repubblica, Il Giornale.Poland: Gazeta Wyborcza, Rzeczpospolita, Fakt. Latvia: 
Latvijas Avīze, Diena, Vesti Segodņa. Ukraine: Den. 

**NB: The study uses the term ‘migrants’ to cover both migrants and refugees. 
FULL REPORTon the EJO site 
<http://en.ejo.ch/research/research-how-europes-newspapers-reported-the-migration-crisis>
 