
Aim

To address the conditions 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1999/ukpga_19990033_en_1> which will apply to 
persons before they come to the United Kingdom; to affect the way in which 
persons are dealt with at ports when arriving in the United Kingdom; to affect 
how they are dealt with once they are here. To contribute to genuine travellers 
being dealt with more quickly and, on the other hand, to combat illegal entry 
and strengthen powers to deal with other persons not entitled to enter or 
remain in the country. To support asylum seekers in genuine need, to regulate 
immigration advisers and grant bail to persons detained under immigration 
legislation.

Main provisions

• Reforms asylum process to ensure that most cases will be decided within six 
months.
• Replaces welfare benefits for asylum seekers with vouchers worth £35 a week 
for an adult.
• Provides accommodation on a no-choice basis around the United Kingdom.
• Introduces fines of £2,000 per illegal passenger on vehicles coming into 
Britain.
• Regulates immigration advisers. 
• Increases the number of airline liaison officers based abroad in order to 
curb the numbers of immigrants travelling to Britain on forged papers.
• Provides a new legal framework for detention of asylum seekers.
• Restricts marriage for immigration purposes.

Background

Flowing from a July 1998 government white paper entitled Fairer, Faster And 
Firmer <http://www.archive.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm40/4018/4018.htm>
 – A Modern Approach To Immigration And Asylum, the Immigration and Asylum Act 
of 1999 was designed tocompletely overhaul 
<http://www.archive.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm40/4018/chap-3.htm> the 
UK's immigration system.

The system that New Labour inherited was inefficient and overly complex, with 
many asylum claimants waiting several years before their cases were resolved. 
The new system aimed to introduce faster decision-making to resolve the backlog 
of cases.

The bill entered parliament at a time in which the number of people claiming 
asylum in the UK wasrapidly rising 
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/rds/pdfs/hosb1700.pdf> and the Conservatives were 
pressing Labour with accusations that Britain was a "soft touch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/1999/aug/30/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices>
" for "bogus" asylum seekers.

The government hoped the act would stem the rising number of asylum 
applications by discouraging economic migrants from abusing the system. First, 
asylum applicants were barred from accessing all benefits, instead being issued 
with food vouchers. Second, asylum seekers were "dispersed 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/551880.stm>", to reduce the concentration of 
claimants living and working in London and south-east England. In 2000 the
National Asylum Support Service 
<http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/asylum/support/> (NASS) was created to 
administer the new system.

The act also increased the powers of immigration officers to arrest and detain 
people, and expanded the use of immigration detention. Capacity for detention 
was quadrupled to 4,000 people at any time.

Criticism

Sharp criticism of the new system came from refugee rights groups, and also 
from within the Labour party itself. TheRefugee Council 
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/> said the voucher scheme would "stigmatise 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1296044.stm> and demean one of society's most 
vulnerable groups", while the Transport and General Workers' Union leader Bill 
Morris said the policies were "giving life to racists 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1296044.stm>".

Asylum support was tied to the use of dispersal 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1477491.stm> so that no help would be provided 
to asylum seekers unless they agreed to be dispersed. In practice, the system 
meant relocating asylum seekers to parts of the country with a surplus of 
unused housing stock. Invariably this meant asylum seekers were sent to areas 
suffering the effects of economic decline, and therefore urban poverty, 
isolation andhigh levels of crime and violence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2005/dec/23/asylum.immigrationasylumandrefugees>
. This violence was often directed at asylum seekers themselves, made more 
vulnerable by the lack of local support and legal representation. TheJoint 
Council for the Welfare of Immigrants said 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2001/aug/19/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices2>
: "These policies are not only discriminatory against one of the most 
vulnerable sections of our community but also one of the worst kinds of social 
engineering, which is destined to fail."

In response to these and other criticisms, within two years of the act's 
passage the new home secretary,David Blunkett 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2001/oct/29/Whitehall.uk1>, gave the Labour 
party conference 2001 assurances that the Home Office would rethink parts of 
the system.
 