
In a live chat we ran last year about HE in FE 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2011/oct/19/futher-education-collaboration>
, a theme emerged from the discussion; students from low income families are 
risk averse and ill-informed about the costs of higher education, and as such, 
are likely to decide that a degree that could cost as much as £9,000 a year is 
not for them.

Going some way to addressing this problem, the Key Information Sets 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/learning/infohe/kis.htm> (KIS) were developed; 
comparable and standardised information about undergraduate courses, that cover 
information students themselves have deemed useful.

But many commentators feel that, while valuable, KIS don't go far enough 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2011/sep/27/universities-widening-participation-wes-streeting>
. Wes Streeting, chief executive of the Helena Kennedy Foundation, said: 
"Information isn't enough - advice and guidance is what counts."

And HE consultant, Johnny Rich, explains why: "People talk about 'IAG' – 
information, advice and guidance. The distinction between the three is 
interesting and important. Information, I would argue, is facts – data and 
statistics, indisputable details. Advice, meanwhile, happens whenever an 
opinion creeps into the delivery of information. And if it's well-informed 
opinion, it's expert advice. However advice doesn't relate personally to the 
individual getting it. That would be when it becomes guidance – where 
information and advice is bent to the individual circumstances of the person 
who needs it. Guidance is a skilled practice, best done by professionals who 
take the lives and futures of people into their charge and, if they do their 
job well, set them on a brighter path."

It is this need for 'experts' or qualified professionals that makes the 
delivery of IAG by universities an interesting challenge for our times: 
government funding has been cut to programmes such asConnexions 
<http://www.connexionskentandmedway.co.uk/> and Aimhigher 
<http://www.aimhigher.ac.uk/sites/practitioner/home/> while careers services 
have an ever-widening remit and not always the resources or recognition to 
deliver additional services.

These challenges have however led to some innovation including a new web tool, 
UniQs <http://www.uniqs.ac.uk>, developed through a collaboration between The 
1994 Group, Push and JISC.

Talking about UniQs, Janice Kay 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2011/dec/12/uniqs-universities-information-students>
, chair of the 1994 Group Student Experience Policy Group, explained that the 
tool intended to take information students want, to the places where they are 
online: social networks, blogs and professional services they use.

This Friday 20 January, we bring together HE professionals involved with the 
creation and dissemination of IAG, to explore the ways in which all 
universities can better provide all groups of prospective students with what 
they need to make informed decisions.

Join us at 12pm GMT to share your experiences, best practice examples or ask 
questions about where to start.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.

Panel

Tessa Stone, chief executive, Brightside <http://www.thebrightsidetrust.org>, 
an education charity

Brightside provides young people with accessible, impartial information about 
education, money and careers, through free resources atwww.brightknowledge.org 
<http://www.brightknowledge.org/> and www.studentcalculator.org.uk 
<http://www.studentcalculator.org.uk>. Tessa is also the convenor of the 
'CHOIR' group – the Consortium of providers of Higher education Online 
Information Resources and is a member of the UK Careers Sector Strategic Forum. 
@tessa_stone

Johnny Rich, HE Specialist and founder, Push <http://www.push.co.uk/>

Johnny specialises in championing the interests of students in HE. He is the 
founder of Push.co.uk, the leading independent guide for prospective students, 
and is involved in many other initiatives providing information and advice 
including Real World Magazine, BestCourse4Me and the soon-to-be-launched 
UniQs.ac.uk. He is also a director of the Higher Education Academy. @JohnnySRich

Harriet Dunbar-Morris, executive assistant (Learning and Teaching) University 
of Bath <http://www.bath.ac.uk>

Over the last eight years Harriet has worked on a number of research projects 
about the student experience of teaching and learning; the transition to higher 
education; widening participation; and admissions to higher education. Harriet 
is a member ofthe Bridge Group <http://www.thebridgegroup.org.uk>, an 
independent policy association promoting social mobility through higher 
education. @HarrietatBath

Steve Martin, director of guidance, Careers EQ <http://www.careerseq.co.uk>, a 
private organisation providing high quality careers education information

Steve has over 20 years professional experience in careers guidance for 
students applying to HE and dealing with Graduates. An all age adviser with 
knowledge of the HE options in the UK, US, Aus/NZ and Europe. Keen to promote 
impartial IAG on HE, linked to Labour Market intelligence and career coaching 
attributes.

Rachel Winzer, director of research, 1994 Group <http://www.1994group.co.uk>


Rachel's remit covers the research funding environment and all aspects of the 
student experience and has most recently worked on the UniQs project. Rachel 
has previously worked with research policy and administration at the Institute 
of Education, University of London and has a background working with management 
information within a local government setting. @r_winzer
 