
Speaking at an Association of Colleges conference 
<http://www.bis.gov.uk/news/speeches/david-willetts-aoc-conference-2011> 
earlier in the year, universities minister, David Willetts, said: "The 
Coalition has given new freedoms to the FE sector, because we have confidence 
in your ability to make an ever greater contribution to education, to social 
mobility, and to growth."

These freedoms, as stated in the HE white paper, include removing regulatory 
barriers and allowing colleges to offer more accredited part-time or 
accelerated courses, sandwich courses, distance learning and higher-level 
vocational study. Colleges, along with universities, that offer good quality 
teaching combined with value for money could benefit from a flexible margin of 
up to 20,000 more student places.

While this move could increase choice for students, reducing the pressure on 
places in universities, it is not free of challenges. There are questions about 
who will support students studying for degrees in colleges. In anNUS briefing 
<http://www.nusconnect.org.uk/news/article/6011/1725/>, Usman Ali and Shane 
Chowen, vice presidents for HE and FE respectively, said: "HE students [in FE 
colleges] are a significant part of the higher education landscape but are 
often left voiceless as they are caught between whether they should be 
supported by the HE students' union or the FE students' union."

The briefing goes on to identify other challenges in the delivery of HE 
courses in FE colleges: "Some universities [are] already saying that they would 
rather remove accreditation of provision in FE colleges than be undercut in 
terms of the fees being charged."

And this is just one facet of the HE and FE relationship. There's also working 
together in areas such as access, widening participation, foundation degrees, 
Information Advice and Guidance and social mobility to consider too.

So taking all this into account, how can the relationship between HEIs and FE 
colleges be developed?

On Friday 21 October, we will bring together a panel from across the HE and FE 
sectors to discuss how to improve collaboration. Join us at 12pm for the live 
debate, and feel free to post your questions and comments below in advance. To 
comment or ask questions on Twitter, use the hashtag #HElivechat

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.

Panel

Paul Stanistreet, policy lead on higher education, The National Institute of 
Adult Continuing Education <http://www.niace.org.uk> (NIACE)

Paul leads on HE policy for NIACE but as a journalist and editor, he also 
writes on a range of education issues and edits NIACE's quarterly journal 
Adults Learning. He has taught in higher education, at the universities of 
Glasgow, Strathclyde and Stirling, and holds a PhD in early modern philosophy.
@paulstanistreet <http://twitter.com/#!/paulstanistreet>

Barbara Edwards, assistant director, Quality Assurance Agency 
<http://www.qaa.ac.uk>

Barbara's role includes responsibility for reviewing HE in FE in Northern 
Ireland, the review of foundation degrees in Wales, and foundation degree 
awarding powers (FDAP). Prior to QAA, Barbara worked for many years in a 
further education college, mainly delivering higher education, as quality 
manager for FE and HE and manager of education.@QAAtweets 
<http://twitter.com/#!/QAAtweets>

Dr Wayne Clark, senior manager, research and development, Career Development 
Centre <http://www.wmin.ac.uk/page-595>, University of Westminster

Wayne manages careers and employability research in the Career Development 
Centre at University of Westminster. He has extensive experience of researching 
graduate employment destinations, and recently collaborated with Linking London 
Lifelong Learning Network on a study of vocational learner progression into, 
through, and out of HE.

Steve Besley, head of policy, Pearson Centre for Policy and Learning 
<http://www.pearsoncpl.com> 

Steve leads on policy analysis and intelligence across the world of education 
and training and provides commentary through articles, presentations and the 
regular Policy Watch series. Previously he was head of policy at Edexcel which 
is now part of the Pearson Group. Before joining Edexcel, Steve worked on 
training materials for BTEC and prior to that he worked on curriculum and 
business development in schools and FE.@SteveBesley 
<http://twitter.com/#!/SteveBesley>

Rachel Smith, director of corporate development, College Marketing Network  
<http://www.m-network.org>

Rachel Smith has a wide range of experience in FE college marketing. She was 
Chair of the College Marketing Network for six years before taking up the new 
post of Director of Corporate Development for the organisation.@cmnoffice 
<http://twitter.com/#!/cmnoffice>

Greg Wade , higher education policy adviser, UniversitiesUK 
<http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk>

Greg Wade has been a policy adviser at UniversitiesUK for over eight years 
leading on a variety of policy areas including teaching and learning, 
leadership and management and teacher education. His previous experience has 
been in all aspects of quality assurance in higher education. He is currently 
leading on HE and FE issues for UniversitiesUK.

Shane Chowen, independent FE policy consultant

Until July 2011, Shane was the vice president (Further Education) at the 
National Union of Students where he was responsible for NUS' campaigns on 16-19 
and adult education. He is now a policy and public affairs consultant; 
currently working with theInstitute for Learning <http://www.ifl.ac.uk/>. 
@shanechowen <http://twitter.com/#!/shanechowen>

Christa Appleton, elearning advisor and HE coordinator, JISC Regional Support  
<http://www.rsc-wm.ac.uk/?/Homepage>Centre West Midlands

With more than ten years teaching experience in FE, Christa now works closely 
with the staff responsible for HE teaching and learning in FE Colleges across 
the West Midlands in an advisory capacity, liaises with other agencies and 
groups on their behalf and organises workshops and events relevant to the 
sector and the use of technology for teaching and learning.@christa_line 
<http://twitter.com/#!/christa_line>

Steve Outram, academic lead for, change programmes and non-HEI provision, 
Higher Education Academy <http://www.heacademy.ac.uk> 

Steve has over thirty years experience as an academic in higher education. His 
research interests include the management of change and project management in 
higher education as well as new learning paradigms and improving the quality of 
students' learning experiences. He has a written a number of educational 
development articles and is a member of the editorial committee of Educational 
Developments
 