
“I’m a political person,” says Sidney Blumenthal, over lunch on a blooming May 
day in Manhattan. “It’s the political season. The Clintons are on stage.”

So they are. Therefore, so is he.

Once an adviser to Bill Clinton, then an adviser to Hillary Clinton when she 
first campaigned for president, Blumenthal is now touring television studios, 
colleges and bookshops in support of his new book.A Self-Made Man 
<http://www.amazon.com/Self-Made-Man-Political-Abraham-Lincoln/dp/147677725X>, 
the first of a four-volume political life of Abraham Lincoln, was published in 
the US on Wednesday.

“There are many Lincolns,” he says, when asked why he turned from writing 
influential books on modern politics – The Permanent Campaign,The Clinton Wars 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/18/books/review/18DALLEKT.html?pagewanted=all>, 
How Bush Rules – to such well-trodden historical ground. “The most commonly 
held is seen as sitting above us, in his enormous chair in his memorial of 
white alabaster: pure, immoveable, transcendent.

“And none of that was possible without him being the opposite of that, a real 
live politician who developed in ways that I wanted to look at.”

Early reviews have been strong. The product of a fascination begun with a 
childhood visit toSpringfield <https://www.nps.gov/liho/index.htm>, 10 years in 
the writing, A Self-Made Man contains insights on the 16th president’s 
speeches, marriage and career that have been hailed by leading Lincoln scholars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa877d168606e94af79f445aa6165104ef2b7b09b%2F0_68_1530_1911%2F1530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20age%20of%20Trump%2C%20Sidney%20Blumenthal's%20book%20on%20Lincoln%20illuminates%20party%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20age%20of%20Trump%2C%20Sidney%20Blumenthal%27s%20book%20on%20Lincoln%20illuminates%20party%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa877d168606e94af79f445aa6165104ef2b7b09b%2F0_68_1530_1911%2F1530.jpg>
 Abraham Lincoln as a young politician. ‘Pure, immoveable, transcendent.’ 
Photograph: Time Life Pictures/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
It is also a terrific read, teeming with 19th-century life, from the down and 
dirty politics of 1830s Illinois to Lincoln’s single term in Congress at the 
end of the 1840s. Over it all looms the problem of slavery. By the end of 
volume three, Lincoln will once again have solved it. Volume four will cover 
Lincoln’s afterlife in American politics, of which Blumenthal is now a part.

But as he follows up on publication of volume one, the down and dirty politics 
of 2016 persist in following him around. Around our meeting, onMSNBC 
<http://www.weeklystandard.com/blumenthal-benghazi-probe-belongs-to-the-past/article/2002387>
,CNN 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/05/11/politics/sid-blumenthal-emails-hillary-clinton/> 
andCNBC 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2016/05/12/cnbc_grills_sidney_blumenthal_how_would_we_know_donations_to_clinton_foundation_didnt_affect_policy.html>
, interviewers have been less eager to talk telegrams and the Mexican war than 
emails and Benghazi.

On 11 September 2012, in the northern Libyan city, a mob attacked a consular 
building <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/benghazi-attack>. Four Americans 
died, includingUS ambassador Chris Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/12/chris-stevens-us-ambassador-libya-killed>
. Hillary Clinton was secretary of state at the time and Blumenthal – then 
working for the Clinton Foundation –was sending her advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/01/sidney-blumenthal-bill-hillary-clinton-adviser-emails>
about issues including the precarious situation in Libya. 


Amidst an FBI investigation of Clinton’s use of a private server while in 
office, many of those emails are now public property. On the right, Benghazi 
has become a stick with which to beat Clinton as she campaigns again for the 
presidency.

Last summer, months before Clinton’s own appearance, Blumenthal was summoned 
by a Republican-led House committee. His testimony, all nine and a half hours 
of it,has not been made public 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/10/hillary-clinton-benghazi-sidney-blumenthal-trey-gowdy-elijah-cummings>
. On the promotional trail for his book, he has called for it to be released. 
He has also refused comment on the ongoing FBI investigation.

This must be getting frustrating. On Wednesday morning, CNN gave Blumenthal 
seven minutes of prime time. Five were on Hillary and the emails and two on 
Lincoln, prefaced with a rather dismissive “What else is there to say?”

It’s not an easy thing to … learn to be uninterested about caricatures of 
yourself
Sidney Blumenthal 
Blumenthal smiles and, as with any question, chooses his words with care.

“I’m not surprised,” he said. “I expect it. I’ve been through this for years 
and years. I’m not going to say I’m inured to it, but there it is. You expect 
it, particularly on cable television, these days.”

Blumenthal also testified to the Senate in 1999, during impeachment 
proceedings against Bill Clinton over his affair with Monica Lewinsky. 
Rightwing news sites see him as some sort of pantomime villain, his wordsparsed 
relentlessly 
<http://www.newsmax.com/Newsfront/sidney-blumenthal-clinton-email-probe/2016/05/12/id/728502/>
, any on-air chuckle or smilescorned with puritan zeal 
<http://dailycaller.com/2016/05/12/sidney-blumenthal-laughs-at-question-about-fbi-interview-video/>
.

“You learn how to deal with it,” he says. “It’s not an easy thing to … learn 
to be uninterested about caricatures of yourself. But that’s essential in order 
to understand why it happens and to be able to take it.

“Does it effect how I view the world or how I work? No. I just work. I write. 
And research. And do some politics.”

•••


There are, as Blumenthal says, many Lincolns. It turns out one of them was 
him. Last summer in Rappahannock County, Virginia, in a one-off performance of
The Peacemaker by James Reston Jr <http://www.shermanpeacemaker.com/>, 
Blumenthal played the president’s ghost.

“So Lincoln’s dead,” he says, “and I’m Lincoln. I stood on a little cliff 
above the stage, in costume, and every so often I would appear and declaim down 
towards the living actors with ominous and portentous words.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f4cde4b867cf983e8b262e7979c856bf037222e%2F426_360_4311_2587%2F4311.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20age%20of%20Trump%2C%20Sidney%20Blumenthal's%20book%20on%20Lincoln%20illuminates%20party%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20age%20of%20Trump%2C%20Sidney%20Blumenthal%27s%20book%20on%20Lincoln%20illuminates%20party%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f4cde4b867cf983e8b262e7979c856bf037222e%2F426_360_4311_2587%2F4311.jpg>
 Sidney Blumenthal, left, in costume as Abraham Lincoln with the late NAACP 
chair Julian Bond, center, and conservative commentator Richard Viguerie as 
Confederate general John Bell Hood. Photograph: supplied by Sidney Blumenthal 
“It’s a good role, being a ghost. No one can attack a ghost.”

Lincoln’s ghost has long been said to haunt the White House 
<https://www.whitehousehistory.org/the-origin-of-the-abraham-lincoln-ghost-story>
. Supposedly, President Truman heard it and Winston Churchill saw it, in the 
latter case while naked and smoking a bedtime cigar. Blumenthal says he never 
did, though he might have seen Nixon’s spook in the Lincoln Bedroom, praying 
for forgiveness.

The joke is fitting, even if the assassinated president has become a tragic 
figure – in Blumenthal’s words a kind of “American Christ” who saved the 
country and was killed on Good Friday. Lincoln had a notoriously robust sense 
of humor; much in the early chapters of A Self-Made Man is duly hilariously 
funny.

At rural fairgrounds, Lincoln won debates with smutty wit. In a legislative 
session held in an Illinois church, he sought to deny his opponents a quorum by 
jumping out of a window. Challenged to a duel over an insulting editorial, he 
chose broadswords to take advantage of his great height, only to find out his 
diminutive challenger was an excellent fencer.



Blumenthal appreciates the value of a good editorial. He started his career 
writing on baseball and politics for Boston newspapers, and has written for the 
New Republic, the Washington Post, the New Yorker, Salon, the Atlantic andthe 
Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sidneyblumenthal>. In his Lincoln 
book, he delights in the role of the press. Before he went to Washington, 
Lincoln covertly controlled a Whig paper, wrote brutal editorials anonymously 
and eagerly read of great speeches made in the east.

Lincoln’s self-education in what we call political economy has been remarked 
on in the past but also overlooked

Blumenthal’s experience in the politics of the press – he has consulted for 
the “progressive media watchdog”Media Matters <https://mediamatters.org/> as 
well as the pro-Hillary Clinton super pac American Bridge – also means that in 
2016, as the election pivots from primary to presidential, he is not remotely 
surprised that the reception of his political book has been colored by politics.

Among Lincoln scholars this is rather like a game of tennis, shots exchanged 
across the net with a polite thwack and applause for well-made points. Allen 
Guelzo of Gettysburg College, a conservative, gave A Self-Made Mana glowing 
review 
<http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/magazine/junejulyaugust_2016/on_political_books/a_springfield_education060475.php?page=all>
 of which Blumenthal is naturally very appreciative. But he did take exception 
to the contention that Lincoln, through reading the work ofHenry Carey 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Henry-C-Carey> and others, believed in 
federal economic intervention.

Lincoln’s concept of political economy, Guelzo wrote, “was a very long way 
from a Keynesian, not to say a Clintonian concept of government”.

“It doesn’t surprise me that he wrote that,” Blumenthal says, of the economic 
point as well as the reference to the Clintons, which is ofa kind also prompted 
<https://www.washingtonian.com/2016/05/03/sidney-blumenthals-lincoln-sounds-lot-like-clintons/>
 by his work on the Lincoln marriage.

“It’s his point of view. This is mine and I stand by it. Lincoln’s 
self-education in what we call political economy has been remarked on in the 
past but also overlooked.”

The role of the federal government in the economy is ever remarked upon. Four 
years ago, Mitt Romney insisted businessneeded no help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/19/romney-obama-build-that-live>. 
Blumenthal takes aim at a man then on the podium with Romney, now House 
speaker: Paul Ryan.

“[Lincoln’s] belief in the essential role of government in the economy as part 
of democracy might not fit Paul Ryan’s understanding of what is the party of 
Lincoln,” he says. “Lincoln was not a follower of Ayn Rand. Although Trump may 
well be the embodiment, however a nightmare embodiment, of Ayn Rand’s vision. 
So be careful what you wish for.

American crossroads: Reagan, Trump and the devil down south
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/trump-reagan-nixon-republican-party-racism>
And thus we have reached, presumably by a federally maintained road, the 
parlous state of the so-called “party of Lincoln”. On Wednesday morning, the 
presumptive Republican presidential nominee, Donald Trump,met Ryan and other 
party leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/12/donald-trump-paul-ryan-meeting-washington-republicans-election>
. The result was an apparent calming of troubled waters, but Blumenthal views 
those in the present day GOP who trumpet Lincoln with skepticism and Trump 
himself with disdain.

In his statement against Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/05/paul-ryan-declines-to-support-trump-as-republican-nominee>
 a week earlier, Ryan widened his definition of the GOP to “the party of 
Lincoln and Reagan and Jack Kemp”. Blumenthal points out thatReagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/trump-reagan-nixon-republican-party-racism>
 “began his 1980 campaign at theNeshoba County Fair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/05/trump-reagan-nixon-republican-party-racism>
, [near] where three civil rights workers were murdered, and spoke about states 
rights surrounded by Confederate battle flags. So the idea of the party of 
Lincoln [who defeated the Confederacy] and the party of Reagan is a strange 
bracketing.”

He also knew Kemp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/may/04/jack-kemp-obituary>, the 
popular congressman from Buffalo who was Bob Dole’s vice-presidential pick in 
1996. He isn’t buying.


“There was a decency to him and openness to Jack,” he says. “[He] never 
imprinted himself on the party much.”

Blumenthal returns to a point he has repeated on TV 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/05/12/gop-in-danger-of-going-the-way-of-the-whigs-blumenthal.html>
 and in public. On issues including immigration and the equality of all 
citizens, the GOP has moved a long way from the ideals of its first president. 
Furthermore, Lincoln became a Republican because his first party, the Whigs, 
tore themselves apart over politics.

Casting his eye at Trump, he says: “This happened not least because of 
nativism, the schism and the growth of the Know Nothing Party, the so-called 
American Party. The Know Nothings created this ideal citizen who represented 
the ideal American. And he wanted to make America great again.

“Citizen Know Nothing had a son, named Jonathan, a pure American who had a 
fresh face and wore a sort of rural farmer’s hat, but he was neatly turned out.”

He smiles.

“And so on.”

•••


It’s time for some direct political questions. 

“Go ahead,” he says, smiling. “We’ll see if I answer.”

Should Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
win the presidential election, does Blumenthal expect to return to the White 
House?

“I haven’t given it much thought. My position is to be here, a year from now, 
with volume two. I have my next few years plotted out – for four volumes at one 
a year, and that’s enough.”


Famously, Lincoln’s cabinet was a “team of rivals”, including would-be 
presidents Seward, Chase and Bates. Could a President Hillary Clinton appoint, 
say, former Republican Utah governor Jon Huntsmanas her own first secretary of 
state? 
<http://www.sltrib.com/home/2652211-155/mormon-rivals-could-hillary-clinton>

“I haven’t heard that.”

Fair enough. But with such brutal dissension within and without the two modern 
parties, does Lincoln’s famous magnanimity inspire any advice to the next 
president, whoever that may be?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef08d53647f06b22cbb1a8ff8ab074babd00c12%2F0_0_3150_2222%2F3150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20age%20of%20Trump%2C%20Sidney%20Blumenthal's%20book%20on%20Lincoln%20illuminates%20party%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20age%20of%20Trump%2C%20Sidney%20Blumenthal%27s%20book%20on%20Lincoln%20illuminates%20party%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fsidney-blumenthal-lincoln-biography-hillary-clinton-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef08d53647f06b22cbb1a8ff8ab074babd00c12%2F0_0_3150_2222%2F3150.jpg>
 Abraham Lincoln’s memorial looms over three Democratic presidents and one 
first lady, in a picture from 2013. Photograph: Charles Dharapak/AP 
“Well, working with members of the other party, maybe … it depends upon who 
controls which house in Congress and how powerful [they are]. So we’ll see. 
That’s how it always is.


“But in Lincoln’s case there was a lot of personal relationships … and a lot 
of that has broken down. I think one of the great precipitators of the 
breakdown was Newt Gingrich [once House speaker, now reportedlya possible Trump 
VP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/04/donald-trump-running-mate-chris-christie-newt-gingrich>
] and Ted Cruz is his natural-born child, politically.”


He turns his attention to the Democratic primary, a bitter struggle in which 
Bernie Sanders has vowed to fight all the way to the convention.

“In terms of getting along within your own party, Lincoln said once people 
stop attacking him, then he could work with them … He’d even work with people 
who didn’t stop attacking him, [like] his secretary of the treasury, Salmon 
Chase.

Lincoln offers lessons in binding a party together … I think those are good 
lessons for the Democrats right now

“I think there are lessons in binding a party together, if you can. I think 
those are good lessons for the Democrats right now. I think it’s likely the
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> will come together, 
and I don’t think there are such irretrievable differences and wounds that 
can’t be dealt with.


“I remember President Clinton when he was first elected, his political team 
was opposed to the appointment of somebody who had been on an opposing primary 
campaign and had been combative. And Clinton told them to knock it off, and 
said: ‘I thought we won.’”

The meaning is implicit: in 2009, thanks to his work in the 2008 primary, the 
Obama administrationreportedly barred Blumenthal 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/08/16/us/politics/16emanuel.html> from taking a 
role at the state department under Clinton.

He speaks glowingly of Obama, who he says like Lincoln “stands for inclusion, 
and the vindication of American ideals”. Regarding the contest to replace Obama 
in the White House, to select the next man or woman to contemplate its many 
portraits of Lincoln, he indicates a willingness to fight the good fight.

“[It’s] all hands on deck, all talents forward on our side.” 

Thinking again of Lincoln and the Whigs, torn apart over slavery, he adds: “On 
the Republican side? No-one knows where this story ends.

“We’re just at the beginning. They’re under the volcano.”

 * Sidney Blumenthal’s The Political Life of Abraham Lincoln, vol I: A 
Self-Made Man, 1809-1849 is published in the US by Simon & Schuster  