
What a headache Amit Chaudhuri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/amit-chaudhuri> must be for his publishers. 
He puts out four novels to praise and awards - then breaks off to work on 
music. An unusual diversion for any writer - Woody Allen may dabble with the 
clarinet, but he sticks to the day job - and, in the modern book industry, 
tantamount to career suicide. Most would-be authors strive for a label (young 
or Muslim or interested in sex) and do all the things publicists demand: a 
reading here, an interview there and 750 words for the regional paper. But 
perhaps Mr Chaudhuri did not get the statutory career advice. Yes, he writes 
about India, but not the Technicolor romps British readers have come to expect 
since Midnight's Children. Mr Chaudhuri's work is better, and more truthful, 
than that; rather than the standard Indian fare, he also looks at London's 
Belsize Park, where (a little-known fact) many Bengalis lived in the 60s, while 
doing their postgraduate studies. And there are precise observations of "the 
irrelevances and digressions that make up lives". His writing is tender - men 
do not share a light, their cigarettes "kiss". It is witty, too - a toilet in a 
student residence does not flush, it "gurgles candidly". Despite his mild 
manner, Mr Chaudhuri can be delightfully spiky, as shown in his new book of 
literary criticism, Clearing a Space. Then there was last year's album: This Is 
Not Fusion, it was pointedly titled, stirring up a muso controversy over what 
fusion is. Yet what does the term mean if not his mixture of Hindustani 
classical and rock?
 