
"Whom do I hate?" wrote Alan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-sillitoe> in his notebook in 1957. A 
promising sentence, duly topped by what followed. "At a rough guess I would say 
everyone, hoping to qualify that statement to my satisfaction later." This is 
the Sillitoe everyone loves: the awkward sod who writes about other awkward 
sods. Fifty years after it was published, his classic Saturday Night and Sunday 
Morning still wallops a reader over the head with its exuberant rage. But while 
the lathe-worker Arthur Seaton careers, curses and fights his way through the 
novel, he remains an elusive, moody character (brilliantly caught by Albert 
Finney in the film adaptation). The integrity of that depiction of 
working-class life still resonates, which is why Arctic Monkeys took an Arthur 
Seaton line - "whatever people say I am, that's what I'm not" - as the title of 
their first album. It helps set Sillitoe apart from the pack of authors who 
also came to prominence in the 50s and 60s. In his affectionate new biography 
of the writer, Richard Bradford describes how Sillitoe came from a poorer, 
harsher background than the likes of Keith Waterhouse. His family moved their 
things in handcarts around interwar Nottingham between "the kind of dwellings 
which Dickens improved on". Yet his work is more than Lowry-in-prose, with 
immense variety in characters and forms. Now 80, Sillitoe still writes - and 
still begins the day with 10 minutes of press-ups and jumps. Some people just 
do not conform to type.
 