
“Recruitment agency: an organisation that matches employers to employees and 
vice versa; an intermediary in the labour market” – or so the dictionary tells 
us. But, givenrecent findings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
 that agencies are using aggressive tax avoidance schemes at a time when new 
benefit caps are driving single parents into poverty; that some agencies have 
conned low-paid temporary workers into buying worthless accident insurance; 
and, from my own research, that agencies are enabling the undercutting of 
workers’ rights and wages by pitting migrant workers against local people, it 
would be truer to life if we described recruitment agencies as arbiters of 
capitalism and the mass exploitation of workers.

Labour MP calls for urgent investigation into tax avoidance scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/labour-mp-frank-field-calls-for-urgent-investigation-tax-avoidance-scheme-hmrc>
It is estimated that recruitment agencies employ 1.2 million people every day. 
Agencies are now the vehicle by which desperate workers are driven into the 
arms of exploitative employers, and they are fundamental to understanding the
new age of precarity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/more-than-7m-britons-in-precarious-employment>
 in the labour market and the “gig economy”.

There are hundreds of examples – from Sports Direct to NHS cleaners – of 
agencies actively undermining the rights of employees. One recent case was 
brought to light by the trade union GMB. Agency workers at anAsos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> warehouse in Grimethorpe, South 
Yorkshire, are being subject to a “flexing clause”, which employers argue was 
introduced to help manage peak times and quiet periods.

What it actually means is that workers can arrive at the warehouse only to be 
told they will be starting two hours later (with these two hours unpaid), or 
indeed work two hours later in the evening. When workers refuse, they are 
disciplined. This practice can cause a great deal of stress – particularly for 
those with childcare commitments. These flex contracts are likely to be in 
breach of employment law because it means workers aren’t actually being paid 
the minimum wage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-how-employment-agencies-avoid-tax-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20employment%20agencies%20avoid%20tax%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-how-employment-agencies-avoid-tax-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20employment%20agencies%20avoid%20tax%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frevealed-how-employment-agencies-avoid-tax-video&media=>
Revealed: how employment agencies avoid tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/15/revealed-how-employment-agencies-avoid-tax-video>
This story won’t come as a surprise. We have known that recruitment agencies 
have been the pimps of the labour market for some time. What theGuardian’s new 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/temp-agency-tax-avoidance-scheme-national-insurance>
 has found is that they are not only promoting the use of temporary and 
zero-hours contracts where they are not appropriate, but using aggressive tax 
avoidance schemes that are depriving the taxpayer of hundreds of millions of 
pounds a year.

What a time for these findings to come to light. Earlier this month, a new 
benefits cap was introduced which reduces the household benefit cap from 
£26,000 to £20,000 outside London, affecting more than 80,000 households,
according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8717>. The new work and pensions 
secretary, Damian Green, has also confirmed that the government will be making 
the £3.4bn cuts to universal credit planned by the last parliament, despite 
fears that it will push working families into poverty, and protests by 
backbench Tory MPs. Recruitment agencies are therefore robbing workers of a 
decent standard of living in two ways: directly, through undermining rights and 
pay, and indirectly by contributing to the demise of social security and our 
public services.

This is maddening. Just like Mike Ashley, Philip Green and other fat cat 
capitalists, this is this sort of behaviour that reminds us how the economy is 
no longer serving everyday people.

There is another, relatively unexplored problem that recruitment agencies have 
created: friction between migrant and local workers. In 2009, I carried out some
research in Hull <http:>, where there were a growing number of Polish migrants 
working in factories via recruitment agencies, especially in food packing and 
processing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fgig-economy-recruitment-agencies-employment-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcafb58259fa6b08b05bae7dba59d0412c48bb9cd%2F0_245_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20gig%20economy%2C%20recruitment%20agencies%20are%20the%20gangmasters%20%7C%20Faiza%20Shaheen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fgig-economy-recruitment-agencies-employment-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20gig%20economy%2C%20recruitment%20agencies%20are%20the%20gangmasters%20%7C%20Faiza%20Shaheen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fgig-economy-recruitment-agencies-employment-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcafb58259fa6b08b05bae7dba59d0412c48bb9cd%2F0_245_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Len McClusky of Unite is one of the union leaders fighting the race to the 
bottom culture for jobs. Photograph: Mary Turner/Getty Images 
At one agency, a lead recruiter was candid about the way in which the agency 
focused on recruiting only Polish and eastern European workers. This, she said, 
was in response to business demands for workers with “a stronger work ethic”. 
When pushed further, she admitted that Polish workers were less likely to 
demand higher wages and to know the rights temporary workers were entitled to.

When I spoke to local people, they were all too aware that agencies were not 
taking them on, and were justifiably angry. At the time I couldn’t foresee how 
much such outcomes – which are due to lack of employment safeguards, rather 
than immigration per se – would fuel anti-immigration sentiments in the years 
to come.

It is therefore odd that while immigration has become a growing public 
concern, recruitment agencies have continued to flourish. At the Centre for 
Labour and Social Studies conference last month, the general secretary of the 
Unite union, Len McCluskey, spoke of thisrace to the bottom culture <http:>, 
calling for us to focus on safeguards for workers, and proposing that any 
employer wishing to recruit labour abroad could only do so if they are either 
covered by a proper union agreement, or by sectoral collective bargaining. Such 
solutions get to the heart of problems in the labour market and would help us 
move away from an unhelpful and misleading focus on the number of immigrants.

Of course, we must acknowledge that some progress has been made on the rights 
of agency workers – through holiday pay legislation, for example. However, such 
legislation is itself used for abusive ends. For example, the Agency Workers 
Regulations were introduced to ensure equality of pay for long-term temporary 
workers compared with their permanent counterparts. Instead, this legislation 
has been used as a means of undercutting permanent staff.

It is important to remember, however, that not all recruitment agencies are 
the same. Unfortunately for the good ones, the worst have damaged the 
reputation of the industry. Recruitment agencies do not simply represent a cog 
in the capitalist system, but rather the oil that allows it to function. When 
faced with all the challenges of the labour market, it can be overwhelming. But 
having been reminded of the many ways in which agencies are abusing workers, 
and how far they have veered from their supposed original purpose, it’s clear 
where our battle must begin.
 