
Independent News & Media defeated an attempt by rebel shareholder Denis O'Brien
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien> to unseat two of its most 
senior figures today.

At an extraordinary general meeting requested by O'Brien, shareholders voted 
against proposals tabled by his representatives, which would have resulted in 
the removal of the chairman, Brian Hillery, and the senior non-executive 
director, Baroness Jay.

Nearly two thirds of votes cast were against the motion. INM said that it was 
rejected by the overwhelming majority of investors outside the two main 
shareholding blocks controlled by O'Brien and Tony O'Reilly.

O'Reilly, who stood down as INM chief executive earlier this year, controls 
28.5%, and O'Brien 26%.

O'Brien had requested that a range of additional resolutions should be put 
before shareholders, including a demand that the Independent andIndependent on 
Sunday <https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> be sold off. 
He also wanted the group to close its London office and stop paying a salary to 
O'Reilly, who is now its president emeritus.

INM rejected those demands, however, and only two resolutions – on the 
directorships of Hillery and Baroness Jay – were put before shareholders at 
today's EGM.

O'Brien did not attend this morning's meeting in Dublin, which is the first in 
a series of EGMs deigned to pave the way for a restructuring at INM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/03/independent-news-and-media>.

INM has agreed a debt for equity swap with bondholders, who have agreed to 
write off most of a €200m debt – originally due to be repaid in May – in 
exchange for a 46% stake in the company.

INM's banks have also said they are broadly supportive of the restructuring 
plan. A bondholder meeting called to sign off the details will take place on 10 
November and another EGM has been called for 23 November, when investors will 
vote on the restructuring plan.

A further EGM has been called at O'Brien's behest for 13 November, when 
shareholders will vote on the board's authority to issue more shares ahead of a 
rights issue later this year.

INM announced today that a separate vote will also be held on that date to 
approve the disposal of INM Outdoor, its South African advertising business. 
O'Brien originally opposed the sale but has since reversed his position.

The money raised will be used to pay down debts. INM has total debts, in the 
form of bank loans and bonds, of around €1.2bn.

A rights issue will be held after the restructuring is complete, with the 
money raised - around €94m - used to pay down debt. In total, the company 
expects its borrowings to fall by €350m.

A deal will safeguard the future of the company, whose assets include 
newspapers, advertising businesses and radio assets around the globe. It will 
also remove uncertainty about the fate of the London-based Independent and 
Independent on Sunday.

Gavin O'Reilly <https://www.theguardian.com/media/gavin-o-reilly>, who 
replaced his father Tony as chief executive earlier this year, said it would 
enable the group, which has implemented dramatic cost savings in recent months, 
to benefit from the economic upturn when it eventually arrives.

O'Brien tabled an alternative rescue plan, which would have seen him invest 
around €100m for a majority stake in the business. This was rejected by the INM 
board and by bondholders.

Last week, INM secured a further extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/30/inm-buys-more-time-debts-standstill>
 to the "standstill agreement" negotiated with bondholders to give it time to 
finalise the refinancing deal.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 