
The Lebedevs, owners of the Independent titles, are keeping the papers' 
website in a separate company in a move that could allow a lucrative future 
sale of digital assets potentially worth millions.

Andreas Whittam Smith – the recently appointed chairman of Independent Print 
Limited, the publishing company behind the Independent, Independent on Sunday 
and 20p stablemate i – has beengiven the task of quietly sounding out potential 
buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/16/alexander-lebedev-buyers-independent-sunday-i>
 for the loss-making titles by proprietors Alexander and Evgeny Lebedev.

However, arguably the newspapers' most valuable assets – digital properties 
including independent.co.uk, with 28 million monthly users – are housed in a 
separate company, Independent Digital News and Media Limited (IDNML).

IDNML has just two directors, Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, who holds a 57% stake, and 
Justin Byam Shaw, who controls 38%.

Former London Evening Standard editor Geordie Greig – now editing the Mail on 
Sunday – brought in Byam Shaw,whom he referred to as a "serial entrepreneur" 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/6afa920c-40db-11de-8f18-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2r8Ckx5nb>
, to help negotiate the sale of the majority stake in the Standard from owner 
Associated Newspapers on behalf of the Lebedevs.

The ring fencing of what is understood to be profitable online assets creates 
more options for the Lebedevs, as any potential buyer of the Independent 
newspapers would have to enter a separate negotiation to secure the digital 
assets.

This ownership structure potentially makes IDNML extremely attractive to 
future buyers or investors looking for a digital-only business because they 
will not have to deal with the economics of the loss-making Independent titles, 
a thorny issue which has deterred suitors since Alexander Lebedevfirst sought 
new investment 18 months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/29/alexander-lebedev-backer-independent-profit>
.

Accounts for IDNML, which was set up a few months after Alexander Lebedev 
bought the Independent in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/05/lebedev-buys-independent-newspapers>
, indicate how much the pair effectively paid for their shareholding.

IDNML is funded by interest-free shareholder loans, with Evgeny Lebedev owed 
£360,000, and Byam Shaw £180,000, as at 30 September 2012, according to the 
most recent publicly available accounts.

The company made a loss of £221,747 in the year to the end of September 2012, 
and had net liabilities of £497,290.

However, the continuing growth of the Independent's digital presence, which 
includes thelaunch of a range of apps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/oct/10/independent-website-paywall-non-uk-readers>
 and an international paywall, meant that the business hit profitability for 
the first time last year.

"The company has made operating losses to date, but the directors believe that 
the company will trade profitably in 2013 and will not require additional 
funding," said auditors Deloitte.

However, Deloitte also noted that the Independent digital business relies on 
the loss-making papers for its content. Any buyer would either have to buy the 
Independent titles and their editorial staff, or provide alternative content 
for the website business.

Any potential buyer considering a separate bid for i, which has built a 
circulation of about 300,000 since launching in late 2010 and is also thought 
to be operating at a profit, would face a similar issue. Thei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> has a small editorial team and also 
relies on the Independent titles for content.

However, Deloitte highlights the advantage that IDNML has as a standalone 
company if the print titles were to close, noting that at the time of filing 
the report on 27 February last year that there was a "material uncertainty in 
relation to the availability of the funding required [forIndependent Print 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-print> Limited]".

"Should Independent Print Limited cease to trade, the directors of [IDNML] 
would have to consider the implications … which might include the need to seek 
further funding to scale up the operations or could in extremis include a 
curtailment of operations," said Deloitte. "This latter outcome the directors 
believe to be unlikely."

Independent.co.uk is considered the digital minnow among the UK's national 
newspapers. However, since the Lebedevs acquired the site, it has shown strong 
traffic growth and hit profitability and there could well be a number of 
investors interested in a digital-only business of such scale.

Since the Lebedevs took over the Independent titles in 2010, website traffic 
has almost tripled in size – from 9.99 million unique users a month to 28 
million in November 2013.

Other quality national newspaper websites have enjoyed a similar growth surge 
over that period. Theguardian.com is up from 33 million to 85 million monthly 
users and Telegraph.co.uk has doubled from 30 million to 60 million.

By far the greatest proportionate growth between 2010 and November last year 
was achieved by the Mail Online juggernaut, which has seen web traffic well 
over quadruple from 39 million to 168 million users per month.

Just three years ago, The Huffington Post sold up to AOL for $315m (£190m), at 
the time it had just 25 million users a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2011/feb/07/huffington-post-sale-aol-ariana>
, although with mostly US users there is not a direct comparison with the 
Independent website in terms of likely valuation.

Independent Print declined to comment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>. 
 