
Katerina Tkachenko, a journalist at an independent television station in 
Belarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, used to keep a bag by the 
door with warm clothes and a toothbrush in case KGB agents came.

“For a long time the risk of prison was such a reality,” Tkachenko said.

It was December 2010, after long-time president Alexander Lukashenko had been 
declared the winner of the presidential election with an unlikely 80% of the 
vote, and thousands ofBelarusians had taken to the streets in protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/20/presidential-candidate-dragged-from-hospital>
.

In the days that followed, opposition leaders were arrested and the homes of 
activists and independent journalists raided by security forces.


On 26 December, the rented apartment where Tkachenko’s TV station Belsat had 
been based was searched 
<http://udf.by/news/society/37031-obysk-v-ofise-belsata-specialno-dlya-specsluzhb.html>
, but journalists had already moved. They left only an old typewriter with a 
sheet of paper that read: “Specially for you.”

A few days later KGB agents raided Tkachenko’s home, confiscating her laptop 
and an archive of old family movies.

Five years later, as the country approaches presidential elections on Sunday, 
the independent media are once again under fire.

“Now it’s harder,” said Tkachenko. “Their tactics changed. They summon our 
journalists to court after this or that piece and the judge fines them.”

Once again, Lukashenko is certain to win the election, this time with broad 
support, partly due to constant positive coverage on state-controlled local 
news channels.

The three challengers running in the presidential race have only been allowed 
two half-hour appearances on state television each, plus atelevised debate 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hgcDD6zEt4k> this weekend in which Lukashenko 
did not take part.

A few independent news outlets, including Belsat and Radio Racja, struggle to 
provide a more critical view of issues such as the ongoing recession. Denied 
registration in Belarus by the authorities, they report in Belarusian but 
broadcast from neighbouring Poland. Belsat is part of the Polish public 
television channel TVP, while Radio Racja is funded by the Polish government.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Findependent-media-under-attack-ahead-of-belarus-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91cdcd44664670c50ce26dcae3e09955b79d737%2F0_83_3632_2179%2F3632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Independent%20media%20under%20attack%20ahead%20of%20Belarus%20presidential%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Findependent-media-under-attack-ahead-of-belarus-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Independent%20media%20under%20attack%20ahead%20of%20Belarus%20presidential%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Findependent-media-under-attack-ahead-of-belarus-presidential-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91cdcd44664670c50ce26dcae3e09955b79d737%2F0_83_3632_2179%2F3632.jpg>
 A Belarusian cadet receives his ballot papers during early voting at a polling 
station in Minsk, Belarus on Wednesday. Photograph: Tatyana Zenkovich/EPA 
When early voting started on Tuesday, state television 
<http://www.tvr.by/news/politika/dosrochnoe_golosovanie_po_vyboram_prezidenta_segodnya_startovalo_v_belarusi/>
 channel Belarus 1 interviewed famous cultural figures praising the “stability” 
brought by the current regime. Belsat, on the other hand, noted reports that 
soldiers, students and state employeeshad been forced to vote early in the past 
<http://vybary.belsat.eu/en/news/u-belarusi-startue-daterminovae-galasavanne/> 
to falsify results.


According to Gennady Barbarych, a correspondent for Radio Racja, most 
independent television and radio stations have closed down since Lukashenko 
took office in 1994. “Even though he promised not to touch the press, 
repressions started and only grew,” he said.


Under a 2009 law that requires reporters working for foreign media to get 
accreditation from the Belarusian foreign ministry, independent journalists 
often receive court summons and fines.


“At any moment they can detain you, and even if they don’t convict you, you 
will spend three hours in court,” said Belsat correspondent Sergei Kovalyov, 
who was once jailed for 10 days for hooliganism after he filmed an opposition 
rally in 2011.


Although neither Belsat nor Radio Racja had figures on the size of their 
audience, the journalists say their reporting is making an impact – at least on 
the regime itself.


“KGB employees and the presidential administration start their day looking at 
independent media. You need to know your enemy,” said Lyubov Lunyova, who works 
at Belsat and the newspaperNarodnaya Volya <http://www.nv-online.info>. “People 
often tell us that after our publications, guys came from the [security] organs 
to deal with the issue.”

 