
Playoff update

The 2013 regular season is nearly complete, so let's take a swing around the 
league as we head into its final weekend.

Detroit clinched their third straight American League Central title on 
Wednesday by beating the Minnesota Twins 1-0, becoming the first Tigers team to 
win three straight division titles since the 1906-1909 clubs. While such 
success is welcomed in Motown, the Tigers, with the likes of Miguel Cabrera, 
Prince Fielder, Max Scherzer and Justin Verlander making up their esteemed 
core, are probably the only team in the playoffs that must win the World Series 
to validate their season. St Louis, surging into the playoffs on the back of a 
7-3 stretch, are now within one game of winning the National League Central and 
also have the best record in the NL. Behind them are the Cincinnati Reds and 
the Pittsburgh Pirates, who will almost definitely battle it out in the wild 
card one game playoff. The question is, who will get the home game? If the 
teams finish with the same record, their head-to-head record will determine who 
travels where - right now the Pirates,who are in the postseason for the first 
time in 21 years 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/pirates/2013/09/23/pittsburgh-pirates-playoff-berth-chicago-cubs/2858821/>
, are up a game in the standings and the season series is tied at eight. The 
two clubs finish with three games in Cincinnati.

In the AL and NL West, the Oakland A's and Los Angeles Dodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-dodgers> have their divisions 
wrapped up, as do the Boston Red Sox and the Atlanta Braves in the AL and NL 
East. That leaves the two AL wild card spots to play for, and three teams, the 
Tampa Bay Rays, Cleveland Indians and Texas Rangers are the remaining clubs 
bidding for the postseason. The Rays occupy the first wild card spot having won 
six straight games while the Tribe, also winners of six straight, have a one 
game lead over Texas. The Rangers, besides being down a game, have to host the 
Angels, a team playing their best baseball of the season, a team that their 
former slugger, Josh Hamilton, jettisoned them for last winter - needless to 
say the Halos will have plenty of incentive to knock out their rivals.

No one has had an easier schedule down the stretch than Cleveland, and they 
look they'll run the table right now, finishing with four games in Minnesota 
against the lowly Twins. The Rays finish with one game in the Bronx, Mariano 
Rivera's last appearance at Yankee Stadium, before flying to Toronto for three 
games. It's hard to imagine Texas recovering from yet another collapse at the 
11th hour, but if the three teams are tied a whole new wildly complex scenario 
breaks out, one that will involve multiple play-in games on Monday and Tuesday 
of next week.

You probably want to know how a three-way tie would be broken - deep breathe...

The two teams with the best combined winning percentage against the other tied 
teams gets two chances to qualify for the playoffs. The Indians were 7-5 this 
season against Texas and Tampa Bay. Tampa were 7-6 against Texas and Cleveland. 
In the current scenario, Cleveland and Tampa Bay would play each other. The 
winner of that game, which would be in Cleveland on Monday 30 September, would 
become the first wild card team, while the loser of that game would play Texas 
on Tuesday 1 October. If Tampa lose to Cleveland, they would travel to Texas 
for that second game, and if Cleveland lost they would host Texas. The winner 
of that game would also go to the wildcard game. Get it? I don't blame you if 
you don't.

So, if the season ended today, what would the playoff match-ups be?

NL Wild Card, one game

Pittsburgh vs Cincinnati, site TBD, 1 October 

NLDS, best of five series

Los Angeles vs Atlanta, 3 October

Winner of Wild Card game vs St Louis, 3 October

AL Wild Card, one game

Cleveland vs Tampa Bay or Texas vs Cleveland or Tampa Bay vs Texas, site TBD, 
2 October

ALDS, best of five series

Detroit vs Oakland, 4 October

Winner of Wild Card game vs Boston, 4 October

Alex Rodriguez appeal vs playoffs 
 A fan has a message for the New York Yankees' Alex Rodriguez in top of the 
second inning against the Chicago White Sox at US Cellular Field in Chicago, 
Illinois, Monday, August 5, 2013. Photograph: Chicago Tribune/MCT via Getty 
Images 

The New York Yankees may be out of the running for the postseason for only the 
second time since 1995, but their fans can still expect to be entertained after 
the 2013 season expires.The Alex Rodriguez show 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/yankees-insider-a-rod-exits-early-article-1.1467944>
 returns just in time for it to compete with the playoffs for attention - just 
another reason for the Commissioners Office to be upset with A-Rod. His hearing 
begins Monday as the slugger's wildly expensive defense team get set to appeal 
the 211 game suspension that Major League Baseball handed him for his 
connection to the anti-aging clinic,Biogenesis of America, the now defunct firm 
accused of providing performance-enhancing drugs to big leaguers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/02/biogenesis-peds-scandal-explained>
. Rodriguez' representatives, which are alleged to cost him several hundred 
thousand dollars a month, are fighting to squash the suspension completely and 
get him back on the field next season, while baseball seeks to uphold the 
lengthy ban, one substantially longer than the 65-game suspension handed out to 
Ryan Braun and the 12 other players who received 50-game suspensions.There is 
also the possibility that MLB and Rodriguez could reach a settlement. 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/i-team/count-a-rod-settlement-article-1.1466774>
 Reporters will not be present during that hearing that promises to be 
absolutely brutal as both sides fight to win over arbitrator Fredric Horowitz. 
Anthony Bosch, the former owner of Biogenesis, who handed over documents to MLB 
after the league sued him and several of his colleagues, is expected to be the 
first on the stand.

Should A-Rod be back on the field in 2014 it will be with a different looking 
Yankees ballclub. 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/harper-checkbook-hope-yanks-quick-fix-article-1.1465505>
 Joe Girardi, who took a pile of rusty bolts to the brink of the playoffs is a 
free agent and could go to several teams including the Nationals, Chicago Cubs, 
Philadelphia Phillies and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, to name just a 
few, or, he could stay home and take the pay raise. With Mariano Rivera and 
Andy Pettitte retired, Derek Jeter is all there is left to the core of the 
ballclub that won five World Series titles. First baseman Mark Teixeira will be 
back from his wrist injury, while Joba Chamberlain and Phil Hughes will likely 
be elsewhere. Curtis Granderson and Hiroki Kuroda are free agents, as are Kevin 
Youkilis, and of course, Robinson Cano. The Yankees second baseman won't have 
too many teams after him - the Angels won't get caught up in another big money 
signing, the Dodgers don't really need him, so, who is out there to drive out 
the price? It's probably best for both parties for Cano to stay in New York, so 
don't expect him to leave the Bronx. We also still don't know if A-Rod's salary 
will come off the salary books should he be suspended next season - New York 
are attempting to get their payroll under $189m to avoid a substantial luxury 
tax. That decision will impact the way the Yankees move forward in what 
promises to be a major transition.

The Toddfather bids adieu

There was no league-wide goodbye tour for Todd Helton 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/h/heltoto01.shtml>, no mile high 
pile of gifts (although he did inspire one particularly amusing piece of 
"artwork" - see the tweet below), no endless stream of praise as there has been
for Mariano Rivera, the retiring New York Yankees closer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/23/new-york-yankees-mariano-rivera-number-retired>
. However, if you're a Colorado fan, Helton is your face of your 20-year-old 
franchise, the center of your Rockies universe, a role he's been playing for as 
long as you can remember. That means his last game on Thursday at Coors Field 
was a big deal, which makes sense when you consider we're talking about a 
player with a lifetime batting average of .317*, someone who has hit 369* 
career home runs, who has collected over 2500* hits over a 17-year career - 
certainly numbers worthy of hall-of-fame consideration. Helton was a very good 
baseball player, and so he deserves a good deal praise, which he got in droves 
from the Denver crowd. They cheered as hereceived a gift horse, 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2013/09/todd-helton-colorado-rockies-horse/> when he 
and his family threw out the first pitch, when he crushed a dramatic home run 
against the visiting Red Sox in saying goodbye - solid script writing from
Peyton Manning's ex-Tennessee teammate. 
<http://www.thedenverchannel.com/sports/rockies/broncos-qb-peyton-manning-reflects-on-his-friendship-with-rockies-todd-helton-as-helton-retires>
April Whitzman (@Alleycat17) 
A #Rockies <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Rockies&src=hash> fan presented 
Todd Helton with an incredible piece of art: Helton as a Centaur. Amazing:
pic.twitter.com/TrT0Si8bFP <http://t.co/TrT0Si8bFP>
 <https://twitter.com/Alleycat17/statuses/382248267934744576> September 23, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/Alleycat17/statuses/382248267934744576> 

The sad bit is that for fans outside Colorado, (and even those honest ones 
inside) Helton will always be linked with the ballpark in which he played - 
Coors Field, a venue that comes complete with an asterisk because it's 
surrounded by Denver's thin and dry rocky mountain air, one that has inflated 
both hitting and pitching statistics over the years. Even thoughColorado began 
using a humidor in 2002 <http://mlbreports.com/2012/07/14/humidor/> to keep the 
balls from drying up, and thus, from flying further, and even though Coors 
Field hasn't actually led the league in home runs since that season, it is 
still very much a friendly park for hitters, and thus, Helton's career has been 
taken less seriously by baseball fans. That's a shame because baseball people 
love it when a player stays loyal to a franchise as The Toddfather has, when a 
player is relatively consistent for long periods. It's true, you can't deny 
that Helton played better at home, a lot better actually - but really, who 
doesn't? Even Ted Williams' batting average was over 30 points better at Fenway 
Park. OK, OK, I won't mention Williams and Helton in the same paragraph again - 
but you know what I mean. The point is, for once, let's forget about the 
ballpark, even for a few moments, and give a Colorado Rockies legend the full 
respect and credit that he deserves.

Birds season heads south
 Baltimore Orioles' Manny Machado is taken off the field on a stretcher after 
injuring his left leg against the Tampa Bay Rays on Monday. Photograph: Chris 
O'Meara/AP 

There's the bad news and the not so bad news for fans of the Baltimore 
Orioles. The bad news is that the O's won't be making a return trip to the 
postseason. The not so bad news is thatManny Machado 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/machama01.shtml>, who emerged as 
one of the most dynamic and electrifying young talents in baseball this season, 
is not as hurt as many onlookers feared when the 21-year-old phenom went down 
on Monday in Tampa. Manny Machado was legging out a ground ball to second base 
and then suddenly collapsed, grabbing his knee in what was a routine play. 
After several minutes on the turf, writing in pain, the stretcher was out, and 
Machado was removed as the Orioles braced themselves for what looked like a 
blown out knee. Luckily it wasn't, rather it was a tear of his, and get your 
medical books out, medial patellofemoral ligament, which meanshe is out for six 
to eight weeks rather than significantly longer. 
<http://articles.baltimoresun.com/2013-09-24/sports/bal-orioles-manny-machado-injury-less-serious-than-feared-20130924_1_manny-machado-spring-training-injury>
 The O's pass a gut check, as Machado, who played the best third base in 
baseball this season while hitting a league leading 51 doubles, should be as 
good as new come springtime.

The O's may not have made it back to the playoffs, but it's clear that the 
organization has finally turned a corner. Their fielding improved, and their 
hitting improved, notably in slugging percentage, with many thanks going to 
Chris Davis' league leading 52 home runs. What went wrong? Well, they weren't 
as lucky as last season, when they were29-9 in one run games 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/BAL/2012-schedule-scores.shtml> and 
16-2 in extra innings.This year they were 17-31 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/BAL/2013-schedule-scores.shtml> in one 
run games, and 8-7 in extras. Those are massive swings. Now, you're probably 
thinking, heck, looks like they were just lucky in 2012. Well, there's no 
arguing that. This year though it looks like karma came and nipped them in the 
you know where - if we split the difference in one run games, the O's are in 
the playoffs. The route back to the postseason is to go out and find a way to 
bring in a few first class arms to improve the weak rotation, and so that's 
their winter project. There's some depth in the lineup to acquire the starting 
pitching they need to join the elite - not an easy task, as no one likes to 
give up pitching. Should Baltimore be able to pull something legitimate off (a 
bigger splash than Scott Feldman) they'll have a legitimate shot at re-joining 
the AL elite in 2014.

National disappointment
 The Washigton Nationals honored Davey Johnson on Sunday, paying tribute to 
the retiring 70-year-old manager. Photograph: Susan Walsh/AP 

There's a major case of schadenfreude going around baseball as those in and 
around the game take great delight in watching the Washington Nationals fail to 
reach the postseason. The Nationalsput their ace Stephen Strasburg on an 
innings limit in 2012 to protect his long term health, 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/nationals/washington-nationals-stephen-strasburg-shutdown-decision-in-2012-still-haunts-team/2013/09/24/2036ebd6-2537-11e3-b3e9-d97fb087acd6_story.html>
 and ultimately shut him down despite reaching the playoffs for the first time 
since moving from Montreal for 2005 -St Louis sent them home in the decisive 
Game Five of the NLDS, one in which they blew a 6-0 lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/13/st-louis-cardinals-washington-nationals-nlds-game-5-live>
. Whether or not you believe Strasburg would have made the difference, and 
managerDavey Johnson said in his weekly radio spot that they "probably" win it 
all 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/23840110/davey-johnson-nats-probably-win-12-world-series-with-strasburg>
 with their ace on the postseason roster, doesn't stop those from believing the 
Nats were being arrogant in their belief that they'd have other chances at 
winning a first franchise World Series, and now, a year after exceeding 
expectations in winning 98 games, they've failed to live up to their billing. 
So the short and bittersweet Davey Johnson era comes to an end with the team 
playing it's best ball as the season wound down only to fall short of the 
playoffs. The rotation, which was just lights out last season, took somewhat of 
a step back in 2013, while the offense surged down the stretch after health 
issues curtailed their bats in the first half. So, it's still all there, 
Strasburg, Bryce Harper, Ryan Zimmerman, Gio Gonzalez, and much more, meaning 
there's reason to believe this season was something of an aberration. Now they 
need a new manager as Davey Johnson, who managed four different teams to the 
playoffs, who enjoyed an extraordinary 60 year baseball career as a skipper and 
a player, moves to the front office to become a team consultant.

Who will replace Johnson in what has suddenly become one of the better 
managerial positions in baseball? Well, the in-house leader must be Randy Knoor 
-mlb.com 
<http://therocket.mlblogs.com/2013/09/02/knorr-would-like-to-be-manager-of-nats/>
 says he managed half the current roster in the minor leagues, and so, if you 
believe that's important in a skipper, then he's a strong candidate. Outside 
the organization, well, if Joe Girardi wants to leave the Yankees, and he's a 
hot free-agent manager, he could do a lot worse then land in D.C., where 
there's a young core of talent. Charlie Manuel is also available and wants to 
manage again. Then there's skippers like Willie Randolph, who won a lot of 
games with the Mets and never got another shot. What if Arte Moreno in Los 
Angeles fires Mike Scioscia - could he land in the capital? There's a ton of 
managerial talent out there, and whoever GM Mike Rizzo brings in will make 
offseason headlines.
 