
Indie comics have not yet followed Disney films, rock discographies and the 
Jerry Springer Show into the world of opera. There is still noMaus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maus>: The Opera, nor Jimmy Corrigan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jimmy_Corrigan>: the Smartest Tenor on Earth. But 
there is at least one comics legend brave enough to have made the jump from 
scribe to librettist. Harvey Pekar, author ofAmerican Splendor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Splendor>, has written his first opera.

Leave Me Alone tells the story of Harvey Pekar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harvey-pekar> (played by Harvey Pekar), 
while he is in the process of writing a jazz opera with saxophonist Dan Plonsey 
(played by Dan Plonsey). The two grapple with the creative dilemmas, the avant 
garde, paying the bills, and their wives (who play, naturally, themselves). 
Artist Robert Crumb also appears, by telephone.

The whole thing premiered this weekend at Oberlin College in Ohio. It can be 
viewed – free of charge –over the internet 
<http://www.oberlin.edu/con/leavemealone/>.

"I'm trying to get everyman involved in art," Pekar explained to NPR. "And I'm 
trying to get them involved in thinking about what it takes to get everyman 
into experimental music or painting or novel writing. I think it's important to 
have the support of the masses."

Pekar has enjoyed at least a little support from the masses, making the 
transition from underground figure to mainstream icon thanks toAmerican Splendor
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-splendor> – a cult comic strip that 
later became a film.

"I went back home to Dallas," tells Patty Stubel, 23, one of the opera's 
singers, "and my friends were like, 'So, what are you doing?' I told them about 
this opera and I was like, 'Yeah, it's written by this guy named Harvey Pekar.' 
And they're like, 'American Splendor Harvey Pekar?' And I'm like, 'Yeah, I 
hadn't really heard of it.' And they're like, 'Are you kidding me?' So, my bad."
 