
Working in India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> as I do, the thing 
that strikes me most about students I talk to is their drive, dedication and 
their ambition to succeed. Indian students maintain a difficult balance between 
young, forward-thinking individualism and observing the more traditional social 
normsof strict family and generational structures. This is reinforced by many 
state institutions which are largely out of sync with the volume and needs of 
young people, especially women.

Within this context, education, especially higher education, represents a once 
in a lifetime opportunity to secure and achieve personal ambition and transcend 
the barriers that Indian students perceive hold them back. Overseas education 
has for a long time been seen as the best opportunity to do this – and the UK 
is stilll held in high regard.

However, traditional flows of Indian students moving around the world have 
since 2010 begun to change.Latest figures from the Higher Education Statistics 
Agency <http://www.hesa.ac.uk/content/view/3103/393/> (Hesa) show an alarming 
25% reduction of Indian students recruited to the UK. Some groups have blamed 
the government's reforms to post-study work opportunities, not to mention
restrictions on part-time work during study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/nov/06/international-students-private-universities-working-visas>
.

But it does a gross disservice to both the complex ambitions and motivations 
of Indian students, and the attractiveness of the UK's higher education sector, 
to attribute such a big drop solely to the ability to work after study issue. 
In autumn 2013, the British Council sought to analyse what is causing such big 
shifts in Indian student mobility. Our research of more than 10,000 Indian 
students' views revealed a much more significant change in their 
decision-making process.

Of those surveyed, 65% of students indicated that high cost was the greatest 
deterrent to studying overseas. Second to this was the lack of scholarship 
opportunities (45%) followed by difficulties getting a visa (44%) and not 
having the opportunity to work (34%).

Financial concerns come as no real surprise given the recent depreciation of 
the rupee – the real cost of studying overseas (between 2011-13) in the US, 
Australia and UK has increased on average US $10,000 per year. Of the big study 
destinations, only Germany has managed to restrict rising costs to under $2,000.

If cost is the biggest decision-making factor, what are perceptions around the 
value of studying overseas? It's easy to assume that return on investment (ROI) 
should be solely measured by financial return. The research showed that Indian 
students considered value with far more nuance. Yes, 27% did equate ROI to 
securing a well-paid job after graduation. But 20% also indicated they believed 
the value of their investment was best returned by becoming an expert in their 
chosen field of study, and 15% defined ROI as global employers recognising 
their qualifications.

Getting a good job is a high priority, but Indian students very clearly view 
their employment status with a wider perspective outside their traditional 
Indian setting – they seek global acknowledgement.

So Indian students want recognition on a global platform, and feel the only 
way they can achieve this is via top quality education – 61% consider this the 
most important factor when selecting a study destination. In this context, what 
does quality mean? Our research found that the three most important aspects of 
quality for Indian students were: the higher education institution and its 
reputation; the course, its content and who is teaching it; and the value added 
to their experience. Skills for future employment were identified as a 
necessary part of this added value, something that may placate the Indian 
employers who complain that recent graduates return with the academic knowledge 
and qualification but not the career-ready skills.

This means there will always be a proportion of Indian students that seek 
overseas education. For too long, however, UK institutions have failed to 
recognise the wider context and rationale in which Indian students choose to 
study abroad. It is incorrect to attribute the recent fall in UK applications 
simply to a change in government visa policy and misplaced rhetoric – the
"horrible, negative effect" 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/anglo-indian-ties-have-been-butchered-by-may/2010735.article>
 cited by the University of East Anglia's Edward Acton in the wake of Hesa's 
figures.

The opportunities for UK institutions to recruit ambitious students are still 
there, but given how discerning those students are, the most successful 
institutions will be those who recognise that young Indians are thinking 
globally, and devise a recruitment strategy that reflects that.

This strategy will be characterised by new partnerships that find career entry 
points and pathways for students with top international businesses, with 
opportunities to work before or while they study, flexible learning options 
merging virtual and face-to-face learning, and new global networks for 
professional development for alumni.

Creating these conditions will require a genuine leap of faith from the UK 
government, industry and the higher education sector to co-operate and a new 
wave of commitment between all UK stakeholders on the ground in India to 
support and communicate with our universities.

Richard Everitt is director of education at British Council, India – follow it 
on Twitter@inBritish <https://twitter.com/inBritish>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 