 Louis le Brocquy's Procession with Lilies. Will it make €350,000 at auction? 
The cash-strapped Irish newspaper publisher, Independent News & Media (INM), 
is selling off its substantial art collection. Some 67 paintings and drawings - 
including several by acclaimed Irish artists - will be auctioned at Adam's in 
Dublin next Wednesday (26 September).

The reason (excuse?) given for the decision to sell is that INM's new offices 
have "a lot of glass" and "picture-unfriendly".

It is more likely that INM's current management and its largest shareholder, 
Denis O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>, have little 
affection for paintings acquired during the reign of the company's previous 
owner and chairman, Tony O'Reilly.

Most of the paintings were bought by INM in the 1970s and 1980s, and were 
displayed in the boardroom, management offices and editorial offices at the 
company's former headquarters.

The collection includes nine works by Louis le Brocquy, including a painting 
entitled Procession with Lilies, which is estimated to fetch somewhere between 
€250,000 and €350,000.The Irish Times reported  
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/ireland/2012/0821/1224322586933.html>that 
it was inspired by a photograph in the Dublin Evening Herald captioned: 
"Schoolgirls returning from church after the blessing of the lilies on the 
feast of St Anthony".

There are also four paintings by Basil Blackshaw, two by Martin Mooney listed 
between €8,000 and €12,000, and one by the celebrated politician, writer and 
poet George Russell (Æ), which could attract bids of about €6,000.

In total, the collection could realise more than €500,000 (£400,000). But the 
art market inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is somewhat 
depressed, not least because so many companies have been disposing of corporate 
art collections in recent years.
 