
Independent News & Media, the indebted Irish media group, is pursuing a sale 
of its South African business,according to a Financial Times article. 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/63ac6e26-ca9e-11e1-8872-00144feabdc0.html#axzz20GBt3vnW>

INM publishes leading titles in the country's main cities - including The Star 
in Johannesburg, The Cape Times in Cape Town, The Mercury in Durban and the 
Pretoria Times.

Its South African operations account for a third of its revenue and half of 
its operating profit. Last year the revenues totalled €194.6m (£153.7m) while 
the operating profit was €37.6m (£29.7m).

The FT story says the potential buyers are one of two South African 
conglomerates, Shanduka, run by Cyril Ramaphosa, and Sekunjalo. They could pay 
as much as £200m for the group.

It is yet another indication of the continuing decline of INM, the global 
media empire built up by Tony O'Reilly. His commitment to South Africa was 
founded on his admiration for, and friendship with,Nelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela>.

He has already seen his beloved British Independent titles sold off (to 
Alexander andEvgeny Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev> 
in March 2010).

The decision to explore the South African disposal comes three months after 
O'Reilly's son, Gavin, stepped down from as chief executive following a 
prolonged battle with INM's largest shareholder,Denis O'Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>.

O'Brien built up his stake as the company found it increasingly onerous to 
deal with its debt, now standing at €426m (£336m). It has a big pension deficit 
too.

Costs have been cut substantially since Vincent Crowley assumed the role of 
chief executive in April. But the refinancing of its debts is of paramount 
importance.

It makes sense therefore to sell the South African division because, according 
to a stockbroking analyst quoted by the FT, it's "a good business that is 
performing well."

Source: Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/63ac6e26-ca9e-11e1-8872-00144feabdc0.html#axzz20GBt3vnW>
 