
In a previous life, I was the innovation manager of a division of a 
multinational consumer goods company. Now, I run an NGO dedicated to fighting 
hunger. Both organisations need innovation.


I think civil society organisations can learn quite a bit from business, from 
its processes, its instruments, its focus on results. One such concept is 
“disruptive innovation”. I don’t mean the panicky talk of making our NGO world 
redundant that’s so fashionable in development circles these days. What I mean 
is something new that creates a new market, in our case a new type of impact. 
Think of how Southwest Airlines made air travelaffordable to normal people 
<https://books.google.de/books?id=f8H4PMhK6AMC&pg=PA137&lpg=PA137&dq=southwest+airlines+scott+anthony&source=bl&ots=rcZtJi_Qub&sig=uybJfHiFPyw9L22IycZxXdPJB-s&hl=de&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjAiNn51PPPAhVGPhQKHa0UBgsQ6AEIQzAF#v=onepage&q=southwest%20airlines%20scott%20anthony&f=false>
. None of the elements were new, but Southwest stripped the existing business 
model of flying down to the bare essentials of getting people from A to B. The 
concept of the low-cost airline was born, and a new market was created. The 
trick was not to focus on the perfect solution, but on the solution that was 
“good enough” for the job at hand.

Radical thinking reveals the secrets of making change happen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/31/radical-thinking-reveals-the-secrets-of-making-change-happen>
At my NGO Welthungerhilfe (one of Germany’s biggest), we’re using the same 
good enough approach. We have drilled boreholes and built wells for over 50 
years now. As you would expect from a German organisation, our wells would make 
any engineer proud. They aren’t always the cheapest, but they get the job done, 
and they last. But durability isn’t always the main problem. Sometimes, the 
problem is that you simply can’t ship in material from the outside. Or, if you 
do, you don’t get spare parts easily if the well does need to be repaired. Or 
you need trained experts to do the maintenance. In these cases, sometimes there 
is indeed a better way.


In our case the good enough solution was a driller and a water pump made 
solely of locally available material that we developed and scaled with our 
partner organisation EMAS: a plastic tube and valves, galvanised steel, glass 
marbles. Nothing fancy, nothing more. It’s about minimal material investment 
and maximum output. At a fraction of the cost of a normal well (in fact, our 
well costs only 15% of a standard well), this opens up a new market for 
individual households as opposed to the communities who could afford wells 
before. It builds a new value chain for parts, assembly and maintenance in the 
region where the wells are being used. It is adapted to local standards, both 
financially and technology-wise. Yes, the well has limitations (it operates 
best in sandy soil), but where conditions are right, it’s good enough. In fact, 
so good enough that in Bolivia alone, more than 50,000 wells were built. We 
talk about technology innovation a lot, and we often mean high-tech solutions. 
But sometimes, innovation can be decidedly low-tech, and our manual pump is a 
case in point.

Another NGO taking the good enough approach is AFRIpads, a social enterprise 
based in Uganda. AFRIpads focuses on one very clear issue: the absence of 
sanitary hygiene for girls which leads to high drop-out rates at school. The 
normal solution would be to sell sanitary pads, but that is costly and 
impracticable in many hard to reach villages. AFRIpads found a new solution by 
going back to basics. They have created reusable sanitary pads manufactured 
locally in Uganda by women in a firm that operates as a social enterprise and 
channels proceeds back into the company. A standard pad may have been the 
technically perfect solution, but the reusable one was good enough. It created 
both a market and millions of opportunities for girls who would otherwise 
suffer from stigmatisation during their periods.

About 90% of all innovations fail. Companies spend a lot of money to test and 
qualify, but the development world doesn’t have those kinds of resources, and 
most donors like to fund ideas that are the least likely to fail. So, how can 
we improve the odds? Making a virtue out of necessity sometimes works best. If 
you eliminate “business as usual” as an alternative, your chances of successful 
adoption increase.


How do you solve a problem like a broken water pump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/22/how-do-you-solve-a-problem-like-a-broken-water-pump>
Here’s how this worked for us in Sierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone>. Welthungerhilfe had offered 
farmer field schools for a long time and with quite some success: we trained 
cocoa farmers to nurse, plant, harvest and market their produce. Then Ebola hit 
in 2011. Suddenly, gatherings of more than five people were forbidden. It could 
have been the end of our farmer field schools, but it forced us to think again. 
It forced us to go digital. We developed a digital farmer school for illiterate 
farmers that combined training with women empowerment, certification and market 
links. The result: costs per farmer decreased by 90%. A potential scaling up of 
this could reach millions of cocoa smallholder farmers in Africa. We have now 
reapplied the model in other countries. In Kenya, it formed the basis of an 
electronic marketplace for cattle – we call it “eBay for cows”. In Zimbabwe, 
the model was used to build a digital agriculture extension service.

The lessons learned for innovation in the development sector? For me there are 
three: the first is that disruptive innovation, the one that creates new 
markets, is based on the concept of good enough. Rather than go for the perfect 
solution, go for the cost-effective, smarter, leaner one. The second lesson is 
that, in order to get traction and maximise the odds of success, it pays to 
look for real problems on the ground, build up from what already exists, and 
try to eliminate the business as usualoption as an alternative. And lastly, 
that business tools such as the notion of disruptive innovation can be really 
useful in a development context. They have been created to sell more soap. 
Let’s use them to help us solve some of the world’s most pressing social 
problems. Let’s not leave the sharpest tools in the box to the capitalists.


Dr. Till Wahnbaeck is the CEO of Welthungerhilfe. For more information about 
their work clickhere <http://www.welthungerhilfe.de/home.html>. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 