
Seeing the northern lights is a truly unforgettable travel experience, but one 
that is largely dependent on luck. As a traveller with limited time, you must 
do all you can to increase your chances of catching a show. This winter, the 
lights enter the most lively phase of their 11-year cycle, meaning the next 
three years are a great time to go. And there's plenty of choice when it comes 
to where to go; Scandinavia, Canada, Alaska ... even Scotland, each of which 
have lovely places to hole up and turn your eyes skyward, as our insiders 
reveal ...

Canada

When I was a child, it never occurred to me that people would have to travel 
to see the northern lights. They were just there, dancing through the winter 
night. "My northern lights," I called them, as one might say "my friends". It's 
possible to feel this way if you are born in a village called Valhalla Centre, 
north of the 55th parallel in Alberta, Canada. But the northern lights capital 
of the world has to be the sub-Arctic city of Yellowknife in the Northwest 
Territories, where I lived for several years. There's nothing like standing on 
the surface of a frozen lake, in total dark and cold, watching ribbons of 
greenish light run and ripple and play crack the whip across the heavens.

The Great Canadian Adventure Company (+1 888 285 1676, adventures.ca 
<http://adventures.ca/>) has a four-day tour to view the northern lights from 
Yellowknife for £995pp including hotel accommodation, hot drinks and snacks, 
aurora viewing from heated tipis and expert guides, but not flights. (Canadian 
North flights –canadiannorth.com <http://www.canadiannorth.com> – connect 
Yellowknife to Edmonton, Calgary and Ottawa). Online images of the northern 
lights above Yellowknife can be seen atastronomynorth.com 
<http://astronomynorth.com/>.
Candace Savage, author of Aurora: the Mysterious Northern Lights

Also try British tour operator Ski Safari (01273 224060, skisafari.com 
<http://www.skisafari.com>) has add-on trips to the Yukon to see the northern 
lights in winter. A nine-night holiday in January, with five nights in Whistler 
followed by a four-night aurora borealis package, including all flights and 
transfers, costs £1,819pp.

Iceland
 Light relief ... geothermal heated hot tub, Reykjavik. Photograph: Alamy 
Just like in Donald Rumsfeld's world, there are known unknowns and unknown 
unknowns when looking to view the aurora borealis in Iceland. Here are some of 
the known knowns: optimal viewing time is between September and March; cold, 
crisp, clear nights are the best; and it's also nice if the weather is calm, as 
you'll want to stand outside and gaze. You can stay in Reykjavík and hope for 
the best (a really intense aurora), or venture outside and increase your odds. 
A 30-minute drive from Reykjavík is usually far enough. The geothermal pools 
that dot the Icelandic countryside are excellent places for aurora-spotting, 
especially when it's really cold. My personal favourite is Reykjanes, in the 
north-west of Iceland, which has an Olympic-sized geothermal pool. You can swim 
at midnight, sometimes joined by ducks and nightjars, and stay in the rustic 
Hotel Reykjanes (+354 456 4844, rnes.is <http://rnes.is/>, doubles from £54). 
Haukur Magnússon, editor of Reykjavík Grapevine (grapevine.is 
<http://grapevine.is>) the city's English language magazine

Iceland has several boutique hotels in rural locations. Hotel Ranga (+354 487 
5700,hotelranga.is <http://www.hotelranga.is>, doubles from £158) sits close to 
the still-steaming crater of the Eyjafjalljökull volcano and has naturally 
heated hot tubs for aurora viewing. Hotel staff will wake guests when the 
lights begin to dance, so there's no need to stay up all night. Hotel Budir 
(+354 435 6700,budir.is <http://budir.is>, doubles from £115) on the 
Snaefellsnes peninsula is an elegant getaway with a fabulous restaurant, and 
the bar's floor-to-ceiling windows look over a striking volcanic shoreline. 
Those wanting to combine activities with lights-chasing may want to travel 
further north, to Hotel Sel Myvatn (+354 464 4164,myvatn.is 
<http://www.myvatn.is/>, doubles from £73), for ice go-karting, cross-country 
skiing and winter horse-riding.
Polly Evans <http://www.pollyevans.com/>, author of Northern Lights: A 
Practical Travel Guide 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781841623375>
 (Bradt, £5.59 at the Guardian bookshop)

In Iceland it only takes 20 minutes to drive from the capital to a place to 
see the northern lights. In other countries you need to go to more remote 
areas. Many people head toThingvellir national park <http://www.thingvellir.is>
. There's no hotel there but it's close to Reykjavík: you can leave after 
dinner and be back before midnight. Head to Almannagjá, the spot in the park 
where they founded the parliament over 1,000 years ago. It's a small canyon 
with huge cliffs and nothing to block your view of the lights. In Reykjavík 
stay at Hotel Holt (+354 552 5700,holt.is <http://holt.is/>, doubles from 
£120), one of the oldest hotels in town, with cosy charm and one of the biggest 
collections of art by Icelandic artist Jóhannes Kjarval, who paid for his rooms 
with paintings when he was starting out.
Magnus Haflidason, local expert on Reykjavík for MyDestinationInfo.com 
<http://www.mydestinationinfo.com/>

Sweden

The lights are visible nearly every night in Swedish Lapland, and 6pm to 2am 
is the best time. On some nights they may be very faint and disappear quickly, 
while on others they will be brighter and visible for several hours.

The Tornedalen region is a good place to see them, with cross-country skiing, 
snowshoeing, walking on the frozen River Torne and ice fishing available. You 
can travel by husky sledge or snowmobile through ancient forests and around 
Lake Poustijärvi, and stay in a traditional log cabin, hopping between a hot 
steam bath and a roll in the snow. You can feast on traditional foods: coffee, 
rieska sandwich, coffee-cheese, dried smoked game and fried burbot, a 
freshwater fish. The Rokka family in the village of Lansån are Sami reindeer 
herders and moose farmers, and can take you reindeer sledding and give you a 
Lappish lunch for about £160pp, including transport and equipment (+46 926 
26018,rokkas.se <http://www.rokkas.se>). They also do overnight trips.
Rolf Lahti, green travel operator (arcticexperience.se 
<http://www.arcticexperience.se>) and chairman of the Korva branch of the 
Swedish Society for Nature Conservation 
<http://www.naturskyddsforeningen.se/in-english/>

Also try Responsible Travel (responsibletravel.com/Trip/Trip101513.htm) offers 
tailormade trips to the region around the river Torne. A four-day stay costs 
from £434 including chalet accommodation, cross-country skiing and northern 
lights viewing, but not flights (fly to Kemi/Tornio, just over the border in 
Finland, connections from Helsinki with Finavia,finavia.fi 
<http://www.finavia.fi>).

Norway
 Enjoy a meal in a Sami tent. Photograph: Harry Horton/Alamy 
Norway is in the centre of the northern lights zone, so the probability of 
seeing it is close to 100% on any cloud-free night between October and March. 
If you stay in Tromsø (frequent sightings from November to the end of March), 
you can explore the city's historic wooden houses by day and hunt the lights at 
night. Other adventures include dogsledding in the remote Tamok valley with 
Lyngsfjord Adventure (lyngsfjord.com <http://lyngsfjord.com/>, £170pp, 
half-price for children); a photography trip with guide Kjetil Skogli (
auroraphoto.no <http://www.kskogli.no/aurora/>, from £153pp), or join Guide 
Gunnar for a Theatre of Food meal in a Sami tent by the sea (from £111pp,
guide-gunnar.no <http://www.guide-gunnar.no>) while watching for the lights. 
Direct flights to Tromsø from Gatwick and Edinburgh cost from £53 one way with 
Norwegian (norwegian.com <http://www.norwegian.com/>). In Tromsø, the Rica 
Ishavshotell (+47 77 666400,rica.no/ishavshotel <http://www.rica.no/ishavshotel>
, doubles from £135) is on the quay.
Hanne Knudsen, of Visit Norway (visitnorway.com <http://www.visitnorway.com/>)

Alaska
 Northen lights over Alaska. Photograph: Johnny Johnson/Getty Images 
The Fairbanks area is a convenient site for seeing the aurora but for the best 
viewing, get away from the city lights to the hilltops 20 miles north of town, 
where there are facilities for aurora watchers and accommodation such as the 
Aurora Borealis Lodge (+1 907 389 2812,auroracabin.com 
<http://www.auroracabin.com/>, from $169-199 a night). Another popular site is 
the Chena Hot Springs Resort (+1 907 451 8104,chenahotsprings.com 
<http://www.chenahotsprings.com/>), 60 miles to the north-east, where you can 
take a dog-sled ride then soak in hot water while watching the sky. Be prepared 
to stay up all night, and visit the museum on the University of Alaska 
Fairbanks campus. You can check the online forecast at
gedds.alaska.edu/auroraforecast <http://www.gedds.alaska.edu/auroraforecast/>.

The viewing season in Alaska runs from late August to mid-April in Fairbanks. 
March is particularly good because skies tend to be clear.
Neil Davis (neildavisalaska.com <http://www.neildavisalaska.com/>), professor 
emeritus of geophysics at the University of Alaska Fairbanks and the author of 
The Aurora Watcher's Handbook (Chicago University Press) 

Scotland

I haven't seen the northern lights for a while, but the further north you go 
the better, so head to the remote regions of the Highlands and Islands, 
particularly the north-east, such as Nairn (seevisitnairn.com 
<http://www.visitnairn.com/#> for accommodation, including the luxurious Castle 
Stuart, £150pp per night) or Cullen in Banffshire (britainsfinest.co.uk 
<http://www.britainsfinest.co.uk/selfcatering/selfcatering.cfm/searchazref/aikenshill-house>
 has stylish Seatown of Cullen Holiday Cottages from £450 a week, sleeping six).
Craig McCall Flynn, tour guide based in Greenock (mini-tours.com 
<http://www.mini-tours.com/>)

Finland
 Hotel Kakslauttanen igloos, Finland 
My wife and I have seen the lights from our home by the placid and frozen 
Paijanne lake, in Finland's lake district, and while driving through a deserted 
forest road. All of a sudden the winter sky became alive and we had to stop to 
admire the colours and shapes moving above us. It lasted about 10 minutes 
before the sky returned to its stern cold appearance. It was probably the 
fourth or fifth time we had seen the northern lights in all of our 17 years in 
Finland, but it was worth the wait.

You might be luckier, especially if you head north, to Lapland. With regular 
flights to Rovaniemi and Ivalo from Helsinki (from £210 withFinnair 
<http://finnair.com>), visitors can spend a weekend surrounded by reindeer and 
close to wonderful skiing. Ounasvaaran Pirtit (+358 16 333 0100,
ounasvaaranpirtit.fi <http://www.ounasvaaranpirtit.fi>, €138 a night for an 
apartment for two) in Rovaniemi, has red cabins just outside town. Kittila, a 
small town about 250km north of Rovaniemi, has log cabins in remote and 
wonderful forests.Holidaylettings.co.uk <http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk> has 
three ski lodges sleeping six from £204 a week. Kittila can be reached by plane 
(finnair.com, from £140 return <http://www.finnair.com>) from Helsinki or 
Tampere (about two hours).

Near Ivalo airport, the glass igloos of Hotel Kakslauttanen (+358 16 667100, 
kakslauttanen.fi/en <http://kakslauttanen.fi/en/>) are designed specially for 
watching the lights.
John Murolo, author of Elks Do Not Speak English, about Finnish culture and 
society (AuthorHouse, £7.50)

Greenland

Kangerlussuaq, and neighbouring Sisimiut, just above the Arctic circle in the 
south-west of the country are the best places, because of the stable climate 
and many days with clear skies. Around that area are many great hiking trails, 
and you can go dog-sledding, snowmobiling and skiing.

See greenland.com <http://www.greenland.com/> for adventures and 
accommodation. The Hotel Sisimut (+299 864840,hotelsisimiut.gl 
<http://www.hotelsisimiut.gl/>) has doubles for around £170. Air Greenland 
(airgreenland.com) flies from Copenhagen to Greenland.
Stine Sorenson, of tour operator I Love Adventure (
iloveadventure.co.uk/category/destination/greenland 
<http://iloveadventure.co.uk/category/destination/greenland>)
 