
September 2015

To begin this momentous year I meet Stella McCartney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/stella-mccartney> for coffee in Notting 
Hill. She’s very worried that the Chinese are taking all the places at the best 
private schools. Briefly consider whether I should put a Chinese model on the 
front cover of January’s issue, then decide against it. I then go home to try 
to fix the boiler. Get to the office where I have an exhausting morning trying 
to choose some pictures and working out the seating plan for a gala dinner.

October 2015


Meet Richard Macer who is making a documentary about Vogue’s centenary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/09/absolutely-fashion-inside-british-vogue-review-ridiculous-fascinating-and-fabulous-of-course>
 year. Not quite sure why I agreed to this and make a mental note to be as 
unhelpful as possible. I get him to waste his first two weeks filming inside GQ 
before he realises his mistake. Good. Go to meetVictoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/sep/05/-sp-victoria-beckham-fashion-empire-famous-successful>
 who is eating half a carrot for lunch. She tells meJohn Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> is keen to get her involved 
with the humanitarian crisis in Syria. Her next collection is to be entitled 
“Refugee Chic” with 1% of the profits going towards supermodels trapped inside 
Aleppo.

November 2015


Vogue editor Alexandra Shulman's fashion rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/28/alexandra-shulman-vogue-editor-fashion-rules>
My first meeting with the Duchess of Cambridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/duchess-of-cambridge> who is to be cover model 
for the centenary issue. She is much taller than I expected and far more 
helpful. Josh the photographer has some amazing ideas for the shoot. “How about 
we build a huge mansion in Kensington Gardens and I snap you on the doorstep?” 
he says. I point out there already is a large mansion in Kensington Gardens. 
“That’s totes amazing,” he says. “I never knew that.” I think the shoot is 
going to be a big success so long as no one finds out what we are planning. I 
go home to try and fix the boiler again.

December 2015
Fly to Milan for the Dolce & Gabbana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/dolce-gabbana-debuts-luxury-hijab-collection>
 fashion show. The plane does not crash. The show is truly groundbreaking as it 
is featuring winter clothes when all the other designers are showcasing summer 
clothes. Fashion is truly on the verge of a major revolution. Arrange to meet
Kate Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/20/kate-moss-instagram-finally-joined>
 for coffee at 3. She eventually turns up five days later. Time-keeping is not 
her strong point. I tell her not to worry as I hadn’t had anything better to do 
than keep my entire life on hold while she did whatever it was she was doing. I 
ask her if she will do a Rolling Stones cover shoot sometime next year. She 
says she will think about it and then falls over.

January 2016
I wake up to find out that David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/15/david-bowies-last-days-an-18-month-burst-of-creativity>
 has died. Audrey, my yoga teacher, tells me it is because Mercury is in 
retrograde. If only she had told David that he would have taken more care not 
to get cancer. Fly to Paris with Richard the idiot film-maker to meetKarl 
Lagerfeld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/26/karl-lagerfeld-takes-chanel-nature-trail-paris>
. “You look great,” I tell Karl. I genuinely don’t know why more 80 year olds 
don’t wear dark glasses indoors and tie their hair back in a pony tail. My good 
friendGeordie Greig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jul/16/mail-on-sundays-geordie-greig-is-50-courtier-50-old-school-hack>
, the editor of the Mail on Sunday, says he can’t wait to see the new Vogue 
exhibition and promises to give it a big plug. He sends Liz Jones, who writes 
2,000 words about how undermined she felt about there not being a photograph of 
herself.

February 2016
Get to stitch up Anna Wintour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/may/06/anna-wintour-who-is-the-real> 
by sneakily running my Rihanna cover ahead of hers. I’m sure she won’t mind as 
Condé Nast is one big happy family. Check through the spreadsheets and am 
saddened to see how little some of my staff earn. Cheer myself up by 
commissioning a £50,000 shoot withMario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/07/mario-testino-my-mother-is-a-big-dresser-she-is-92>
 and Kate to which Kate doesn’t bother to turn up. Am beginning to feel a bit 
guilty about fooling Richard and my team about the Duchess of Cambridge cover. 
PhoneNaomi Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/19/naomi-campbell-modelling-bob-marley-putin-autobiography-extract>
 to ask if she knows of a good plumber as my boiler is still playing up.

March 2016
Try to get David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/aug/23/stylewatch-david-beckhams-horse-head-tattoo>
 to do a shoot. He says yes. Then he says no. Then he says yes. Then he says no 
again. This goes on all month. I have a cold and am exhausted.

April 2016

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Finside-vogue-a-diary-of-my-100th-year-by-alexandra-shulman-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39116ecaf62b0e44508a7bc9cdddb1eb8b086396%2F0_0_866_1188%2F866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Vogue%3A%20A%20Diary%20of%20My%20100th%20Year%20by%20Alexandra%20Shulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Finside-vogue-a-diary-of-my-100th-year-by-alexandra-shulman-digested-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Vogue%3A%20A%20Diary%20of%20My%20100th%20Year%20by%20Alexandra%20Shulman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Finside-vogue-a-diary-of-my-100th-year-by-alexandra-shulman-digested-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39116ecaf62b0e44508a7bc9cdddb1eb8b086396%2F0_0_866_1188%2F866.jpg>
 Inside Vogue: A Diary Of My 100th Year (Fig Tree, £16.99) 
Fly to Paris for new Armani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/01/milan-fashion-week-armani-looks-to-next-years-red-carpet>
 collection. “It’s called Black Velvet,” he whispers to me. “Why?” I ask. 
“Because everything is made out of black velvet,” he replies. I tell him he’s a 
genius. Plans for the gala festival are all in the air asTaylor Swift and Tom 
Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/19/tom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt>
 can’t remember if they are supposed to be going out with one another or not. 
At leastKim Kardashian <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>
 is coming. Maybe she knows someone who can fix my boiler.

May 2016
Everyone loves my Duchess of Cambridge cover, though I get a bit annoyed when 
I see someone looking at it in the hairdressers for free. Richard tells me that 
he isn’t actually making the documentary he said he was. I am furious. How dare 
he work behind my back? To cap it all, my boiler is still leaking.

June 2016
A great night at the Vogue gala which even David Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/29/the-time-david-bailey-threatened-to-unzip-his-flies-while-taking-my-portrait>
 couldn’t ruin.Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
 says he can’t leave his yacht right now. I know none of his employees will 
have a pension but I can’t help loving him. All the Poles have left London as a 
result of Brexit. Now my boiler will never get mended.

Digested read, digested: Fashion at boiling point.

 