
Renee Wootton didn’t set out to smash any stereotypes, she just wanted to find 
friends when she moved to live with her grandparents in Marlee, a small town on 
the mid north coast of New South Wales.

But when she joined the Australian Air Force Cadets as a teen, she discovered 
a passion for aircraft that led her to a career in aerospace engineering – an 
unusual choice for a woman, especially one with an Indigenous background.

Wootton, now 23, is in the graduate program at Qantas with an honours degree 
under her belt, thanks to her own hard work and dedication and a number of 
programs that gave her a helping hand.

Putting to one side the dearth of female engineers (around 14% of enrolments), 
the number of Indigenous students who enrol in Stem courses (science, 
technology, engineering and maths) is tiny – fewer than 1%. Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander studentsrepresent around 1.4% 
<https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/atsiheac_background_paper_stem.pdf>
 (pdf) of all university enrolments. Around 3% of the Australian population is 
Indigenous.

This absence from Stem is locking them out of some of the most rewarding and 
high-paying jobs. Of fast-growing occupations, 75% require Stem skills.

Autistic employees can give companies an edge in innovative thinking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/17/autistic-employees-can-give-companies-an-edge-in-innovative-thinking>
Wootton says she had a drive to achieve: “For me, I didn’t have a family that 
stuck together. My parents divorced early on and Mum never really had a steady 
job – so that was a life I didn’t want for myself”.

Once Wootton discovered her love for aircraft engines, she took extra tutoring 
at school to try to get the marks she needed to get to university.

The aerospace engineering course at the University of NSW required an ATAR 
score of 93. Wootton achieved 80.71, but was awarded entry into an alternative 
pathway for Indigenous students, via a diploma in science, engineering and 
technology. After a year, she was able to transfer to the degree course.

In Sydney, she joined a mentoring and support service for Indigenous 
university students, CareerTrackers, which placed her in an internship at 
Qantas.

Qantas group executive of brand, marketing and corporate affairs, Olivia 
Wirth, says around1% (317 people) 
<http://www.reconciliation.org.au/raphub/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/reconciliation-action-plan-2015-2018.pdf>
 of the airline’s employees are of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander 
background.

Qantas is working towards a target of 1.5% by 2018 and, once it achieves that, 
will continue to keep increasing the proportion, she says.

“We are the national carrier and that has a lot of meaning. We believe it is 
important to play a leadership role – across the issue of diversity, not just 
Indigenous diversity,” she says.

“We believe reconciliation is important and we want to have a positive impact 
on the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community.”

The airline has a number of Indigenous employment programs in place, but last 
year was one of the first companies to sign a 10-year contract with 
CareerTrackers. Qantas will provide a minimum of 250 Aboriginal and Torres 
Strait Islander internships over 10 years, with 100 Indigenous internships over 
the first three years.

Wirth says the airline has a focus on getting diversity in the people employed 
in its Stem roles, which include pilots and engineers, and Indigenous people 
have been part of that.

Michael Combs is the founder of CareerTrackers 
<http://www.careertrackers.org.au/>, now in its seventh year, and says 94% of 
its internsgraduate 
<http://www.hcamag.com/hr-news/indigenous-interns-soaring-says-careertrackers-report-216982.aspx>
 from university (compared with the 40% of Indigenous students not in the 
program).

Combs credits this success rate to the sense of community, mutual support and 
accountability generated among the interns.

Combs says around 200 CareerTrackers students are doing Stem degrees and are 
being recruited by a wide range of companies which are looking for the “Stem 
way of thinking”.

Australian software company Atlassian is looking for ways to employ more 
people of Indigenous background and has so far hosted one intern through 
CareerTrackers last summer. “He was a first-year IT student at uni and he was 
so great that we are bringing him back for a second internship,” says head of 
diversity, Aubrey Blanche.

Gender diversity at work: using education to tackle the backlash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/10/gender-diversity-at-work-using-education-to-tackle-the-backlash>
“That is definitely a partnership we are looking at continuing in the future.”

Last year, the CSIRO and BHP Billiton Foundation launched the $28.8m 
Indigenous Stem education program. This ambitious five-year project has the 
twin aims of encouraging Indigenous students into Stem careers, while 
integrating traditional Indigenous science into school curricula.

The project director of the Indigenous Stem education program, Therese Postma, 
says integrating Indigenous content into schools’ science classes is a way of 
engaging the interest of Indigenous and non-Indigenous children.

“There is literature 
<http://research.acer.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1290&context=research_conference>
 that says Indigenous students are slightly more interested in science than 
non-Indigenous students,” she says.

“I think that links back to [the fact] there are still a lot who are working 
on the land and that links to responsibilities, what their family do, 
culturally, and cultural practices.”

This program also runs free summer schools 
<http://www.csiro.au/en/Education/Programs/Indigenous-STEM> for year 10 
Indigenous students, across the country. “The feedback we have had from those 
summer schools has been that students have come there thinking they might be a 
bricklayer in their community – and have left thinking they can be an 
engineer,” says Postma.

They can then take part in a leadership program, which supports them through 
the rest of their high school years and provides workplace opportunities in 
Stem areas.

Students are also offered a place in a Melbourne University-run bachelor of 
science, which is extended an extra year to four years so that young people who 
may face greater challenges in a tertiary education environment have time to 
get up to speed.

These university students are not required to qualify by their Atar score, but 
are accepted for their passion and interest in the subject. It is hoped that, 
at the end of the five years of BHP Billiton foundation funding, many of the 
elements of the program will have become self-sustaining and that funding can 
be found for the rest.

Aboriginal-owned business, Indigi Lab, promotes Indigenous science, 
<http://www.indigilab.com.au/what-is-indigenous-science/> while also 
encouraging Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children to take up Stem 
careers. Co-founder Luke Briscoe, a Kuku Yalanji man from far north Queensland 
explains Indigenous science has been around for 80,000 years or more. “Science 
for Indigenous people is a way of knowing and a way of life. It is part of our 
culture,” he says.

In November, Indigi Lab is delivering an ecotech program to 130 Indigenous 
youth, covering subjects such as project planning, cultural brokerage, app 
development and marketing.

It is also holding a panel discussion 
<https://maas.museum/event/maas-presents-indigi-lab-streams-iq-i-with-dr-david-suzuki/>
 with scientist Dr David Suzuki on 28 October at the Powerhouse Museum on how 
Indigenous and western sciences and knowledge systems can work together. It’s a 
discussion many can learn from.








 