
We know starting university can be a stressful time for many – new 
surroundings, new peers and a high level of academic expectation makes even the 
most confident student a little anxious. But think how much greater this is for 
those students whose main concern is not only finding their way around campus, 
but getting to grips with a different language, culture and set of customs.

It will be a question that's playing on the minds of many university staff 
this week as they finalise the schedule for orientation week: what really is 
the best way to make international students feel welcome and settled in?

While many UK universities pride themselves on their international reach, 
recruitment is not the end point. Are universities doing their best at 
integrating international students once they've arrived?

"Student friendship groups are often defined by nationality," as one blogger 
wrote for Guardian Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2013/apr/11/why-arent-brits-making-friends-with-overseas-students>
. "It's not just Chinese students who don't mix – Brits also tend to stick 
together." Whether this is down to "cultural differences", as Fadi Dakkak, 
international student officer of the University of Sheffield's Student Union 
puts it, or practical arrangements such as housing students in separate 
accommodation, it's clear there are many factors at play.

Learning and teaching is a key issue. For Xin Qu <>, who came from China to 
study an MSc in management at LSE, the biggest challenge was getting used to 
the UK education system – talking aloud about her opinions, using her 
initiative and attending social networking events.

According to Daniel Stevens, international officer at the NUS, there's 
definitely been an improvement in the way universities approach and prioritise 
integrating international students, but he says there's still more work to be 
done. "There is troubling evidence that a large proportion of international 
students still feel isolated from the university community and feel they have 
difficulties making friends with domestic students," says Stevens.

"There needs to be a holistic strategy, which includes collaboration between 
universities and students' unions on a student-led approach to integration," he 
adds.EUSA Global <http://www.eusa.ed.ac.uk/getinvolved/eusaglobal/> at the 
University of Edinburgh andWorld@Warwick 
<https://www.warwicksu.com/worldatwarwick/home/> at Warwick University are two 
good working examples of how to integrate students, but we want to know how 
your university settles in their students – and sets them up for success.

So join our live chat on Friday 13 September from 12-2pm BST, in partnership 
withETS TOEFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-ets-toefl-partner-zone>, to 
discuss whether universities are doing enough to help integrate international 
students.

You can also follow the debate live on Twitter using the hashtag #HElivechat 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23HElivechat&src=typd>

Panel

Paul Woods, assistant director of Royal Holloway international 
<http://www.rhul.ac.uk/international/home.aspx>

Daniel Stevens, international students' officer for the NUS 
<http://www.nusconnect.org.uk/campaigns/international/>. @dc_stevens <>

Jeremy Burgess, head of international student recruitment at the University of 
Warwick <http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/study/international/>, and member of both the
BUILA <http://www.buila.ac.uk/>Executive and the UCAS International Advisory 
Board.

Caroline Magennis <http://harlaxton.academia.edu/CarolineMagennis> teaches 
British studies and literature at Harlaxton College, the study abroad campus of 
the University of Evansville.@drmagennis <https://twitter.com/DrMagennis>

Tee Holden, campus manager at SAE Institute Oxford 
<http://oxford.sae.edu/en-gb/home/> and former international operations manager 
at Derby University.@Tee_Al <https://twitter.com/Tee_Al>

Shreya Paudel, committee member of the international students' campaign at the 
NUS.@shreya_paudel <https://twitter.com/Shreya_Paudel>

Sylvia Hoffmann, English lecturer at University of Wales Trinity Saint David <>
 (London campus).@londonpolyglot  <https://twitter.com/londonpolyglot>

Rebecca Danes, global student support coordinator at the University of the 
West of England.@Beccadanes <https://twitter.com/Beccadanes> 

Sandy Tippett, director of student outcomes at Study Group 
<http://www.studygroup.com/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for thousands of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 