
Recruitment of international students has been a hot topic over the past few 
weeks. At the recent Liberal Democrat party conference, business secretary 
Vince Cable voiced his concern aboutforeign students not feeling welcome in the 
UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2013/sep/17/vince-cable-international-students-not-welcome>
.

He said: "There are lots of perception issues particularly in India where the 
message has got back that the British do not what overseas students. Numbers 
have fallen sharply and students have gone off to the States and Australia."

With £10bn of the £17bn that's generated by universities each year coming from 
overseas students, they are a valuable group not just to the education sector, 
but for a growing economy.

In our recent live chat on how best to welcome foreign students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2013/sep/11/international-students-welcome-uk-universities>
, our expert panel suggested that alongside collaboration with student unions 
and staff exchange schemes, it's also vital for universities to remember that 
recruitment is not the end point.

By the same token, student orientation and integration needs to start as early 
as possible. Universities must not only convince overseas students that they 
are welcome in the UK but that they'll be looked after once they've arrived.

There's no denying that international student recruitment is complex, costly 
and competitive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/mar/18/international-alumni-university-recruitment>
. So how are universities coping with the challenge? According to Nik Miller, 
alumni engagement officer at the University of York, "Smart institutions are 
investing, looking towards their growing alumni communities overseas to boost 
their international efforts."

With universities diverting more of their funds towards marketing and 
recruitment departments, these teams are having to get creative in how they 
represent not only their institution, but the British education system as a 
whole.

The key to a successful student recruitment strategy is thinking about "what 
you communicate, to whom, and how," 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2012/nov/13/student-recruitment-strategy-international-universities>
 according to Richard Levin, executive director of enrolment services and 
university registration at the University of Toronto in Canada. "Messages must 
be consistent and clear and authentic," he says. A university that asks itself 
the right questions is more likely to provide answers that students want to 
hear.

From social media and easy-to-navigate university websites, to recruitment 
fairs and university branding, in this week's live chat we want to discuss best 
practice in international recruitment. What works and what doesn't? And what 
are the roles of agents and international offices in promoting study in the UK.

Join our online discussion in partnership with ETS TOEFL Friday 27 September 
from 12-2pm BST. You can also follow the debate live on Twitter using the 
hashtag#HElivechat <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23HElivechat&src=typd>.

Panel

Sandy Bhangal is associate director of client relations at ETS Global 
<http://www.etsglobal.org/Global/Eng/My-Country/United-Kingdom> UK. 

Daniel Stevens is the international students' officer for the National Union 
of Students <http://www.nusconnect.org.uk/campaigns/international/>. @dc_stevens
 <>

Pam Murria is assistant director of the international office at Birmingham 
City University <http://www.bcu.ac.uk/>.

Jeanine Gregersen-Hermans is director of student recruitment at the University 
of Hull.

Aurelie Phommarack is international recruitment officer at Salford University. 
<http://www.salford.ac.uk/>

Gavin Newman is managing director of ivent <http://www.virtual-ivent.com/> and 
also heads up their sub-brand OnlinEd, which designs and delivers online 
virtual student recruitment events and open days for UK universities.

Neil Johnson is head of marketing for educate <http://www.educate-direct.com/> 
and a student recruitment specialist.@neil_educate 
<https://twitter.com/neil_educate>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 