
How would you feel if the school that your son or daughter attended received 
commission from a university for sending students to study there? This question 
was recently posed by Vincenzo Raimo,director of the international office at 
the University of Nottingham 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2013/mar/04/international-student-expectation-experience-universities>
, as he revealed that his institution alone paid £1m in commission to education 
agents for successfully recruiting international students in 2012.

Raimo was not arguing against the use of agents, but suggesting that 
institutions should exercise more control over them and be more open about 
their relationship with them. I have to agree. Despite thedisturbing stories in 
the media 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2012/aug/01/regulating-overseas-recruitment-agents>
 about rogue agents making fraudulent applications to UK universities or 
running off with the deposits of students, the vast majority provide a good, 
legitimate and sought-after service. But it only takes one bad apple to sour 
relations and rot reputations.

Institutions' use of agents has increased significantly since 2006 when a 
survey of UK universities found a third of international student enrolments 
came via this route. The proportion of students recruited through agents at 
Nottingham has increased from 19% of the international intake in 2005, to 25% 
in 2011. This statistic is reflected across the sector and confirms our own 
experience of institutions' increasing reliance on agents, through our work 
providing an international student fee payment system for universities and 
English language colleges.

Is there anything wrong with agents being paid fees for the work they do to 
recruit students to universities and colleges? Some fear it may create perverse 
incentives for agents to push prospective students that come to them towards 
the institutions that pay the highest commission rates.

The growing use of agents both in the UK and in Australia, where the latest 
survey shows nearly 58% of international students are recruited through agents, 
suggests that the majority of institutions are comfortable with this situation. 
Most universities and colleges cannot afford to set up offices across the 
globe, or provide their own multilingual agents able to navigate the 
intricacies of different education systems, qualifications or academic 
reference styles. They also need people who can help prospective students 
through the sometimes complex and frustrating visa application process.

There seems to be a reluctance within the sector, however, to be open about 
the fact that agents are used at all, let alone to divulge the size of 
commission payments seen as commercially sensitive by institutions competing 
for students. In an ideal world, all institutions would offer the same agreed 
commission fees based on the type and length of course. There would be no 
incentive for an agent to steer students towards one university rather than 
another.

Realistically, that is unlikely to happen in a diverse system of 
independently-run institutions. So there has to be other ways to control and 
monitor agents and protect students. Uni-Pay is trying to help by introducing a 
new system to handle fee payments via agents that is designed to make the 
transactions transparent.Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students>, institutions and agents 
themselves can see at the press of a button which payments are pending or 
complete on a secure system.

But perhaps it is time for institutions to be more open about their use of 
agents, not least because they could then share information about rogues in the 
system between themselves and with bone fide agents.

The British Council took a helpful step forward last year when it brokered an 
international agreement known asthe London Statement 
<http://www.britishcouncil.org/press/landmark-international-code-of-ethics-education-agents>
, setting out seven principles that agents should follow to improve the 
integrity of the system. The joint statement by education officials from the 
UK, Australia, Ireland and New Zealand called for business dealings with agents 
to be made transparent through written agreements. It also urged agents to sign 
up to a code of ethics to help ensure they provide current, accurate and honest 
information to students.

Perhaps the next step should be the introduction of a voluntary quality 
control system. Institutions have amassed a vast amount of up-to-date 
information about individual agents – the ones that consistently provide high 
calibre students, have the best visa application success rates and the most 
satisfied clients.

Put this together with the British Council's initiative and a quality 
'kite-mark' could be introduced for international agents who meet the highest 
standards. With sufficient backing from institutions and governments, this 
would become sought after by agents. Not only would it be a powerful and 
cost-effective way for the sector to increase its control over agents, it would 
bring reassurance tostudents from across the world 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2013/apr/16/testing-questions-international-student-lse>
 who pay a lot of money to come to study in the UK.

Simon Read is the managing director of Uni-Pay <http://www.uni-pay.net/> – 
follow it on Twitter@Uni_Pay <http://twitter.com/uni_pay>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 