
Another World Cup and, for the lads of '66, more work. For Bally and Hursty 
and Bobby there are television shows to be done, books to be signed, dinners to 
be spoken after. As each World Cup passes, so the scale of their achievement 
grows through the failure of their successors to emulate it. Theirs is a unique 
selling proposition and these guys have never been more popular; they have even 
just been recruited en masse by Flora pro.activ for a campaign to lower the 
nation's cholesterol levels (Alan Ball started with the highest at 7.1, Martin 
Peters the lowest at 4.1). But to suggest to Nobby Stiles (5.75) that their 
value would be undermined by another English victory is to invite the kind of 
snap that, as a player, Alf Ramsey's midfield enforcer reserved for opponents' 
shins.

"I read in the paper the other day that we was all so jealous of what we did 
that we didn't want anyone else to win it," he says, bristling at the very 
concept. "What a pile of crap. I won't dignify the paper what printed that by 
naming it - it wasn't the Guardian by the way, mate - but what a load of 
rubbish. There is no one more supportive of the England team than the '66 lads, 
no one wants them to win more than me. I tell you what, I can't wait for 
someone else to experience what I did. Because it changed my life."

Thirty-six years ago Stiles had only just broken into the England squad. Aged 
23, he had first played for his country the year before, in the same game in 
which Jack Charlton made his debut. The side was still forming in the mind of 
the manager as the squad assembled at the Hendon Hall hotel, just up the road 
from Wembley. Things around the tournament headquarters were not, Stiles says, 
like those experienced by today's England squad. For a start, there was the 
training. No one appeared worried about inflicting injuries. Roy Keane would 
have approved of the intensity of their pre-tournament paces.

"I'd had a long season," Stiles recalls. "When I got there I thought Alf was 
going to let us take it nice and easy, give us a rest. None of that. I had the 
hardest two weeks' training I've ever done in my life. To be fair, though, I 
felt great at the end of it."

Another contrast with today was the security: there was none. With no media 
camp at the gate of the team hotel and no mobs of fans, players could wander 
out into town as they wished.

"If people recognised you in the street they might say good luck and that," he 
says. "But basically you was left alone."

The players amused themselves with a trip to the cinema in the West End (it 
was a Bond movie and, much to Jimmy Greaves's amusement, Ramsey referred to its 
star as "Seen" Connery). They went on shopping expeditions round Hendon ("Well, 
I went shopping, Bally went to the bookies"). And Stiles went to church 
("George Cohen had a laugh at me. He said: 'Where the hell are you going to 
find a Catholic church in Golders Green?' But I managed it").

"It was all much simpler than today - naive, looking back on it," Stiles says. 
"It wasn't until '70 in Mexico that there was any hint of medical stuff. Alf's 
preparations for Mexico, by the way, were incredible. They'd be reckoned 
obsolete by today's standards but in them days they was revolutionary. No stone 
was left unturned. He even took HP Sauce out there. I'll always remember that: 
HP Sauce on the tables. But for '66 we were at home, nothing special needed."

Stiles shared a room with Ball on the top floor of the hotel. The two young 
tyros were of one mind, determined practical jokers who regarded it as their 
job to keep spirits high in the camp. Stiles was fabulously superstitious. 
After England's first win of the tournament, against Mexico, he insisted on 
wearing the same shirt, tie, shoes, socks and underpants every day around the 
camp.

"I did get them laundered," he insists. 

In his lucky suit Stiles was reckoned the squad's good-luck charm. The 
Toothless Tiger they called him. Physically accurate though that adjective may 
have been to describe the gap-toothed Mancunian, anyone who had been on the 
wrong end of it would be loath to call his tackling toothless. In fact, during 
the tournament his aggressive ball-winning became an issue of some debate: many 
commentators regarded him as a blot on England's landscape, a carbuncle on the 
beautiful game.

"I got slaughtered in the papers, absolutely slaughtered," he recalls. "I'm 
sure Nicky Butt would agree, you can't play if you haven't got the ball. My job 
was to win it, give it to Bobby [Charlton] and let him get on with it. But the 
criticism never put me off. I know it's a clich√© but I never looked beyond the 
next game. Even during the season, when [Manchester] United were in the 
semi-finals of the European Cup and the semi-finals of the FA Cup, I never held 
back from a tackle thinking 'Hey, we've got a World Cup coming up and I don't 
want to get injured.' The only time I had doubts was after the French game."

No wonder. Against France in England's final group match, which the hosts won 
2-0, his tackle on Jacques Simon put the French playmaker out of the game. The 
referee, not seeing anything wrong, did not even signal a foul (much to French 
chagrin; as Simon lay prostrate, England scored). But others spotted Stiles's 
intervention. Danny Blanchflower, working for the BBC, said the incident ruined 
the game for him. The next day a Fifa official who had been sitting in the 
Wembley stands issued a booking for the quaintly named crime of "rough play". 
It came with a warning that another transgression and England would be deprived 
of their terrier for the rest of the tournament.

"Alf was great about it," Stiles recalls. "He called me over during training 
and says: 'Did you mean it?' I says: 'Course not, Alf'. He says: 'That's good 
enough for me.' But the selection committee at the FA wanted me dropped from 
the quarter-final against Argentina. Alf wasn't having any of that. Course, I 
didn't know that, I was worried sick about not being in. On the Friday, day 
before the game, he comes up to me at the hotel and says [he adopts Ramsey's 
faux posh tones perfectly]: 'Incidentally, you might like to know you're 
playing tomorrow.' I was doing cartwheels inside. But that was Alf."

Ramsey, he says, never let him know quite how anxious some of the FA blazers 
had been that he be dropped.

"By all accounts the committee told him in no uncertain terms I couldn't play, 
that England needed to make an example of me. I was a liability, they said. Alf 
told them he'd resign if he couldn't pick who he wanted. He was prepared to 
resign in the middle of a World Cup over me. I never found that out till he'd 
died, Alf. What a man."

Such loyalty to his players, Stiles says, was at the root of Ramsey's 
man-management success.

"It worked both ways. Because he was loyal to you, you'd run through brick 
walls for him. And it wasn't just the players. Everyone concerned with England 
was doing it for Alf. Before the Argentina game I was in the bathroom putting 
me contacts in when Harold Shepherdson [Ramsey's assistant] come in. He grabs 
me by the throat, pushes me against the wall and says: 'Don't you let Alf 
down.'"

As it turned out Stiles did not let anyone down against Argentina, opponents 
he describes as "appalling".

"A very, very good side, Argentina. If they'd come out and played, we'd have 
been in trouble but they didn't," he says. "You should have seen the stuff that 
was going on. They couldn't get away with it now because of all the TV cameras 
but it was all shirt-pulling, spitting in your face. I was fortunate in a way; 
because of the booking I knew I couldn't react. I was under so much spotlight 
it was unbelievable. To be fair, there was many a time I would react. But that 
time I didn't. So the booking done me a favour in a way."

It was only after the victory against Argentina, Stiles believes, that a head 
of steam began to develop behind England.

"Alf always told us we would win it, from the off," he says. "Of course we all 
thought we could win it but he said we would. I'm not sure early on many in the 
country believed him."

He has a point. After the 0-0 draw against Uruguay in the tournament's opening 
game the Observer's Hugh McIlvanney was scathing about the English supporters' 
enthusiasm: "Either Wembley audiences have changed fundamentally," he wrote, 
"or there ought to be dope tests for spectators."

"Very negative the press was, very negative," recalls Stiles. "They roasted us 
after the group games. Alf never took any notice. But my point was, the first 
goal we let in was in the semi-final. Hey, if you don't let goals in, you don't 
lose matches. Still, it wasn't until going on the coach to the semi against 
Portugal that I realised something was going on in the country. The atmosphere 
was unbelievable. I'll never forget that night, going to that game, seeing the 
fans everywhere, crowding the bus. The adrenalin kicked in and you started 
doing things you never thought you could."

And as for the final, well, it changed his life. 

"It's still the biggest thing that happened to me," he says. "Everyone still 
wants a piece of you because of it. To be fair, I'm not as busy as some of the 
other lads. But wherever you go, what you did means so much to people. Not just 
lads of my age, you'd expect that. But kids of me grandkids' age, they come up 
to me and go: 'Hey, you, you're the fella with no teeth who danced round 
Wembley, aren't you?' In a way, you end up belonging to everyone."

It is a nice way of putting it. And talking of the teeth, how did the 
country's most famous gummy warrior lose that top set?

"Hey, I'd rather not say, lad," he says. "No, sorry." 

Even for World Cup winners, it seems, some things should remain private.
 