
The next version of Apple’s software for the iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPad, iOS 10, will feature 
enhanced 3D touch features, expanded Siri and an improved lock screen plus 
overhauls to Photos, Music and Messages.


Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has also improved 
notifications, allowing apps to provide rich notifications that are activated 
via 3D touch gestures in the notification pane, as well as the widget pane and 
via the lock screen.

Siri is now open to third-party developers, which means apps like WeChat can 
be accessed straight from the voice-control window. While the Apple QuickType 
keyboard now has part of Siri’s machine learning to allow it to predict your 
responses based on what is happening on the rest of the phone.

Apple Photos now has facial, scene and object recognition built in, which is 
performed on device, as well as the ability to view your photos on a map and to 
automatically group photos for topics, trips, people and other activities in 
what Apple calls “Memories”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4fbfbc34ce2ab697051a7891f14d3ba8af52324%2F0_317_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=iOS%2010%20brings%20bigger%20emojis%2C%20better%20Siri%20and%20facial%20recognition%20to%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=iOS%2010%20brings%20bigger%20emojis%2C%20better%20Siri%20and%20facial%20recognition%20to%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4fbfbc34ce2ab697051a7891f14d3ba8af52324%2F0_317_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Craig Federighi of Apple Inc. talks about photos within iOS at the company’s 
World Wide Developers Conference in San Francisco, California. Photograph: 
Stephen Lam/Reuters 
Apple Maps also got an overhaul to make it smarter, scanning your calendar for 
places and learning from your typical actions, adding third-party integrations 
such as Uber and a new dynamic view for driving directions, which is integrated 
into Apple’s CarPlay.

Apple made a big deal about how its machine intelligence features were powered 
by data stored on the device itself, not via cloud-based processing as with 
most other artificial intelligence features.

Craig Federighi, the head of software, described it as Apple’s differentiator 
with end-to-end encryption and advanced anonymization where taking data off the 
device for development is necessary saying: “Great features and great privacy. 
You demanded it.”

Apple’s Phone and Messages apps were upgraded. Messages gained rich links for 
video and websites, and larger emoji and prediction for “emojification” that 
allows semi-autonomous replacement of words with emoji. Message bubble 
animations and instant responses similar to Facebook were also added, plus the 
ability to handwrite messages, while iMessages has been opened up to 
third-party developer additions. The phone app also gained transcription for 
voice mail and integration with VoIP apps such as Skype, making them appear 
like the native dialer app.

Apple Music was also redesigned, as was Apple News with breaking news 
notifications and subscriptions. Apple’s HomeKit home internet of things also 
got an upgrade with a dedicated Home app on the iPhone, integration into 
Control Centre and the use of the Apple TV as a central hub for remote control 
of HomeKit devices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67bfabb19c0f83757ee50d1c786a7d8bc466222d%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=iOS%2010%20brings%20bigger%20emojis%2C%20better%20Siri%20and%20facial%20recognition%20to%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=iOS%2010%20brings%20bigger%20emojis%2C%20better%20Siri%20and%20facial%20recognition%20to%20iPhone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fapple-ios-10-emoji-siri-facial-recognition-iphone-ipad-homekit-watch-os-3%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67bfabb19c0f83757ee50d1c786a7d8bc466222d%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Eddy Cue, Apple’s senior vice president of internet software and services, 
walks the WWDC faithful through changes to Apple Music. Photograph: Andrew 
Burton/Getty Images 
The update is rolling out now to developers, along with a new development kit, 
and is expected to be available to the public via a beta programme in the next 
few months. The final version ofiOS <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ios>
 10 is expected to be released in September to users via iTunes or directly 
through the Settings app on iPhones and iPads.

As part of the new update, Apple showed off some more pressure-sensitive 3D 
touch gestures on the lockscreen, greater multitasking features and more 
advanced Night Shift features that help limit the impact of device use on sleep.

The tenth version of iOS will support the iPhone 5 and newer, and the iPad Air 
and newer, including theiPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> Mini 
2, older iPhones and iPads will be left on iOS 9.3.

Apple also unveiled the latest version of its watchOS 3 for its smartwatch, 
which is set to improve native app support, speed them up and give them a 
greater ability to operate when not connected to an iPhone.

“Our top focus has been performance. Your watch should respond instantly, and 
it should be updated before you look at it,” said Kevin Lynch, vice president 
of technology for Apple. “It’s about seven times faster, but it feels a million 
times faster.”

One of the biggest criticisms of the Apple Watch is the time it takes for apps 
to load and perform actions, often longer than simply pulling out an iPhone 
from the pocket. Apple hopes to address speed issues, as it tried to with 
watchOS 2, although newApple Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-watch> hardware is likely 
required to bring them up to speed with the rest of the company’s devices.

There’s a new Control Centre for quick settings and a live dock of apps. Apps 
can now update behind the scenes so that they’re ready when you need them, 
while Apple has redesigned many of its apps to be quicker to activate the most 
common actions, often within one tap.

Apple has also implemented handwriting recognition functionality called 
Scribble, which allows users to write out words one letter at a time, an SOS 
emergency call function and activity sharing for fitness competition between 
friends and family. The company has also refined its activity tracking for 
wheelchair users and added a meditation app called Breathe.

 * Apple WWDC keynote: key points at a glance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/apple-wwdc-keynote-key-points-at-a-glance>

 * MacOS Sierra: Apple launches new desktop OS with Siri built-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/mac-os-sierra-apple-os-x-siri-desktop-wwdc> 