
Two Iranian refugees on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> have been released 
from police detention more than 36 hours after being reportedly assaulted by 
police and immigration officials on New Year’s Eve.

The two men, whose first names are Mehdi and Mohammad, were allegedly 
assaulted when they were in Lorengau township at about 8pm on New Year’s Eve.

Behrouz Boochani <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/behrouz-boochani>, an 
Iranian journalist and fellow refugee also held on Manus, visited the men in 
police detention on Monday.


“The refugees said the first to attack them were two PNG immigration officers 
who were drunk and came to them and said ‘you don’t have the right to be 
outside of the prison at this moment’.”

“After a few minutes the police joined them and beat them extremely badly in 
the head, face, back and hands. One of the refugees has pain in his head and 
probably his hand is broken.”

Faysal Ishak Ahmed's life was full of pain. Australia had a duty to protect 
him | Behrouz Boochani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/faysal-ishak-ahmeds-life-was-full-of-pain-australia-had-a-duty-to-protect-him>
While in police detention they were not charged with any offence, and were not 
allowed to see a doctor.


“The refugees were so scared and distressed and they said the police did not 
give them any food or medical treatment,” Boochani said.

Boochani said Mohammad remained in a serious condition, he has told 
authorities has he blood in his urine and stomach pains.

“Some local people gave them food but Mohammad vomited the food and Mehdi has 
started to hunger strike. He has pain in his hand and thinks his hand is 
broken.”

On Monday afternoon, Australian Border Force officials arrived at Lorengau to 
organise the men’s release and take them to the detention centre medical clinic.

However, they were only released by PNG officials after they agreed to pay 200 
Kina (AUD$100) on charges of “drunkenness” and “resisting arrest”.

The minister for immigration, Peter Dutton, told Sydney radio station 2GB that 
he wanted to hear from the PNG police before commenting further.

“If people have had an interaction with the PNG police on a New Year’s Eve 
night, I would wait to see the full facts of that case before I’d make any 
comment to say that they were targeted because they were refugees or because 
they were part of the Manus Island population,” he said.

“I think we’re better off to wait for the full facts instead of letting the 
refugee advocates try to use this to again attack the government’s successful 
border protection policy.”

Phone calls to the PNG police force have not been returned.

Refugee Action Coalition spokesman Ian Rintoul described the charges against 
the men as “manufactured” and said the Australian government was a “party to 
the brutality” of the offshore detention regime.

“It’s time the government stopped playing politics with the lives of innocent 
people, and brought all the asylum seekers and refugees to Australia.”

Australian officials exercise overall authority and control over the Manus 
Island detention centre, and the assault of the two men has again drawn 
attention to the nature of their detention on the island and their futures 
after more than three years in detention.

In April last year, the PNG supreme court ruled 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/26/PNG_SC_judgement.pdf> that the detention 
of asylum seekers and refugees in the Manus Island centre was “illegal and 
unconstitutional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
”. Both the Australian and PNG governments agreed to close it, but, more than 
eight months later, it remains open.

The Australian and PNG governments insist the men on Manus are no longer in 
detention and are free to move around, though not leave, the island.

But those on the island say the changes to the detention regime have been 
superficial: the detention centre remains ringed by three-metre steel fences 
and the men cannot move freely within it; they cannot walk outside the centre 
because it is housed within a military base, and can only leave on 
pre-arranged, scheduled buses; they are security screened on entry and exit; 
and their communications are monitored.

Australia announced in November it had reached an agreement with the United 
States to resettle refugees from its offshore detention network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/refugees-held-in-australian-offshore-detention-to-be-resettled-in-us>
 - Manus Island and Nauru - in America, but there remain few details about the 
nature of the agreement, the number of people to be resettled, and when that 
might happen.


The judge who unmade Manus Island on why offshore detention has no future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/the-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future>
A change of administration in the US, on January 20, might also change, or 
end, that agreement.

The assault on Mehdi and Mohammad follows the death of Sudanese refugee Faysal 
Ishak Ahmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/26/refugee-pleaded-with-doctors-on-manus-island-for-help-before-his-death>
, after he collapsed inside the Manus Island detention centre just over a week 
ago.

Ahmed had reportedly been seriously unwell for months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/26/refugee-pleaded-with-doctors-on-manus-island-for-help-before-his-death>
, suffering regular seizures, but he had allegedly been told he was faking his 
illness and told not to seek help at the medical centre anymore.

The father of one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/faysal-ishak-ahmeds-life-was-full-of-pain-australia-had-a-duty-to-protect-him>
 collapsed and was treated at the medical clinic on December 22, before being 
medivacced by air ambulance as an emergency case to Australia. He was 
pronounced dead at a Brisbane hospital on December 24.

In the wake of his death, the Queensland coroner has been flooded with emails 
pleading for a coronial inquest into his death.

The Guardian understands at least 40 emails from refugee advocates, religious 
groups, and other members of the public, have been sent to the Queensland 
Coroner in a campaign to request an open and public inquest.

“There needs to be clear repercussions for either the doctors or the 
government who oversee the medical care of refugee applicants in offshore 
detention centres. It is apparent to the Australian public that the current 
system is wilfully endangering human life,” one of the emails states.

Currently underway before Queensland state coroner Terry Ryan is an inquest 
into the death ofHamid Kehazaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hamid-kehazaei>, who died in 
September 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/delay-to-treatment-of-hamid-kehazaei-before-he-died-revealed-in-leaked-files>
after a leg infection contracted in the Manus Island detention centre turned 
septic and caused a series of heart attacks and ultimately, his death.

The coronial inquest into his death has heard that the Manus Island medical 
facilities were inadequate, doctors’ clinical instructions were ignored and 
critical medical equipment was not working. Requests to urgently transfer 
Kehazaei from the island were ignored, then refused, before he was finally 
flown on an air ambulance, first to Port Moresby and then, ultimately, to 
Brisbane.

Several other asylum seekers and refugees have died in immigration detention 
or on detention islands.Reza Barati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reza-barati> was murdered by guards 
inside the Manus detention centre in 2014, and in 2016,Omid Masoumali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 died after dousing himself in lighter fluid and setting himself alight on 
Nauru, in protest at being held indefinitely on the island.

Other refugees suffering serious medical complaints, including pregnant woman 
facing complex births 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/06/doctors-plead-for-pregnant-refugee-to-be-sent-from-nauru-to-australia-for-caesarean>
, orsuspected cancerous growths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/06/refugee-with-growing-breast-lump-has-medical-transfer-from-nauru-cancelled>
, have been denied medical transfers from detention islands.

The National Justice Project, a not-for-profit human rights law centre in 
Sydney, has called on the Australian Government to institute a Royal Commission 
into the medical care of refugees on Manus Island and Nauru.

“This is the tip of the iceberg. The government consistently delays necessary 
medical treatment, often until it is too late,” principal solicitor of the 
project, adjunct professor George Newhouse said.

“Evidence given at the coronial investigation into Hamid Khazaei’s death has 
confirmed that the government’s political manoeuvring can be fatal. An inquest 
would determine whether the government’s actions, poor medical care or both 
contributed to Fayzal’s death but they take time and how many more individuals 
will die waiting for the government to act on such recommendations.”

“A royal commission with broader enquiry powers into the provision of health 
care on Nauru and Manus is necessary to lift the lid on this scandalous state 
of affairs.”




 