
The true story of an Iraqi translator who fought with US Navy Seals as part of 
the US-led invasion is heading to cinemas, based on a book co-written by
American Sniper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper> co-author 
Jim DeFelice and no doubt hoping to capitalise on the wave of American 
patriotism inspired by Clint Eastwood’s blockbuster drama.

Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/straight-outta-compton-review-how-hip-hop-pioneers-nwa-took-on-the-world>
 screenwriter Alan Wenkus will adapt the untitled film from the bestselling 
2014 memoir Code Name: Johnny Walker, which tells how an Iraq-born man helped 
saved countless American military lives during a six-year stint accompanying US 
servicemen targeting terrorists. Its subject, who is known only by his code 
name, travelled with his family to the US following the Iraq war after Seals 
stepped in to rescue them from the threat of retaliation by militants.

The new film will move forward with the posthumous backing of American Sniper 
subject Chris Kyle himself. Kyle, reportedly the most lethal sniper in US 
military history with 160 confirmed kills out of 255 “probables” during four 
tours of duty in Iraq, once said of Felice’s book: “Johnny is responsible for 
saving American lives, especially Seals. He has an amazing story that I feel 
needs to be told and would touch the hearts of all Americans.” Kyle was shot 
dead at a Texas gun range in 2013. Marine corps veteran Eddie Ray Routh was
convicted of his murder in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/american-sniper-trial-eddie-ray-routh-found-guilty-and-sentenced-to-life-in-prison-without-parole>
 and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcode-name-johnny-walker-american-sniper-iraq-movie-jim-defelice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442315585647%2F30f49c2e-caee-4529-aeae-232a86d10013-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tale%20of%20Iraqi%20who%20helped%20Navy%20Seals%20heading%20to%20big%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcode-name-johnny-walker-american-sniper-iraq-movie-jim-defelice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tale%20of%20Iraqi%20who%20helped%20Navy%20Seals%20heading%20to%20big%20screen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fcode-name-johnny-walker-american-sniper-iraq-movie-jim-defelice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442315585647%2F30f49c2e-caee-4529-aeae-232a86d10013-680x1020.jpeg>
 The cover of Code Name: Johnny Walker Photograph: PR 
Wenkus, whose film about the pioneering rap group NWA has also proven a 
considerable box-office hit, described the proposed film as a “cinematic 
thriller that goes far beyond what the book was able to cover” and added: “It’s 
a side of the Iraq situation that’s never been told. Johnny started out as an 
Iraqi citizen who saw the beginnings of the rise of ISIS and worked with the 
Seals to save hundreds of American and Iraqi lives, and possibly change the 
course of the war.”

American Sniper was the highest-grossing film released in 2014 at the US box 
office with $350m (£227m), ahead of big-budget fantasy blockbusters such as The 
Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part One, Guardians of the Galaxy, Captain America: 
Winter Soldier and The Lego Movie. The Johnny Walker project will be touted to 
buyers at this week’s Toronto film festival,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/code-name-johnny-walker-adaptation-822465>
.

Wenkus’s film is the latest patriotic venture being forged by studios in an 
effort to repeat the remarkable success of Eastwood’s film, which took $547m 
globally. American Sniper screenwriterJason Hall is to make his directorial 
debut on Thank You for Your Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/01/american-sniper-scriptwriter-jason-hall-debut-director-thank-you-for-your-service-david-finkel>
, a drama about post-traumatic stress disorder among Iraq war veterans, while
Reese Witherspoon is set to star as one of the first female American soldiers 
to risk their lives on the battlefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/reese-witherspoon-film-ashley-white-us-woman-soldier-killed-afghanistan-frontline>
, 1st Lieutenant Ashley White, in the military biopic Ashley’s War.
 