
Leading figures in Irish literature, arts and music – including Man Booker 
prize winners and Hollywood directors – have launched a campaign for the 
abolition of an amendment to Ireland’s constitution that they say prevents 
serious reform ofits strict anti-abortion laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/17/guardian-view-abortion-ireland-no-choice>
.

Authors including Anne Enright, Edna O’Brien and John Banville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnbanville> are protesting alongside 
filmmakers such as Jim Sheridan and John Boorman to call for the repeal of the 
eighth amendment. It gives a foetus the same constitutional rights as every 
other citizen in the Irish Republic, even at the earliest stages of pregnancy.

Pro-choice groups say the amendment creates a legal “chill factor” among 
medical teams even in cases affected by a law passed last year that allows for 
terminations in very limited circumstances. The Protection of Life During 
Pregnancy Act (2013) allows abortion when continuing with a pregnancy would 
result in the mother’s death or in cases where the woman is suicidal.

Irish actors including Cillian Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cillian-murphy> have joined the campaign to 
make abolishing the eighth amendment a central issue in the general election, 
which is expected to take place early next year.

In their statement, released on Tuesday, the artists say: “The eighth 
amendment of the constitution of Ireland, article 40.3.3 inserted in 1983, has 
prevented our doctors and our legislators from providing proper care to women in
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. The resulting physical and 
emotional trauma inflicted on women is inexcusable and an ongoing shame for 
Irish citizens.

Ireland's abortion law tortures women. It needs to be legal | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/10/irelands-abortion-law-tortures-women-amnesty-report>
“The eighth amendment undermines the status of the Irish constitution. It is a 
key source of Ireland’s failure to reach international human rights standards 
and of the state’s failure to meet its obligations to vindicate women’s human 
rights.

“We, the undersigned artists, call for the repeal of the eighth amendment to 
the Irish constitution and for action by our elected legislators to provide 
women in Ireland with modern reproductive health services in line with best 
medical practice and international human rights norms.”

The amendment was introduced via a referendum in the republic in 1983. 
Ireland’s then politically influential anti-abortion lobby – in alliance with 
the Catholic church – forced the Fine Gael-Labour coalition under the late 
Garret FitzGerald to hold a national vote to in effect make an embryo into an 
Irish citizen. The amendment was passed with 67% voting in favour.

Any move to abolish the amendment would require a new abortion referendum, 
which would be far more divisive than thevote to endorse gay marriage in Ireland
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/live/2015/may/23/counting-underway-for-irelands-referendum-on-marriage-equality>
 in May.

The array of literary, filmmaking and musical talent calling for abortion 
reform want all the political parties in the republic to commit to a referendum 
in their election manifestos for 2016.

The artists are backing a coalition of groups that have come together to 
campaign forrepeal of the eighth amendment 
<http://www.abortionrightscampaign.ie/repealthe8th/>. The coalition claims that 
public opinion in Ireland has shifted towards being more pro-choice.

Savita Halappanavar death: nine members of Irish medical team disciplined
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/11/savita-halappavanar-abortion-ireland-medical-team-disciplined>
Ailbhe Smith, the coalition’s convener, said: “Since the death of Savita 
Halappanavar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/19/savita-halappanavar-medical-misadventure-inquest>
 (2012) and the introduction of theProtection of Life During Pregnancy Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/12/ireland-law-abortion-rights> 
(2013), opinion poll after opinion poll has shown a groundswell of support for 
repeal. This is why we are deeply disappointed by Taoiseach Enda Kenny’s 
comments that Fine Gael would not favour abolishing the eighth amendment 
without considering what would replace it. The taoiseach’s views are seriously 
out of step with the majority of voters in this country.

“Women’s reproductive choices have no place in the constitution. It is time 
for political parties to stop kicking the can down the road and to commit to a 
referendum in 2016.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> – 50% 
of the electorate – deserve better from our political leaders.”

Last year, a young asylum seeker who had been raped in her native country was 
refused an abortion by the Irish health service even though she claimed she was 
suicidal. The woman tried to escape to Britain to get a termination in 
Liverpool but was arrested and deported back to Ireland from the Birkhenhead 
ferry terminal by Merseyside police because she had no personal documentation 
with her.

The woman was forced to go ahead with the pregnancy and gave birth via 
caesarean section in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/17/ireland-woman-forced-birth-denied-abortion>
. The child was given up for adoption. It is understood the rape victim’s legal 
team are to sue the Irish state for forcing her to go full term against her 
will.
 