
The cost of iron ore has fallen below US$50 a tonne for the first time in more 
than a decade, heaping more pressure on Joe Hockey’s federal budget plans and 
the share prices of the big mining companies.

Iron ore for immediate delivery to the port of Tianjin in China fell to US$49 
a tonne, from US$51, while ore at the port of Qingdao was fetching US$49.53.

After starting last year at US$135 a tonne, the fall has already deprived the 
treasurer of billions of dollars in tax revenues from exports.

The continued slump is estimated to have cost him a further $3bn, according to 
a Deloitte Access Economics ­director, Chris Richardson. The mid-year budget 
update assumed a price per tonne of US$60.

“What we’re now seeing is that commodity prices around the world are going 
back to normal,”Richardson told the Australian. 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/treasury/iron-ore-price-plunge-cuts-3bn-from-budget/story-fn59nsif-1227288506201?login=1>
 “That is a big problem for Australia. It’s an old mistake to assume that a 
boom is permanent. In this particular case it was a very large boom and both 
sides of politics spent a lot.”

A further cut in interest rates is also more likely as a result. 

The market now puts the chances of the Reserve Bank cutting the cash rate from 
2.25% to two per cent when it meets on Tuesday at 70%.
Barclays chief economist Kieran Davies brought forward his rate cut forecast 
from May to April, citing the Australian dollar’s failure to fall as 
dramatically as the iron ore price. The dollar was buying US75.8c on Thursday 
morning.

“With commodities slumping again and the currency only partly reflecting that, 
you’ve got a gap opening up again between the currency and the terms of trade 
and I think that’s been a persistent source of frustration for the RBA,” Mr 
Davies said.

The world’s fourth-largest iron ore miner, Andrew Forrest’s Fortescue Metals 
Group, is likely to be losing money at current prices, with its margins wiped 
out by the plunge.

Twiggy Forrest is right: we shouldn't sell our natural resources at bargain 
basement prices | Richard Denniss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/01/andrew-forrest-is-right-we-shouldnt-sell-our-natural-resources-at-bargain-basement-prices>
Losses for smaller junior miners such as BC iron will also increase. 

Increased production by companies such as Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton> has been a major factor in 
driving the price lower along with falling demand from China, but their share 
prices have been hit hard by the falls.

Rio shares were down nearly 1% at $55.90 in early trade on the ASX200 index 
while BHP shares were down 0.5% at $30.21.

It is the lowest price in nearly a decade and compares to the record 
US$185-plus reached by the steelmaking commodity – Australia’s most valuable 
export – during 2011.


Forrest, who controversially called for a cap on production last week, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/25/accc-slaps-down-andrew-forrests-call-for-cap-on-iron-ore-production>
 has again criticised Rio and BHP, saying they were incinerating shareholder 
value, Fairfax Media’s Australian Financial Review reported.

Commodity forecasters say the price will get worse before it improves, with 
Deutsche Bank predicting a fall to US$40.

The falls have sparked speculation the Reserve Bank of Australia will cut 
interest rates again next week to boost the economy.
 