
What kind of book do you want to settle down with over Halloween? Perhaps one 
with “hauntings, disturbing diary entries and [a] general air of yellowing 
newspaper reports”.

That’s Philip Larkin <http://www.lchr.org/a/3/qj/mitchell/larkin.htm> writing 
aboutGladys Mitchell’s <http://www.gladysmitchell.com/> When Last I Died 
(1941). It’s a perfect, atmospheric description of a crime novel in which a 
character is asked if the seances being re-examined were ever disappointing, 
and replies: “The seancesalways produced results … Tom never had what you would 
call abarren seance.”

If you’re looking for a book to make your flesh creep, you can find plenty 
more Ouija boards, malign spirits and fortune-telling in books of the last 
century – and they are, of course, never barren. A seance – held in a darkened 
room where spirits might talk, tap out messages, or even appear – was a 
particularly useful standby for other great crime authors besides Mitchell.


Agatha Christie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/agathachristie> used the 
idea many times. In The Sittaford Mystery, the murder victim’s death is 
announced at a seance. The Pale Horse, meanwhile, is packed with dead 
cockerels, weird mediums and the voices of the dead – the kind of thing Miss 
Marple would describe as “not quite nice”.

In Peril at End House, you won’t be in any doubt that the seance is faked, as 
Poirot ropes in Hastings, the dim Watson-style narrator, to be a most unlikely 
medium. But in Christie’s Dumb Witness, whose cast includes vegetarian 
spiritualist sisters, Poirot – surprisingly for one so keen on logic – says he 
has an open mind on the subject. Christie also wrote a particularly memorable 
and chilling short story called The Last Seance (yes, well, it will be for
someone) which, unusually for her, does accept the existence of a real spirit 
world – no faking.

One of the best sections in the entire oeuvre of Dorothy L Sayers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorothylsayers> comes in 1930’s Strong 
Poison, when Lord Peter Wimsey’s right-hand woman, Miss Climpson, reinvents 
herself as a fake medium to get valuable information from a gullible nurse. It 
is very funny and informative – Sayers had obviously researched how to create 
dramatic effects with garters, a small metal soapbox, wires and a flimsy table.

There were two differing views of seances and spiritualism. For some, it was a 
desperate attempt to keep contact with and remember a dead relation. For 
others, in the days before television was commonplace, it was just another 
evening entertainment or party game: an excuse to enjoy a frisson in the dark, 
and perhaps move in close to a fanciable friend. EF Benson was the supreme 
chronicler of such crazes and pastimes for the leisured classes in his Lucia 
books: Princess Popoffski (another vegetarian – there was a definite feeling 
between the wars that the two ideas were linked) is fought over and prized by 
the residents of Riseholme in the 1920 book Queen Lucia. But the princess turns 
out to be a fraud, and yards of muslin are found in her bedroom after she 
leaves. Muslin was the key to producing fake ectoplasm (the physical 
manifestation of spirits) during a seance – apparently when draped on wires, or 
even appearing from a medium’s mouth, it looked like a wispy, translucent white 
spirit.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhalloween-creepy-seance-stories-agatha-christie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc420099b8e526f8ed466ebee476c71868593b819%2F0_0_3125_2012%2F3125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20anybody%20there%3F%20The%20creepiest%20seance%20stories%20to%20read%20this%20Halloween&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhalloween-creepy-seance-stories-agatha-christie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20anybody%20there%3F%20The%20creepiest%20seance%20stories%20to%20read%20this%20Halloween&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhalloween-creepy-seance-stories-agatha-christie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc420099b8e526f8ed466ebee476c71868593b819%2F0_0_3125_2012%2F3125.jpg>
 A table apparently moves of its own accord during a seance in Paris, c1900. 
Photograph: General Photographic Agency/Getty Images 
The Victorians were also great ones for seances. They don’t feature much in 
books of the era, but make excellent material for historical novelists. Sarah 
Waters’s second book, Affinity, is often overlooked between the big hitters of
Fingersmith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/02/fiction.sarahwaters> 
andTipping the Velvet <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/nov/05/fiction>, 
but is a terrifying, complex story of spiritualism, hauntings and different 
kinds of prisons.


One of the Victorian illusionists in Christopher Priest’s 1995 The Prestige 
starts his career doing seances in the 1870s. And in AS Byatt’sPossession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/possession>, the seances in the Victorian 
section are trailed as psychologically helpful – “They bring such unspeakable 
comfort to the deeply grieving” – but result in considerable drama.

A modern crime story can also make good use of the trope: Christine Poulson’s 
Cambridge crime series includes Murder Is Academic (2002), which contains an 
excellent and amusing seance scene – helped by the fact that the various 
attendees have very different views of how seriously to take it. And there is 
always room for those no-good fortune tellers who unexpectedly make lousy 
prophecies that turn out to be true – see, for example, Professor Trelawney in 
Harry Potter.


It’s clear that most authors believe that we want to have our palpitations, 
but then be consoled with the news that none of it is real. That makes two 
novels particularly chilling.

In 1967, Stella Gibbons, famous only for Cold Comfort Farm, published a novel 
called Starlight. It may be the least appropriately named book ever, sounding 
comforting and twee when in fact it is a dark look at lost humanity, shattered 
lives and a very convincing medium who doesn’t want to give any more sittings.

Nearly 40 years later, in Hilary Mantel’s Beyond Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/30/featuresreviews.guardianreview30>
, the medium Alison is hounded by Morris, a deadly departed dwarf – and there 
is no reassurance. The mixture of suburbia, cheap hotels and malevolent spirits 
would make anyone shudder. If you really want to be scared at Halloween, try 
one of these books.

If you have any notable seance scenes to add, let us know in the comments 
below.
 