
The speed with which the Kremlin has become hostile towards its neighbour 
Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/sp-ukraine-russia-cold-war> has 
left many in Belarus fearful of Russian aggression, or even an incursion across 
their own border.

Throughout his 21-year rule president Alexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko> has traditionally held 
close political, economic and military ties with Russia. However he’s also 
maintained that although the two countries “are like brothers”, Belarus is a 
separate and autonomous state.


Clearly unsettled by the recent war between Russian-backed separatists and 
national army forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/29/ukraine-anti-terror-hardens-opposition-donbass>
in eastern Ukraine, Lukashenko has now stepped up a campaign to strengthen his 
country’s ties to Europe, sending envoys to European capitals and welcoming 
embassies from the EU and US.

He has also been cautious to address the subject of Russian influence: in 
April, the presidentraised concerns about the rise of pro-Russian NGOs 
<http://president.gov.by/ru/news_ru/view/stenogramma-vstrechi-s-predstaviteljami-belorusskix-i-zarubezhnyx-smi-10760/>
 in Belarus. He suggested that extremist Russian groups were active in his 
country and claimed he had “taken measures against them”.

The pro-government Centre for Strategic and Geopolitical studies has also 
launcheda blog 
<http://csfps.by/new-research/crisis-watch-kak-delayutsya-perevoroty-gipoteticheskiy-scenariy>
 aimed at tracking what they say are attempts by some parts of the Russian 
elite to destabilise Belarus.

Fault lines

Fears have also been heightened by a number of articles in the Russian media.

The online newspaper Sputnik i Pogrom recently ran an opinion piece claiming 
that three of Belarus’s six regions were in fact “received as a gift from 
Soviet Russia” – a notion that was popularised about Crimea too before its 
annexation.Leaked text message correspondence 
<https://meduza.io/feature/2015/03/31/kto-sleduyuschiy> between a Russian high 
official has suggested that the website may have been under the Kremlin’s 
protection.

A columnist for Russia’s Vzglyad website has also stoked the fire by arguing 
that Lukashenko should hold a referendum 
<http://vz.ru/opinions/2015/4/7/738010.html> on Belarus’s accession into the 
Russian Federation this autumn, otherwise “[the country] in its current form 
would be eliminated”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fbelarus-russia-brotherly-love-ukraine-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432741280795%2Fb9759e0b-fc7e-43ea-a61f-691944264d46-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20this%20the%20end%20for%20Belarus%20and%20Russia's%20'brotherly%20love'%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fbelarus-russia-brotherly-love-ukraine-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20this%20the%20end%20for%20Belarus%20and%20Russia%27s%20%27brotherly%20love%27%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fbelarus-russia-brotherly-love-ukraine-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432741280795%2Fb9759e0b-fc7e-43ea-a61f-691944264d46-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pro-Russia militants at the frontline of the Ukraine crisis, near the city of 
Starobeshevo in the Donetsk region. Photograph: Vasily Maximov/AFP/Getty Images 
Beyond the rhetoric, the Russian annexation of Crimea and its hand in the 
rebellions in easternUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> has 
revealed significant cracks in the relationship between Belarus and its 
powerful neighbour.

In the face of the pro-Russian separatist violence in eastern Ukraine, 
Lukashenko has been vocal in saying the country must not split, and has pledged 
his support for western-backed Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, offering 
him “the friendship of the Belarusian people”.

The president has also voiced veiled criticism of Putin: though careful not to 
mention the Russian president directly, Lukashenko said ina March press 
conference that he is no longer 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-02/belarus-strongman-balances-among-war-in-ukraine-putin-eu>
 “Europe’slast dictator”, seen as a hint at his eastern counterpart.


As soon as Belarus voices a wish to make friends with Europe, Russia will 
start behaving aggressively – as sure as a gun
Alexander Milinkevich 
He also warned 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-02/belarus-strongman-balances-among-war-in-ukraine-putin-eu>
 that wherever military aggression comes from, the country would defend its 
autonomy: “one should be cautious with Russia”, he said.

Alexander Milinkevich, the chairman for the opposition party, Movement for 
Freedom, claims the country’s sovereignty has been immensely endangered: “Putin 
has purposely tried to exhume the Soviet Union,” he said.

“At the moment there’s absolutely no ground for the Russians to intrude, but 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, the expert in fabrications, 
can easily make up some”, he added.

“A thought has matured in ruling circles that we have lost years without 
serious co-operation with the European Union,” says Milinkevich. “But as soon as
Belarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> voices her wish to make 
friends with Europe, then Russia will start behaving aggressively – as sure as 
a gun”.

He suggests it’s Lukashenko’s distancing from Moscow that could provide a 
possible pretext for Russian aggression.


‘Imperial hysteria’

The former founder of the Tell the Truth campaign Vladimir Neklyaev – who ran 
against Lukashenko in the 2010 elections – believes it’s not Putin who is a 
menace to Belarus’s independence, but the nationalist forces that have been 
awoken by his actions in Ukraine.

He says an increasingly powerful segment of Russian society don’t see Belarus 
or Ukraine as independent nations, and that their views are rapidly acquiring 
influence within the Russian political elite.

Belarus could become an easy target for its neighbour’s “imperial hysteria”, 
he said.

Yuri Tsarik, a pro-Russian and pro-government Belarusian political scientist 
believes a more credible guess about Russia’s future plan would be an economic 
offensive on Minsk – a tactic Moscow has used before.

Belarus: 20 years under dictatorship and a revolution behind the rest of Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-belarus-remains-revolution-behind>
In the early 2000s Russia suspended gas transportation to Belarus as a way of 
keeping Lukashenko’s government in line. In2010 and 2011 the Kremlin cut its 
discounted oil supplies that fuel Belarus’s gasoline production 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/business/2010/jan/03/russia-suspends-belarus-energy-supplies>
, and threatened to do so again in 2013. Last year, it blocked much of 
Belarus’s $4.5bn foodstuff exports to Russia.

Belarusians now fear they’re trapped in a no-win situation: if Lukashenko cows 
to Moscow, Belarus could return to its place as a Russian frontier land, as it 
was during Soviet rule. But if Lukashenko tries to diversify his foreign policy 
and makes new friends inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
it’s possible the Kremlin could respond with aggression – both pose a threat to 
Belarus’s independence.
 