
Everything is peachy at the beginning of Dear John, Lasse Hallstrom's new 
weepie about a soldier's star-crossed romance with a college student. That's 
because it's spring 2001, a time when the idea of hijacked planes slamming into 
the twin towers was as far-fetched as a black president or airport body scans. 
Midway through the film, of course, the planes finally hit, forcing Channing 
Tatum to leave Amanda Seyfried and do his bit for God and country. That's 
right, people. In just nine years, the defining event of our age has become the 
reason why the guy fromStep Up <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0462590/> can't be 
with the girl from Mamma Mia!

According to Elisabeth Kubler-Ross's book On Death and Dying 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ar2lqlxsHeQC&printsec=frontcover&dq=Elisabeth+Kubler-Ross%E2%80%99s++On+Death+and+Dying&source=bl&ots=lR-BuWt2IO&sig=6ihU56Hs_QTAvvqUcLK0a5u0ryA&hl=en&ei=x8SwS7zpM43y0gS8_bSKDg&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=1&ved=0CAYQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=&f=false>
, the five stages of grief are denial, anger, bargaining, depression and 
acceptance. By and large Hollywood seems to have gone through something similar 
with regards to 9/11. In the immediate aftermath of the tragedy nobody dared 
address the event itself; it was too raw, too seismic, too hard to grasp in its 
entirety. The best the movies could do was to acknowledge its impact, in films 
like The Guys (in which journalist Sigourney Weaver helped fire captain Anthony 
LaPaglia pen eulogies for his fallen comrades) orThe 25th Hour 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2003/apr/25/artsfeatures5> (which opened 
with shots of the towers of light that marked the half-year anniversary in 
2002).

If that was Tinseltown in denial, it took Michael Moore to provide the anger 
in his 2004 documentaryFahrenheit 9/11 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theguardian/2004/jul/09/1>, which saw the portly 
film-maker accusing Bush and his cronies of turning the tragedy to their own 
advantage. In time, however, thoughts turned to how that same tragedy could be 
dramatised successfully – the bargaining stage, if you will. No film could hope 
to convey its full enormity, and any that attempted to were sure to be accused 
of naivety or crassness. It was reasoned, though, that individual displays of 
heroism and sacrifice could act as metaphors for the larger whole, be it the 
passengers of the fourth plane who fought back against the hijackers – 
commemorated inUnited 93 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2006/jun/02/1> by 
Paul Greengrass – or the police officers trapped in the rubble whose ordeal 
Oliver Stone recreated inWorld Trade Center 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2006/sep/29/actionandadventure>.

Dramatic reconstruction – also used in Antonia Bird's Hamburg Cell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2004/aug/20/edinburghfilmfestival2004.edinburghfilmfestival>
, a film about the hijackers themselves – served a purpose, but it could also 
be a gruelling depressant. So were the slew of Iraq and Afghanistan films which 
surfaced in 9/11's aftermath (Stop-Loss, Rendition,In the Valley of Elah 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/jan/25/drama.thriller>) – downbeat affairs 
with serious agendas which left both critics and audiences cold. Why pay to 
watch movies about the war on terror when you could see Jack Bauer win it at 
home for nothing? More importantly, what could the likes ofLions for Lambs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2007/nov/12/youreviewlionsforlambs> 
and The Kingdom tell us we didn't already know? Perhaps this explains why 
Hollywood has jumped forward to acceptance, greenlighting films which use 9/11 
as a dramatic device in fictional narratives capable of having the happy ending 
real life can't always provide.

Reign Over Me <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2007/apr/20/drama>, a buddy 
picture from 2007 in which Don Cheadle nursed Adam Sandler's bereaved husband 
through his loss, was criticised by some for making the September 11 attacks a 
mere plot point. If Dear John is anything to go by, though, we should probably 
get used to it. Last week camenews that Richard Gere and Keira Knightley are to 
play father and daughter in The Emperor's Children 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/mar/26/keira-knightley-richard-gere>, 
adapted fromClaire Messud's novel 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/27/books/review/ORourke.html> about New Yorkers 
before and after 9/11. This week, meanwhile, sees the release of Remember Me, 
in which Robert Pattinson shows love means never having to say you're sorry for 
an exploitative ending.
 