
With nine months before the general election, there is little time left to 
complete the overhaul of government procurement processes.

Improving the management of the £200bn the public sector spends each year on 
the purchase of goods, services, equipment, building works and projects has 
been a priority of Francis Maude, the minister responsible to driving Whitehall 
efficiency.

The success of these reforms matters to all of us because, if we exclude 
benefits and pensions, the cost of procurement amounts to 40% of government 
expenditure: £6,000 a year for each taxpayer.

To spearhead reform, particularly in central government, Maude created a 
central buying service, theCrown Commercial Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-whitehall-central-buying-service-to-save-more-for-taxpayers>
 (CCS). The CCS is now responsible for commonly purchased goods and services by 
central government departments, and increasingly by local government and the 
NHS. The NHS expects to save £300m by 2016 through using the CCS.

However, government departments largely retain their own procurement 
organisations, which let contracts to many of the same suppliers. While this 
independence may be understandable for the Ministry of Defence, which needs 
specialist equipment and services, the duplication is inexcusable for other 
departments. Poor handling of government contracts has resulted in many 
problems, such as the alleged frauds by Serco and G4S, the irregularities with 
A4e, theWest coast mainline fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/west-coast-mainline> and, most recently, the 
£220m bill a tribunal ordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/aug/18/uk-bill-eborders-contract-termination-raytheon>
 the UK Border Agency pay to US company Raytheon over the unlawful termination 
of the e-borders contract.

The CCS has tried to compensate by investing heavily in crown representatives 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/cabinet-office/groups/crown-representatives>
, who try to manage key Whitehall suppliers, but lack the authority to be fully 
effective.

I proposed the CCS 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmpubadm/123/123vw26.htm>
 to the public administration select committee in January 2013, envisaging a 
central body of expertise that would let and manage government departmental 
contracts. It would be independent of the departments, but performance 
oversight by the National Audit Office would ensure that it could be held to 
account. Combining the procurement teams of central government departments 
within the CCS would create an immensely powerful organisation, the expertise 
of which would be available to all.

Taking things further, if the CCS were to be released from the normal Treasury 
employment controls – as is happening with Ministry of Defence procurement – it 
would be able to recruit top professionals from the private sector to enhance 
capability.

The last Labour government invested heavily in improving procurement in 
individual government departments. This created a gravy train for some 
consultants and gave some powerful commercial and procurement directors a 
vested interest in briefing permanent secretaries and ministers for their own 
survival and against radical change. They may anticipate surviving the next 
nine months.

Francis Maude needs quick results, but is it too late? The incoming Whitehall 
chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/jul/31/whitehall-chief-executive-ambiguous-powerless>
, who the government is having trouble recruiting, will have to report to 
several people, including Maude. But for all his dedication, Maude is not a 
member of the Cabinet, unlike some of the colleagues he will need to influence. 
Completing the fundamental reform of government procurement, so desperately 
needed, hangs in the balance.

Colin Cram is a public sector consultant specialising in procurement and 
contributing editor to the Guardian Public Leaders network • Want your say? 
Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.comJoin Guardian Public Leaders 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders/> for more comment, analysis and
job opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 