
If the hugely popular teaser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/28/star-wars-the-force-awakens-teaser-trailer-eight-things-we-learned>
 for Star Wars: The Force Awakens told us one thing, it was that CGI remains 
just as much a part of the space saga’s special effects box of tricks as it has 
been since the terrible prequel trilogy. Last year, Lucasfilm boss Kathleen 
Kennedy hinted that JJ Abrams would be dispensing with digital techniques in 
favour of the real sets and models used by the original trilogy that hit 
cinemas between 1977 and 1983. But if rolling ball droid BB-8 and the new 
Millennium Falcon drone and X-Wings starfighter were not born on a Mac 
computer,then my name’s Nute Gunray.

Now JJ Abrams has confirmed that, far from eschewing CGI altogether, the new 
movie will adopt a best of both worlds. “I feel like the beauty of this age of 
film-making is that there are more tools at your disposal, but it doesn’t mean 
that any of these new tools are automatically the right tools,”Abrams told 
Collider <http://collider.com/star-wars-the-force-awakens-jj-abrams-interview/>
. “And there are a lot of situations where we went very much old school, and in 
fact used CG more to remove things than to add things.”

“There are obviously an enormous amount of CG effects in the film, and I can’t 
wait for you to see the combination,” he added. “But it was very important … 
that the film have a tangible, sort of authentic quality that you believed that 
these things were actually happening in a real space with real sunlight – if it 
was an exterior scene – or [that] we could build a big portion of a scene and 
not have anything be blue screen …”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417193289728%2FStar-Wars-The-Force-Awake-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%3A%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3A%20watch%20the%20trailer%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstar-wars-the-force-awakens-trailer-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F28%2F1417193289728%2FStar-Wars-The-Force-Awake-017.jpg>
 Watch The Force Awakens trailer – video 
Abrams also said the film-making team agonised over the crucifix-shaped design 
for the new lightsaber, seen in the trailer, almost as much as fans have chewed 
over the weapon’s apparently pointless additional forks. “It was a sketch that 
became a whole thing. And, you know, this was not done without a lot of 
conversation, [so] it’s fun to see people have the conversation that we had, 
but in reverse.”

Since the trailer was released, Abrams has received countless emails from 
people weighing in with their thoughts about the lightsaber’s design. “I cannot 
tell you how many contradictory emails I have received from people who have 
defended it with unbelievably detailed graphics,” he said. “I’ve gotten [emails 
from] people who’ve shown how it’ll kill you and how it doesn’t make any sense. 
It’s been the funniest thing to see the arguments that have developed over this 
thing.”

Star Wars: The Force Awakens teaser trailer – eight things we learned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/nov/28/star-wars-the-force-awakens-teaser-trailer-eight-things-we-learned>
Abrams’ comments may disappoint some fans, and I have to say the idea of 
celebrating 70s science-fiction techniques in the newStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> movie had a certain degree of 
appeal. After all, the stop-motion style that has been present in film since 
the 19th century is in the midst of a comeback – if it ever went away. So why 
shouldn’t space opera also hark back to its glorious past?

On the other hand, the return of CGI in The Force Awakens doesn’t mean we’ll 
necessarily be getting the appalling incongruous digital creatures shoved by 
George Lucas into the special editions of the original trilogy. We’ve already 
seen at least one animatronic alien inAbrams’ first video for the Force for 
Change <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XfNiC9iKM0Q>charitable campaign, and 
Andy Serkis’s involvement 
<http://screenrant.com/star-wars-7-force-awakens-andy-serkis-character/> 
guarantees a degree of quality to the movie’s mooted mo-cap creations. The only 
concern is that, in trying to balance on the fine line between old and new, The 
Force Awakens will not successfully apply either aesthetic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fjj-abrams-cgi-star-wars-the-force-awakens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423500935758%2Fd027f5dd-849b-4316-96f5-2e1c67afac75-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20JJ%20Abrams%20headed%20to%20the%20CGI%20dark%20side%20for%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fjj-abrams-cgi-star-wars-the-force-awakens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20JJ%20Abrams%20headed%20to%20the%20CGI%20dark%20side%20for%20The%20Force%20Awakens%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fjj-abrams-cgi-star-wars-the-force-awakens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423500935758%2Fd027f5dd-849b-4316-96f5-2e1c67afac75-1020x612.jpeg>
 Abrams on the new lightsaber: ‘I’ve gotten [emails from] people who’ve shown 
how it doesn’t make any sense.’ Photograph: Disney/PA 
Still, everything released so far suggests Abrams isn’t exactly turning to the 
CGI dark side. Just as long as The Force Awakens steers clear of walking hutts 
and computer-game jazz-band leaders who try to swallow the camera, we can 
probably forgive him for not throwing the entire digital-effects department to 
the sarlacc.
 