
It’s absurd to feel jealous of a fruit, but I have to admit to a small stab of 
envy to see how lovingly cossetedMarks & Spencer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marksspencer>’s mangoes are. Or at least 
one variety the store is currently stocking: a nam dok mai mango. It sits, cosy 
in its rigid plastic shell, and is wearing what appears to be a fetching 
bright-yellow knitted jumper, doubled over for extra warmth and coddling. I 
feel sad for the second-tier mangoes on the shelf beneath, naked of sweaters or 
shells, jumbled and bumping into each other.

But it’s not M&S’s mango that is the subject of minor emissions of outrage on 
social media, though – that target would be its pre-chopped avocado. “Customers 
love an avocado, but they’re sometimes not the easiest to prepare,” said M&S 
product developer Erica Molyneaux. “So we’ve done the messy bit for them and 
created a ready sliced, fully ripened option.”

Cutting is a struggle for many people, including those with arthritis and 
other difficulties with mobility

“M&S starts selling pre-sliced avocado, because cutting is a struggle,” goes 
the sarcastic headline 
<http://mashable.com/2016/04/25/presliced-avocado-marks-and-spencer/?utm_cid=mash-com-Tw-main-link#9Edwr5QQmEq5>
, forgetting that cutting is indeed a struggle for many people, including those 
with arthritis and other difficulties with mobility. That aside, it’s hard to 
feel too angry about pre-sliced avocado when we’ve long had pre-torn lettuce 
leaves, pre-diced fruit salad or pre-spiralised and chopped vegetables. Or 
peeled, hard-boiled eggs in plastic pots at sandwich chains. Or, indeed, 
pre-prepared sandwiches.
 Whole Foods removed ready-peeled oranges from its shelves after social  
<http://mashable.com/2016/03/04/orange-packaging-twitter/#MX_ZL4ccmsq3>media 
indignation. Photograph: Nathalie Gordon 
But about 5m tons of packaging goes through UK households every year and, yes, 
most people can probably survive without pre-cut avocado in a plastic pot. 
There was enoughsocial media indignation about peeled oranges 
<http://mashable.com/2016/03/04/orange-packaging-twitter/#MX_ZL4ccmsq3> sold in 
a plastic tub to get Whole Foods to remove them from its shelves. The same 
happened after people complained aboutpre-peeled bananas 
<http://gawker.com/5945973/common-sense-supermarket-chain-sells-pre-peeled-bananas-wrapped-in-plastic>
 sold in a shrink-wrapped plastic tray at a supermarket in Austria.

Despite first appearances, packaging is not always a crime. A plastic-wrapped 
cucumber, for instance, lasts three times longer than one sold without, and 
bags of potatoes and grapes sold by the supermarket Morrisons have led toless 
waste in store 
<http://your.morrisons.com/Home-New/Corporate/Media-centre/Corporate-news/Morrisons-launch-Great-Taste-Less-Waste-campaign-to-save-families-up-to-600-per-year-/>
 (previously, odd small bunches of grapes or single potatoes would get thrown 
away).

Packaging can help prevent food waste, and food waste is said to be at least 
10 times more damaging to the environment than packaging waste. Is it worth 
taking a hit on packaging to prevent food from spoiling and being thrown away? 
Nobody fromWrap <http://www.wrap.org.uk/>, the sustainability organisation, 
which does a lot of work on packaging, was available to say. Still, it’s hard 
to reconcile that idea when you see a single mango in a foam sweater, or – 
perhaps even worse, and spotted again at M&S – a four-pack of pears, nestled in 
a tray, with a hard plastic shield on top. The whole thing was wrapped in 
another layer of plastic.

 