
The story of Robert Durst, currently in custody in New Orleans and charged 
with murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/16/robert-durst-charged-with-first-degree-after-his-arrest-in-new-orleans>
 after apparently incriminating himself in the television documentary series 
The Jinx, has all the elements of a Hollywood thriller. In fact, one element 
appears to have been lifted wholesale from the master of suspense, Alfred 
Hitchcock.


In The Jinx, Durst’s apparently unguarded confession – “What the hell did I 
do? Killed them all, of course” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/16/robert-durst-what-did-i-do-killed-them-all-of-course>
 – occurs after the film-makers present him with a letter he wrote to his 
friend Susan Berman which bore a close resemblance to an anonymous note sent by 
Berman’s killer to the Beverly Hills police on the day of her murder. Both were 
written in similar block letters, and the word “Beverly” was misspelled as 
“Beverley” in both cases.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Frobert-durst-wrong-man-jinx-finale-hitchcock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d1403eca18ac476c923c40f97b1968e3f3886a%2F0_0_2200_1320%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Robert%20Durst%20the%20Wrong%20Man%3F%20How%20The%20Jinx%20is%20straight%20out%20of%20Hitchcock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Frobert-durst-wrong-man-jinx-finale-hitchcock%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Robert%20Durst%20the%20Wrong%20Man%3F%20How%20The%20Jinx%20is%20straight%20out%20of%20Hitchcock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fmar%2F18%2Frobert-durst-wrong-man-jinx-finale-hitchcock%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38d1403eca18ac476c923c40f97b1968e3f3886a%2F0_0_2200_1320%2F2000.jpg>
 Robert Durst appears in a New York criminal courtroom in December 2014. 
Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters 
In the series it is a moment of high drama. Film buffs, however, may feel they 
have seen it all before.

In Hitchcock’s 1956 film The Wrong Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a30ZjSrEU0w>, Henry Fonda plays Manny 
Balestrero, a musician who is arrested after staff at an insurance company 
identify him as the man who held up their office twice a few months earlier.

The police ask him for a handwriting sample, getting him to write the words 
from the stick-up note at the insurance company. The block-letter handwriting 
bears some similarities and crucially Balestrero misspells the word “drawer” as 
“draw” – the same mistake as the robber made.

For the rest of the film Balestrero struggles with increasing desperation to 
prove his innocence. He is eventually exonerated when the true robber is 
arrested holding up a grocery store, although at the end of the movie his wife 
is in hospital suffering from depression.

In the movie’s prologue, Hitchcock, in his only speaking role on the big 
screen, assures viewers that “every word is true”, and indeed the movie is 
based on the “The True Story of Christopher Emmanuel Balestrero”, a 1953 Life 
magazine story. Balestrero worked as a musician at the Stork Club in New York 
and died decades after his ordeal in North Carolina in 1998. British-born 
Hitchcock, whose earlier work included Suspicion and Dial M For Murder, went on 
to make the classic Psycho in 1960.

Of course, the movies are the movies and real life is real life. But don’t be 
surprised, if this case ever comes to trial in California, to find lawyers 
callingAlfred Hitchcock <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfredhitchcock> and 
Henry Fonda in Durst’s defence.
 