
Figures released this morning 
<http://statistics.dwp.gov.uk/asd/index.php?page=wp> give the first indication 
of the success, or otherwise, of the government's flagship – and controversial 
– welfare to work programme, which aims to help 2.4 million long-term 
unemployed people and sickness benefit recipients find work.

As this Social Market Foundation analysis 
<http://www.smf.co.uk/files/4613/5393/7338/20121125_WP_briefing_note.pdf> 
explains, the scheme, described by the Department for Work and Pensions as a 
"revolution in back to work support", is designed to pay providers, including 
A4e and G4S, only when they succeed in getting unemployed people into sustained 
employment.

The figure just released by the government reveals a 3.5% average performance 
for the group, falling short of the 5.5% target. This was predicted by many, 
including the BBC'sNick Robinson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-20507767>, who wrote earlier this 
morning that the statistics suggest "as many unemployed are getting sustainable 
jobs as if the Work Programme had never existed". He explains:

"A minimum target was set for those firms. They should get sustainable jobs 
for five in 100 job seekers. For months there has been speculation that they 
will miss that figure as stories have emerged of charities and firms involved 
with the scheme hitting financial problems, with some going bust …The 5% target 
was what the Treasury calls the deadweight cost."

He goes on to say that a well-placed government source does not accept that 
the scheme, launched in 2011, is a failure. Instead, the source claims, it is 
still "on track", the next set of figures will be better and the work programme 
is cheaper than the schemes it replaced.

Meanwhile, the Guardian reports  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/nov/27/government-work-programme-private-firms>
 that the companies involved are striking back at suggestions they are failing 
in their task. Chris Blackwell, an industry expert who will next year take up a 
position as managing director of Maximus, which holds £180m of the work 
programme,said the suggestion  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/9699273/Just-one-in-20-aided-by-back-to-work-scheme.html>
 that just one in 20 long-term unemployed people had got permanent jobs via the 
scheme was "just wrong. It's a complete misrepresentation of the data. The 
figures are looking at just the first few months of the scheme and do not give 
an accurate picture of what's happening with the work programme".

Jackie Long of Channel 4 
<http://blogs.channel4.com/jackie-long-on-social-affairs/work-programme-results-the-long-wait-is-over/421>
 – which last month revealed that A4e, one of the biggest work programme 
contractors whose head Emma Harrison quit amid fraud investigations into the 
firm, was failing to meet the government's minimum target – says "the key 
figures to look out for are how many people on the programme have actually got 
what are known as "sustainable" jobs", that's work which has lasted for three 
or six months, depending on the individual's status within the programme."

To add to the swirl of claim and counter-claim, the Social Market Foundation 
has justtweeted <https://twitter.com/SMFthinktank/status/273364864066527236>, 
"If you're looking at #workprogramme figs, be aware that 1st yr is 12 months, 
not 14 as the DWP figures suggest. Performance actually 2.5%"

What do you think of the figures released this morning, and the welfare to 
work scheme in general? Do you have personal experience of it? Is it working, 
or not?

• This is a Comment is free experiment – tell us if you would like to see a 
"Debate of the day" every day

• This article was amended on 29 November 2012 because the original described 
Chris Blackwell as the managing director of Maximus. Blackwell will take up 
this position next year.
 