
The video released Tuesday by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, appearing to threaten US troops, is, 
like all such productions, meant to deliver different messages to different 
audiences.

Ayman al-Zawahiri <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri>, the 
63-year-old leader of al-Qaida, whose authority was repudiated last year by the 
leader of Isis, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, could be one potential viewer.

It is not hard to see who is winning the competition between the two groups 
and the two men, at least when it comes to media and outreach, and therefore 
donations, influence and volunteers.

Last week al-Qaida released its own video, announcing the formation of a new 
branch in India, and the contrast with the new video clip from Islamic State in
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and the Levant (Isis), makes 
clear the differing styles, and generational and social composition of the two 
biggest players in the fragmented world of contemporary Islamic militancy.

The Isis clip, purporting to be a trailer for a film entitled Flames of War, 
and released by the al-Hayat Media Centre, Isis's English-language propaganda 
arm, appearsslick, action-packed and designed for quick viewing on a smart phone
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/17/islamic-state-video-threatens-white-house-us-troops>
.

Al-Qaida's clip is pedestrian, wordy, and features a long lecture by an 
elderly man wearing thick spectacles.

One effort focuses on a region that leads bulletins week after week and 
includes footage from a week or so ago; the other looks to a part of the world 
which is marginal to the global news agenda and quotes a leader who was killed 
four years ago.

There are three other elements in this new Isis release which are significant. 
The first is that it is almost devoid of any sense of place. A recent hour-long 
film from the group, entitled the Clanging of the Swords IV, began with a long 
zoom in on a map of the Middle East and a sequence shot from a drone in 
Fallujah, the city in western Iraq.

In the newest clip, the geographical locations of the images, though 
recognisable as probably being in Iraq, are not explicitly identified. The 
pictures of the White House are of course immediately recognisable and play 
into the rhetoric and iconography of global jihad, which has become alingua 
franca among active and aspirant militants everywhere.

There is almost no text at any point in the video, and what there is appears 
in both Arabic and English. The only spoken words are those of Barack Obama. 
This is a production which appears deliberately made to appeal, or indeed 
repulse, anywhere in the world.

The second striking feature is that the video is entirely devoid of the 
debased religious content so characteristic of the genre. There are no sound 
bites from speeches, no lectures, no mentions of religious sites or 
personalities. The religious songs so common elsewhere are absent.

Much has been made of Britons buying copies of Islam For Dummies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/08/two-british-men-admit-linking-extremist-group-syria>
 before going to Syria and the ignorance of raw recruits to the militants' 
group can be exaggerated. But whoever made this video knew the target audience 
â€“ and it is not one that enjoys studying doctrines, arguments or, above all, 
texts.

This too is one reason why all the images are not just of conflict, but of war 
of a particular type. This is the third striking element. There are no images 
of terrorist attacks, as usually conceived, and the western targets shown are 
US troops in Iraq. A murder is trailed but not shown, in contrast to previous 
deliberate dissemination of graphic images of atrocities. Instead the clip 
shows "exciting" images of conventional warfare.

There are militants battling tanks and armoured personnel carriers, firing 
rocket propelled grenades, and fighting through urban areas, but there are no 
suicide bombers blowing up checkpoints, let alone trains full of commuters.

Of course, like most jihadi propaganda, these images are designed to reinforce 
the idea that those signing up to join Isis are taking part in a war pitting 
belief against unbelief, good against evil, right against wrong, in a cosmic 
struggle that will last for millennia. But beyond that, they help aspirant 
recruits in the west to overcome any reservations they might have about joining 
a group which targets their own countries.

Few westerners joining militant groups do not have some ambivalence in their 
attitude towards the place where they were born, or at least grew up.MI5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> once recorded a set of aspirant bombers 
describing without irony the British police as the "good old Bill".

One of the key tasks assigned al-Qaida handlers who looked after volunteers 
making their way to the group's bases along Pakistan's western frontier in the 
last 10 years was to convince them that, rather than fight against Nato troops 
in Afghanistan, they should return to the UK, France, Belgium, Germany and the 
US or wherever, to strike there. This was a difficult and delicate job and for 
every success, such as the 7/7 bombers, for example, there were many failures.

In July, Baghdadi devoted a portion of his first big public speech to 
rebutting accusations of terrorism. Isis, by framing its campaign as a 
conventional war fought out amid the date palms and scrub of a distant land 
with automatic rifles and grenades, makes participation considerably more 
attractive to a bored, frustrated, angry 21-year-old in Europe or America.

Once recruits are inside the so-called caliphate, exposed to horrific violence 
in extreme conditions, different ideas can be introduced.
 