
Israeli soldiers had already searched the Palestinian families trudging away 
from their homes, cleared them of their weapons, and sent them on their way. 
Then a second group of soldiers pulled up in a car, separated out the men, took 
them to one side and shot them.

When horrified observers asked their commander, “How could this be?”, he 
shrugged off the massacre. “When you chop wood, chips fly,” he told his men.

The casual murder of 15 civilian men, yards away from their mothers, wives and 
daughters, is just one of the alleged war crimes detailed by Israeli veterans 
of the six-day war of 1967 inCensored Voices <http://www.censoredvoices.com>, a 
challenging exploration of a conflict at the heart of Israel’s identity.

“They are not only voices of our past; they are the voices of our present and 
our future. This war is affecting us every single day since then,” said 
director Mor Loushy, in her first interview with British media about her 
controversial film.

The first-person testimony of the horrors of all war – and the mistakes and 
brutality of this conflict in particular – was narrated by reservists just days 
after they returned from the fighting, but the account was then locked away for 
nearly half a century. Loushy was transfixed by the gap between their accounts 
and the history of the war in Israeli collective memory. “We didn’t have the 
other voice that knew from the beginning that this war was going to lead us to 
a terrible place,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEh0Z1VfYPcE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEh0Z1VfYPcE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEh0Z1VfYPcE&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Censored Voices. 
Even after 48 years, the men’s stories are still explosive, with “a power that 
can shatter truths at the very heart of the state of Israel”,according to 
Israel’sHaaretz newspaper 
<http://www.haaretz.com/news/diplomacy-defense/1.659923>. The descriptions of 
brutality are shocking, as is the clarity with which many of the men, in a 
moment of national triumph, saw how their victory had laid the seeds of future 
violence and misery for the conquerors as well as for the vanquished.

“Are we doomed to bomb villages every decade for defensive purposes?” one 
wonders. “Are we doomed to live in the pauses between wars?”

The film opens with the terror that hung over Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in the run-up to war and traces the 
jubilation of the soldiers as they race to victory, and then their growing 
confusion as a simple war for survival shifts into a darker conflict. “I was 
convinced the war was just because it was over our existence,” one veteran says 
as he picks through his memories. “But it became something that it wasn’t in 
the beginning.

On 5 June 1967 the country feared annihilation as Arab nations massed their 
armies near its borders. By June 10, Israel had all but destroyed the Egyptian 
and Syrian air forces, controlled all of Jerusalem, the West Bank, Gaza and 
Sinai, and was overwhelmed with euphoria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fisrael-six-day-war-film-censored-voices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F29%2F1440842860810%2F6172ff54-33e0-40f5-ac1e-869056d92c99-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20veterans%20recall%20horrors%20of%20country%E2%80%99s%20victory%20in%20six-day%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fisrael-six-day-war-film-censored-voices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20veterans%20recall%20horrors%20of%20country%E2%80%99s%20victory%20in%20six-day%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fisrael-six-day-war-film-censored-voices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F29%2F1440842860810%2F6172ff54-33e0-40f5-ac1e-869056d92c99-1020x612.jpeg>
 Israeli writer and six-day war veteran Amos Oz listens to a tape of his 
earlier self in the documentary Censored Voices. Photograph: PR 
However, there was a current of darkness swirling beneath the jubilation. 
Writer Amos Oz decided to try to capture it. “People did not come back happy 
from this war. There’s a sense of sadness that the newspapers don’t address,” a 
young Oz says at the beginning of the recordings, explaining what the project 
is trying to achieve. “We may not do the best service to what’s called 
‘national morale’, but we’ll do a small service to the truth.”

Setting off for kibbutzes across the country, he sought out fellow veterans 
and asked them to share their memories. He found young men haunted by memories 
of dead friends and slaughtered enemies, and traumatised by their role in the 
forcible eviction of Palestinian families. On tapes in quiet rooms, veiled in 
the semi-anonymity of audio recordings, they poured out the stories of horror 
and tragedy.

I had a feeling I was evil. Nothing can make that feeling go away
An Israeli six-day war veteran 
One recalls: “My friends, friends I went to school with, who I know as good 
people, these same people, one of them sees a wounded enemy, so he doesn’t go 
to help him but draws his Uzi to finish him off. And an Arab runs in the 
desert, so he lifts his Uzi and fires, for no reason, out of murder.”

“I had a feeling I was evil,” another veteran says of forcing an old man from 
his home. “Nothing can make that feeling go away.”

Some of those stories were collected in a book, The Seventh Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/jun/08/andontheseventhday>, 
published soon after the war. Loushy stumbled over it while studying for a 
history degree and decided the story needed a bigger audience. “You can’t 
imagine how many films there are telling the heroic story of the six-day war,” 
says Loushy, who spent years tracking down the tapes, the veterans and rare 
footage from around the world to illustrate the story they told. “It’s 
important that younger generations have this film on the shelf.”

Some of the soldiers, who at the time were a little more than two decades away 
from the horrors of the Holocaust, describe being painfully torn between the 
pressing need to fight for their own survival and the cost to others. “I could 
see myself in those kids who were carried in their parents’ arms, when my 
father carried me,” one says. “Perhaps that’s the tragedy, that I identified 
with the other side. With our enemies.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fisrael-six-day-war-film-censored-voices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F29%2F1440842962591%2F8bf07c47-e5a4-43e1-8e54-698a1a316692-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20veterans%20recall%20horrors%20of%20country%E2%80%99s%20victory%20in%20six-day%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fisrael-six-day-war-film-censored-voices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20veterans%20recall%20horrors%20of%20country%E2%80%99s%20victory%20in%20six-day%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fisrael-six-day-war-film-censored-voices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F29%2F1440842962591%2F8bf07c47-e5a4-43e1-8e54-698a1a316692-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Director/writer of Censored Voices, Mor Loushy. Photograph: Victoria 
Will/Invision/AP 
Beyond the terror of the murders and abuse there is another horror, the 
clarity with which the men who fought the war saw what occupation of the lands 
they conquered would bring. They saw not the security the country longed for 
but cycles of conflict and bitterness.

“I don’t believe this is the last time we’ll have to wear uniforms,” one says. 
“I always have a feeling that the next round will be much crueller because we 
have become a conquering army. This is actual occupation.”

Loushy, who spent years working on the film, found these warnings, and the way 
they were buried, among the most important and tragic parts of the veterans’ 
story. “They knew that if we kept those territories it would be the end of the 
state that they dreamt of, that it will destroy us. And I think they were 
right. Because they were on those territories, they fought on the battlefield, 
they saw in those short six days what it is like to occupy a civilian society, 
and they understood the deep meaning of it. This is the tragedy of it – they 
saw it, they spoke about it. But Israel just fell in love with the territories.”

Censored Voices will be released in the UK on 16 October
 