
Back in 2008, I hit the shops with an unlikely style guide: Stuart Rose, the 
then boss of M&S. I had taken him to task over what I saw as the shop's lack of 
stylish clothing; he, with inimitable panache,proved me wrong 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2008/oct/24/fashion-marks-and-spencer>. 
I left the central London store a convert. But were I to take M&S's latest 
campaign as my guide, there's no way I'd be stepping back through those doors.

Shot in Miami, in lurid Technicolor, it features the "M&S girls" (as they are 
chummily known) – Twiggy, Lisa Snowdon, VV Brown, Dannii Minogue and model Ana 
Beatriz Barros –vogueing all over the place 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/MS-TV/b/311612031?intid=emtv_1_null_821900934001\>
 in a series of horrible outfits.

Twiggy has been dressed in a garish paisley gown that looks as though it comes 
from the Benidorm costume department (plus she has a slightly terrifying look 
on her face – perhaps she feels the same as me about the clothes); VV Brown is 
in a shapeless jumpsuit with an unflatteringly low crotch. If she can't pull 
this look off, there's no hope for the rest of us. Many of the M&S ranges have 
much better stuff on offer – especially the Limited Collection, where I found a 
fantastic graphic-print shift dress just last week – so why use these ones?

The "M&S girls" ads have been part of the store's "Your M&S" rebrand 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2006/nov/06/retail.mondaymediasection> since 
2004, and they have generally been astonishingly successful: in 2005, three 
items worn by Twiggy, Erin O'Connor and Laura Bailey sold out in three weeks. 
But in their increasingly irritating quest for quirkiness (Peter Kay as a 
long-haired dance teacher in the Christmas 2010 clip was just plain disturbing, 
while seeing Twiggy throw shapes by a swimming pool in the latest one is like 
watching your drunk Aunt Doris at a family wedding), I'd argue that the ads 
have lost sight of what they're meant to be showcasing: clothes you'd actually 
want to be seen in.


 