
It's right there in the trailer. The key moment in Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>'s new romantic comedy, the 
pledge of mutual devotion that's supposed to have us reaching for our hankies, 
comes whenBill Nighy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/billnighy> says, "My 
son," andDomhnall Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/21/first-sight-domhnall-gleeson> 
whispers back: "My dad." Yes, the posters may concentrate on Gleeson and Rachel 
McAdams, rather than Gleeson and Nighy, but by the end ofAbout Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155249/about-time> it's clear that the 
young sweethearts' flirty shenanigans are incidental to the main event. What 
matters to Curtis is just a father, standing in front of a son, and asking him 
to love him.

We shouldn't be too surprised. One curious aspect of Curtis's filmography is 
that while he's more or less synonymous with romantic comedy, he's profoundly 
uninterested in romantic relationships. InFour Weddings and a Funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/54602/four.weddings.and.a.funeral> and 
Notting Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77241/notting.hill>, the 
relationships we care about are those between the floppy-haired hero and his 
ever-supportive, mildly wacky group of metropolitan friends, flatmates and 
siblings. They're the people who share his adventures. They're the people he 
can talk to without, ahh, you know, that is, I mean, stammering. The supposed 
leading ladies, on the other hand, are outsiders who drop into his life every 
now and then before flying back across the Atlantic. No wonder the first 
audiences of Four Weddings were reported to have howled their disapproval when 
Hugh Grant got together with Andie MacDowell. Why hadn't he plumped for Kristin 
Scott Thomas, the eligible beauty he actually got on with?

In The Boat That Rocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128972/boat-that-rocked>, the 
connections that count are those between a gang of unhygienic mates on a pirate 
radio ship. And in About Time, the paternal-filial bond is so central that it's 
bound up with the film's time-travelling premise. What happens is that when 
Gleeson turns 21, Nighy tells him that they both have the power to zap 
themselves back into the past. Every man in the family can do it, he says. But, 
he adds, it's vitally important that they never mention this to the women. 
Presumably, they shouldn't have to bother their fluffy little heads about it.

Gleeson accepts this sexist stipulation without pause, and goes on to use his 
time-hopping skills, Groundhog Day-style, to woo McAdams. Whenever he does 
something gauche – which is quite a lot, what with this being in aRichard Curtis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis> film – he rewinds time 
and then replays the situation in a way that puts him in a better light. It's 
all a bit uncomfortable. As Gleeson rewrites history in his favour over and 
over again, you can't help but feel that he is, well, cheating. And you wait 
for him to admit to McAdams that their love is built on secrets and lies.

But – spoiler alert! – it doesn't happen. Gleeson has no qualms at all about 
his time-tinkering. He continues to hoodwink McAdams with an indifference that 
recalls the notoriously dodgy sequence in The Boat That Rocked when Nick Frost 
tries to trick his girlfriend into bed with someone else. As long as a man 
benefits from such odious behaviour, it seems, we shouldn't worry too much if a 
woman is the victim. We're not supposed to come out of Four Weddings frothing 
about how heartless Hugh Grant was for dumping poor Anna Chancellor on their 
wedding day.

To be fair, Curtis doesn't treat his female characters so cruelly in every 
film. But he does treat them as objects, not human beings. They're visions of 
unattainable loveliness – until you attain them, that is. But there's never any 
reason to get to know them. From The Tall Guy onwards, as soon as a Curtis hero 
sees the heroine, he falls in love with her. Talking to her neither increases 
nor diminishes that love, and there's no chance that she'll turn out to be a 
kleptomaniac or a Tea Party activist. Indeed, if she has any opinions or goals 
of her own, the hero never hears about them, and neither does the audience. To 
Colin Firth inLove Actually 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96863/love.actually>, it doesn't even 
matter that he and his Portuguese housekeeper don't speak each other's 
language. If a heroine in Curtisland seems perfect when the hero meets her, 
then perfect is how she'll stay. As James Fleet puts it in Four Weddings: 
"Golly. Thunderbolt City."

It's this immature view of women – the view of a tongue-tied schoolboy 
idolising the prettiest girl in class – that sets Curtis's work apart fromWhen 
Harry Met Sally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/75869/when-harry-met-sally.>, Annie Hall
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36314/annie.hall>, His Girl Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76369/his-girl-friday> and the other 
great romantic comedies. However absurd the situations may become in those 
films, they all rest on the personalities of the star-crossed lovers. Are they 
compatible? Will they commit to one another or throw plates at each other's 
heads? Will they commit to one another and then throw plates at each other's 
heads? These questions never seem to cross Curtis's mind.

One can only assume that his own relationship with his partner and script 
editor, Emma Freud, is nothing but delightful. Maybe he simply can't imagine 
what would stop two people living happily ever after unless one of them were a 
time traveller, or the prime minister, or engaged to somebody else. But if he's 
stuck for an idea for his next film, he could always try one about a man and 
woman who sometimes have meaningful conversations. It might even be romantic. 
And it's about time.

More on About Time

• About Time: first-look review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/08/about-time-review-richard-curtis>
• Feature: why can't women time travel? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/31/why-cant-women-time-travel>
• Watch the About Time trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/may/14/about-time-richard-curtis-trailer-video>
 