 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fj-is-for-juxtaposition-share-your-artwork-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc59997fd6d5922102cf99e673e6c97ea356662cf%2F0_0_757_1157%2F757.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J%20is%20for%20Juxtaposition%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fj-is-for-juxtaposition-share-your-artwork-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J%20is%20for%20Juxtaposition%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommunity%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fj-is-for-juxtaposition-share-your-artwork-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc59997fd6d5922102cf99e673e6c97ea356662cf%2F0_0_757_1157%2F757.jpg>
 Female Shot-putter, 1924, Paper collage Photograph: Petr Galadzhev/Alex 
Lachmann Collection, London 
What do you see in this collage by Petr Galadzhev from 1924? Women as 
athletes, mothers, wives, public figures: heroes. The Soviet superwoman - 
synonymous with power, stoicism and equal to men. These women helped build a 
new society, stood beside their male counterparts and were instrumental in the 
creation of a new Soviet world. But anew exhibition at GRAD titled Superwoman: 
‘Work, Build and Don’t Whine’ 
<https://www.grad-london.com/whatson/superwoman-work-build-and-don-t-whine/>
(after the famous propaganda poster by Alexandra Deineka, 1930) challenges this 
ideal. It charts the development of the Soviet superwoman and explores this 
propaganda image against the very different social reality of the time.

The first revolution of 1917 was instigated by women who gained considerable 
rights, they made unparalleled progress for women compared with the rest of the 
world. Russia became the first major world power to grant women the vote and 
the legalisation of abortion and the provision of generous maternity leave soon 
followed. Furthermore, the Soviet Union’s first constitution, published in 
1923, officially recognised the equal rights of women, including equal pay and 
generous divorce laws.

Standing beside the new Soviet man, initiated by Stalin, it was both logical 
and inspired that this ideal woman would also be ripe for reconstruction. 
However, unlike men, women were not just expected to be communist citizens, 
workers, soldiers, scientists, dancers and cosmonauts but also wives and 
mothers. It’s this double burden which created an incredible juxtaposition, 
explored in the show. The iconic image of the superwoman seen in propaganda had 
a ‘dark side’, hidden in plain sight from the rest of the world. The objects 
and artworks in the exhibition tell the story of the Soviet Woman in her many, 
sometimes conflicting, guises.

This unique Soviet experience has informed Russia’s social narrative more than 
any other period. At the end of the Revolution, the question of women’s issues 
were thought to be ‘solved’ by many (the Zhenotdels - the women’s rights 
department installed by government - was disbanded in 1936). However the 
exhibition, the first of a series, hopes to start an international dialogue 
around the subject of Soviet and Russian women’s roles so that today’s 
landscape can both reflect on the past and women’s rights can progress.

Perhaps, then, this juxtaposition between women’s public perception and the 
reality of their experience is portrayed perfectly in this image: the women 
represented by Galadzhev are all occupied in their various roles, but there 
isn’t a sense of their individual identities - who are they pleasing or 
appealing to? The exhibition brings this dichotomy to life, putting on display 
the multiple- and changing- truths of women.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

Superwoman: Work, Build and Don’t Whine is at the Gallery for Russian Arts and 
Design 
<https://www.grad-london.com/whatson/superwoman-work-build-and-don-t-whine/>, 
in London, from 18 June to 17 September.
 