
Whenever the debate about social security rages, so do the commenters harping 
on about how everyone in their street has a "massive fucking telly" – the 
implication being that they claim benefits, ergo, the complainants' taxes paid 
for their plasma screen.

Then we have Edwina Currie, claiming  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2542105/Edwina-Currie-ordered-Twitter-husband-criticised-saying-foodbank-users-spend-spare-cash-tattoos-dog-food.html?ITO=1490&ns_mchannel=rss&ns_campaign=1490>
poor people are only poor because they have tattoos. I expect to see David 
Beckham and Angelina Jolie at the front of a food bank queue at any moment, 
glumly ruing the day they spent so much of their money on body art, a slippery 
slope that led them straight into financial despair.

Perks of a job are often termed "benefits". When I worked at a supermarket a 
few years ago, staff received a handbook of benefits that came with the job. A 
few quid off your phone contract, a free driving lesson with a certain company, 
10% staff discount at the shop. Implying that subsistence payments for people 
who are out of work, sick, disabled or on low incomes are a perk is to play 
straight into the hands of the wrong side of the debate.

But Social Security Street (to call it by its proper name), despite the neat 
alliteration, wouldn't have packed the same punch forLove Productions 
<http://www.loveproductions.co.uk/>, the company responsible for the horror show
Benefits Street for Channel 4 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/benefits-street>.

Other jobs that come with generous benefit packages include being paid £300 
for clocking in and sneaking out again, courtesy of theHouse of Lords 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/mps-and-lords/about-lords/lords-allowances/>. 
It's like signing on, but the pay is better and there's less intrusion into 
your personal life. Replace the Jobcentre Plus staff with a couple of braying 
Hooray Henrys slapping you on the back for your latest media gaffe, and you've 
got the picture.

Perks for MPs include turning up to work for a few minutes to let everyone 
know you're there, then sloping off to the in-house bar, returning only for a 
named vote so it looks as if you were there all along.

Imagine if our doctors turned up in the morning, said hello to receptionists, 
saw a patient or two, and then went down the pub for the rest of the day. 
If any of the rest of us behaved that way we would be out of a job and possibly 
receiving the "benefit" of £71 a week on income support. But not those MPs on a 
base salary of £66,396 a year, with all the time in the world to moonlight as 
bank consultants on the side.

Shrieks about "where my taxes go" are often predictably accompanied by tales 
of television sets, multiple children, mobile phones – and scarcely a brief 
murmur about the duck houses, the moat clearances, the family and friends 
employed on eyebrow-raising salaries in MPs' offices. Woe betide the person 
with a dog who has to use a food bank to see them through a brief period of 
crisis, but who cares about the elected officials using taxpayers' money on 
soft furnishings and boozy late nights?

To avoid any further confusion in the social security and entitlement debate, 
perhaps someone could draw up an official list of "things poor people are 
allowed to have". According to Edwina and co, dogs, tattoos, mobile phones, 
televisions and children under 18 sleeping in separate bedrooms are a definite 
no – althoughfrom bitter experience some of them are harder to sell on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/23/jack-monroe-face-modern-poverty>
 than others when the chips are down. Where do they stand on paracetamol? 
Goldfish? Razors? Teabags? Sanitary towels? £12,000 self-portraits?

There is a Benefits <https://www.theguardian.com/society/benefits> Street in 
Britain. It isn't in Birmingham. It's in Westminster. But in the attempt to 
make such bravely controversial television it was clearly overlooked. Go on 
Love, it would be riveting. I've got my popcorn and swearwords waiting.
 