
We're true believers, but we're also troublemakers, and if you look at the 
work we do, a lot of it has a sense of humor.

So says Michael Goldfarb, founder of the Washington Free Beacon, basking in 
the predictable reaction to an article by Free Beacon staff that accusedthe New 
Republic's owner of purging Jewish writers 
<http://freebeacon.com/hughes-drops-jews/>. That's the whole MO: be outrageous, 
scurrilous and completely unfair. And then, when you get a rise, just shrug and 
say: "What's your problem: can't take a joke?"

But for something to be humor, it has to be funny. And as comedy goes, the 
Free Beacon's jokes have all the subtlety of Jackass. The only difference is 
that instead of creating dubious hilarity at the spectacle of their 
self-inflicted pain, they're using equally ridiculous stunts to laugh at yours. 
Clinically speaking, we call people with that attitude "sociopaths", but in the 
political realm, Goldfarb's punchlines – emphasis on punch! – are just the 
latest iteration of a burgeoning style of discourse whose practitioners have 
become influential enough to deserve their own designation.

They belong to an emerging group of conservatives with technological and PR 
savvy who specialize in passing off mean-spirited pranks as a form of partisan 
journalism, and whose passionate plaints against a perceived liberal agenda are 
rooted in name-calling rather than philosophy.

Call them Limbaugh Mini-Mes, or Nixon's New Media 'Plumbers', or maybe 
Breitbart's Brat Pack (Breitbrats, Bratbarts?).

Here's a sample of the Free Beacon's headlines: "The Booty Bundler 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/05/23/washington-free-beacon-booty-bundler_n_1539431.html>
", about a minor Obama fundraiser with a striptease video on her resume. "Coal 
Runnings 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2012/06/22/the-flimsy-trail-of-evidence-behind-a-free-beac/185921>
", a largely hypothetical piece about how much new national standards for power 
plants could cost Missouri voters. And the typically subtle "Obama Lie Machine 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/08/02/the_free_beacons_tax_fail/>", about the Obama 
campaign's tax calculator in which the paper's staff appears to completely 
misunderstand the concept of marginal tax rates.

Goldfarb is connected to the legacy of professional provocateur Andrew 
Breitbart mainly via shared tactics, but also through shared information: the 
Free Beacon andBreitbart.com <http://breitbart.com/> trade links like two 
besties on Livejournal 
<https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&ie=UTF-8#hl=en&output=search&sclient=psy-ab&q=free%20beacon%20brietbart&oq=&gs_l=&pbx=1&fp=517dd349d85c70a3&ion=1&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.r_cp.r_qf.&bvm=bv.42965579,d.aWc&biw=908&bih=434>
. Other members of the crew operate under his official banner.

Ben Shapiro is a Brietbart.com editor-at-large, most recently in the news for 
his role inperpetuating 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2013/02/friends-of-hamas-and-andrew-breitbarts-legacy.html>
 the allegation that Chuck Hagel once accepted money from the "Friends of 
Hamas". Shapiro was unsurprisingly resistant to admitting fault, if 
uncharacteristically sober in doing so. Perhaps he was chastened by the actual 
satire embedded in the "Friends of Hamas backstory" (the group was invented in 
a reporter's whimsical inquiry of a Senate aide).

Shapiro's typical rhetorical strategy is a stream of amused, yet angry 
non-sequiturs: before the Hagel flap, in January, he became a folk hero of the 
right for waving the US constitution atPiers Morgan 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2013/01/10/breitbarts_ben_shapiro_vs_piers_morgan_on_gun_control.html>
 and warning of America, as a democracy, "going usurpatious".

James O'Keefe also works for the Breitbart enterprise. Best known as the man 
who felledAcorn 
<http://gawker.com/5508190/okeefe-and-breitbart-acorn-videos-severely-edited> 
(via a hidden camera and some of the most stagey "pimp-ho" role-play outside 
suburban bedrooms), O'Keefe's body of work is a genius mixture of soft targets 
and careful editing. Not one of his video exposés has vaulted into mainstream 
media consciousness without highly selective cuts. That he has succeeded in 
wrestingresignations 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2011/03/08/james_o_keefe_versus_npr.html> 
(at NPR, over supposed pandering to a faux Muslim group) and otherwiseending 
careers 
<http://healthland.time.com/2011/02/03/what-did-the-planned-parenthood-sting-really-accomplish/>
 (one overly sympathetic Planned Parenthood employee) doesn't mean that O'Keefe 
is a good journalist. It just that he has good aim for slow-moving prey.

Ambush specialist Jason Mattera is another beneficiary of Breitbartian 
synergism (writing forBigGovernment.com <http://biggovernment.com/>, the sites 
dutifully report on his latest exploits). But as with Goldfarb, Mattera's 
sensibility is infused by Breitbart's rough-and-tumble way with people and his 
sense of drama. He is less brazenly flippant with facts than his brethren, 
mostly because he focuses on setting up liberal politicians for admittedly 
uncomfortable, but also unanswerable and aggressively beside-the-point 
questions – such asasking Mayor Mike Bloomberg last month 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Big-Journalism/2013/01/28/EXCLUSIVE-Journalist-Accosted-By-Security-Over-Mayor-Bloomberg-Gun-Control-Question>
 if he would disarm his security detail as part of a ban on guns.

Propagandists on either side of the political spectrum shade their facts; 
that's what makes them propagandists. What sets the Bratbarts apart from 
partisan pugilists like Sean Hannity and Michael Moore is the panache with 
which they do it, and their reflexive use of a specifically churlish sense of 
humor as both an excuse and motivation.

Jonah Goldberg, the National Review columnist, is a philosophical forebear 
here, with his constant Simpsons references and defensive sarcasm. However, 
these guys don'tflaunt a knowledge of pop culture, as Goldberg does, as a way 
of distinguishing themselves from the squares of mainstream conservatism. 
Instead, it is simply a part of their language, an assumed body of knowledge. 
They don'tmake the argument that South Park, or the Simpsons, or the Star Wars 
movies are "conservative" in some way – theyare that argument. When Ben Shapiro 
writes a column entitled "Jedi Mind Trick Nation 
<http://townhall.com/columnists/benshapiro/2012/12/05/jedi_mind_trick_nation>", 
the pop culture reference is just a tool appropriated for use against the 
ideological enemy – to be precise, a Bratbart brickbat.

Bullies have been laughing at others' vulnerabilities since there was sand to 
kick in people's faces. But the perversity of this post-Ann Coulter generation 
is that they believe the world is run by nerdy liberal elitists , that their 
antics are a righteous rebellion instead of an attempt to assert the law of 
jungle. Perhaps it is true that liberal nerds have made great strides in 
governing – certainly, our president is one – but the reactionary insurgents' 
anti-establishment pose, which goes along with shoving a camera in someone's 
face, breaks down when you consider the actual policies advocated by the guy 
behind the viewfinder. Policies that, say, continue to suppress voting rights 
of minorities won't make them punk rock heroes.

The only thing remotely disruptive about the material generated by the 
Bratbarts is its incivility. In itself, that is simply a style, not an argument 
or a critique. Incivility can be OK: I am a big believer in disrespecting those 
in power, and there's nothing inherently wrong with being flippant – there are 
times when it is the only proper response to authority. As journalist and 
defender of the lowbrowGilbert Seldes 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilbert_Seldes> put it:

"Comedy is last refuge of the nonconformist mind."

But confusing satire and hazing? Mixing up muckraking with misinformation? 
Revelation with subterfuge? Laughter with cruelty? Those are the tactics of 
would-be authoritarians, not outlaw liberators.
 