
Four Rooms <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/visual_arts/four_rooms> at 
theTandanya National Aboriginal Cultural Institute <http://www.tandanya.com.au/>
 in Adelaide is a rare example of something that far exceeds its inspiration. 
It takes its title and concept from theterrible 1995 portmanteau film 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0113101/> set in four hotel bedrooms; but the 
Indigenous artists in the show use the quartet of different spaces to explore 
Australia and the world in a far deeper and more intriguing fashion than 
Quentin Tarantino and his pals did in the movie.

Alfred Hickling talks about one of the four installations – Tess Allas, 
Charlie Scheider and Vernon Ah-Kee’s brilliant piece Andy Warhol on Aboriginal 
Art – here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/08/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-one>
. Another room also sees a collaboration between an Australian and an American 
artist.Jenny Fraser <http://www.daao.org.au/bio/jenny-fraser/> and James Luna 
<http://www.jamesluna.com/> are Indigenous people from opposite shores of the 
Pacific. She is from Mareeba in Queensland; he is from Orange, California, and 
lives on the La Jolla reservation. Their room includes two films by Fraser; one 
of a campfire, the other of clips of films likePoint Break 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0102685/>, with pivotal scenes that take place by 
– or in – the sea. On the floor are shells and a sandbox, as well as what looks 
like the remains of a beach-cooked meal (an empty tin of Spam features). Luna 
placed the objects in a ritualistic performance, telling the audience stories 
about their significance. He finished off with a story about his uncle, and how 
he showed Luna the points of significance in their world.

“He was curing himself of a hangover. We went up the mountain and I thought he 
was going to show me something sacred. He was purging himself with cold spring 
water and then after he was well, he looked down at the horizon and told me the 
story about our points. It was such a moment for me, because to be in a vantage 
point on the top of a mountain see the points of your Indigenous world as it 
was, it centred me. It not only told me who I was, where it came from, how far 
our nation was and what it encompassed, but showed me that if you had this kind 
of knowledge, wherever you went you would never be lost, spiritually, 
physically or mentally.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F13%2Fjames-luna-four-rooms-adelaide-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394607599360%2F9c51eb48-6b50-4894-9ad6-7211b8ffd832-822x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=James%20Luna%3A%20%22For%20Indigenous%20people%2C%20humour%20is%20a%20survival%20skill%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F13%2Fjames-luna-four-rooms-adelaide-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=James%20Luna%3A%20%22For%20Indigenous%20people%2C%20humour%20is%20a%20survival%20skill%22&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F13%2Fjames-luna-four-rooms-adelaide-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394607599360%2F9c51eb48-6b50-4894-9ad6-7211b8ffd832-822x1020.jpeg>
 Name that beach film: Jenny Fraser and James Luna's installation at Four 
Rooms. Photograph: Alicia Canter/The Guardian 
Luna and Fraser met at an Indigenous film festival  
<http://www.imaginenative.org/home/>in Toronto. Luna says that there is a close 
affinity between the Indigenous peoples of Australasia and America. “We speak – 
not literally – the same language,” he says. “Our world outlook, our seagoing 
people, our relationship with the ocean and the land – it just makes sense. How 
did those chickens get to New Zealand? They just followed the current. If you 
look at the tribes culturally, there are some similarities there in how we 
think and how we perform our rituals and the protocol of it all. For us, the 
world’s a small place and what makes us different is the intrusion on our 
cultures, but each of us has strived to survive despite this and carry on.”

In Luna’s experience, Indigenous people from to two continents also share a 
laugh. “When we meet each other there’s this wonderful sense of humour, and the 
humour is a survival skill. I’ve been quoted as saying dammit, if you can’t 
laugh at it then you’re gonna be depressed, so even though it might be painful, 
someone will crack a joke just to break the ice and keep moving on and I like 
to put that in my work as well. Also there’s a story there for all people in 
terms of survival, difference, acceptance, outlook.

“I truly believe that all the strife in the world is caused by 
miscommunication and ignorance,” he adds. “But it’s not quite that simple 
because we need to rewrite history as it was written. It didn’t surprise me to 
go toBrighton Beach 
<http://www.southaustralia.com/regions/adelaide-city-beaches.aspx> and see a 
big statue to the explorer that discovered Australia. It galls me, because how 
can you discover a culture that’s been there for thousands and thousands of 
years? As an artist, I can’t change the way people think but I can get some 
people to reconsider.”
 