
Was it just Monkey or did the Royal Television Society programme awards at the 
Grosvenor House in London last even longer than usual? Proceedings wrapped up 
around 11.30pm. RTS presidentPeter Bazalgette made a valiant plea to winners to 
make short speeches, reminding the audience of former winner,actress Jessica 
Hynes' show-stopping, expletive-packed acceptance speech last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2013/mar/20/jessica-hynes-rts-awards-media-monkey>
, which Baz said with masterful understatement: "Went on for a bit of a while." 
HostTim Vine made a valiant effort to keep things moving although his 
long-running gag involving trying to catch a pen behind the ear did not help 
matters. But was the team behindChannel 4's Four Rooms  
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/four-rooms/profiles>out of the room when 
Baz made his plea? Their speech lasted almost three minutes, mostly thanks to 
presenterGordon Watson's long anecdote about how he was persuaded by producers 
Boundless to be on the show. He said he told producers: "I'm happy, I don't 
need to be on the programme". And as the clock ticked on, the audience decided 
he didn't need to be on stage either, starting to clap when he paused for 
breath.

The award ceremony was also notable for its absentees. James Corden was 
missing, although The Wrong Mans co-creator Matthew Baynton said on collecting 
the award for best comedy writer he wanted to thank Corden for his absence as 
it meant he could, "get a word in edgeways". Other missing winners included 
Luther starIdris Elba, Brendan O'Carroll (on tour with Mrs Brown's Boys in 
Australia), lifetime achievement award winnerDavid Suchet – sadly taken ill 
earlier in the day – and best entertainment performerAlan Carr. However Carr 
sent an acceptance speech which was read out asking for his award to be 
dedicated to his late agent, the colourfulAddison Cresswell who died in December
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/24/addison-cresswell>. The team 
from The Last Leg also paid tribute to Cresswell who they said "fought" for 
their show. Monkey agrees with Carr's sentiment that it is a "less vibrant 
place without him".
 