
While I was waiting to go into FOMO 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out/b5b8c2e8-9c8a-4810-b556-89288afeda47>
 yesterday,  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out/b5b8c2e8-9c8a-4810-b556-89288afeda47>
 I ran into Pete Muller, better known asFestival Freak <http://ff.moobaa.com/>, 
 <http://ff.moobaa.com/> who has now seen over 10% of the 2014 Fringe program. 
(Keep in mind that there are more than 900 shows). FOMO was show number 101, 
and his plan had him at another six before the day was through. Post festival 
season, Muller gets blogging, where he’ll spend the next year catching up on a 
backlog of reviews until he starts it all again in 2015. When I expressed 
amazement that he was still going so strong, he brushed me off. “Seeing shows 
is easy,” he told me, “you pay your money, you show up, you go.” Simple.

I was back at the Tuxedo Cat in the evening to see They Saw a Thylacine 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/they-saw-a-thylacine/f609f953-a588-4979-8a5a-0d49f34d1fb3>
,  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/they-saw-a-thylacine/f609f953-a588-4979-8a5a-0d49f34d1fb3>
 from Melbourne performance makers Sarah Hamilton and Justine Campbell. This 
lyrical piece sees two women narrating the stories of their relationships with 
the thylacine, or Tasmanian tiger, in the years before its extinction: Hamilton 
shares the story of a tracker, and Campbell the story of a zoo keeper’s 
daughter – not allowed to become a zoo keeper herself. While the show offers a 
brief history of the Tasmanian tiger in the 1930s, its real focus is Australian 
women in that decade: it details sexually inappropriate treatment from men, and 
the very real restrictions placed on women. This is simple theatre done well: 
just two women sharing their stories with heart and with humour.

I had a journey of a completely different sort onboard at the Storytellers’ 
Club 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/storytellers-club-on-the-popeye/05cddbcc-e092-4010-a39c-c788b14ae526>
:  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/storytellers-club-on-the-popeye/05cddbcc-e092-4010-a39c-c788b14ae526>
 four comedians and host Sarah Bennetto telling stories while we puttered along 
the Torrens. It is hardly the most scenic of waterways – it’s probably a good 
thing the journey takes place under the darkness of night – but there was 
something particularly lovely about a festival cruise that traveled between 
Lola’s and the music of Womad. It was the perfect night for it, too. The boat 
has a changing lineup of comics through the season, who all tell stories then 
bring out their traditional acts. The pick of my night wasKatie Mulgrew 
<http://katiemulgrew.wordpress.com/>,  <http://katiemulgrew.wordpress.com/> who 
unfortunately doesn’t have a standalone show this Fringe – perhaps you’ll be 
lucky and grab her again on Popeye.
 