
The moment will be familiar to a generation of Jaws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jaws> fanatics. Early in the movie, after the 
first mangled victim is discovered, the highly strung police chief Martin Brody 
is certain a great white shark is lurking in the waters surrounding Amity 
island – but it’s the Fourth of July and the mayor insists that the beach has 
to stay open. With the expectation of more carnage in every viewers’ mind, the 
camera cuts to a beachside arcade, and one machine in particular. On the 
cabinet screen we see the visually arresting depiction of a shark thrashing 
about in its bloody death throes, before the camera draws back to the player 
operating a harpoon-gun shaped controller. It’s effectively Brody’s nightmare, 
and his objective, rolled into one flickering image on an ancient coin-op 
display for a few redolent seconds.

In a movie filled with legendary cinematic moments, this brief sequence is a 
minor one, but as with many other elements of Steven Spielberg’s 1975 picture, 
it was also prescient. The director, a keen games player and watcher of pop 
culture trends, foresaw an era in which Hollywood would be seduced by the 
popularity and the visual spectacle of the emerging video game arcade scene. He 
got the appeal of these new entertainment machines, but he also understood how 
computer graphics represented a new way to present narrative to audiences – 
even if, in Jaws, it was a few seconds of footage.
 Sega’s early ‘electro-mechanical’ arcade game Killer Shark, as seen in the 
movie Jaws 
As for the game itself, the image we see is not quite what it seems. Sega’s 
1972 electro-mechanical release Killer Shark 
<http://bavatuesdays.com/killer-shark-1972/> uses no digital computer graphics 
at all. Instead the image of the shark is actually produced by a series of 
slides on two metal wheels. The player sees the terrifying fish projected on 
screen, and a strobe lighting effect gives the appearance of movement. If the 
player shoots at the section of the screen that the shark image inhabits, the 
discs swap and the death sequence is played out.

Formed in the early 1960s, Sega Enterprises was a pioneer of these new 
machines, which combined incoming screen technologies with the traditional 
shooting galleries found in fairgrounds and early pinball arcades throughout 
America. Founder David Rosen had served with the US military during the Korean 
war before setting up a business importing US made coin-op machines into Japan. 
He immediately understood the potential of this new technology, and, after 
merging his company with Japanese manufacturer Nihon Goraku Bussan in 1965, he 
designed Sega’s first entry into the medium, Periscope. Released in Japan in 
1966, this naval shooting game featured a realistic periscope as a sighting 
mechanism, allowing players to shoot at chain-mounted cardboard ships that 
chugged along on a painted ocean background. It was a worldwide hit, prompting 
a slew of similar electrical shooting titles, often withbeautifully elaborate 
cabinets <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sp7lv1lhNJI> to augment the very 
basic visuals.

Jaws, 40 years on: ‘One of the truly great and lasting classics of American 
cinema’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/31/jaws-40-years-on-truly-great-lasting-classics-of-america-cinema>
At this time, a young Steven Spielberg was being introduced to computer 
technology by his father, Arnold, an electrical engineer who helped pioneer the 
concept of personal computing while working at General Electrics. In the 60s, 
he took his son to see the GE-225 mainframe computer he’d helped design, the 
first machine to run the formative BASIC programming language. Spielberg was 
fascinated, sparking a lifelong interest in computer and video game technology, 
and during the filming of Jaws in 1974, the director spent much of his downtime 
playing early Atari coin-op Pong against actor Roy Scheider. That game would 
also crop up in Frank Perry’s contemporary western, Rancho Deluxe, released 
several months before Jaws. In that film, Jeff Bridges and Harry Dean Stanton 
are seen playing the game, their faces reflected in the screen as they talk.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd_p4NsgH05E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd_p4NsgH05E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd_p4NsgH05E&media=>
But it was Jaws that situated games, not just as an interesting visual 
diversion, but as a narrative signifier – something that could comment on the 
themes of the film. And it was only the first of Spielberg’s movies to draw on 
gaming aesthetics and concepts – indeed, he would later go on to co-design and 
produce several game titles, including LucasArts adventure The Dig and Nintendo 
Wii title Boom Blox. In 1995, he formed Dreamworks Interactive, overseeing the 
development of seminal military shooter, Medal of Honor.

The appearance of Killer Shark in Jaws would be followed several years later 
by a slew of Hollywood movies looking to explore the early 80s boom in arcade 
culture. The likes of Tron, WarGames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games> and the Last Starfighter not 
only depicted arcades and video games, they also borrowed the narrative ideas, 
technology and conventions of the medium. But in a more subtle way, both Jaws 
and Rancho Deluxe previewed an era in which games would become a convenient 
cultural touchstone. Suddenly, movies started to use arcades as shorthand for 
“where the kids hang out”, or just revelled in the exhileration of a young 
entertainment industry – hence the cathartic scene in George A Romero’s Dawn of 
the Dead, where the survivor is let loose in the mall’s arcade.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3UVzepqkmts&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3UVzepqkmts>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3UVzepqkmts&media=>
Nowadays, of course, action films have utterly appropriated both the graphical 
technologies and the narrative techniques of video games. Young directors like 
JJ Abrams and Duncan Jones were gamers before they were film and TV makers and 
have brought with them the language and impulses of interactive media. 
Meanwhile, CGI artists move seamlessly between the movie and video game worlds, 
their skills largely transferable in an era of special effects and shared 
cultural ideals. Spielberg has now signed up to direct a movie translation of 
Ready Player One, a dystopian novel about a future society in which people 
exist almost entirely within game-like virtual worlds.

In those fleeting seconds showing a swirling, thrashing shark, Jaws heralded a 
new era of video game appropriation. It foreshadowed the complex multilayered 
relationship between films, games, computer technology and arcade culture, that 
would infest 80s cinema, but also inform the interactive artform. Later in 
1975, Atari founder Nolan Bushnell allegedly approached Universal for 
permission to produce a game based around Jaws, by then a global smash hit. The 
studio apparently refused, so Bushnell set up a subsidiary, Horror Games, and 
released a coin-op called Shark Jaws – with the word “Shark” displayed a lot 
smaller than “Jaws” on the cabinet – to cash in on the phenomenon. It would be 
one of the first attempts at a licensed video game tie-in, preempting what 
would become a major element of the games industry.

Jaws, then: not only an amazing movie about one man’s struggle against 
authority and nature, but also about one director’s prescient understanding of 
a new electronic culture that would change everything.
 