
Picture: Armthorpe Wives support group 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401460872652/Members-of-the-Armthorpe-Wi.pdf>

Jean Stead <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/jean-stead>, previously 
news editor for the Guardian, was Scottish correspondent at the time of the
miners' strike of 1984-85 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/miners-strike-1984-85>. She reported on 
the strikes in Scotland (a village in Stirlingshire claimed to have started the 
national strike when the Polmaise pit was closed in January 1984) and clearly 
felt strongly about the situation faced by both men and women in the mining 
communities across the country. One item in the Jean Stead collection is a 
draft of a letter to Alastair Hetherington, then chairman of theScott Trust 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/>, in which Stead explains her 
disappointment at the way the strike had been reported in the national press, 
and describes an incident she witnessed at a demonstration: "Demonstrators were 
dragged out of the crowd by the police, including a mother whose child was 
knocked out of her arms and tramped on by policemen (it was not seriously hurt) 
and she was dragged away half naked. You have to be there to see these things. 
I was there."

Stead spoke to women from mining communities across Britain about their 
involvement in the strike. She wrote a book, Never the Same Again: Women and 
the Miners' Strike, which was published in 1987 and is held in the historical 
reference library in the Archive. The book analyses the part the women played 
in the strikes, as well as how the strike transformed the lives of those women. 
She dedicated the book "To women and men of Polmaise Colliery".
 Miners' wives relief organisation outside Polmaise Colliery, Scotland, 20 May 
1984 Photograph: Guardian 
Picture: Polmaise miners' wives relief organisation 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401460877506/Polmaise-Colliery,-Scotland.pdf> 

Women formed support groups as soon as the national strike began on 9 March 
1984. One of the largest and most influential of these groups was the Barnsley 
Women Against Pit Closures. They organised an all-women rally and march through 
Barnsley on 12 May 1984, and invited women's support groups from all over the 
country to join them. The response was huge, and at least 10,000 women attended 
the rally. Stead writes in Never the Same Again: "It was the Barnsley march 
that started things off. It was after this that the women started contacting 
groups from outside their own areas, making plans, organising and getting 
together on a national basis […] It was a turning point, not only in the 
strike, but in the working class feminist movement as a whole."

After the success in Barnsley, another national women's rally was organised to 
take place in London on 11 August 1984. 15,000 women attended. Shortly before 
the rally, a unified national women's support group was founded: Women Against 
Pit Closures (WAPC).
 Women Against Pit Closures rally in London, 12 August 1984. Roger Tooth for 
the Guardian 
Picture: Women Against Pit Closures rally in London 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401460875967/Miners-wives-rally-in-Londo.pdf>

The aims of the WAPC were not just to secure the future of the mines and the 
jobs of their husbands and sons, but as Stead explains, included "The promotion 
and development of education for working class women and campaigns on all 
issues which affect mining communities, particularly peace, jobs, health and 
education, and the issues of nuclear power and nuclear weapons." On the issue 
of nuclear power, the women's groups found allies in the women at the protest 
camps atGreenham Common <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greenham>.

The women's page in the Guardian on 28 May 1984 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401440507220/Maggie-Brown-Women's-page.pdf> 
features an interview with members of the Barnsley WAPC, including both Anne 
Scargill (then wife of Arthur Scargill, president of the National Union of 
Mineworkers) andBetty Heathfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/feb/22/guardianobituaries.politics>, 
wife of NUM general secretary Peter Heathfield and leading figure in the 
women's support groups. The piece describes how the strike had transformed how 
working class women were perceived by the rest of the country: "The comfy, 
media image of working class wives whose husbands are on strike has been one of 
them conservatively egging them back to work, stabbing them in the back. One 
by-product of the miners' women's action is the creation of a powerful new 
image, distinctive, feminist, and very much part of the 80s."
 Miners' wives counting money sent in response to appeal, 28 November 1984. 
Garry Weaser for the Guardian 
Picture: Miners' wives counting money in response to appeal 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401460874516/Miners-wives-counting-money.pdf>

Women involved in the strikes were discovering they were capable of things 
they had never before considered, like public speaking and large scale 
organisation, and it was transforming their lives for good. In Stead's book, 
Kay Bowen, wife of the delegate at the Blaenent colliery, Wales says: "I'd 
thought I'd never be able to give orders or ask people to do things. But I've 
found that I like leadership and being in charge. I've changed, like all the 
other women, and I'll never be able to go back to how I was before."

They were also gaining a new respect from the men in their communities, though 
this was sometimes grudging; Susan Petney from Blidworth in Nottinghamshire 
says in Stead's book: "We are sort of re-educating them slowly. They are not 
liking it a lot [...] But slowly they are coming round to it. They don't call 
us 'ladies' any more. They call us women. That's a start."

Barbara Williams, another influential figure in the women's groups, and the 
leader of the Rhondda women at Maerdy in Wales, said: "We have shaken men. Men 
thought we were content with our lot. Now they realise that a woman is not just 
a wife in the house; there's something else in the house."

The strike ended on 5 March 1985, nearly a year after it began. The women's 
page from 5 June 1985 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401440507686/Women's-page-end-of-strike.pdf> 
focuses on how the miners' wives were reacting to the end of the strike. One of 
the stories looks at how marriages had been adversely affected, and how women 
were being forced back into their traditional roles in the home by the demands 
of their husbands' shifts in the mines. But the other story is far more 
positive: a miner's wife who described herself as "A housewife, plain and 
simple […] totally non-political" before the strike, tells of how she began 
speaking on behalf of the miners during the strike, and was subsequently 
invited by Anne Scargill to Europe to speak to trade unions and mining towns as 
well as the European Parliament in Strasbourg. "The dispute brought working 
people from all round Britain and abroad closer together" she says. "That's how 
we survived. We've stood together and shown what we are capable of."
 Women Against Pit Closures, Sheffield, 18 August 1985. Graham Turner for the 
Guardian 
Picture: Women Against Pit Closures, Sheffield 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1401460879459/Women-against-pit-closures,.pdf>

The Jean Stead collection 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=JLS&> 
andphotographs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2?guni=Article:in%20body%20link> from 
the miners' strike can be consulted in theGNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> reading room by appointment 
<mailto:archives@theguardian.com>. More information can be found on the archive 
catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
 