Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df-I2cLMLYkQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df-I2cLMLYkQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df-I2cLMLYkQ&media=>
 Exclusive: watch Fallen, performed by dancers from Tanztheater Wuppertal 
Ever since Coco Chanel was hired by Sergei Diaghilev 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/d/diaghilev-and-the-ballets-russes/> to 
create the costumes for his 1924 productionLe Train Bleu 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le_Train_Bleu_>, stars of the fashion world have 
regularly worked as guest designers for dance.Halston 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halston>, Karl Lagerfeld <http://www.karl.com>, 
Christian Lacroix <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christian_Lacroix>, and 
Alexander McQueen <http://www.alexandermcqueen.com/gb/alexandermcqueen> are 
among those who have created costumes and, occasionally, sets for the dance 
stage, with both wonderful and sometimes disastrous results

More recently, the relationship has started to work the other way, with 
fashion designers co-opting dance for their catwalk shows. Alexander McQueen 
invitedMichael Clark <http://www.michaelclarkcompany.com> to choreograph his 
spring–summer 2004 show 
<http://www.anothermag.com/fashion-beauty/7148/the-story-behind-alexander-mcqueens-deliverance-collection>
, and in 2013,Rick Owens <https://www.rickowens.eu/en/> startled Paris by using 
street dancers instead of models 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/sep/27/rick-owens-models-dancers-paris-fashion-week>
.

Let’s Tanz: Pina Bausch’s dancers on her unearthed 80s creations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/07/pina-bausch-wuppertal-dancers-ahnen-gebirge-sadlers-wells>
But the two art forms are now being combined in a very different way, in a new 
project launched byJefferson Hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/17/new-year-new-cool-media>, 
the Dazed group co-founder.MOVEment is a series of seven short films 
<http://www.anothermag.com/fashion-beauty/7262/introducing-movement>, 
commissioned in association withAnOther Magazine <http://www.anothermag.com/>, 
on which Hack has invited designers and choreographers to collaborate on 
original ideas. As he explains: “We’ve created a neutral space where neither 
fashion or dance were leading the dialogue, where they could both be allowed to 
play.” The two have combined to think about costume and movement in ways that 
expand our ideas about bodies, clothes, and dance. An A-list of contributing 
names includes Miuccia Prada, and Sarah Burton from McQueen as well as 
choreographersWayne McGregor <http://www.randomdance.org/wayne_mcgregor> and 
Russell Maliphant. <http://www.russellmaliphant.com/people/russell-maliphant/>

When Hack began thinking about the project back in 2013, his idea was to 
commission some kind of in-depth investigation into the relationship between 
fashion and dance, using the medium of film rather than print. Having only an 
outsider’s knowledge of dance, he went for advice to Alistair Spalding, 
artistic director ofSadler’s Wells <http://www.sadlerswells.com>. “We had a lot 
of interesting conversations,” says Spalding, “going through a whole Rolodex of 
choreographers to work out which ones would suit which designers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429109021009%2Fc87240ed-6d44-40c6-8bb9-a73b99ab6384-808x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jefferson%20Hack%E2%80%99s%20fashion-dance%20mashup%3A%20Dancers%20from%20Tanztheater%20Wuppertal%20perform%20in%20Prada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jefferson%20Hack%E2%80%99s%20fashion-dance%20mashup%3A%20Dancers%20from%20Tanztheater%20Wuppertal%20perform%20in%20Prada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429109021009%2Fc87240ed-6d44-40c6-8bb9-a73b99ab6384-808x1020.jpeg>
 Dancer from Jasmin Vardimon Company in a costume by Stephen Jones Millinery, 
for a film by Matthew Donaldson. Photograph: Lena C Emery 
Some of the participants had strong opinions about who they wished to work 
with: Prada wanted to be paired with dancers fromTanztheater Wuppertal 
<http://www.pina-bausch.de/en/dancetheatre/>. Francisco Costa, from Calvin 
Klein, was keen to work with the American ballerinaJulie Kent 
<http://www.abt.org/dancers/detail.asp?Dancer_ID=23>. But Hack says that though 
they tried to make each collaboration a pairing of “like minds”, there was no 
sense of cosiness about the resulting films, which he describes as “an 
incredible polyphony of voices”.

He’s particularly proud of the Prada/Wuppertal collaboration. It’s a beautiful 
piece, set in a derelict theatre, in which the 10 dancers move through a 
sequence of delicate, exploratory duets. Both sexes are interchangeably dressed 
in male and female clothes, and the haunting strangeness of the film (directed 
by Kevin Frillet) is highlighted by the small white feathers that rain down on 
the dancers throughout.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429116023205%2F73b91ef0-3c3b-46c2-94a2-a037ce497cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jefferson%20Hack%E2%80%99s%20fashion-dance%20mashup%3A%20Dancers%20from%20Tanztheater%20Wuppertal%20perform%20in%20Prada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jefferson%20Hack%E2%80%99s%20fashion-dance%20mashup%3A%20Dancers%20from%20Tanztheater%20Wuppertal%20perform%20in%20Prada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429116023205%2F73b91ef0-3c3b-46c2-94a2-a037ce497cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dancers of Tanztheater Wuppertal in costumes by Prada for a film by Kevin 
Frilet. Photograph: Albrecht Fuchs 
All seven films are radically different. In the Maliphant/Iris van Herpen 
collaboration <http://www.irisvanherpen.com/>, the dancer isn’t clothed in 
actual fabric, but in a “virtual” costume – a cloud of luminous digital 
particles. In the McGregor/Gareth Pugh 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gareth_Pugh> collaboration, one of the costumes 
is made out of thousands of slender drinking straws that somehow move like fur. 
As Spalding says: “The relationship between fashion and dance has been blown 
out of the water. In some cases it has nothing to do with how a normal garment 
fits a human being.”

Even where the dancer is more conventionally dressed, the film and 
choreography work their own transformations. Paris Opera ballerinaMarie-Agnès 
Gillot 
<https://www.operadeparis.fr/en/les-artistes/le-ballet/etoiles/marie-agnes-gillot>
 wears a black lace dress from McQueen, yet as she dances it becomes the shroud 
of a dying swan, a goth ballgown, the robes of a flying angel.

Hack says each film has brilliantly transcended its original brief, to become 
“a snapshot of an attitude, a philosophy, a mood”. After a public screening, 
the films will be released one at a time onanothermag.com 
<http://www.anothermag.com/>. Hack has high ambitions for the audience they 
will find: “Once they’re out on the web, they will travel really far.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429111751933%2F8e0da61f-e963-45fb-bf74-a209ef7d8052-1609x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jefferson%20Hack%E2%80%99s%20fashion-dance%20mashup%3A%20Dancers%20from%20Tanztheater%20Wuppertal%20perform%20in%20Prada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jefferson%20Hack%E2%80%99s%20fashion-dance%20mashup%3A%20Dancers%20from%20Tanztheater%20Wuppertal%20perform%20in%20Prada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fjefferson-hack-fashion-dance-tanztheater-wuppertal-prada-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429111751933%2F8e0da61f-e963-45fb-bf74-a209ef7d8052-1609x2040.jpeg>
 Marie-Agnès Gillot in a costume by Alexander McQueen for a film by Daniel 
Askill. Photograph: Sam Rock 
But he’s equally keen for MOVEment to become the first step of a much bigger 
project: “I hope we can go on to explore different commissions, maybe even for 
the stage. I really think this is just the beginning of the dialogue.”

• The MOVEment films will be screened at Sadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/>’ Lilian Baylis Studio on 18 April, presented by 
AnOther Magazine in association with Ford Vignale. Box office: 0844 412 4300.
 