
Jeremy Corbyn has brushed aside suggestions that he would face an internal 
coup to depose him if he became Labour leader, saying he would follow the 
example of Abraham Lincoln who acted as a unifying figure after theAmerican 
civil war <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/american-civil-war>.

Established party figures, led by Neil Kinnock and Peter Mandelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/peter-mandelson>, have warned of the 
“dangers” of a Corbyn victory. Corbyn, in Leeds at the launch of an economic 
plan to rejuvenate the north of England, said: “Plots and double plots and 
sub-plots and plotting – it’s fascinating. I think Abraham Lincoln made a 
point. At the end of the American civil war he said, ‘with malice toward none 
and charity towards all’ we will go forward, I am sure that is the right way to 
do things.”

Up to eight members of the shadow cabinet, led by the shadow chancellor, Chris 
Leslie <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/chris-leslie>, have said they would 
decline to serve on the frontbench under Corbyn. Kinnock suggested over the 
weekend that Corbyn, the MP for Islington North, was more suitable to serve as 
“chair of a discussion group who can preside over two years or more of 
fascinating debate”.

Mandelson criticised Dave Ward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/04/jeremy-corbyn-shrugs-off-coup-risk-in-labour-leadership-battle>
, general secretary of the Communications Workers’ Union for describing Corbyn 
as the antidote to the “virus” of Blairism, and warned of a return to the 
divisions of the 1980s.

Corbyn made clear that he would not be responding to the criticism. “I do not 
engage in personal abuse, I do not name-call people, I am not particularly 
bothered if people name-call me because I don’t bother to read it anyway. I 
don’t care. It is the name-calling, the depoliticisation of serious political 
debate that drives people away.

“Our campaign is not getting involved. We aren’t doing rebuttals, we’re not 
interested. We are interested in jobs, we’re interested in education, we’re 
interested in decency and security in society, we’re interested in 
environmental protection and peace. We haven’t got time to get involved in name 
calling and we never will.”

The Corbyn campaign is aware that some Labour figures have been talking about 
staging a coup to unseat him if he wins the Labour leadership. A fresh Labour 
leadership contest could be triggered if 47Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs persuade a special party 
conference to stage a coup. In recent days, however, senior figures have said 
that an attempt to unseat Corbyn would probably trigger even greater support 
for him or an ally.

Leslie has led the charge against Corbyn this week, warning that his proposal 
to raise billions of pounds for public investment through what is being 
described as people’s quantitative easing, amounts to “starry-eyed, hard left” 
politics.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fchris-leslie-labour-leadership-hard-left-economics-risk-to-vulnerable-audio&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438598962577%2FKP_378908_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20leadership%3A%20Leslie%20warns%20hard%20left%20economics%20risk%20hurting%20most%20vulnerable%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fchris-leslie-labour-leadership-hard-left-economics-risk-to-vulnerable-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20leadership%3A%20Leslie%20warns%20hard%20left%20economics%20risk%20hurting%20most%20vulnerable%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fchris-leslie-labour-leadership-hard-left-economics-risk-to-vulnerable-audio&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F3%2F1438598962577%2FKP_378908_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Chris Leslie warns hard left economics risk hurting most vulnerable 
Corbyn laughed off the criticisms as he said that his economic plans outlined 
in Leeds, which involved greater investment in the railways and returning the 
rail network to public ownership when franchises expired, would be considered 
mainstream in Germany.

In a seminar in Leeds attended by supporters from the Labour party and trade 
unions, Corbyn launched a document entitled Northern Future, in which he 
outlined plans to rebalance the British economy. In addition to greater 
investment in the rail network in the north, he would seek to encourage 
manufacturing industry in the north to reduce Britain’s
dependence on the services industry. 

Corbyn would also seek to encourage graduates educated in the north to remain 
there to work and would devolve real power to the north instead of what he 
described as the “cruel deception” of George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse”, 
which involved devolving the power to introduce central spending cuts.

The MP for Islington North said: “None of what we have said on this platform 
today would be seen as remotely exceptional, extreme or leftwing in Germany, 
where they proudly have public investment in all kinds of industries and don’t 
feel ashamed about it. Why have we got this obsession with not getting public 
involvement in what is the essential basis of our society and our economy?”

Corbyn dealt with suggestions that he would take the party to the 1980s by 
saying that he could do better and look back to the 1970s. “I am accused of 
being a throwback to the 1980s so I’ll go back one decade further and say there 
are lessons from what that [the Callaghan and Wilson governments were] trying 
to do to recognise the changing industrial face of the whole world but also 
recognising the huge skill levels we have and the traditions of industry we 
have in this county that were allowed to be wasted on the altar of monetarism 
and developing a financial services economy rather than a manufacturing 
economy.”

He added: “The Labour government lost in 1979 – no government is ever perfect 
– but it was investing in high technology, it was investing in growing 
industries, it was investing in computing and many many other industries 
through the National Economic Development Council and the smaller sector 
working parties and sector economic development councils.”
 