
Question 1: What was it like working with Robert Mitchum in Dead Man?

JJ: Robert Mitchum is an actor who does not like to improvise, and liked to 
have all of his dialogue in his hands a few days at least before shooting. I 
was a little bit intimidated by him because, hell, he's Robert Mitchum, one of 
my all-time favourite screen actors. But he's a very self-effacing, really 
funny, intelligent man, and it was a real honour to work with him. But it was 
also very funny. He has a shotgun which is a prop in the scene. I knew he had 
some guns and thought he was maybe interested in them, so I got several vintage 
shotguns form the period for him to choose, put them in my car and drove from 
LA to Santa Barbara where he lived, and went to his house.

His wife let me in and I laid out the guns on a carpet in the living room to 
let him come and look at the shotguns. And he came in and said, "What the 
hell's this?" and I said, "Well, I wanted you to choose the gun that you use in 
the film," and he said, "Why the hell should I care which one it is, you're the 
damn director!" I had spent a day going to the place, picking the guns, 
researching everything and I said, "You don't care which one it is?" and he 
said, "I gotta hold the damn thing in several scenes, right?" and I said, 
"Yeah", and he said, "Well, which one's the lightest?" (Laughter)

Also, when we were shooting that scene when he was talking to the three 
killers, he was basically in two positions: one leaning over the desk and one 
standing up. I kept shooting it with different lenses and different sizes, and 
he got confused where we were picking up a certain section from and he said, 
"Well dammit Jim, was I in the receiving position, or was I fully erect?" and I 
said, "You were fully erect," and he said, "Goddamn right I was!" (Laughter) 
What an amazing man I tell you.

Question 2: How were you influenced by Wim Wenders?

JJ: I would not cite Wim Wenders as a particular influence any more than any 
other film-makers whose work I like. Wim works in a different way and often 
prefers, I think, not to have a script at all and just start filming and then 
finding the story that way. That's not the way I work. I like his visual sense 
and a lot of things about his films, but I would not cite him as a primary 
influence. But he has inspired me and also helped me personally by giving me 
film material in the very beginning and being supportive, and I have a lot of 
respect for him.

Question 3: What do you feel about films, such as Four Rooms, Go and Pulp 
Fiction, which use the same structure as Mystery Train?

JJ: I've only seen Pulp Fiction out of those three films, but I know that Four 
Rooms is very similar and people have mentioned Go to me. I guess I'm flattered 
in some way. I liked Pulp Fiction.

Question 4: What was it like working with Robby Mueller?

JJ: I loved Robby Mueller's work and I asked Wim Wenders in 1980 how I might 
meet him. I was going to the Rotterdam Film Festival to show my first film, 
Permanent Vacation, and at that time in Rotterdam the people who visited the 
festival stayed on a boat that was harboured there, it had a bar in it, and Wim 
said, "Just go on the boat and in the bar next to the peanut machine, Robby 
Mueller will be sitting there."

So I went to Rotterdam, I went on the boat, I went in the bar, and next to the 
peanut machine Robby Mueller was sitting there. (Laughter) Seriously. So I sat 
down next to him and started talking to him. And we hung out quite a bit at the 
festival and he saw my first film, and he said to me eventually, "If you ever 
want to work together man, let me know." That was a big thing for me. I made my 
next film Stranger Than Paradise with my friend Tom DiCillo, because Tom was 
working then as a director of photography, but he really wasn't interested in 
shooting films, so when I wrote Down By Law, I immediately called Robby Mueller.

The beautiful thing about Robby is that he starts the process by talking to 
you about what the film means, what the story is about, what the characters are 
about. He starts from the inside out, which is really, really such a great way. 
I've learned that you find the look of the film later after you've found the 
essence of the film, what its atmosphere is, what it's about and then you look 
at locations together, you start talking about light and colour, about what 
film material to use and the general look of the film, and we've worked 
together a lot now, so we don't have to discuss as many things as other people 
might because we understand each other.

He considers himself to be an artisan in a way. I remember, especially in Dead 
Man, the crew and I were joking a lot by saying, "He's Robby Mueller, but don't 
tell him that!" He considers he has a lens, he has film material and he has 
light. Sometimes crew members would mention some modern piece of equipment, "We 
could do that shot with a lumacrane," and Robbie would say, "What is a 
lumacrane?" I think he's like a Dutch interior painter, like Vermeer or de 
Hoeck, who was born in the wrong century.

Question 5: A lot of your characters seemed to be touched by loneliness and 
melancholy, what draws you to that?

JJ: My own loneliness and melancholy. (Laughter) It's part of life and I've 
always felt like an outsider in a lot of ways - I'm sure you can't imagine why! 
But in the same way that I'm drawn to humour, miscommunication and things that 
arise out of misunderstanding. All those things coexist, so I try to have them 
coexist in a character or in a film.

Question 6: A lot of characters in your films are foreigners. Do you enjoy 
seeing films through the eyes of the foreigner?

JJ: It's several things. One is that America is made up of foreigners, and 
there are indigenous people that lived here for thousands of years, but then 
white Europeans tried to commit genocide against them all. I'm a mongrel, I 
have Irish blood, bohemian blood, some German blood, and all of America is a 
cultural mixture, and although America is very much in denial of this, that's 
really what America is.

And the other thing that attracts me is that I love to travel and I love to be 
in places where I don't understand everything culturally, or even 
linguistically because my imagination opens up, I try to imagine things or 
understand, but I'm sure that I misinterpret them and misunderstand them. For 
me, it's imagining things that's a kind of gift I enjoy. You know when dogs 
don't understand something and they go like that? (cocks head on one side and 
takes an asking look) I feel sort of like that sometimes.

Question 7: How do you get funding for your films while retaining creative 
control?

JJ: I'm really stubborn and I started out with an attitude that I was going to 
make films the way I and those people I chose to collaborate with want to make 
them and I've just stuck to that. I'm not seduced by money or the things that 
Hollywood tries to offer you, and in exchange you have to make the film the way 
some businessmen tell you to, and I just would not be good at that. So I have a 
system where I try to avoid having American money in my films, because with 
that comes a lot of strings attached and script meetings and casting 
consultations, and really I can't work that way because I don't tell the 
business people who finance the films how to run their business, so why should 
they tell me how to make a film? I've been very lucky to find people to 
collaborate with in that way.

Since Mystery Train, JVC in Japan has been very supportive and has invested 
money in all of my films. Pandora in Germany has done the same. For the last 
two films, I've worked with BAC films in Paris. All of them, in my contract, 
I'm not even required to show them a rough cut of the film, I could just 
deliver them the finished film. But I do show them a rough cut because they 
respect me, so I respect them. And if they give me comments, I listen to them 
and sometimes their comments are helpful. But if they're not, I can discard 
them, I'm not obligated in any way to do anything they suggest.

It comes from stubbornness and I've walked out of a lot of deals where people 
were offering to finance a film under certain conditions, and the Hollywood 
people are really, really shocked when you say to them, "I don't do it that 
way, I'm going to go now," and they think, "Who does he think he is anyway? He 
doesn't want our money to make a film, people are banging on our doors to get 
us to do this and he's just going to walk out?" and I do, because I can't do it 
that way. I would end up in jail for kneecapping some guy in a $4,000 suit. And 
I'd also make bad movies that way. I'm not saying I don't make bad movies, but 
I make 'em bad in my own way! And when I get depressed about business things, I 
get a copy of Sid Vicious's My Way and turn it up to 11, really it does your 
soul good.

Question 8: Do you have any comedic influences?

JJ: Certainly, many. My favourite director of all time is Buster Keaton, and 
it goes deeper than just being a comedian, because he is a great director and 
actor and funny in an extremely human way. I like Charlie Chaplin, but he's not 
on the same level as Buster Keaton, who is someone really I have a deep respect 
for.

I love the Marx Brothers very much, although some of their films have 
shockingly racist things in them and things which disturb me. I know it's a 
reflection of the period, but their sense of comedy is incredible to me. I read 
an article about a guy who had cancer, who they said could not be cured, and he 
watched Marx Brothers movies over and over, and his cancer went into remission 
and the guy says he owes it to the Marx brothers.

Lennie Bruce is important to me. I like To-To, the Italian comedic actor. I 
like Chris Rock, sometimes I like George Carlin, sometimes Eddie Murphy, 
Richard Pryor was one of the great comedians. There is a film by Steve Martin 
called All of Me which is very funny, he can be very funny. There's a lot of 
funny cats out there. In the days before he was ever in a film, Steve Buscemi 
and another actor, Mark Boon Jnr, used to perform in little clubs in the lower 
east side of New York, doing little two-man half -theatre half-comedy sketches 
that were really, really hilarious.

Question 9: Are you trying to get away from 'The Jim Jarmusch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jim-jarmusch> Film'?

JJ: I'm not really very self-analytical. I don't really want to know what a 
Jim Jarmusch film is. I'm just a guy from Akron trying to learn films and I 
just move on to the next thing. It's not superstition in that case, it's not 
feeling comfortable looking backwards and the same in my life as well. I know 
Robert Altman and I know he likes to watch his old films over and show them to 
people, and I wish I could be like that because he really loves them, he's 
proud of them, they're like his children. And my films are like my children, 
but I send them off to military school. (Laughter)

Question 10:  In Blue in the Face, you play a man who is having his last 
cigarette, were you trying to quit smoking yourself?

JJ: Well, I hope I'm not a notorious smoker. (Laughter) I'm insulted. They 
approached me, and Paul Auster had an idea about someone quitting smoking, and 
he asked me, so I wrote most of my dialogue, but it was based on a conversation 
I had with him. As far as giving up smoking, films aren't really real, it's all 
set up. (Laughter) There's a camera there, those people aren't really doing 
those things.

Question 11: What happened to the project which fell through because of Dead 
Man?

JJ: Parts of it were rewoven into Dead Man, so it's not something that exists 
that I'm going to do ever.

Question 12: How do you feel about Dead Man being banned in Australia?

JJ: I thought it was very strange because they banned it for the scene where 
one character is getting a blow job at gunpoint, and I don't know what they 
thought that meant, because the guy is walking through a town with a lot of 
skeletons and images of death and very negative examples of this civilisation's 
effect on the land, and the idea that they might think that the film is 
condoning that was really strange, strange to me. I never thought that Dead Man 
was promoting going out and getting blow jobs at gunpoint. (Laughter)

Question 13: Why do you like Aki Kaurismaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/aki-kaurismaki> so much?

JJ: He's one of my favourite film-makers. I love his films, I love the 
simplicity of them, I love the dry sense of humour of them, I love the 
bleakness. Here is a film-maker who uses limitations as a strength, and that's 
something I've tried to learn to do myself. I get very moved by Kaurismaki's 
films.

There's a scene in one, Ariel, where the guy meets a girl and they're in bed 
together having a cigarette after making love and she says, "Does that mean you 
will love me forever and ever?" and he says, "Yes." (Laughter)

Sound clips

 Comedy in his films 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch1.RA>
  Poetry <http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch2.RA>
  Lingerie shops in Paris 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch3.RA>
  Dead Man <http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch4.RA>
  Year of the Horse with Neil Young 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch5.RA>

  Working with RZA on Ghost Dog 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch6.RA>
  Seeing things from another perspective 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/LFF/Jarmusch7.RA>
 