
Jim Mullen’s task as chief executive of Ladbrokes is to do better than his 
predecessor, the hapless but well-remunerated Richard Glynn. Two days into the 
job, he has started splendidly. Glynn signed the pro-Tory letter to the Daily 
Telegraph from business people. Mullen has disassociated himself andLadbrokes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> from it.

Three business leaders distance themselves from pro-Tory letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/02/astrazeneca-and-ladbrokes-withdraw-support-for-pro-tory-election-letter>
“Our business is to take bets on the general election, not to tell people how 
to vote,” says Mullen. “There are many shades of political opinion in our 
workforce of 15,000, never mind ex-employees or our customer base of millions 
of people. My vote is worth the same as theirs and their choice of vote is 
their business. So I won’t be signing any letters in this, or any other, 
general election that seek to tell people how to vote.”

Well said. Mullen has identified the unpleasant tone of self-importance that 
accompanies these pre-election letters from chairman and chief executives. The 
latest dispatch to the Telegraph boasted that “businesses like ours have 
created over 1.85m new jobs”. But, in almost all the cases, the businesses 
aren’t theirs at all. They are owned, formally, by the shareholders and they 
are sustained by the work of employees, most of whom (if the polls are an 
accurate guide) won’t share the boss’s political views.

As Mullen has grasped, the idea that the signatories are acting in “a personal 
capacity”, which is what they always say, is a veneer. The names of their 
employers are always printed by the newspaper – inevitably so, because 99% of 
Ladbrokes’ punters couldn’t name the chief executive.

Why do the signatories sign? They obviously believe what they are saying and 
think it might make a difference (let’s not be too cynical about seeking 
gongs). But does Bob Dudley at BP, say, stop to think about how the line about 
creating lots of employment will be received in Aberdeen? BP recently announced 
it was cutting 300 jobs in the city.

We are apolitical
Marc Bolland, M&S 
Lobbying on specific matters of public policy – from betting tax to North Sea 
oil taxes – is entirely legitimate, of course. But a confident guess says most 
serving chief executives and chairmen of public companies share Mullen’s view 
on the proper way to behave during general elections. They think it is 
presumptuous, and potentially commercially damaging, to lend the company’s name 
to a political party.

“We are apolitical,” said Marks & Spencer chief executive Marc Bolland 
yesterday. He is another who has got it right.

Don’t expect too much from M&S – just yet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fjim-mullen-ladbrokes-business-letter-richard-glynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1428000393522%2F4d01b24a-7890-4068-843e-59e2b726c402-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jim%20Mullen%20is%20right%20to%20disassociate%20Ladbrokes%20from%20business%20letter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fjim-mullen-ladbrokes-business-letter-richard-glynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jim%20Mullen%20is%20right%20to%20disassociate%20Ladbrokes%20from%20business%20letter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fjim-mullen-ladbrokes-business-letter-richard-glynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1428000393522%2F4d01b24a-7890-4068-843e-59e2b726c402-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The share price of M&S, under Marc Bolland, has risen by 0.7% over the 
quarter. Photograph: Staff /Reuters 
In the false dawn stakes, nobody beats Marks & Spencer. Under Stuart Rose, the 
share price doubled, then halved, between 2004 and 2010. Under Marc Bolland, 
the undulations have been less wild, but almost every outbreak of optimism has 
been followed by disappointment.

So be wary of treating a return to like-for-like sales growth in clothing, 
after four long years, as the real deal. An increase of 0.7% ain’t much. 
Bolland, wisely, kept it cool and stuck to his “step by step” routine.

Marks & Spencer clothing sales rise for first time in four years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/02/marks-spencer-clothing-sales-rise-for-first-time-in-four-years>
Investors, though, are more excitable – the share price stands at its highest 
level since 2008 and has improved 40% since last autumn. Why so much enthusiasm?

Two reasons, one suspects. First, the business doesn’t feel as if it would be 
blown backwards by the next consumer downturn. The elusive fashion edge may be 
reappearing, even if the much-hyped £199 suede skirt, for now, is merely a 
triumph for the publicity department since the punters can’t buy one for 
another week.

The second reason is that M&S will soon be attempting to live without the vast 
sums of investment that have been lavished on the business in the past decade, 
first in the stores, then in the behind-the-scenes infrastructure and logistics 
operations. If it can adapt to a leaner cash diet, goodies in the form of a 
higher dividend or share buyback should flow.

That shareholder-friendly script is intact after yesterday’s trading update. 
M&S seems to be sticking to its plan to refrain, as far as possible, from 
discounting and thus keep gross margins high. At the same time, it is chipping 
away at costs. An update on returns to shareholders is promised with the 
full-year results in May.

Jolly good, but a 555p share price suggests investors’ expectations have raced 
ahead of events. One better-than-expected quarter doesn’t mean M&S has acquired 
strong momentum. Given past experience, Bolland will surely want to be 
confident that M&S is properly out of woods before he throws serious cash to 
shareholders. Investors may be anticipating too much, too soon.

What does Alliance Trust’s silent trio have to say?

It’s not what Alliance Trust’s embattled chief executive Katherine Garrett-Cox 
wanted to hear: ShareSoc, which does fine work promoting the interests of 
private shareholders, is still backing Elliott Advisors, the New York hedge 
fund demanding a boardroom shake-up at the Dundee-based investment trust. 
That’s significant because 70% of Alliance’s shareholders are retail investors: 
ShareSoc’s constituency.

But the view here remains the same. Shareholders should wait to hear what the 
three non-executive directors proposed by Elliott – Anthony Brooke, Peter 
Chambers and Rory Macnamara – have to say.

The trio all have strong City reputations but they have been unaccountably 
silent so far. That’s a problem. Would-be independent directors should 
demonstrate their independence by speaking for themselves. The vote is the 
29th, so there’s still time. But don’t leave it late, guys: the silence is 
already deafening.
 