
Jimmy Garoppolo, starting in place of suspended Tom Brady, threw for 264 yards 
and a touchdown, leading the severely depletedNew England Patriots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-england-patriots> to a 23-21 victory 
over the favored Arizona Cardinals on Sunday night.

Arizonaâ€™s Chandler Catanzaro missed a 47-yard field goal with 41 seconds to 
play.

The miss came after Garoppolo, in his first NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> start, directed the Patriots from their 
own 19 to the Arizona 15 to set up Stephen Gostkowskiâ€™s 23-yard field goal for 
what proved to be the winner with 3:44 to play.

Garappolo completed 24 of 33 passes with no interceptions. Arizonaâ€™s Carson 
Palmer threw for 271 yards and two touchdowns, both to Larry Fitzgerald.

Not only were the Patriots without Brady, suspended for his role in the 
Deflategate scandal, but they also didnâ€™t have tight end Rob Gronkowski, 
defensive end Rob Ninkovich and two starters on the offensive line.

A remarkable 45-yard run by David Johnson set up a two-yard, over-the-shoulder 
touchdown catch by Fitzgerald that gave the Cardinals their only lead of the 
night, 21-20, with 9:46 remaining.
NFL (@NFL) 
DAVID. JOHNSON.
Are you kidding?!?

The @AZCardinals <https://twitter.com/AZCardinals> RB turns a loss into an 
incredible run! ðŸ‘€#NEvsAZ <https://twitter.com/hashtag/NEvsAZ?src=hash> 
https://t.co/cbXiAl3zhA <https://t.co/cbXiAl3zhA>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/775166888078774272> September 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/775166888078774272> 
Ex-Patriot Chandler Jones sacked Garoppolo on the first play of New Englandâ€™s 
next possession, but the young quarterback still set up the winning kick by 
Gostkowski, who also booted a 53-yarder.

NFL week one round-up: Lions pull off wild win to foil Luck comeback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/nfl-round-up-green-bay-packers> 
A holding penalty hampered the final Arizona drive but a pass to Jaron Brown 
put the Cardinals within field-goal range. The snap was low and Catanzaro 
skewed the ball to the left of the uprights.

New England, a five-point underdog, took the lead on its first possession and 
scored again to start the second half.

Up 10-7 at the break, the Patriots took the second-half kickoff and went 70 
yards in nine plays. Rookie cornerback Brandon Williams was beaten badly for 
the second time on Garoppoloâ€™s 28-yard pass to the Arizona eight. LaGarrette 
Blount bulled it in from there and the Patriots led 17-7 with 10 minutes left 
in the first quarter.

The first two Arizona touchdowns followed New England turnovers.
 