
The UK is in “absolutely no position to dare to close one single public 
library”, the bestselling novelistJoanna Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/joanna-trollope> has said. She is just one 
of a host of major literary names throw11§ing their weight behind a new 
campaign to hold the government to account for failing to keep libraries open.

As well as Trollope, the award-winning novelists Neil Gaiman and Ali Smith, 
and the former poet laureateAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion> are also supporting the 
Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals battle to get the 
government to “fulfil their statutory responsibilities to taxpayers”.

 According to CILIP, almost 450 library branches have closed since 2010, with 
more than 100 libraries closed in England, Wales and Scotland last year.

Libraries today are as fast and more generous than any online bookshop | Emma 
Brockes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/17/libraries-online-bookshop-new-york-public-library>
CILIP’s campaign My Library By Right, which launched in December, argues that 
library closures could be against the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/17/librarians-take-legal-fight-against-library-closures-to-government>
.

“The 1964 Public Libraries and Museums Act affirmed the Public Libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> Act of 1850 and neither act has 
been rescinded – the closures are against the law,” said Smith, author of the 
multiple-award-winning novel How to Be Both. “Democracy of reading, democracy 
of space: that’s our library tradition, it was incredibly hard won for us by 
the generations before us, and we should be protecting it, not just for 
ourselves but in the name of every generation after us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjoanna-trollope-uk-not-afford-close-one-single-public-library%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42efcde980f1cd0c847408ca49ac2c662b4f568%2F0_1354_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joanna%20Trollope%3A%20'UK%20cannot%20afford%20to%20close%20one%20single%20public%20library'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjoanna-trollope-uk-not-afford-close-one-single-public-library%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joanna%20Trollope%3A%20%27UK%20cannot%20afford%20to%20close%20one%20single%20public%20library%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fjoanna-trollope-uk-not-afford-close-one-single-public-library%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42efcde980f1cd0c847408ca49ac2c662b4f568%2F0_1354_3360_2016%2F3360.jpg>
 Andrew Motion: ‘A healthy library service means a healthy society.’ 
Photograph: Karen Robinson for the Observer 
Gaiman also supported the campaign, calling libraries “the thin red line 
between civilisation and barbarism”, while Motion said that “a healthy library 
service means a healthy society”, and that “this government and its predecessor 
have systematically undermined or ignored such a notion”.

Trollope said: “The UK – ranked near the bottom of the OECD’s recent survey of 
literacy levels in the world’s most developed countries – is in absolutely no 
position to dare to close one single public library. Especially when that 
library service costs so very little to run and is so crucial to the nation’s 
wellbeing and future.”

Almost 7,000 people have now signed CILIP’s petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/john-whittingdale-hm-government-act-now-to-protect-my-statutory-rights-to-a-quality-public-library-service>
 calling on the culture secretary, John Whittingdale, to “act now to protect my 
statutory rights to a quality public library service”. Signatories include the 
Walsall South MP Valerie Vaz, currentlyprotesting against cuts in Walsall 
<http://www.expressandstar.com/news/politics/2016/01/06/walsall-council-cuts-thousands-oppose-library-closure-plan/>
.

UK library closures and the fights to save them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/17/library-closures-campaigns-fights-cuts-uk>
“There has been tremendous support for the campaign because so many people 
care about what is happening to library services in this country,” said Nick 
Poole, CILIP chief executive.

“Public libraries across the country are doing fantastic work, and these cuts 
are a false economy – they may or may not deliver limited short-term savings 
but in reality they do lasting damage to local people, communities and 
businesses. We are very clearly asking government to take action, to meet its 
duties under English law and to comply with people’s right to quality library 
services enshrined in three important acts of law.”

The campaign is also supported by the Society of Authors. Chief executive 
Nicola Solomon said: “Library closures have a devastating, long-lasting and 
irreparable effect on local communities as well as on the wider community and 
the nation.”

Library campaigners are now preparing for National Libraries Day on 6 
February, when the UK’s libraries will be celebrated up and down the country, 
while a parliamentary lobby led by the Speak Up For Libraries coalition will 
take their argument to parliament on 9 February.
 