
“No one in his right mind,” Joe Sutter told Air & Space magazine in 2007, 
“would want to get into this business.” Fortunately for commercial aviation, 
Sutter, who has died aged 95, was a man afflicted by a particularly beneficial 
form of wrong-headedness, since he was the aeronautical engineer identified as 
the “father” of theBoeing 747 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/23/boeings-747-production-scaled-back-airbus>
 jumbo jet. This was the airliner which, from its first flight on 9 February 
1969, ushered in the second age of civil jet aviation, focusing on mass transit.

“You bet the company,” Sutter had added, “each time you do a new project.” 
This was never more true than with the 747, where the engineer managed the 
design team – the “Incredibles” – who put the project together in 28 months. 
“It was,” hetold the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03wtnfv> in 2015, “a 
fight all the way.”

It took in the construction of the largest building in the world to house the 
new aircraft, major cash flow issues and successfully overcoming the Pratt & 
Whitney JT9D engines’ unfortunate tendency to catch fire. A tough negotiator, 
Sutter also assumed, wrongly, that he would lose his job in 1967 after 
successfully resisting demands that he sack 1,000 of his 4,500 engineers. To 
cap all this, there was also the illusory challenge of the Anglo-FrenchConcorde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/concorde>, and the 747’s initial status as 
the poor relation to the Boeing 2707 Mach 3 airliner, which was finally 
abandoned in 1971.

The 747 was born in 1965 when Juan Trippe, the boss of Pan American, told 
Boeing <https://www.theguardian.com/business/boeing> that his airline wanted a 
huge new double-decker passenger aircraft. What he got, and eventually agreed 
to, was the wide-bodied 747, with its 20ft cabin width and space for 400-plus 
passengers; earlier jet airliners had peaked with a capacity of fewer than 200.

In spring 1966, Trippe made an initial order of 25 aircraft, and on 22 January 
1970 the first Pan Am scheduled flight, from New York to London, touched down – 
six hours late; the original aircraft had developed engine trouble and a 
substitute plane had had to be found. The Guardian’s headline was “Another fit 
of stumbles for Jumbo”. But the stumbles faded, and the 747, instantly 
recognisable, went on to redefine air travel, with no comparable rival emerging 
until the EuropeanAirbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> A380 in 
2005.

Before the epic of the 747, Sutter worked on a series of Boeing passenger 
planes that established the company in a dominant position in commercial 
aviation from the late 1950s onwards. He was an aerodynamist on the 707, the 
second jet on the transatlantic route (following fleeting competition from the 
British Comet 4), and he significantly affected the wing design on the short 
and medium haul 727 launched in the early 1960s. And he won his first patent on 
the short and medium haul 737, which first flew in 1967, is still in production 
now and, with more than 9,000 sales, is the most popular jet airliner in the 
world.

Sutter was born and raised in a Catholic family in Seattle, Washington state. 
His father, Frank (originally Franc Suhadolc), was a Slovenian immigrant who 
had come to North America as a Klondike gold prospector and became a meat 
cutter, while his mother, Rose (nee Plesik) was born in Austria-Hungary. Sutter 
grew up in the Beacon Hill district of Seattle and was educated at Cleveland 
high school in the city. A model plane builder in childhood, Sutter found 
student summer work at the Boeing Plant 2, while an undergraduate at the 
University of Washington.

William Boeing had set up his original company in 1916 and in the immediate 
period after the first world war it had focused on commercial aviation. But it 
was the military/civil interplay to come that was key to the company’s success. 
In the later interwar years, when Sutter was in his teens, Boeing was also 
developing the B17 four-engined bomber, which would provide the backbone of the 
US Army Air Forces’ war over Germany. By the end of the 1930s the company was 
also beginning tentative work on the B29 bomber which, in 1945, launched the 
two atomic attacks on Japan.

In 1943 Sutter graduated with a degree in aeronautical engineering and then 
did war service on a US Navy destroyer in the Pacific. Demobbed, in 1946 he 
accepted a job in California with Douglas Aircraft, which then enjoyed a lead 
in the field of commercial aircraft. Later, back in Seattle, he took on a 
temporary post at Boeing – it would last 40 years. The company was then 
beginning to reconsider its civilian aircraft options and a move towards jets, 
particularly after seeing the de Havilland Comet in England in 1950.

Sutter’s early and relatively lowly work at Boeing took in engine and flight 
control issues on the propeller-driven Boeing Stratocruiser transcontinental 
airliner. This, in its turn, had been developed from the B29 bomber. Like the 
747, it was a twin decker; unlike the 747, with it 1,500-plus sales in an era 
of mass air travel, the Stratocruiser served a luxury market, with only 56 
aircraft built.

Sutter served on the presidential commission into the 1986 Challenger space 
shuttle disaster. He received many honours, including membership of the US 
National Academy of Engineering, honorary fellowship of the Royal Aeronautical 
Society, the US Medal of Technology and the Guggenheim Medal.

Sutter’s wife, Nancy (nee French), died in 1997. He is survived by two 
daughters, Gabrielle and Adrienne, a son, Jonathan, five grandchildren, and 
three great-grandchildren.

• Joseph Frederick Sutter, aeronautical engineer, born 21 March 1921; died 30 
August 2016
 