
My uncle John Norton, who has died aged 85, was an aeronautical engineer whose 
achievements added greatly to the quality and safety of modern aircraft.

John was born in Bristol, son of May (nee Rich) and John, an engineer, and 
after leaving St Brendan’s grammar school began working for the British 
Aircraft Corporation in Bristol, where he became part of the company’s mission 
to produce ever lighter, stronger components. John’s early experiments involved 
the use of explosives to “blow” sheets of titanium into preformed moulds. Over 
time his thinking developed – and success finally came with the use of 
electrically heated moulds, into which the hot, malleable titanium was formed 
using high-pressure benign gas.

The first production item of real significance was an Airbus under-wing access 
panel. When it went into successful production it was probably the lightest, 
strongest and most corrosion-resistant titanium structure ever produced. The 
process – now universally known as “superplastic forming” – has since been 
adopted worldwide.

Spin-offs of the technique led to improvements in medical implants, racing car 
parts, ship structures and locomotive components. John also collaborated with 
surgeons pioneering microsurgery to create fine surgical instruments. On 
retirement he was in demand as a consultant, helping others establish their 
superplastic forming capabilities.

John embodied Iain Duncan Smith’s injunction not to “underestimate the 
determination of a quiet man”. He was very determined, and worked out of the 
limelight. He was a great listener – and unfailingly asked exactly the right 
questions, making just the right comments to help you to the correct 
conclusions. He was also enormous fun – as indicated by the wicked glint in his 
eye and a tiny tug at the corner of his mouth.

He is survived by his wife, Teresa (nee James), whom he married in 1954, their 
children, Kevin and Mandy, and granddaughters Jade and Rubie.
 