
Covers of old favourites recorded for John Lewis TV commercials since 2009 
have already sold more than 1 million units. If previous Christmas ads for the 
retailer are anything to go by, then 20-year-old Gabrielle Aplin could shift as 
many 80,000 copies of her rendition of Frankie Goes To Hollywood's The Power of 
Love, which accompaniesthis year's snowman-centric offering 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/video/2012/nov/09/john-lewis-christmas-advert-video>
.

The Journey, the title of John Lewis's ad, was released online at 9.30am on 
Friday and breaks on TV, on Channel 4, at 9.10pm. However, Aplin, the singer,
tweeted <https://twitter.com/GabrielleAplin/status/266966019690606595> just 
after 6pm that her song was already No 24 in the iTunes chart.

Since matching a cover of Guns N' Roses' Sweet Child O' Mine to its 2009 
Christmas TV campaign, resulting in a hit song that landed just outside the top 
20,John Lewis <https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis> commercials have 
become more talked about than the programmes they interrupt.

This year, John Lewis chose the relatively unknown singer Aplin with her 
version of Frankie Goes to Hollywood's 1984 No 1 hit for its Christmas TV ad.

Aplin's version was chosen over as many eight submitted to John Lewis, some 
from well-known acts such as electropop duo La Roux, and will be played in 
almost every household in the run up to Christmas thanks to a £6m marketing 
blitz by the retailer.

This despite the fact that John Lewis's marketing director, Craig Inglis, the 
man behind the transformation of the company's advertising in recent years, 
admitted that he does not like Frankie's original version of The Power of Love.

"I wasn't a huge fan of the original song, but it is not about that," he said. 
"It was about listening to [Aplin's] demo, her interpretation, listening to 
what it was like and if it had that sparkle. It was clear from the first few 
seconds, it is not about my personal choice on the music, it is about what 
works for the ad."

Songs from John Lewis's three Christmas ads since 2009, plus other commercials 
from the retailer including the 2010 ad featuring Fyfe Dangerfield's cover of 
She's Always A Woman, have sold a total of 1,070,000 units.

By far the biggest seller was Ellie Goulding's cover of Elton John's Your 
Song, which accompanied the 2010 Christmas commercial, shifting 725,000 units 
and staying in the charts for 26 weeks, reaching No 2.

Dangerfield's cover of She's Always A Woman, a song from Billy Joel's 1977 
album Stranger, was in the charts for 14 weeks reaching No 7.

In 2009, the Taken by Trees cover of Sweet Child O'Mine sold 71,000 copies and 
hit No 23 in the chart; last year, Slow Moving Millie's version of The Smith's 
Please, Please, Please Let Me Get What I Want shifted 83,000 and reached No 31.

If the public take to the ad and song then Aplin, who described being chosen 
to for the ad as "like winning X Factor", could hope to hit sales of this level.

"The sales are in no small part a reflection of the success and credibility of 
the ads," said Inglis. "Artists want to do it, it feel credible being involved, 
it is a reflection of a change of dynamics in the industry. We have record 
labels and artists approaching us which I never would have believed would have 
happened a few years ago."

According to music industry body the British Phonographic Industry, licensing 
tie-ups between record companies and film, TV and advertising companies, 
referred to as "sync" deals, is still small but rapidly growing. Revenues from 
UK music synchronisation – the use of recordings in films, TV programmes, 
advertising and games – grew 12% year-on-year to £18m in 2011.

This recent run of successful commercials has borne fruit from the partnership 
between Inglis and the advertising agency adam&eveDDB.

"Music plays a powerful part in these ads because music is shorthand for 
feeling and emotion," said James Murphy, adam&eveDDB's chief executive. "And it 
is also increasingly important for the music business as so many people are 
dual screening, using laptops and tablets and smartphones while watching TV, 
that if they hear something they like they instantly look to buy it. That 
dynamic is becoming increasingly important to the music industry."

The John Lewis ad campaign, which was filmed in New Zealand ("the only place 
we could find reliable snow in July"), will appear in shows including The X 
Factor and Derren Brown's Fear and Faith.

Inglis, who said John Lewis punches well above its weight despite spending 
about half as much as its big rivals on advertising, added that the strategy is 
to target "premium programmes, programmes that drive conversations and allows 
the ad to become part of that".

The John Lewis ads that fuelled 1m-plus in music sales

Christmas 2011

Please, Please, Please Let Me Get What I Want

Slow Moving Millie's cover of The Smith's

Peak position: 31

Weeks in chart: 7

Sales: 83,000

The TV ad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pSLOnR1s74o>

Christmas 2010

Your Song

Ellie Goulding cover of Elton John

Peak position: 2

Weeks in chart: 26

Sales: 725,000

The TV ad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M0zZScVSMEw>

Christmas 2009

Sweet Child O'Mine

Taken by Trees cover of Guns N' Roses

Peak position: 23

Weeks in chart: 6

Sales: 71,000

The TV ad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZ7Rz2rmjck>

And...

Summer 2010

She's Always a Woman

Fyfe Dangerfield cover of Billy Joel

Peak position: 7

Weeks in chart: 14

Sales: Unknown but almost certainly close to 200,000 given length of time and 
peak in chart.

The TV ad <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jYOsWWKHZVw>

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook  
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 