
If Masada Marathon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/12/john-zorn-masada-marathonreview-free-jazz-at-full-power>
had been John Zorn’s klezmer project andClassical Marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/13/john-zorn-classical-marathon-review-adelaide-festival>
 had showed the breadth of his, well, classical work, then Triple Bill saw him 
pushing through the musical pain barrier into the realms of pure noise, 
especially with the final section, the near-unbearable Cobra. First, however, 
wasBladerunner 
<http://www.brooklynvegan.com/archives/2014/01/john_zorns_blad.html>, a trio 
comprising Zorn on saxophone, Bill Laswell on bass andDave Lombardo 
<http://musicfeeds.com.au/news/dave-lombardo-on-slayer-i-made-on-tour-in-2011-67000/>
, formerly of Slayer, on drums. It spoke volumes about Zorn’s versatility. What 
other composer would perform with the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra one night and 
the drummer with the quintessential thrash metal band the next?

Lombardo had flown to Adelaide from California solely to play this 35-minute 
set, a testament to Zorn’s pulling power, yet the audience – and festival – 
probably got its money’s worth. His 100mph drumming, especially when aligned 
with Zorn’s squealing saxophone (thanks to his circular breathing technique, he 
can hold one note for aeons) was like being strapped to the bottom of a runaway 
train with your head six inches from the track.


Bladerunner was music as extreme sport – exhilarating, visceral, and almost 
comical in its intensity. Lombardo surely hits the drums as hard as John Bonham 
did, but at about ten times the speed. For the final song,Mike Patton 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/12878-epic-fail-how-mike-patton-murdered-faith-no-more>
 was brought onstage to twitch, squat, throat-sing, scream and generally make 
an unholy racket. The Adelaide festival has played host to a lot of bizarre 
music this week, but it’s unlikely to see anything quite like that performance 
ever again.

Fortunately, the second section, Essential Cinema, didn’t attempt to up the 
ante, but aligned Zorn with New York’s underground filmmakers. The music 
accompanyingJoseph Cornell <http://www.pem.org/sites/cornell/>’s 1936 film Rose 
Hobart was twangy and torrid, much like the film, with its images of volcanoes 
and romance in hot climes. The Tin Woodsman’s Dream, a kaleidoscopic montage of 
dancing women and byHarry Smith 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harry_Everett_Smith>, who worked at Disney until 
the film got him fired, was soundtracked by gongs, organ chords and 
laptop-generated jungle noises. The third film,Aleph 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1710316/> (1966) was a fast-cut anthology of 60s 
counterculture, from the Rolling Stones to copious female nudity, and Zorn’s 
band – as with the other films, playing in the dark – soundtracked it with 
hectic but appealing jazz.

Cobra <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cobra_%28Zorn%29>, the final section, is 
an improvised piece, in this case played by a 12-piece band, with Zorn stood in 
the middle directing them with different coloured cue cards which were spread 
out on a table in front of him. As he picked up different cards and brandished 
them at the players, they were inspired to even greater heights of distorted 
screaming and scatting (in the case of Mike Patton), emitting fire-alarm-style 
shrieks and generally making an unholy din – although Zorn looked displeased at 
one point, pointing his finger angrily. After umpteen changes in rhythm and 
time signature, Cobra worked to a conclusion so abrasive and shatteringly loud 
it was pushing up against the pain barrier – yet the audience gave it a 
standing ovation, which surely wasn’t just due to relief that it was over. For 
those listeners with a hardened palate, only Zorn can hit the spot.

 