
Quatrevingt-treize by Victor Hugo

Hugo's final work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9782266083065/quatrevingt-treize>
 was a historical novel that dramatised the uprising against the French 
revolution that took place in the Vendée in 1793. The novel was controversially 
even-handed in its sympathies, its true hero being Gauvain, a humane republican 
commander who allows the rebel leader to escape execution and so goes to the 
guillotine himself.

"Easter, 1916" by WB Yeats

Yeats's brilliantly phrased memorial to the Easter uprising, with its roll 
call of republicans executed by the British, became one of the most eloquent 
justifications of violence ever written, its final line – "A terrible beauty is 
born" – inspiring or repelling generations of readers.

1919 by John Dos Passos

The second volume of Dos Passos's USA trilogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141185811/usa> 
combines history, fictional biography and stream of consciousness narration to 
try to fit modern America into one book. As the world staggers out of a 
cataclysmic war, we follow an assortment of representative characters, but also 
mingle with politicians, labour leaders and the banker JP Morgan.

"September 1, 1939" by WH Auden

Auden's poem, written and set in New York, marks the opening of the second 
world war "As the clever hopes expire / Of a low dishonest decade". Its 
resonant phrase-making – "We must love one another or die" and so on – was for 
some undermined by the fact that the poet muttered his discontent in Manhattan 
while the Europe he left met its terrible fate.

Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell

Every subsequent novel with a date-title recalls this one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780141191201/nineteen-eighty-four>
, the dystopian classic that announced itself as a prophecy in 1948, but now 
seems an irrefutable analysis of every totalitarian regime of modern times. One 
of Orwell's strokes of brilliance was to make the future more dilapidated and 
impoverished than the present, so it cannot be outdated.

"MCMXIV" by Philip Larkin

The year is 1914, and the first months of the first world war, but the date is 
given in Roman numerals, as if on a memorial or cenotaph. The poem describes 
the long lines queuing to sign up, those young men's faces preserved in a 
photograph, "Grinning as if it were all / An August Bank Holiday lark". "Never 
such innocence again".

2001: A Space Odyssey by Arthur C Clarke

Clarke's portentous scifi meditation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/science-fiction/9781857236644/a-space-odyssey>
, which appeared in 1968, imagined that leaps in human development are 
influenced by a mysterious alien race who send odd monoliths to encourage new 
ideas in human beings. In the novel's last section, set in 2001, an astronaut 
enters an alternative universe.

August 1914 by Alexander Solzhenitsyn

The great dissident's massive historical novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780094521100/august> is 
an exploration of the conditions for the rise of communism. It dramatises the 
defeat of the ineptly led imperial army at the Battle of Tannenberg while (in 
the uncensored version) Lenin was busily conspiring to take advantage of the 
palsied Tsarist regime.

1985 by Anthony Burgess

Published in 1978, Burgess's supposed homage to Orwell was a wonderfully 
bonkers novella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781907616006/anthony-burgess>
 in which trade union power has become absolute. The protagonist's wife dies 
when a hospital burns down because the firemen are on strike. Everyone is 
always on strike in this book, and Muslims are quietly at work to make Britain 
an Islamic state.

Nineteen Seventy-Four by David Peace

Set during the year in question, the first part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9781846687051/david-peace> 
of Peace'sRed Riding quartet follows a crime reporter on the Yorkshire Post as 
he investigates the bizarre murder of a young girl. He begins to discover that 
God's Own County is a seething pit of corruption, lust and perverse violence. 
Welcome to the 70s.

• Tell us about the dates in titles we have missed and give us your ideas for 
future columns
 