
Johnson Matthey, the platinum specialist which makes automotive catalysts to 
reduce emissions, has been hit by the crisis in the global car industry.

The company's full year profits of £267.9m beat forecasts but it warned that 
the downturn it experienced in the second half had continued into the new 
financial year. Chief executive Neil Carson said: "So far we have seen no real 
signs of improvement in demand for automotive products in 2009/10 and we expect 
the group's sales will be down in our first half in comparison to a very strong 
performance in the same period last year."

This gloom has sent its shares down 43p to £12.09, making it one of the 
biggest losers in the FTSE 100 index. Jeremy Batstone-Carr at Charles Stanley 
said:

"The outlook statement is grim, pointing to no sign of any improvement so far 
in demand for automotive products. Despite the bad news, much of which will 
come as no surprise, investors should note Johnson's strong position in many 
industrial segments, its low debt (potential in-fill acquisitions in due 
course?) and strong management. Estimates already reflect the difficult 
operating environment and the shares, trading off 2010 P/E of 15 times and 
yielding 3.5% remain a hold."

The news has also turned attention back to platinum miners, and the fact that 
metal prices have been falling sharply since last summer. SoLonmin - which 
separately revealed 96.38% acceptances for its rights issue - has lost 44p to 
£14.66 andAquarius Platinum is down 10.75p at 289.25p.

Ahead of the Bank of England's update from its latest monthly meeting - due at 
noon - theFTSE 100 is managing to stay in positive territory, currently up 
24.22 points at 4407.64.

Barclays has bounced back 12.25p to 272p after its recent falls, while Lloyds 
Banking Group is up 2.6p at 68.6p and Royal Bank of Scotland has risen 1.4p to 
37.5p.
 