
John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> met rival 
candidates in Afghanistan's contested presidential election on Friday after a 
deal between the two unravelled.

The US secretary of state arrived in Kabul on Thursday in an attempt to 
salvage the faltering political and technical agreements that he brokered 
betweenAbdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> 
and Ashraf Ghani last month.

The deal, agreed after a marathon negotiating session, was intended to produce 
a winner in Afghanistan's election but has fallen apart in the four weeks since 
it was reached, with fistfights breaking out in the auditing centre and the 
process being halted numerous times.

Abdullah wants clarity on the political agreement and Ghani does not want to 
commit to it until the vote audit, which he hopes will declare him the winner, 
is complete.

Ghani, a former World Bank technocrat, emerged from the runoff on 14Â June in 
the lead but Abdullah, a former mujahideen doctor, claimed that 2m of the votes 
cast for his rival were fake.

The seven-point political agreement outlines the steps to be taken after the 
audit. According to negotiators who helped broker the deal, the agreement 
states that a president will take office immediately and hold aloya jirga, or 
meeting of elders, to create a new prime minister position within the first two 
years.

The president will also create the position of opposition leader, to be 
appointed by the runner-up, and both the winner and the loser will select 
certain posts in national security and economic institutions.

The president alone will appoint ministers, the chief justice and other key 
provincial positions. With an eye on future elections, the agreement also calls 
on the two candidates to begin work on electoral reform to address some of the 
shortcomings of this year's ballot.

Concerns are mounting that the progress of the audit has been dramatically 
slower than anticipated. Western officials and the UN hope that the audit will 
be complete before a Nato summit in September, but the first week of the 
auditing proved that this was unlikely.

Fabrizio Foschini, of the Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> Analysts Network, said Kerry's 
visit was a sign of improving conditions. "It shows a high level of commitment 
on the part of the international community that they want the audit plus 
political process to end the way that it was envisioned," he said. "It remains 
to be seen whether this risks becoming a pattern, where every time you have a 
crisis, it cannot be solved without external input."
 