
John Zorn is known for the remarkable breadth of his work – he has tackled 
everything from punk to opera – and on Wednesday the second of Adelaide 
festival’s four-night retrospective focused on his classical repertoire. It was 
performed in two halves, the first by the Brisbane-basedElision Ensemble 
<http://www.elision.org.au/ELISION_Ensemble/ELISION.html> and second by the 
Adelaide Symphony Orchestra <http://www.aso.com.au/> – both last seen in the 
Adelaide festival at Tectonics – and conducted byDavid Fulmer 
<http://fulmermusic.com/>, who was hugged so hard by Zorn at the end that he 
nearly lost his balance.

 The performance opened with A Rebours, Zorn’s tribute to Gy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/27/gyorgy-ligeti-contemporary-music-guide>
örgy Ligeti <>, 11 minutes of pensive, choppy music bristling with bells, 
rattling percussion and, at one point, the sound of a modified football rattle. 
It was followed by Sortilège, a parping and anarchic duet/battle between two 
bass clarinets, played byCarl Rosman <http://www.carlrosman.com/> and Richard 
Haynes <http://www.elision.org.au/ELISION_Ensemble/Richard_Haynes_clarinet.html>
. The look of mutual pride and admiration they gave one another when the 
challenging piece came to an end was a moving reminder of the way music is 
perhaps the ultimate expression of human co-operation and communication.
 John Zorn's Sortilege is performed by Elision Ensemble bass clarinet players 
Carl Rosman and Richard Haynes. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
The Rimbaud-inspired Bateau Ivre started with droplets of piano before 
concluding turbulently. Zeitgehöft, a world premiere, was a challenging and 
austere piece expertly driven by violin and cello. Throughout the first half, 
the Elision Ensemble negotiated the switchbacks and violently clashing moods of 
Zorn’s music in consummate style, though sometimes admiration outstripped 
emotional engagement – for this listener at least.
) Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx5DbKzbLzUU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx5DbKzbLzUU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx5DbKzbLzUU&media=>
The second, full orchestral half saw the concert’s highlight – Kol Nidre 
<http://www.milkenarchive.org/works/view/494>, a minimal and somberly touching 
piece based on the declaration that opens Yom Kippur, and which was played at 
Ground Zero on the first anniversary of 9/11. The concert ended with the 
25-minute Suppôts et Supplications, beginning with strings keening like 
electrical interference, then taking in a celeste played like an out-of-control 
music box, apocalyptic percussion and blaring brass that could have shaken the 
walls of Jericho. Like the night as a whole, it was tempestuous and 
challenging, but never anything other than compelling.
 