
Secretary of State John Kerry on Saturday saluted what he called the triumph 
of “statesmanship and compromise” inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, which will inaugurate its new 
president on Monday. On the same day, however, the Afghan government said it 
would delay paying the October salaries of hundreds of thousands of civil 
servants, because it does not have enough money.

Kerry was writing in the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/john-kerry-afghanistans-triumph-of-statesmanship-and-compromise/2014/09/26/8393f858-45b2-11e4-b47c-f5889e061e5f_story.html>
 ahead of the inauguration of President Ashraf Ghani, which he said would mark 
“the first democratic transfer of power in Afghanistan’s history and the first 
peaceful leadership transition in more than 40 years”.

Ghani, he said, would “work in tandem with the country’s first-ever chief 
executive officer”,Abdullah Abdullah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah>, after the “two statesmen 
… came together to form a government of national unity following a very 
contentious election”.

Ghani and Abdullah reached their power-sharing agreement last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/21/afghanistan-power-sharing-deal-ghani-abdullah>
, three controversy-filled months after the country’s presidential election 
failed to find a clear successor to Hamid Karzai, president since 2004, who 
came to power in an election which took place after the American-led invasion 
of the country and the fall of the Taliban.

Ghani will run the cabinet and take charge of strategic functions; Abdullah 
will be in charge of daily duties.

Kerry wrote: “This moment was not easily arrived at, and it belongs primarily 
to the millions who courageously went to the polls to vote in April and June in 
defiance of Taliban threats. The voters’ message was unequivocal: No improvised 
explosive device and no suicide bomber would stand in the way of their 
country’s democratic future.”

Aside from continuing the fight against the Taliban, one of the key issues 
facing Ghani and Abdullah – financing the government – became clear on 
Saturday, as the director general of the country’s treasury told Reuters his 
country could not afford the $116m needed to begin processing monthly salaries 
for October.


Alhaj Mohammad Aqa said the shortfall would not affect salaries for members of 
the military and police engaged in the fight against the Taliban, and said 
Afghanistan had asked for $537m in emergency funding from the US, an injection 
that has not yet been approved.

Kerry, who noted that both Ghani and Abdullah had committed to signing the 
necessary agreement for US troops to remain in the country beyond the end of 
this year –a key sticking point with Karzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/27/obama-us-afghanistan-force-2014> 
– said the new Afghan government was built on “a common vision for economic 
reform, honest government, security and peace”.

The secretary of state also made a wry comparison between the bipartisan 
co-operation underpinning the new Afghan government and the polarised state of 
American domestic politics.

“For those at home who are quick to question Afghanistan’s democracy,” he 
wrote, “they might ask themselves whether they believe that – in less than 90 
days – two US presidential candidates could transform a bitter and hotly 
contested campaign into a unity government with an exceptionally strong mandate 
to govern.”

Referring to the contested presidential vote which eventually returned George 
W Bush to power over the Democratic nominee Al Gore, he added: “Flipping the 
pages of our own history back to the 2000 election, the answer might provoke 
some humility or at least some perspective on how difficult it can be.”
 