
John Zorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/21/contemporary-composers-guide-john-zorn>
 has never been to Australia before and, according to Adelaide festival 
director David Sefton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/28/adelaide-festval-david-sefton>
, he’s never coming back again, so these concerts mark the rarest of 
opportunities for Australian audiences to see the 60-year-old avant garde 
legend in the flesh. Tuesday saw the first of four concerts designed as a 
retrospective of Zorn’s long and eclectic career, the whole of which will 
involve some 40 musicians includingMike Patton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/29/whats-that-sound-mike-patton>, 
andDave Lombardo 
<http://www.metalinjection.net/latest-news/drama/dave-lombardo-is-basically-never-coming-back-to-slayer>
, formerly of Slayer, plus the Adelaide Symphony orchestra.


Masada Marathon is a four-hour taster of Zorn’s sprawling Masada project 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Masada_%28band%29>. Taking in some 500 tunes, one 
tranche written in the 90s and another in 2004, Masada is Zorn’s bid to fuse 
jazz withklezmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/03/klezmer-jewish-judaism-world-music>
, the music made by Jewish musicians as they travelled through eastern Europe 
and America, the result being, Zorn hopes, “a sort of radical Jewish music ... 
music for the Jews of today.”

In concert, this meant a succession of 12 crack ensembles or soloists paying 
three or four tunes each. In the first and last ensembles, Masada Quartet and 
Electric Masada, Zorn played saxophone in a style so furiously exuberant it 
could have stripped the paint off the back wall of the theatre. The rest of the 
time, Zorn – dressed down in combat trousers and a red T-shirt – was either a 
guiding spirit somewhere in the wings; back onstage, dancing along and 
conducting the musicians with slashing hand gestures; or else offering 
encouragement that was touching to see – the percussionist Cyro Baptista even 
got his belly rubbed.

While the music never cut itself off from its klezmer roots – beguiling, 
mournful and ancient-sounding, a musical distillation of Yiddish culture – it 
ranged far and wide, from Fender Rhodes-infused cocktail jazz to full-blown 
psychedelic rock. Highlights included the all-female vocal quartetMycale 
<http://mycalevocal.com/> (the only women, bar one playing a laptop at the end, 
on the stage) whose complex, Spanish-inflected songs were elegant and breezy.
Shanir Blumenkranz <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shanir_Ezra_Blumenkranz>’s 
earth-shaking bass made the set by Banquet of the Spirits a viscerally funky 
experience. Both solo and as part of the Masada string trio, cellistErik 
Friedlander <http://erik-friedlander.squarespace.com/> matched technical 
precision with emotion to heart-tugging effect.

Yet it was in the loudest moments that Masada Marathon was at its most 
intense, and judging by the whoops of the audience, that was what Zorn’s fans 
had come to experience – free jazz at full power, with the sound pinning you to 
your seat. After four hours, we were drained, but more than satisfied.

 