
Johnny Depp <https://www.theguardian.com/film/johnnydepp> is the year’s most 
overpaid actor, according to Forbes.

Forbes' best-paid actors list: is Disney dismantling Hollywood's star system?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/forbes-best-paid-actors-list-is-disney-dismantling-hollywoods-star-system>
The 53-year-old Oscar nominee has topped the list for the second year in a row 
after big budget sequel Alice Through the Looking Glass became the latest in a 
long line of flops. The release of the critically maligned fantasy arrived at 
the same time as allegations of domestic violence against his wife Amber Heard.

While Depp scored an Oscar nomination for last year’s true crime drama Black 
Mass, his box office appeal continues to wane with the Disney sequel making 
just $77m in the US compared to the original’s $334m. The past few years have 
also seen him fail to attract audiences to Mortdecai, Transcendence and The 
Lone Ranger. Next year sees him return to the Pirates of the Caribbean 
franchise.

The list looks at an actor’s last three non-animated films before June 2016 
and works out the money made compared to the salary paid. Depp brought in just 
$2.80 for every $1 he was paid.

Former box office heavyweight Will Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/willsmith> is in second place after his NFL 
Oscarbait drama Concussion failed to connect, following in the footsteps of 
conman romance Focus and sci-flop After Earth. His role in Suicide Squad 
arrived just after the cut-off. He’ll next be seen in star-studded fantasy 
drama Collateral Beauty.

The rest of the top five is filled out by Channing Tatum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/channing-tatum>, Will Ferrell and George 
Clooney. The only female actor in the list is Julia Roberts in ninth position 
after both Money Monster and Mother’s Day disappointed.

Full list:

1. Johnny Depp – $2.80 for every $1

2. Will Smith – $5 for every $1

3. Channing Tatum – $6 for every $1

4. Will Ferrell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/willferrell> – $6.50 for 
every $1

5. George Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> – $6.70 for 
every $1

6. Adam Sandler <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler> – $7.60 for 
every $1

7. Mark Wahlberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mark-wahlberg> – $9.20 for 
every $1

8. Leonardo DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> – 
$9.90 for every $1

9. Julia Roberts <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliaroberts> – $10.8 for 
every $1

10. Bradley Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradley-cooper> – $12.1 
for every $1
 