
Following the stream of revelations about Jonathan Djanogly's financial 
interests, there is speculation he will lose his job in the next reshuffle. 
Being a junior minister in the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) and its predecessors 
has not often been a great route to political advancement. There have been a 
few exceptions in recent years who in time progressed to the cabinet, like 
Geoff Hoon and Yvette Cooper, but it is generally a low-profile appointment.

So the likelihood of Djanogly progressing far in government was not great 
anyway, but theapparent conflict of interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/18/minister-failed-to-register-firm>
 recently revealed – allied to the not-forgotten furore last year over hisuse 
of private detectives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/sep/10/mp-detectives-leaks-expenses-jonathan-djanogly>
 to investigate colleagues – has certainly not helped. Just as well, perhaps, 
that he has always given the impression of being pretty chuffed with his 
current job.

Djanogly was expecting to join Ken Clarke at the Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills after the last election, but when Clarke was instead 
appointed to the MoJ, Djanogly went with him. While the convention of only 
appointing lawyers to the MoJ has gone, it is still the case that there is 
always one minister below the secretary of state with a legal background and 
Djanogly, formerly a corporatepartner at a major City of London law firm 
<http://www.legalweek.com/legal-week/news/1557675/corporate-partner-djanogly-quits-sj-berwin-focus-political-ambitions>
, is the current incumbent.

That experience does not make him much more qualified than his non-lawyer 
colleagues to reform legal aid, criminal law and conditional fee agreements, 
but that is his current task with the legal aid, sentencing and punishment of 
offenders bill. To me, the recent revelations – while not looking good – do not 
amount to a great deal in practice.

In the wake of responsibility for overseeing claims management companies 
moving to Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/17/jonathan-djanogly-stripped-power-ambulance-chasers>
, the Law Society jumped on the bandwagon and called for a "pause" in the 
progress of the bill. While the report stage of the bill in the House of 
Commons has beendelayed by a week 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2010-11/legalaidsentencingandpunishmentofoffenders.html>
, ostensibly for timetabling reasons, I would be surprised to see a pause. It 
is nearly out of the Commons and heading to the Lords, where the serious 
arguments will be had and concessions made (bringing clinical negligence back 
into the scope of legal aid is the bookies' favourite). Even if Djanogly goes, 
it is unlikely to make a difference to the reform programme – in my view, he is 
just another minister having to package unpalatable cuts, rather than a man 
pursuing his own agenda.

Djanogly is generally regarded as pleasant but not a particularly impressive 
performer, rarely straying from his prepared notes. "His officials like him," 
says one MoJ insider. "That says it all." Those who rememberYes, Minister 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yes_Minister> will know that civil servants like 
ministers who do what they are told and stick to their brief.

He considers his legacy to be the introduction of alternative business 
structures (ABS), which have the potential to radically reshape the legal 
market. Though a creation of Labour's 2007 Legal Services Act, he likes to take 
some of the credit as he did a lot of the Tories' spade work as the act went 
through parliament, and resisted those who wanted him to call a halt to "Tesco 
law" once in power.

Another achievement could be the ban on referral fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/sep/09/ban-referal-fees-curb-rise-insurance-costs>
 in personal injury cases, although rumour has it that this was foisted on him 
from on high. Unsurprising if true: beforeJack Straw's intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/jun/28/jack-straw-insurance-customer-details>
 in June transformed the tenor of the debate, Djanogly seemed relaxed about the 
issue and content with the approach of greater transparency that the Legal 
Services Board had recommended. Some of his arguments around the ban have not 
stood up to close scrutiny and many observers have been disappointed by how 
quickly he reaches for the flimsy "compensation culture" argument to back up 
his case.

In the event of Djanogly losing his position in the MoJ, there is a window of 
opportunity to bring another MP up to speed while the bill goes through the 
Lords. But then he does now know the subject – much though his views infuriate 
many – and there is pressure to get the bill done and dusted so the reforms can 
start on 1 October 2012.

Djanogly was guest of honour at a Legal Services Board reception on 6 October 
to mark the start of ABSs, and in a nice touch the board also invited Bridget 
Prentice, the Labour justice minister who piloted the Legal Services Act 
through parliament and brought the board into being. She spent five years at 
the MoJ until leaving parliament at the last election – reshuffle after 
reshuffle, she moved neither up nor down nor even sideways. Right now,Jonathan 
Djanogly <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jonathan-djanogly> would 
probably be happy with that.

Neil Rose is editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 