
There is more at stake in today's EDF Energy Cup final than either the Ospreys 
orLeicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> would like. 
This is the Welsh region's last chance to win any silverware this season while 
the Tigers face an ongoing struggle to reach the Guinness Premiership 
play-offs. Given the quality of the personnel at the two head coaches' disposal 
there will be some explaining to do if either side finish empty-handed on three 
fronts.

For Lyn Jones of the Ospreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, in 
particular, this afternoon at Twickenham looms as a personal watershed. Any 
repeat of the listless performance that cost his team a European semi-final 
place at Saracens last week could have severe repercussions at a time when 
Welsh tolerance of big-match failure has been shaped by the national team's 
rapid upturn. If the same group of players who won a grand slam continue to 
seem as distracted and weary as they did last Sunday, the contrast with the 
sharp-witted regime of Warren Gatland and Shaun Edwards will be even more acute.

Jones remains one of the more characterful coaches in the game but more than a 
good sense of humour is required at the business end of a season in which his 
team currently languish in sixth position in the Magners League. Gavin Henson's 
strained ankle ligaments have ruled him out of today's game and disquiet is 
clear enough from the rest of the teamsheet. Half the pack who started in 
Watford have been dropped with international regulars Duncan Jones, Huw 
Bennett, Ian Gough and Jonathan Thomas all making way.

If Jones the coach remains cheerfully bullish - "Questions on my future can 
get a bit boring but they come with the territory and I enjoy the pressure" - 
he also knows Leicester will be as motivated as they were when the sides met in 
the final 12 months ago. The Tigers ran in four tries before half-time and 
triumphed 41-35. In three meetings between the sides Leicester have yet to 
lose. They have also won their last eight matches against Welsh opposition. 
"Conceding 28 points in one half is a freak event for any professional side," 
said Jones of last year's final, suggesting the memory would "help drive us on 
to the goal of becoming the first Welsh side to win the EDF Energy Cup" - in 
only the third year of the competition.

Twickenham's wide open spaces should favour the Ospreys more than the tighter 
confines of Vicarage Road did but Leicester also have a number of players with 
points to prove. For Dan Hipkiss, Harry Ellis and the returning Aaron Mauger 
this is a chance to blast away some of the frustrations of the season, although 
Marcelo Loffreda's selection for his first final since arriving at Welford Road 
seems to indicate an initial preference for attacking on a narrower front. Tom 
Croft and Tom Varndell both start on the bench. Instead Ollie Smith will be 
asked to keep an eye on Shane Williams as Leicester seek to avoid the sort of 
basketball-style try-fest that suits the Ospreys winger so well.

Loffreda also has to be mindful of the fact Leicester face three games in 
eight days, with Premiership games against Bath and Bristol next week. "We've 
got a fair few injuries, so there could be some players who are playing in all 
three games," said the captain, Martin Corry. "It's going to be a test of 
fitness, resilience and mental toughness." Leicester are rarely found wanting 
in those departments and the Ospreys may have to make another gloomy trip back 
down the M4. A crowd of around 60,000 is predicted, although about 15,000 of 
those will be cheering Northampton in their EDF National Trophy final against 
Exeter at midday.
 