
Lost in Showbiz does not like to be the bearer of bad tidings, but there's no 
getting around the fact that these are tough times forKatie Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katieprice>. Mere weeks before she and The 
Reidinator's wedding blessing, the gossip mags have whipped out their vuvuzelas 
of doom and started honking away. HONNNNNNNNNNNNK! She's been "shunned by a 
host of top wedding dress designers"! HONNNNâ€“NNNNNNNK! Her chosen venue is 
fully booked! HONNNNNNNNNNK! She's been reduced to searching out potential 
guests on Facebook! HONNNNNNNNNNNNK! "Jordan's limited list is in stark 
contrast to that of her wedding to Peter Andre," noted Now! magazine. "Then she 
did anything but scrape the barrel with guests including Vanessa Feltz."

Vanessa Feltz is a no-show? HONNNNNNNNNNNK!

It's a sad fate for a union heralded by perhaps the most gently affecting 
romantic gesture of modern times: a statement from her publicist reading, 
"Their decision to marry has not been made with any pre-conceived commercial 
plan or media deal in place." Alas, Pelion continues to be piled on to Ossa. 
The Reidinator's fellowCelebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> Big Brother contestant 
Basshunter is supposed to be performing, but responded, "I've heard nothing 
about it." Dane Bowers has been asked to DJ, but coolly answered, "It depends 
on whether I'm free."

In fairness, that remark may sound a bit "I find I'm watching TV that night" 
to an outside observer, but it comes as no surprise to anyone conversant with 
the diary on his website, packed with engagements too high-profile to 
reschedule: as any international superstar will tell you, you don't let the 
Kirkhouse Nightclub down if you ever want to work in Merthyr Tydfil again. Come 
on Jordan! You can't just cancel that 30-minute meet-and-greet at the NU Bar, 
Kidderminster! What are you trying to do? Provoke a potentially fatal riot 
among the notoriously rabid Dane Bowers fans of the West Midlands? Will you 
really enjoy that first dance knowing there's blood on your hands?

Who wants Basshunter at their wedding, anyway? Certainly no one who read his 
views on how Jordan's pop career might pan out: "While Alex is travelling 
around and kicking the shit out of people, she'll be singing." That's a vision 
of the future JG Ballard would have rejected as too unremittingly grim. You 
want some weirdo who dreams up stuff like that harshing your big day's mellow? 
And Vanessa Feltz may have given you the brush-off and ex-Sugababe Keisha 
Buchanan may have failed to respond to your Facebook pleas, but stick at it. 
Why not try some other ex-Sugababes? There are about 30,000 of them. You're 
bound to get a yes! Besides, there are probably loads of celebrities you 
haven't even tried yet. Lembit Opik! Barry Scott off the Cillit Bang adverts! 
Dean Torkington, Britain's Leading Tribute to Meat Loaf and the Songs of Jim 
Steinman!

And look who's already agreed to be present: Michelle Heaton! Did you see Heat 
magazine's recent feature on her hen night? What did those photos of her being 
entertained by a stripping dwarf say to you? That's right: this is a woman who 
adds a touch of class to any nuptial event. Heaton in the mix with Opik, Scott 
and Dean Torkington, Britain's Leading Tribute to Meat Loaf and the Songs of 
Jim Steinman? That's what I call a night to remember!

But help may be at hand, in the shape of "event guru" Yvonne Dixon, whose 
resolutely outside-the-box views on how the big day should progress were 
solicited by OK! magazine, as part of their ongoing series of features in which 
they simply make up things they'd like to happen (see also: Kerry Katona's 
romance with Peter Andre, Kate Middleton to represent Norway in Eurovision 
etc). "Katie would arrive on a white horse and the flower girl, Princess, would 
follow on a white shetland pony with a Swarovski crystal horse blanket. Katie's 
bridesmaids would follow on white ponies. Alex would have his torso out." Lost 
in Showbiz reaches for the smelling salts at the almost inhuman beauty of this 
image and asks: what blushing bride wouldn't want their big day to resemble the 
Horse of the Year show organised by Danny La Rue?
 