
The film Dirty Wars, which premiered at Sundance, can be viewed, as Amy 
Goodman sees it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/28/dirty-wars-jeremy-scahill-zero-dark-thirty>
, as an important narrative of excesses in the global "war on terror". It is 
also a record of something scary for those of us at home – and uncovers the 
biggest story, I would say, in our nation's contemporary history.

Though they wisely refrain from drawing inferences, Scahill and Rowley have 
uncovered the facts of a new unaccountable power in America and the world that 
has the potential to shape domestic and international events in an 
unprecedented way. The film tracks the Joint Special Operations Command (JSoc), 
anetwork of highly-trained, completely unaccountable US assassins 
<http://www.socom.mil/pages/jointspecialoperationscommand.aspx>, armed with 
ever-expanding "kill lists". It was JSoc that ran the operation behind theNavy 
Seal team six that killed bin Laden 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/osama-bin-laden-dead-navy-seal-team-responsible/story?id=13509739>
.

Scahill and Rowley track this new model of US warfare that strikes at 
civilians and insurgents alike – in 70 countries. They interview former JSoc 
assassins, who are shell-shocked at how the "kill lists" they are given keep 
expanding, even as they eliminate more and more people.

Our conventional forces are subject to international laws of war: they are 
accountable for crimes in courts martial; and they run according to a clear 
chain of command. As much as theUS military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> may fall short of these 
standards at times, it is a model of lawfulness compared with JSoc, which has 
far greater scope to undertake the commission of extra-legal operations – and 
unimaginable crimes.

JSoc morphs the secretive, unaccountable mercenary model of private military 
contracting, which Scahill identified inBlackwater: The Rise of the World's 
Most Powerful Mercenary Army 
<http://www.amazon.com/Blackwater-Powerful-Mercenary-Revised-Updated/dp/B001IWO884>
, into a hybrid with the firepower and intelligence backup of our full state 
resources.The Hill reports that JSoc is now seeking 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/defcon-hill/army/219549-joint-special-operations-command-gets-new-commander>
 more "flexibility" to expand its operations globally.

JSoc operates outside the traditional chain of command; it reports directly to 
the president of the United States.In the words of Wired magazine 
<http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2012/02/JSoc-ambinder/>:

"JSoc operates with practically no accountability."

Scahill calls JSoc the president's "paramilitary". Its budget, which may be in 
the billions, is secret.

What does it means for the president to have an unaccountable paramilitary 
force, which can assassinate anyone anywhere in the world? JSoc has already 
been sent to kill at least one US citizen – one who had been indicted for no 
crime, but was condemned for propagandizing for al-Qaida.Anwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>, on JSoc's "kill list" 
since 2010, was killed by CIA-controlled drone attack in September 2011; his 
teenage son, Abdulrahman al-Awlaki – also a US citizen – was killed by a US 
drone two weeks later.

This arrangement – where death squads roam under the sole control of the 
executive – is one definition of dictatorship. It now has the potential to 
threaten critics of the US anywhere in the world.

The film reveals some of these dangers: Scahill, writing in the Nation, 
reported 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/166757/why-president-obama-keeping-journalist-prison-yemen>
 that President Obama called Yemen's President Saleh in 2011 to express 
"concern" about jailed reporter Abdulelah Haider Shaye. US spokespeople have 
confirmed the US interest in keeping him in prison.

Shaye, a Yemeni journalist based in Sana'a, had a reputation for independent 
journalism through his neutral interviewing of al-Qaida operatives, and of 
critics of US policy such as Anwar al-Awlaki. Journalist colleagues inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> dismiss the notion of any terrorist 
affiliation: Shaye had worked for the Washington Post, ABC news, al-Jazeera, 
and other major media outlets.

Shaye went to al-Majala in Yemen, where a missile strike had killed a group 
that the US had called "al-Qaida". "What he discovered,"reports Scahill 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/166757/why-president-obama-keeping-journalist-prison-yemen#>
, "were the remnants of Tomahawk cruise missiles and cluster bombs … some of 
them bearing the label 'Made in the USA', and distributed the photos to 
international media outlets."

Fourteen women and 21 children were killed. "Whether anyone actually active in 
al-Qaida was killed remains hotly contested." Shortly afterwards, Shaye was 
kidnapped and beaten by Yemeni security forces. In a trial that was criticized 
internationally by reporters' groups and human rights organizations, he was 
accused of terrorism. Shaye is currently serving a five-year sentence.

Scahill and Rowley got to the bars of Shaye's cell to interview him, before 
the camera goes dark (in almost every scene, they put their lives at risk). 
This might alsobring to mind the fates of Sami al-Haj of al-Jazeera 
<http://www.andyworthington.co.uk/2008/04/13/sami-al-haj-the-banned-torture-pictures-of-a-journalist-in-guantanamo/>
, also kidnapped, and sent to Guantánamo, and of Julian Assange, trapped in 
asylum in Ecuador's London embassy.

President Obama thus helped put a respected reporter in prison for reporting 
critically on JSoc's activities. The most disturbing issue of all, however, is 
the documentation of the "secret laws" now facilitating these abuses of 
American power: Scahill succeeds in getting Senator Ron Wyden, who sits on the 
Senate intelligence committee, to confirm the fact that there aresecret legal 
opinions governing the use of drones in targeted assassinations 
<http://www.wyden.senate.gov/news/press-releases/wyden-letter-to-cia-director-nominee-brennan-seeks-legal-opinions-on-killing-of-americans>
 that, he says, Americans would be "very surprised" to know about. This is not 
the first time Wyden has issued this warning.

In 2011, Wyden sought an amendment to the USA Patriot Act 
<http://www.wyden.senate.gov/news/press-releases/amendment-requires-government-to-end-practice-of-secretly-interpreting-law>
 titled requiring the US government "to end practice of secretly interpreting 
law".Wyden warns that there is now a system of law 
<http://www.wyden.senate.gov/news/press-releases/wyden-begins-effort-to-amend-patriot-act>
 beneath or behind the law that we can see and debate:

"It is impossible for Congress to hold an informed public debate on the 
Patriot Act when there is a significant gap between what most Americans believe 
the law says and what the government is using the law to do. In fact, I believe 
many members of Congress who have voted on this issue would be stunned to know 
how the Patriot Act is being interpreted and applied.

"Even secret operations need to be conducted within the bounds of established, 
publicly understood law. Any time there is a gap between what the public thinks 
the law says and what the government secretly thinks the law says, I believe 
you have a serious problem."

I have often wondered, since I first wrote about America's slide toward fascism
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/24/usa.comment>, what was driving 
it. I saw the symptoms but not the cause. Scahill's and Rowley's brave, 
transformational film reveals the prime movers at work. The US executive now 
has a network of secret laws, secret budgets, secret kill lists, and a 
well-funded, globally deployed army of secret teams of assassins. That is 
precisely the driving force working behind what we can see. Is fascism really 
too strong a word to describe it?

• This article originally referred to Scahill and Rowley's documentary as 
Secret Wars; this was amended to Dirty Wars at 5.20pm ET on 3 February. The 
phrase "US kill list" in the subhead was also amended to "kill list" in order 
to remove possible ambiguity
 