
Still with one eye on this month's Academy Awards, Oscar-nominated Jude Law 
<http://www.filmunlimited.co.uk/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,42320,00.html> is in 
negotiations with both Warner Brothers and DreamWorks to take a starring role 
in Steven Spielberg's AI.

The project was long the property of the late Stanley Kubrick who acquired the 
rights to the source story by Brian Aldis in 1982 and hoped to direct it 
immediately after finishing what was to be his film swansong,Eyes Wide Shut 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0120663>. Set in the future, AI (Artificial 
Intelligence) tells the story of a childless woman who adopts an android in a 
world submerged beneath the melting polar ice-caps.

Having deliberated for months over his next choice of project, Spielberg now 
looks to be moving at a startling speed. The news that he was to directAI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ai> was only announced on Tuesday and already 
the casting is well under way. The picture begins production on July 10 and 
will be released in the summer of 2001.

Reports over the past weeks have linked the director, variously, with both the 
conspiracy thriller Minority Report, Memoirs of Geisha and an adaptation of JK 
Rowling's Harry Potter stories. Spielberg dropped out of the Potter project due 
to rumoured "creative differences" with Rowling, who objected to the director's 
determination to castHaley Joel Osment 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Osment,+Haley+Joel> (the child star of The Sixth 
Sense) in the lead role. Significantly, he is now reported to have secured 
Osment to star as the boy android in AI.

For Jude, AI will be his third futuristic thriller in as many years. The actor 
starred alongside Ethan Hawke and Uma Thurman in the genetic saga Gattaca and 
last year impressed audiences as a bewildered computer-gamer in David 
Cronenberg's virtual-reality escapade Existenz. Law is nominated as Best 
Supporting Actor for his role as the pampered Dickie Greenleaf in The Talented 
Mr. Ripley but now has a gap in his schedule after pulling out of a remake of 
the tally-ho British war movie The Four Feathers. The Spielberg production 
promises to be the 25 year-old's most high-profile picture to date.
 