
Classically trained, willowy Adelaide-born dancer Julie Shanahan loved her 
art, and had completed her ballet exams at 17. But for several years she had 
been aware she didn’t fit the ballet mould: she was too tall.

Everything happens in Adelaide in March – our picks of the festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/23/everything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival>
Back then she was also, she says, too young, scared and naïve to heed her 
teachers’ urgings to move to Europe to further her career. “I would have ended 
up a mess,” she says today.

But at age 19, during the Adelaide festival of March 1982 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/about/history/1982_adelaide_festival>, 
Shanahan saw a glimpse of her future, when Europe came to her.

There was a buzz about an influential German choreographer, Pina Bausch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/pinabausch>, bringing her performers from 
Wuppertal, an industrial city in western Germany, to Australia for the first 
time to stage a trilogy of shows, innovatively fusing dance and theatre.

Shanahan had been performing at Adelaide Fringe 
<http://fringevault.com.au/mini_sites/event/1982?eid=5438> that season as a 
member of Sydney-based postmodern dance groupOne Extra Dance Theatre 
<http://trove.nla.gov.au/people/726053?c=people>.

Shanahan and her local dance pals sat among the audience on the rough seats in 
the art deco theatre of Thebarton town hall, as it was still widely known, in 
Adelaide’s west, to watch Tanztheater Wuppertal’s initial show, Kontakthof, 
roughly translated as “court of contact”.

Bausch’s performers attempted to seduce each other with snatches of words and 
fumbling and groping, sometimes yielding to one another. The male dancers wore 
suits and the women tight dresses. The production was oh-so-European for an
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> girl still in 
the early days of her art education.

Shanahan then saw the other Bausch shows, Bluebeard and 1980, and quickly had 
the sense she knew, intimately, the Wuppertal performers – though she was a 
mere audience member. “I was totally mesmerised,” recalls Shanahan, 53, on the 
line from Wuppertal, her adopted home of almost 28 years now. “It was 
completely clear to me that’s what I wanted to do.”

Today, Shanahan is preparing to return to Adelaide festival, now as a member 
of Tanztheater Wuppertal of almost three decades, to perform a Bausch piece 
calledNelken (Carnations) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hLBLsYYJjM4>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhLBLsYYJjM4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhLBLsYYJjM4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhLBLsYYJjM4&media=>
The group, including Shanahan, has made only one other journey to Australia 
since 1982, for Sydney’s Olympic Arts festival in 2000, performing Bausch’s
Masurca Fogo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJFOp-D8fQ0>.

The James Plays Trilogy review – high-stakes historical soap proves addictive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/01/the-james-plays-trilogy-review-high-stakes-historical-soap-proves-addictive>
One of Shanahan’s own latter-day performances in Kontakthof 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L1rNuzYsWlc>, which had premiered on stage in 
Wuppertal, in 1978, is captured on film by directorWim Wenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/mar/04/wim-wenders-retrospective-five-to-watch-one-to-miss>
 in his sublime dance biopic, Pina, released in 2011.

What remains striking in the film, originally released in 3D, is the age 
variance of the performers: some have been with the troupe more than30 years, 
dancing through the aches of ageing, passing on their knowledge to new 
performers who join the company.

The pathos of the human condition is often attained in the contrasting 
generations. But Wenders’ film became a posthumous tribute: Bausch died 
unexpectedly of lung cancer in 2009, at age 68, leaving a question over the 
future of the company.

“I ask myself about my future every day,” says Shanahan, who is married to 
fellow Tanztheater Wuppertal performerRainer Behr 
<http://www.pina-bausch.de/tanztheater/ensemble/behr.php>, with whom she has 
two children, aged 14 and 8. PerformerLütz Forster <https://vimeo.com/77543843> 
is now the company’s artistic director.

“It hasn’t been an easy time since Pina left, and many of us question, ‘Where 
is my place?’, because in a way your place was pulled from underneath you, very 
suddenly – you knew what your relationship was with Pina. But when you see the 
pieces and the audience response, it’s definitely worth continuing.”

Shanahan’s road to Wuppertal, east of Düsseldorf, was circuitous. In 1984, 
after two more years performing in Australia, she had saved enough to travel to 
Europe with her then boyfriend, who had a friend in a dance theatre company in 
Bremen, a port city in north Germany.

Shanahan auditioned for the Tanztheater Bremen’s artistic director, Reinhild 
Hoffmann, who, like Bausch, was considered an innovator.

“She took me into the company, and it was really strange: she spoke to me 
afterwards mostly about Pina.” Hoffmann asked whether Shanahan was sure she 
didn’t want to audition for Bausch. Shanahan assured her she wouldn’t.

But in 1986, Hoffmann’s ensemble moved to Bochum, near Wuppertal. In 1988, 
Shanahan quietly auditioned for Bausch, without telling Hoffman. “I felt a 
total connection with Pina straight away,” says Shanahan, auditioning among 200 
hopefuls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjulie-shanahan-on-dancing-in-her-50s-and-life-beyond-pina-bausch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8014ca4067a448558ded475f9e149bdd6b8d1903%2F0_145_2268_2838%2F2268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julie%20Shanahan%20on%20dancing%20in%20her%2050s%20and%20life%20beyond%20Pina%20Bausch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjulie-shanahan-on-dancing-in-her-50s-and-life-beyond-pina-bausch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julie%20Shanahan%20on%20dancing%20in%20her%2050s%20and%20life%20beyond%20Pina%20Bausch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fjulie-shanahan-on-dancing-in-her-50s-and-life-beyond-pina-bausch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8014ca4067a448558ded475f9e149bdd6b8d1903%2F0_145_2268_2838%2F2268.jpg>
 Julie Shanahan with the Tanztheater Wuppertal Pina Bausch perform Sweet Mambo 
at the Edinburgh Playhouse theatre in 2014. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
“I looked up and took a glimpse of her eyes, and she looked at me. I thought, 
‘Yeah, this is the right place for me’.” Hoffmann was “sad” at losing Shanahan, 
but wished her the best.

Bausch, who smoked cigarettes profusely, had few words when directing dancers, 
but “sometimes one word meant a huge amount”. Bausch would convey the state of 
being she was looking for with “micro” gestures, says Shanahan.

In Nelken, which premiered in Wuppertal in 1982, Shanahan sits on the 
shoulders of another performer, hidden under a red dress, and barks commands at 
the dancers.

Audiences are encouraged to empathise with the vulnerability of the 
performers, corralled by Bausch’s notion of “emotional fluidity”, says 
Shanahan. All of the troupe’s shows move through pathos, darkness, droll humour 
and absurdity, all written on the faces and gestures of the performers.

“Pina believed every performer was of the same importance,” says Shanahan. “I 
love that. There’s no ‘star quality’ or ‘I’ve got the lead part, so out the 
way’.”

Where once attending dance classes was enough exercise Shanahan, now in her 
50s, needs swimming and sports training to endure the physical demands.

“In Nelken I’ve taken myself out of some physically hard things. I would 
prefer to take myself out before it’s too late, so I can prolong my time on 
stage. There are certain pieces where I’m very physically involved, and certain 
pieces I’ve gone out of, so I can give myself a break, and also I can spend 
more time as a mother.”

Meanwhile, the troupe has begun producing new works, as well as re-presenting 
the classic works from Bausch’s lifetime. There is renewal and, although it 
won’t be easy, life beyond Pina.

 * Nelken (Carnations) <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2016/dance/Nelken> 
is at Festival theatre, Adelaide Festival Centre, 9-12 March
 