
Julie Bishop has declined to say whether Australia’s new intelligence-sharing 
agreement with Iran will increase the risk of harm for Australian citizens 
fighting forIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> (Isis) in 
Iraq.

The foreign affairs minister dead-batted a question posed by the ABC about 
whether activating Iranian intelligence could lead to Shia militias capturing 
or killing Australian citizens.

“I’m not going to go into those kind of details. I mean that’s obviously a 
matter of deep intelligence operational issues,” Bishop said on Monday.

Australia and Iran have agreed to share intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/20/australia-and-iran-agree-to-sharing-of-intelligence-in-battle-against-isis-in-iraq>
 on Australians fighting with extremist groups in Iraq. Bishop has been in 
Tehran for the first high-level talks between the countries in more than a 
decade.

Australia and Iran agree to sharing of intelligence in battle against Isis in 
Iraq
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/20/australia-and-iran-agree-to-sharing-of-intelligence-in-battle-against-isis-in-iraq>
She has described the new arrangement as “informal”. She said it benefited 
Australia because Iranian forces had a strong presence on the ground, and 
maintained “a very sophisticated intelligence network, and there’s a lot of 
information they have been gathering”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fjulie-bishop-javad-zarif-iran-talks-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F20%2F1429500654421%2FAustralian-Foreign-Minist-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julie%20Bishop%20holds%20a%20press%20conference%20with%20Iran's%20foreign%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fjulie-bishop-javad-zarif-iran-talks-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julie%20Bishop%20holds%20a%20press%20conference%20with%20Iran%27s%20foreign%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fapr%2F20%2Fjulie-bishop-javad-zarif-iran-talks-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F20%2F1429500654421%2FAustralian-Foreign-Minist-001.jpg>
 Julie Bishop relays the weekend discussionsbetween Iran and Australia on 
Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/apr/20/julie-bishop-javad-zarif-iran-talks-video>
Bishop said Australia and Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> had a 
common objective “to defeat Daesh [Isis]”. She again warned Australians to stay 
clear of the conflict. “Australians will be killed if they go to Iraq and Syria 
by Daesh,” she said.

Labor has supported Australia’s military engagement in Iraq, and  the passage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/29/foreign-fighter-measures-approved-as-senate-passes-counter-terrorism-bill>
 of counter-terrorism laws which aim to make it easier to prosecute returning 
jihadist fighters.

But the Labor leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, reacted cautiously 
to news of the intelligence sharing agreement with Tehran.

“We need to not be naive when we deal with Iran,” Shorten told reporters on 
Monday.

He said the west and Iran had a common interest in containing Isis. But that 
did not mean Australia should “lower its guard or be any less vigilant”.

Shorten said the government had not yet briefed the opposition about the 
agreement. He said if the government could demonstrate a benefit to the 
Australian defence force mission in Iraq “then we obviously have to look at it 
– but we will be pragmatic and we won’t be naive”.

“If there is a beneficial relationship in one part of our relationship with 
Iran, that doesn’t automatically mean that everything else has changed,” 
Shorten said.

A former intelligence analyst turned independent MP, Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, denounced the 
agreement as “complete and utter folly”.

He warned that Australia would be used as a pawn by the Iranian regime, which 
he labelled one of the “most ruthless and untrustworthy in the world”, to 
gather information on its opponents.

“They will feed us bucketloads of crap [information],” Wilkie said. “They’re 
going to be using us to get to their enemies.” Wilkie said Australia was 
“dancing with the devil” by concluding an agreement with a country that used 
torture to obtain information.

The chief executive of the Australia/Israel and Jewish Affairs Council, Colin 
Rubenstein, also warned the Abbott government to tread very carefully.

Rubenstein said the intelligence-sharing arrangement was “problematic” and 
would make other countries in the region nervous.

“Iran is still a completely unreformed, highly aggressive regime. Which makes 
all of its neighbours in the Arab Sunni world in particular, as well as, 
obviously, Israel, very apprehensive about their expansionism and their 
aggression in the broader region,” he told ABC TV.

“The idea of broader intelligence sharing with Iran, I think would be a 
surprise to our western allied colleagues with whom we share intelligence in a 
five-power agreement. I can understand the motivation but I think there are a 
lot of serious pitfalls along the way here for us to consider.”
 