
Juno Temple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/12/first-sight-juno-temple> sits 
down in a Los Angeles coffee shop, a bundle of energy in a comfy tracksuit, 
headphones around her neck and waves of blond hair piled on her head like a 
pineapple. She orders an almond milk latte, and apologises in advance for any 
strange scratching that may occur, because she was bitten by mosquitoes during 
the night. “And there’s one bite on my back that is so bad, I had to scratch it 
with a fork to reach it. I was really getting myBaloo the bear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/04/disney-the-jungle-book> on.” A 
fork? “Well, a plastic one – I wasn’t aiming for actual bloodshed. I once used 
a fork to comb my hair,” Temple says, “because there was a time when I didn’t 
own a hairbrush. I can’t remember what film I was shooting, but I was staying 
in a hotel in London – and the fork worked! I felt like Ariel,” she adds, 
wistfully, meaningthe Disney mermaid <http://princess.disney.co.uk/ariel>. 
“God,” she says, seeing my fascination at these cutlery improv situations, 
“you’re never going to let me live forks down, are you?”

It is hard not to warm to the girl. I say girl, but Juno Temple is 26 and has 
been earning her own money since she was a teenager living in Somerset: playing
Cate Blanchett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett>’s daughter in 
Notes On A Scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/feb/02/drama.periodandhistorical>, and 
Lola, the child who is raped byBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>’s character in 
Atonement <https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement> (and later marries him). 
Since then, she has lived in LA for seven years and acted in more films than 
seems possible, usually playing someone far younger than her real age. A 
boarding school girl (theSt Trinian’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122326/st.trinian.s> comedies), or a 
wild child with crazy hair (Linda Lovelace’s best friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/aug/22/lovelace-review>), or an 
English rose with dewy pink cheeks and bags of sexuality waiting to come out.

Bafta gave Temple its Rising Star award in 2013 
<http://www.bafta.org/film/awards/ee-rising-star-award-in-2013>, “which was so 
nice to get, because it was from England. I was like,” she does a lucky gasp, 
“oh, you still remember me! But I also think my little brother rigged it, by 
telling everyone at his school to vote for his sister. He’s a computer whiz-kid 
– he probably hacked in.”

Even so, Temple isn’t a household name, which might be about to change now 
that, as she puts it, “I’ve finally hit puberty on camera! I’m playing 22 
nowadays. Woo-hoo! I’ve left boarding school. Baby steps. Before, I’d go for 
these auditions with an older guy and they’d go, nope, this looks like actual 
paedophilia.”

Her new 22-year-old character is a woman called Jamie Vine, in the American 
drama seriesVinyl <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/vinyl>, set in the 
1970s music industry in an edgy and exciting New York. Temple plays the lone 
woman working in A&R at a record label, trying to get her talent recognised by 
the men, who prefer to use her to buy drugs and make coffee. You could call her
the Peggy Olson figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series>, except that she’s 
shagging, dealing cocaine and trying to invent punkin the first episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/15/vinyl-recap-episode-one-mick-jagger-martin-scorsese-culture-porn>
, so maybe not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F987282167e05134769d5a08ff95f52d470c9d686%2F0_295_4928_2963%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juno%20Temple%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juno%20Temple%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F987282167e05134769d5a08ff95f52d470c9d686%2F0_295_4928_2963%2F4928.jpg>
 With Mick Jagger’s son James in Vinyl. Photograph: Home Box Office Enterprises 
The show was dreamed up by Mick Jagger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mick-jagger> and produced by Martin Scorsese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>, with Jagger’s 30-year-old 
son James as a punk singer who gets tangled up with Jamie – so perhaps it’s no 
surprise that HBO committed to a second series mere days after the first one 
had begun, even ifthe critics were not totally convinced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/15/vinyl-jagger-scorcese>. 
Temple’s performance has been widely praised, though, and she seems absolutely 
in love with the whole thing.

Punk played a formative role in her own childhood. Her father is Julien Temple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/julien-temple>, the British film director who 
became friends with theSex Pistols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sexpistols> and made The Great Rock ’N’ Roll 
Swindle <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0080813/>, Absolute Beginners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/21/how-we-made-absolute-beginners-julien-temple-patsy-kensit>
,The Filth And The Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83549/filth.and.the.fury> and Earth 
Girls Are Easy <http://www.imdb.com/video/screenplay/vi3806790681>. He also had 
a long career making music videos for, among others,David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> (Jazzin’ For Blue Jean 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXvAaNcXNzI>) and the Rolling Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/therollingstones> (Undercover Of The Night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVJkfXeTs9Q>), which leads me to ask Juno if 
she knew Jagger as a child. She is a bit vague on this, wary of being accused 
of nepotism. “I don’tremember having hung out with Mick before. Maybe when I 
was like…” She gestures the height of a small child. “But my dad speaks so 
highly of him. Me and Jimmy Jagger had a lot of mutual friends back in London, 
but our paths had never crossed. We’ve become very good friends now, though. 
He’s like family.”

Nudity to me isn't a big deal. But I've been penalised for taking my clothes 
off

She stresses that she had to audition. “I did a tape and then, yeah, I had to 
go and read for Marty [Scorsese]. It was at the Beverly Hills hotel and it was 
very quick. His direction is so specific. Down to your body language while 
you’re sayingone word. It’s very rare that he’ll just say, ‘OK, let’s go 
again’, like someone else would. It was one of those moments when you’re just, 
like, whatever happens, wow – to be 24 years old and in a room reading for 
Scorsese. I’m all right with that, you know?”

Temple then got to work with him for six weeks on the two-hour pilot episode, 
before he handed over to a series of other directors. “That was a shift for me, 
coming from film. I wasn’t used to working with a different director every 
time. In TV, it’s so much more about the writers, because they’re the ones 
creating the universe. The writers are the ones who know what’s up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab50584acf363c19aa2f42e1d5a133a8993ff699%2F405_387_1593_954%2F1593.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juno%20Temple%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juno%20Temple%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab50584acf363c19aa2f42e1d5a133a8993ff699%2F405_387_1593_954%2F1593.jpg>
 With her father, the film director Julien Temple, in 2011. Photograph: Jeff 
Vespa/Getty Images 
When it came to research, she started with her father. “I picked my dad’s 
brains apart for this time period. Punk was truly a revolution – this thing 
that affected people’s cores, and these kids who were really pissed off with 
what was going on with the world. It gave them a chance to scream about it.” 
(Whether James Jagger took inspiration from his father is less clear; he has 
said he “took a little bit ofJack Ruby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/apr/25/thurston-moore-on-jack-ruby-the-forgotten-heroes-of-pre-punk>
, a little bit ofRichard Hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/nov/26/richard-hell-destiny-street-repaired>
. Maybe a little bit ofIggy Pop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/iggy-pop> – 
and then a lot of asshole.”)

Temple grew up listening to punk, still does – and, yes, she plays everything 
on vinyl. (As for new music, she lovesTame Impala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tame-impala>.) “The fact that my character 
is discovering the beginning of punk, it feels like,” she squeezes herself a 
bit, “Dad would be proud!”

Has he seen it? “I took him as my date to the premiere. I was nervous, because 
I was, like, ifhe doesn’t dig it… And he loved it. He was the perfect date.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67cfd647580a299c8949a5cf637f21f9f3e7b36a%2F1149_155_1666_1001%2F1666.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juno%20Temple%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juno%20Temple%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67cfd647580a299c8949a5cf637f21f9f3e7b36a%2F1149_155_1666_1001%2F1666.jpg>
 In Atonement, 2007. Photograph: Snap Stills/Rex/Shutterstock 
Her childhood sounds so dreamy that I don’t know whether to seethe with envy 
or frantically try to give my own children the same experience. She grew up in 
a 650-year-old house near Taunton, Somerset, with her two younger brothers; her 
mother,Amanda <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0854673/>, is a film producer. 
Rolling fields all around, ancient oak trees, a hedge that her father cut into 
a long upward slope so that Juno, who was obsessed withAlice In Wonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/20/lewis-carroll-alice-in-wonderland-adventures-150-years>
, could run along it and pretend she was getting smaller and smaller. She spent 
her childhood in fancy dress, was always very independent, and from the age of 
nine would go on holiday with her best friend in the summer: “We’d fly on our 
own and meet people there.” She went to King’s College, a nearby private 
school, as a weekly boarder, “but my parents were down the road”. Then she went 
to the notoriously bohemianBedales <http://www.bedales.org.uk> in Hampshire for 
sixth form (Cara Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne>, Lily Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lilyallen> and Sophie Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/may/24/sophie-dahl-cookbook-interview>
 are all alumni), “and I loved it. Loved it.” To be fair, she does seem to love 
absolutely everything.

***

How did her parents feel about her working as an actor, at an early age? “Aw, 
man, they were bummed when I first told them. They were like, ‘Ugh. Ohhhh. 
You’re gonna be told that you’re too short, that your tits aren’t big enough. 
You’re gonna constantly be told the things that are wrong with you.’ As a woman 
in today’s society, you’re already getting that from all quarters. I think they 
were also, like, ‘You can’t just step into this and be good. You will have to 
work and you will have to fight for it.’ My mum sent me to an open audition for 
Notes On A Scandal, so I could see quite how many other girls wanted to do 
this. And I queued up and I got the job. That was my first ever audition, and 
my second wasAtonement <https://www.theguardian.com/film/atonement>. My mum 
thought, ‘Fucking hell, well, surely it goes downhill after this?’”

It didn’t, even though, despite being blond and slim and pretty and white, 
Temple’s is not the cookie-cutter beauty Hollywood most likes. “Sometimes they 
might need that beautiful Malibu Barbie look, and that’s great, but sometimes 
they might need the quirky weirdo. And I feel, like, sometimes you get 
frustrated and you’re like… I would like to look more normal. If I audition for 
things, like playing a mousy secretary at the back of the room, I will 
straighten my hair, tie it up, no makeup and put glasses on. I think as an 
actor you have to embrace the fact that it’s not about looking good; it’s about 
zipping yourself into somebody else’s skin.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2c6760f4874a3fb1839146609f1a006cbff8e4%2F560_1216_2745_4274%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juno%20Temple%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juno%20Temple%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2c6760f4874a3fb1839146609f1a006cbff8e4%2F560_1216_2745_4274%2F2745.jpg>
 Blouse,self-portrait-studio.com <http://self-portrait-studio.com>. Jumpsuit, 
screamingmimis.com <http://screamingmimis.com>. Shoes, gucci.com 
<http://gucci.com>. Photograph: Amanda Friedman for the Guardian 
As for her big hair, “New York is much more embracing of it. They’ll be like, 
‘Woooaaah, that’s a great mane, man. Wow, lucky you!’ Whereas here in LA people 
are, like,” she puts on a deeply concerned voice, “‘Oh my God, whatis that?’”

Directors do seem to like taking her clothes off, though. One year she went to 
theSundance film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival> and afterwards someone 
complained that he had seen her in three films and she’d been naked in all of 
them. “I was like, actually, no: in one of them it’s only side boob.” She adds 
that, “when you sign up to a film, you sign up to everything that’s in the 
script. I really believe in that. So don’t pansy out on the day. Don’t be 
half-arsed about it. Nudity to me isn’t that big a deal. I think if it’s 
necessary, it’s necessary. There are moments where it’s distracting and not 
needed, and I’ve fought my corner and said no, you don’t need to see my tits 
right then.”

Really? “Absolutely. Well, OK, in the Vinyl pilot, there you go, that’s my 
butt and there’s my boobs. The fact that we were naked in that scene to me made 
it more palpable, more raw. But I also think I’ve been penalised for taking my 
clothes off too much, for sure.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fvinyl-people-v-oj-simpson-trapped-tv-review-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F22%2F1456165059170%2FKP_1807477_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vinyl%2C%20%20The%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%20and%20Trapped%3A%20TV%20Review%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fvinyl-people-v-oj-simpson-trapped-tv-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vinyl%2C%20%20The%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%20and%20Trapped%3A%20TV%20Review%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fvinyl-people-v-oj-simpson-trapped-tv-review-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F22%2F1456165059170%2FKP_1807477_crop_640x360.jpg>
Vinyl, The People v OJ Simpson and Trapped: TV Review – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/feb/23/vinyl-people-v-oj-simpson-trapped-tv-review-video>
Meanwhile, she is excited about what she sees as a female revolution in 
Hollywood. “You’ve got theAmy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer>s, she’s so brilliant. Also, 
how cool that most ofthe Oscars nominees 
<http://oscar.go.com/nominees/actress-in-a-leading-role> this year were women 
under 28: women who are intelligent, really beautiful, really brilliant, and 
really real. I cannot wait forthis thing that Amy Schumer is writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/jennifer-lawrence-mess-new-comedy-amy-schumer>
 withJennifer Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence>. 
She didThe Hunger Games <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-hunger-games> in 
such a way that, to me, she felt like a heroine. Not a Hollywood version of a 
heroine.”

Then there are writer-directors such as Jill Soloway 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0813561/>, who cast Temple in Afternoon Delight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/157789/afternoon-delight> and went on 
to make the award-winning TV showTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/transparent-episode-by-episode>
. “Jill truly has set a bar for what it is to be a woman and, I’m just going to 
say this, discover your vagina. Own your ovaries. And, like, be a fucking 
woman. The fact that her writers’ room is full of transgender people, it’s 
like, Jesus Christ, she’s the real deal. When we were doing Afternoon Delight, 
she’d get so involved with some of the scenes we were shooting, she’d be in 
tears.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29edc5b9b221367cdb1df5fbbecd241317cf0714%2F0_154_3880_2330%2F3880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juno%20Temple%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juno%20Temple%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29edc5b9b221367cdb1df5fbbecd241317cf0714%2F0_154_3880_2330%2F3880.jpg>
 In St Trinian’s in 2007. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
I ask about a poker room scene in that film, in which Temple tries to seduce a 
room full of fathers, whose children she also plays with, whose wives she 
knows. It is both very erotic and very uncomfortable. “Jill does great things 
where she comes and whispers little secrets to you, so then you have a new 
motivation. But you don’t know what everybody else’s is.”

She has lived in Los Angeles for seven years now, all without a driving 
licence, walking everywhere, “which makes people think I’m crazy,” she says. 
Her house is a cute bungalow in Los Feliz, which her friends call the Doll 
House because “it’s very sweet, very girly inside, overflowing with vintage 
clothes and records, and on the outside it looks like I’m in deep Louisiana. 
I’ve got a great little jungle going on and all my friends come and have a 
drink on my porch, on the corner of the street.”

She recently separated from her long-term boyfriend, actor Michael Angarano 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0029400/>, hence having to scratch her own back. It 
sounds quite nice being single, though. She lovesAgent Provocateur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2011/nov/27/agent-provocateur-eva-wiseman-lingerie>
 underwear so much that she wears it “mostly on my own at home. It’s my 
heaven.” Years ago, she lived in a tiny flat next to their shop in London. 
“Living in Soho was bonkers. It was nuts. The apartment was probably the size 
of these two booths,” she says, gesturing around the coffee shop. “I lived with 
my best girlfriend and we shared a bed. She had a boyfriend, so when he stayed, 
I was on the couch, with a net curtain between us. It was my first little home. 
My friends came and stopped by. I was the go-to, and I had a constant bowl of 
Haribo on the table.”

For some reason I thought she was going to say cocaine. “No! I was dealing 
sour cherries and milk bottles. Soho has changed so much now. Oh, man. London 
is a grey city: grey sky, grey buildings, grey coats. The idea of living in the 
countryside in England is so much more of a turn-on to me, with that mad, 
blood-red soil when it rains.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dafc48750a3cb2966199d84b9e3c58db32fe8a2%2F0_828_3761_4814%2F3761.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juno%20Temple%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juno%20Temple%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20finally%20hit%20puberty%20on%20camera.%20Woo-hoo%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjuno-temple-finally-hit-puberty-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dafc48750a3cb2966199d84b9e3c58db32fe8a2%2F0_828_3761_4814%2F3761.jpg>
 Tiara, suede jacket, camouflage jacket, allysl.com <http://ysl.com/>. 
Photograph: Amanda Friedman for the Guardian 
But she isn’t planning on moving back, unless Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> wins. She might swap LA for 
New York, though, where Vinyl is made: she fell in love with the Lower East 
Side while researching her role. “I’ve been in LA for seven years, and everyone 
says that’s a good time to finish a cycle.” At the grand old age of 26, Temple 
says it might be “time for a fresh start”.

But now she has to leave, because someone is coming to collect the diamond 
ring she borrowed forthe Vanity Fair Oscars party 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/oscars>. “I asked if I could keep it and 
they said, sure, it will cost you $7,000. I’m so glad I did not know that when 
I was dancing around with it on. I danced so hard, I got blisters. You know 
those big, juicy blisters where you have to…” Get the fork out? “Exactly. You 
have to go in.”


• Main picture: tunic, shirt and knit, all miumiu.com <http://miumiu.com>. 
Stylist: Priscilla Kwateng. Photographer’s assistants: Fabio Doninni and Ashley 
Poole. Hair: Ashley Streicher at Forward Artists. Makeup: Lauren Anderson.


• Vinyl <http://www.hbo.com/vinyl> is on Sky Atlantic at 9pm on Mondays.

This article was amended on 18 March 2016. An earlier version stated that 
James Jagger played the lead in Vinyl. He plays a lead singer in a punk band.
 