
George Stubbs painted animals in an age of insatiable curiosity, where the 
thirst for knowledge sent mariners like Captain Cook to the furthest corners of 
an ever-expanding world. Officers of the East India Company explored the 
highest mountains and deepest jungles, while in Bath, William and Caroline 
Herschel swept the sky for comets and in London anatomists John and William 
Hunter carried out their shady but life-saving investigations of stolen 
cadavers and pickled salamanders. A public appetite for the novel and 
instructive generated a healthy market in images of all genres, travelling 
shows, books, scientific lectures, exotic specimens and every kind of marvel.

When the Governor of Quebec returned to London in 1770 with a captive moose 
calf, he presented it to the Duke of Richmond. To the Third Duke of Richmond, a 
graduate of Leiden University, this strange creature (something between a deer 
and a horse) was not so much a status symbol for a nobleman’s menagerie as a 
specimen for scientific study.

It was Dr William Hunter who commissioned Stubbs to make this painting: he 
intended to use it to illustrate a lecture to the Royal Society. Hunter was 
fascinated by this curious quadruped. As well as having potential value for 
domestication and breeding, he hoped it would yield clues to the relationships 
and origin of species.

Stubbs and the Wild review – a radical world vision seen through animal eyes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/23/stubbs-and-the-wild-review-radical-world-vision-through-animal-eyes>
Natural historians like Hunter, engaged in the systematic study of the living 
world, needed competent draughtsmen to record their findings. With his 
background as both professional anatomist and portrait painter, Stubbs depicted 
his subjects with a unique combination of conscientious observation and 
sympathetic affection, drawing directly from nature with meticulous accuracy 
while adapting traditional artistic language to transform a scientific diagram 
into a vision of the sublime.

In this painting, the artist has set the motherless and uprooted animal in a 
realistic, stormy wilderness, hemmed between a shining lake and the sloping 
trunk of a venerable tree, to create a drama that emphasises the vulnerability 
in the awkward creature’s eyes.

So much art has been made for information, instruction and enquiry. What can 
art teach us today? What knowledge have you gained through the close 
observation involved in drawing, or from just looking at art?

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

• Stubbs and the Wild is at the Holburne Museum, Bath 
<http://www.holburne.org/events/stubbs-and-the-wild/> until 2 October 2016



 