
Elizabeth director Shekhar Kapur is to direct one of Anthony Minghella's final 
projects, a segment of a celluloid ode to New York.

The Cold Mountain director asked Kapur to replace him days before he went into 
surgery for cancer of the neck and tonsils. He died from complications 
following the operation, which took place earlier this month. He had written, 
but not yet cast, his section of the feature, which was due to begin filming in 
Manhattan in April.

"Two days [before the operation] Anthony called me to see if I would direct a 
short he had written as part of a film called New York - I Love You, where a 
bunch of directors make short love stories based in NY," Kapur explainson his 
blog <http://www.shekharkapur.com/blog/archives/2008/03/my_last_convers.htm>. 
"Anthony was supposed to direct it himself but given his sudden illness could 
not do so. He told me his film was about the value of life, and how people 
sometimes just throw away their lives unable to look beyond into the real 
beauty of it."

New York, I Love You follows in the vein of Paris, Je T'aime, a 2006 ode to 
the French capital directed by, among others, the Coen Brothers, Wes Craven and 
GÃ©rard Depardieu. It will feature contributions from Monsoon Wedding's Mira 
Nair, Berlin Golden Bear winner Fatih Akin and Scarlett Johansson in her 
directorial debut. Kapur's segment will be set in New York's Upper East Side 
area. Anthony Minghella's actor son, Max, was supposed to star in the feature 
but withdrew from the project several weeks ago.

Kapur said Minghella chose him because they used to have "long conversations 
about the nature of spirituality, life and death". The film-maker added: "He 
recalled those conversations - saying that it was those conversations too that 
lead him to believe that I should be the one to direct this short film. I will 
direct the film now - with Anthony in my heart and in presence of his soul."

New York, I Love You was one of several projects Minghella had on his plate. 
It is as yet unclear whether his other planned movies, including the 
psychological thriller The Ninth Life of Louis Drax, will be filmed by another 
director. Kapur's work was most recently on our screens in the shape of 
Elizabeth: the Golden Age, the sequel to his hit 1998 historical epic 
Elizabeth, about the English queen's early years.
 