
Katherine Garrett-Cox is to step down from the board of Alliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>, one of the UK’s oldest 
investment firms, but continue as the chief executive of its fund management 
arm after a long battle with an activist investor.

The Dundee-based investment trust said that after consulting shareholders, it 
had decided to simplify its structure and make the main board fully 
independent, staffed solely with non-executive directors. Garrett-Cox,one of 
the City’s most high profile women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/12/garrett-cox-help-mothers-return-work-veuve-clicquot-award>
, will run Alliance Trust Investments (ATI), with separate boards created for 
ATI and Alliance Trust Savings.

 Garrett-Cox, paid £1.34m last year, has been under mounting pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/apr/28/alliance-trust-takes-least-embarrassing-option-over-board-appointments>
 from shareholders over the trust’s underperformance. The US hedge fund Elliott 
Advisors, the wealth manager’s largest shareholder,has been pushing for change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/28/alliance-trust-strikes-a-deal-with-elliott-advisors>
 at the company, which spent £3m on its defence. Alliance Trust agreed to 
revamp its board in late April by appointing two of the three directors put 
forward by the hedge fund.

Karin Forseke, the 127-year-old company’s chair, said: “In the runup to our 
annual meeting, many of our shareholders indicated that they sought change. The 
actions announced today, taken together, represent some of the biggest changes 
in our history and are designed to further improve shareholder value.”

The trust’s chief financial officer, Alan Trotter, is also leaving the firm 
“to seek to continue his career in a publicly listed company elsewhere”. 
Alliance Trust said it intended to focus on global equities and sell non-core 
investments, while reducing costs by £6m a year.

The Alliance Trust Shareholder Action Group welcomed the changes, in 
particular Garrett-Cox’s demotion from the main board, as “the company seemed 
to be being run more in the interests of management than investors”. The action 
group waslaunched in May by ShareSoc 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/05/12/uk-alliancetrust-sharesoc-idUKKBN0NX23620150512>
, which represents individual investors in the UK.

“Having a wholly non-executive board is generally preferable for investment 
trusts. The prospective appointment of a new CFO is also welcomed as it 
appeared to us that this position needed strengthening.”


But the group added: “It is not clear that these changes will quickly make the 
trust more attractive to investors, or ensure that Elliott Advisors do not come 
back with more demands for changes in the future.”

 