
Keaton Jennings will make his England debut in the fourth Test against India 
that begins on Thursday, a match that could see Jake Ball recalled to the side 
amid lingering doubts over the fitness of Stuart Broad.

Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook>, who in 
Jennings will have his 11th opening partner since the retirement of Andrew 
Strauss in 2012, rated Broad’s chances of a return following a foot tendon 
injury as 50-50 but the bowler was scarcely involved in training on Wednesday.

While fast bowlers often rest up the day before a Test, Broad was looking to 
prove his fitness after missingthe defeat in Mohali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/india-england-third-test-day-four-match-report-cricket>
. He was expected to replace the off-spinner Gareth Batty and England could 
turn to Broad’s Nottinghamshire team-mate Ball, who made his debut last summer, 
ahead of fellow reserve seamer Steven Finn.

MCC recommends sendings off be introduced into laws of cricket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/07/mcc-recommend-red-cards-sending-off-laws-of-cricket>
A further option for Cook and Trevor Bayliss is the uncapped left-armer Liam 
Dawson, who is also on standby for a possible Test debut should England opt to 
take three spinners into the match on a Mumbai pitch expected to turn.

The 24-year-old Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/06/keaton-jennings-england-india-test-mumbai>
 has replaced Haseeb Hameed in the lineup, after the teenager suffered a broken 
finger in Mohali that leaves England 2-0 down in the series with two Tests to 
play. He comes into the side after a breakthrough county season for Durham and 
with a hundred to his name when captaining the Lions against the United Arab 
Emirates in Dubai last week.

“Keaton will make his debut. It’s a great opportunity for the guy,” Cook said. 
“He’s in good touch and he’s spent time in the middle for the Lions, and it 
will be a special day for him. It’s similar to what happened to me 10 years 
ago, flying out 48 hours before the game [for his debut in Nagpur in 2006].”

“I had never met him properly before, so it could have been daunting but 
having [his Durham team-mate] Ben Stokes around has helped. He seems to have a 
good head on his shoulders – mentally very strong – and so we wish him all the 
luck. It’s disappointing about Hameed – we have found player there – but if 
Keaton comes in it will add to our top-order players.”

Cook moved to clarify an assertion by Bayliss that he, not the captain, will 
deliver a reminder to the players over the need to bat positively in Mumbai. 
There is a feeling that after racking up 537 in Rajkot they have lost their way.

Those comments could have been interpreted as a challenge to Cook’s authority 
– Bayliss has previously maintained the primacy of the captain – but the 
31-year-old was fully aware a reminder would be issued and agrees with the 
message.

Cook said: “I knew what was coming out, we chatted after Mohali and as part of 
the leadership group we discussed how we wanted to play and what had happened 
after the first Test. We have to take the second innings of Vizag out of the 
equation [when looking to bat out for a draw] and I do wonder if that tied into 
the third Test. There was a hangover and we went back into our shells.

“It was a clear message we want more intent. The team responded to something 
similar in his first game in Cardiff during 2015 Ashes Test. Hopefully we go 
back to that level. Rajkot was our blueprint. It wasn’t Trevor saying it, I was 
part of the conversation and I agree our players play better with a direction.”

Asked if he and Bayliss are aligned in their outlook, Cook said: “Yes, we are 
trying to win games of cricket for England. My batting has been about wearing 
the opposition down but that doesn’t change the intent I need to have. There is 
definitely different approaches, it’s not just fours and sixes, it’s the intent 
to score that gets you in good positions.”

India will be without Ajinkya Rahane for the final two Tests after the 
middle-order batsman, who has struggled to make an impact, suffered a broken 
finger during net practice. He has been replaced in the squad by the uncapped 
Manish Pandey.

The seamer Mohammad Shami has reported a sore knee and Bhuvneshwar Kumar is in 
line for a recall.
 