
Let me be the first to welcome you, says Stephen Fry, to Martians newly 
arrived at Heathrow in afilm <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K7cFXSDN_5k> that 
has, unusually for him, failed to charm the natives. Mainly, given Fry’s 
obvious debt to the imaginaryEnglishman, Major Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jan/13/pressandpublishing.guardianobituaries>
, who used to amuse French people in the 50s,the objection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/british-tetley-tea-stephen-fry-advertisers?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 is that his introduction to “modern Britain” perpetuates ludicrously 
old-fashioned stereotypes. But in fairness to Fry, all Britons, young and old, 
have views on their “unique eclectic culture”, as Heathrow puts it, and they 
cannot all be reflected in a film that celebrates queueing, weather-obsessing, 
apologising, tutting, saying “after you” and cheering when somebody drops a 
glass.

Cheering over broken glasses looms curiously large in Fry’s version of modern 
Britain. Maybe this is something comedians do a lot. Or is it some sort of 
social experiment, to establish how long it takes before anthropologists can 
report a new British variation on sympathetic finger-bowl drinking, of politely 
cheering when a solitary tourist cheers at a smashed glass, so as to alleviate 
his or her social embarrassment?

Either way, any rival guide – for use at Gatwick – might want to replace it 
with a different characteristic; to cite the most obvious, the famous reserve 
that ensures, however rat-arsed a Briton might be, that he will always attempt 
to make it to the nearest wall, bench or darkish corner before urinating or 
vomiting in public.

Or the famous love of animals, to the point that John Bull holds it to be 
self-evident that his dog should enjoy this same right to free and untroubled 
evacuation, preferably near children and in one of the glorious parks created 
by this nation of gardeners. The famous tolerance that has encouraged 
plutocrats of all nations to price indigenous Britons out of their capital 
city. The sturdy anti-intellectualism that ensures that, whatever our national 
pride in Shakespeare, an incoming director of the Globe can cheerfullyconfess  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/05/shakespeares-globe-emma-rice-if-anybody-bended-gender>
that, inasmuch as she’s read any of them, his plays make her fall asleep.

As for being old-fashioned, however, Fry could argue that, if anything, his 
video puts too contemporary a gloss on British life. A foreigner could easily 
get the impression that this could function, for more than a few hours at a 
time, without the comfort and example of the monarchy. True, Fry is himself a 
notable courtier who alludes, at the start of his guide, to “the majesty of our 
countryside, the majesty of – her majesty”. After that, though, the visitor 
would never guess that, as repeatedly demonstrated last week, of all the 
characteristics that define Britain, none is so dependably on view as 
sycophancy.

Russians match us for binge-drinking; other nations can queue and are polite; 
a few, one gathers, even notice variations in the weather. But in how many 
countries, without any fear of appearing to insult the public, would 
campaigners urge us to“Clean for the Queen”? 
<http://www.cleanforthequeen.co.uk/home/2365> Or the national broadcasting 
company hail the monarch’s spouse as the saviour ofengineering 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35201197> , before dwelling on his 
great-grandson’s first day at nursery and the propriety of subjecting a royal 
paw, as Ant or Dec, or both, has done, to a“double handshake”. <http:>

Of all the characteristics that define Britain, none is so dependably on view 
as subjection

The BBC was plainly sore, toadying-wise, that its own coup, Lord Browne’s 
extended grovel to Prince Philip onToday <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35211130>
 – “your royal highness, thank you very much for agreeing to be interviewed, it 
is a great privilege and a pleasure” – should so soon have been outstripped by
Ant and Dec’sMeet the Prince, on ITV 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/Ant-Dec-Met-Prince-40-Years-Prince-s-Trust/story-28446133-detail/story.html>
.

In which brilliant performance, practically an audition for the next casting 
of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern, the pair demonstrate how toadying should be 
updated for modern Britain. By dint of exchanging their speciality – sniggering 
irreverence – for the traditional hand-rubbing, throwing back of the head and 
roaring with laughter, the neophyte courtiers only injected more humble 
sincerity – “wow”, “quite the action man”, “we love this place” – into their 
90-minute act of homage.

In future, any broadcasters after royal access would do better to study the 
Ant and Dec approach than the much regretted, fly-on-the-wall TV exercises of 
1969 and 1994, or more recent investigative exercises that, presumably, led to 
the palace’s imposition of15-page broadcasting contracts 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/prince-charles-the-15-page-contract-that-reveals-how-the-prince-of-wales-tries-to-control-the-media-a6756541.html>
. Compliance allows Clarence House to see both the “rough cut” and “fine cut” 
of any collaboration and to retain the right, if unhappy, to “remove the 
contribution in its entirety from the programme”.

What, a probing Ant and Dec asked Camilla, did she think of Charles’s amazing 
work with the Prince’s Trust, because it had most certainly impressed them, as 
they trotted after him, with only the minimal sniggering required to convey 
objectivity? “I’m knackered!” piped up Ant/Dec. “He does have incredible 
energy,” the duchess supplied. Maybe that was a dayPrince Charles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> chose not to take a helicopter 
between engagements. Modestly refusing to advertise yet another of her 
husband’s highly regarded qualities, his unique bladder control, Camilla duly 
improvised: “I’m really proud to be married to somebody who – 40 years ago, 
aged 27 – had the vision to put it together, it was an amazing idea.”

The Queen’s forthcoming 90th birthday inspired the litter campaign, launched by
Country Life and now supported by a group of charities that endorse its 
proposal that nothing is more likely than the Queen’s happiness finally to 
reform a nation of determined litterers, another cultural habit overlooked by 
the Heathrow guide.

The challenge is all the greater when you consider that the normal appearance 
of tidiness, from the Queen’s perspective, must already approach Potemkin 
levels of artificiality. But the leader of this effort, the former “pageant 
master” of the sodden regatta in 2012, is banking, perhaps justifiably if you 
witnessed its effect onAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>, on the magic of royalty 
to get the nation on its knees, in Clean for the Queen tabards.

In fact, if the calculation is correct, you can only regret a lack of ambition 
on the part of the organisers, who might just as easily have requested subjects 
to break up fat balls in the sewers, or to upgrade the trans-Pennine rail link, 
or to donate organs to any royals who might need one. Not forgetting the poor, 
as Tennyson reminded readers of a cruelly satirised ode to Victoria: “Let the 
maim’d in his heart rejoice/ At this glad Ceremonial,/ and this year of her 
Jubilee”.

“For Her [sic] and for us all, we want to attack the blight of litter and 
reclaim our beautiful countryside” is how the pageant fraternity is promoting 
the cleaning scheme, with a divinity-imputing capitalisation that, to judge by 
William McGonagall’s Ode  (written for the same occasion as Tennyson’s), 
certainly postdates 1887: “Oh! try and make her happy in country and town,/ And 
not with Shakespeare say, ‘uneasy lies the head that wears a crown’.” There is 
nothing in McGonagall, however, about Her happiness being public 
hygiene-related. Either British monarchs have become more demanding since then 
or something yet more worrying has happened to their subjects.
 