
Breitbart News, a news platform for the so-called “alt right” founded by Trump 
chief strategistSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon>, is being abandoned by 
advertising giant Kellogg.


Kellogg Co is pulling its ads from the website after an online campaign 
designed to get marketers to abandon the site featured a screen shot of a 
Kellogg’s Frosted Mini-Wheats advertisement.

“We regularly work with our media-buying partners to ensure our ads do not 
appear on sites that aren’t aligned with our values as a company,” Kris 
Charles, a spokeswoman for Kellogg, toldBloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-29/kellogg-pulls-ads-from-breitbart-amid-concerns-about-hate-speech>
.

“We recently reviewed the list of sites where our ads can be placed and 
decided to discontinue advertising on Breitbart.com. We are working to remove 
our ads from that site.”

Breitbart is the focus of a Twitter-hosted campaign, Sleeping Giants, that has 
been taking screen shots of ads appearing on Breitbart in an attempt to 
pressure brands to end their association with a site that has been widely 
accused of promoting racist, sexist and antisemitic content.

Breitbart News blacklisted by ad tech company for violating hate speech rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/brietbart-blacklist-appnexus-online-ad-hate-speech>
Earlier this month, the Breitbart News Network CEO, Larry Solov, told the 
financial data service that Breitbart “has always and continues to condemn 
racism and bigotry in any form”.

But Breitbart has also seen a surge in traffic, according to ComScore. The 
site had 19 million unique monthly visitors in October, up from 12.9 million a 
year ago.

Kellogg reportedly decided to “blacklist” Breitbart from the websites where its
products are advertised, after being contacted by customers who saw ads for 
Frosted Flakes and Frosted Mini-Wheats.


The company’s decision follows the digital advertising services company 
AppNexus, which  
<http://adage.com/article/digital/major-ad-technology-company-bars-breitbart-news-hate-speech/306887/>
earlierstopped Breitbart from using its services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/brietbart-blacklist-appnexus-online-ad-hate-speech>
 over concerns that the publisher violated its hate-speech rules. A spokesman 
for the company said the publication had breached a policy against content that 
incites violence.

Bloomberg reported that not all companies are willing to abandon the site. The 
automaker Nissan said in a statement that its purpose in maintaining ads on the 
site was part of a strategy to reach as many people as possible.

“The placement of Nissan advertising is not intended to be a political 
commentary and there are no plans to change the advertising mix at this time,” 
the company said.
 