
Twenty-five years ago, as the school bell rang and I gathered my books to 
leave Mrs Bischoff’s American literature class, Mr Goebel, my history teacher, 
came in to discuss some administrative business. She interrupted him to ask if 
he “watched it last night”.

Without mentioning a title, their conversation about harrowing photographs, 
heartfelt letters and melancholy music made it clear they were discussing the 
PBS miniseriesThe Civil War <http://www.pbs.org/kenburns/civil-war/>. I 
considered weighing in, but other students were around, and I already had a 
reputation for liking uncool things asa self-identifying Trekkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/27/trekkie-remembers-leonard-nimoy-mr-spock-star-trek>
. That’s when Ian, a year older and one of the more popular kids, jumped in to 
say “that Civil War show is rad.” Talk about a show everyone could love.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE08eTchCoD8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE08eTchCoD8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE08eTchCoD8&media=>
It was 1990 and everybody was buzzing about the battles of Shiloh, first and 
second Manassas, Antietam and Gettysburg. We weren’t covering the civil war yet 
in history (we were still at 1066) but an executive decision was made for us to 
skip ahead a little bit. While I was definitely more inclined to opt in to a 
public television historical program, film-makerKen Burns 
<http://www.pbs.org/kenburns/>’s nine-night masterpiece managed to engage and 
enrich everyone.

What I didn’t realise then was how this 11-and-a-half-hour documentary would 
have a hold on me for the rest of my adult life. During my late teen years I 
fell in with a group of snobs, and we prided ourselves on only using our 
televisions when we’d rent indie, foreign, classic or underground films on VHS. 
But PBS was OK because they’d show Monty Python reruns and concerts. Like the 
swallows returning to Capistrano, you could always count on Burns to come back 
with The Civil War during a pledge drive. (We were lucky, or perhaps cursed, to 
live in an area that would get New York, Philadelphia and the rarely watched 
New Jersey public stations, so this meant triple the Civil War ubiquity.)

The American civil war then and now – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2015/jun/22/american-civil-war-photography-interactive>
Despite the deep subject matter, I find The Civil War incredibly relaxing. 
Some of my most comforting memories are being on my friend’s parents’ couch, 
nodding off to soothing fiddle music as narratorDavid McCullough 
<http://authors.simonandschuster.com/David-McCullough/938> rattles off facts 
about Pickett’s Charge, Burns’s camera floating over haunting photographs. (A 
technique he did not invent, but was later dubbed by Apple editing software as 
theKen Burns effect 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Burns_effect#Ken_Burns_on_the_.22Ken_Burns_Effect.22>
.) The Civil War always seemed to be on just when you needed it, like a lazy 
summer Sunday afternoon that turned into night and continued straight on to the 
wee hours. “Yes, I’ll go to bed soon, but just after I hear the reading of the 
Gettysburg address.”

In the ensuing years I’ve found that many in my peer group have had similar 
repeat encounters with the show. Not everyone watched it from top to bottom, 
but there are parts everyone remembers. Most famous is actorPaul Roebling 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/08/02/obituaries/paul-roebling-60-actor-in-television-movies-and-theater.html>
’s reading of an obscure letter from a Union officer named Sullivan Ballou. It 
was written to Ballou’s wife a week before being mortally wounded at the first 
battle of Bull Run. His remarkable, heartfelt words did the impossible – they 
took a boring page from history and made it more emotional than any Hollywood 
movie.

With some help, though. Ballou’s letter was set to an obscure piece of music 
called Ashokan Farewell, a simple, sad fiddle tune with piano and upright bass 
composed byJay Ungar <http://jayandmolly.com/> in 1982. Burns had used it in a 
previous documentary aboutHuey Long <http://www.hueylong.com/>, but set against 
Ballou’s words and the perfectly selected ghostlike photographs, it became a 
microcosm for the insanity of America’s bloodiest war. Burns concluded the 
first episode in the miniseries with this sequence, punching everyone who was 
watching right in the gut.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2kZASM8OX7s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2kZASM8OX7s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2kZASM8OX7s&media=>
The song, while still beautiful, is a bit of a joke today. Long before Louis 
CK parodied it 
<http://www.technologytell.com/entertainment/62565/louie-season-finale-breaks-out-the-ashokan-farewell/>
 my girlfriend (now wife) and I would make a similar gag whenever we’d come 
across anything historic on trips to her parents’ place in North Carolina. 
“What’s that, an old mill? Dee-dee-dee-dee-dee-dee …”

Burns’s decision to plunder contemporary diaries is without question the most 
striking aspect of his film. The sources he used included the notes and letters 
from a Union soldier named Elisha Hunt Rhodes, a volunteer infantryman who 
served for the duration of the war, and whose writings were published by his 
great-grandson years later. On the other side (but with many similar 
observations) was Sam Watkins, a Confederate from Tennessee who also fought the 
whole war. He published his memoir, Co Aytch, in 1882. At some point years ago 
I bought both. Haven’t gotten to them yet, but some day.

The first-person source that’s meant the most to me over the years, however, 
was the journal of George Templeton Strong, a lawyer from New York who watched 
the world around him with a keen eye. His 2,250-page diary was discovered in 
the 1930s, and Burns uses it to counter the horror of battle with mundane facts 
of urban life away from the front. The quotes he chooses always end on a 
poignant note, and, as with all primary documents, Burns has the voiceover 
actor take a beat and then repeat the author’s name. This leads us to Burns’s 
other great coup: his casting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fken-burns-the-civil-war-americas-greatest-documentary-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cdd0da9b4a025da5c9e285123b897b479e44d55%2F0_226_4635_2780%2F4635.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Burns's%20The%20Civil%20War%3A%20America's%20greatest%20documentary%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fken-burns-the-civil-war-americas-greatest-documentary-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Burns%27s%20The%20Civil%20War%3A%20America%27s%20greatest%20documentary%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fken-burns-the-civil-war-americas-greatest-documentary-rides-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cdd0da9b4a025da5c9e285123b897b479e44d55%2F0_226_4635_2780%2F4635.jpg>
 Three photographs of American civil war soldiers at the Metropolitan Museum of 
Art in New York. Photograph: Stan Honda/AFP/Getty Images 
All of George Templeton Strong’s writing was read by Paris Review  
<http://www.theparisreview.org/>editor, public intellectual and occasional 
videogame pitchman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aYLly625cXE> George Plimpton
 <http://www.nytimes.com/2003/09/26/obituaries/26CND-PLIM.html>. Plimpton has a 
very robust, patrician tone. When he’d conclude a passage, take a breath and 
say, with gusto, “George Templeton Strong”, it became the most amazing piece of 
punctuation in television history. Over the years, my oddball friends and I 
would use our Plimpton impersonations as shorthand. “Is that IPA any good?” 
“It’s strong.” “How strong?” “George Templeton Strong!” Soon anything that was 
good was “George Templeton Strong” or just “George Templeton” and finally “GT”. 
This is probably not what PBS and Burns had in mind when they wanted to bring 
history to life.

Plimpton isn’t the only unexpected bit of voice acting in the film. There are 
plenty of terrific actors, like Sam Waterston as Abraham Lincoln, Jason Robards 
as Ulysses S Grant, Morgan Freeman as Frederick Douglas and M Emmet Walsh, 
Jeremy Irons, Derek Jacobi and Pamela Reed elsewhere, but there are some 
left-of-centre choices, too. Studs Terkel, Kurt Vonnegut, Arthur Miller, Hoyt 
Axton and Garrison Keillor (as Walt Whitman!) all make appearances. Yet over 
the course of nine episodes some current interview footage was filmed as well, 
and the world was introduced to the King of PBS.

Before The Civil War, Shelby Foote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/06/29/books/shelby-foote-historian-and-novelist-dies-at-88.html>
 was an obscure academic. He wasn’t part of Burns’s initial research circle, 
but a recommendation from All The King’s Men authorRobert Penn Warren 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/robert-penn-warren> led the film-maker to 
the Memphis-based writer. In time, Foote became the key interview subject, for 
two essential reasons. First, he was an enlightened Southerner who could speak 
passionately about the Confederates’ point of view without seeming racist or 
reactionary. Second, and for television purposes perhaps more importantly, was 
theway he would talk. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3bhOqObhz3o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3bhOqObhz3o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3bhOqObhz3o&media=>
A born raconteur with a slow, deep drawl, Foote’s gaze would turn from the 
camera as he spoke about Appomattox Court House or Fort Sumter as if he’d just 
been there. He’d lean into a story with a little chuckle, as if the yarn you 
were about to hear about Stonewall Jackson was something he personally observed 
while having drinks with the man. All told there is a full hour of Foote over 
the course of the documentary, and I’d thrill at any outtakes. For 25 years, if 
I ever hear the name Shelby Foote I instinctively respond “Well, the thing yuh 
gotta remembah about ol’ Nathan Bedford Forrest isthis …”

But it’s conceivable that you haven’t lived in the public television sphere of 
influence all these years. Luckily, you have an opportunity to explore all this 
for yourself. On 7 SeptemberPBS is showing The Civil War in full 
<http://www.pbs.org/kenburns/civil-war/>, this time in a restored edition. 
Matthew Brady <http://www.mathewbrady.com/>’s photos will sure look somethin’ 
in high def, I’m sure. If you only know Burns from the iMovie setting or his 
later work likeJazz <http://www.pbs.org/jazz/> and Baseball 
<http://www.pbs.org/kenburns/baseball/>, I strongly urge you to check it out. 
Just beware that you may end up quoting from it for the rest of your life.
 