
The 16-year-old boy sentenced to 20 years in prison for the murder of a Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> teacher can now be named after a judge 
agreed it was in the public interest to identify him.

He is Will Cornick, who was 15 when he walked up behind Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire> in a classroom at Corpus 
Christi Catholic college and stabbed her to death in front of her class.

Cornick – whose identity had been protected by a court order – had previously 
admitted murdering Maguire, 61, at the school on 28 April. Her family were in 
Leeds crown court to hear his guilty plea.

Cornick was 15 and studying for his GCSEs at the time of the attack, the court 
heard.

The minimum sentence for the crime is usually 12 years but the judge said he 
was increasing that because of seven aggravating features including the fact 
that it was premeditated, that it was carried out in public in front of 
children and witnesses who were traumatised by the sight, and that Maguire had 
died in “extreme pain”.

He added that the boy showed a chilling lack of remorse.

Until the attack Cornick lived with his mother and older brother in a 
semi-detached house a mile from Corpus Christi. His parents, Ian and Michelle, 
split up in 2003, when Cornick was four.
 An image from Will Cornick’s Facebook page. Photograph: Facebook 
Both parents had sat with him in the dock at Leeds crown court as he admitted 
the killing. His family are horrified at what their boy has done and devastated 
at the pain he has inflicted on Maguire’s loved ones. They have given no 
interviews and have asked for privacy as they struggle to come to terms with 
all that has happened.

Paul Greaney QC, prosecuting, told the court that the boy’s parents were “at a 
loss to understand how and why their son has turned out as he has”.

Speaking outside the court after the verdict, the Maguire family’s solicitor 
said in a statement that she was a “genuine teacher with a generous spirit, who 
always led by example”. He said the family thanked the public and the school 
community for the love and support they had received over the “past troubled 
months”. But, he said, they “look to the future with a fragile hope”.

Maguire’s daughter Emma had previously told the court: “Every morning I wake 
up hoping it’s all a bad dream. There’s a split second before reality sets in.”

Don, Maguire’s husband, said: “There will be no closure. Balance will never 
return. There will be no level scales.”

Judge Coulson agreed to lift reporting restrictions relating to the 
identification of Cornick after an application from a number of media 
organisations, led by the Guardian.

Coulson said he was not satisfied that identifying the boy would contravene 
article two of the European convention on human rights, which protects the 
right to life. He said that as the boy was already deemed a suicide risk, being 
identified could not change that.

Naming the boy could act as a “potential deterrent” to others, he added, but 
more important was the “general interest in open justice”, he said.

“There’s a public interest in naming a defendant who has been convicted of 
murder,” the judge declared.

The application was opposed by Richard Wright QC, Cornick’s lawyer, who argued 
that naming the boy was “wholly contrary to the welfare of the child” and would 
have a “devastating effect on the wider Cornick family”.

Wright said that Cornick was on 24-hour suicide watch and was at risk of 
violence from other inmates – shortly after being remanded he was moved to a 
different young offenders’ unit when other inmates learned who he was. He is 
now in solitary confinement in a cell with a glass door and has no contact with 
other inmates, the court heard.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsisters-pay-tribute-murdered-leeds-teacher-ann-maguire-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F3%2F1415026532026%2FShelagh-Connor-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sisters%20pay%20tribute%20to%20murdered%20Leeds%20teacher%20Ann%20Maguire%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsisters-pay-tribute-murdered-leeds-teacher-ann-maguire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sisters%20pay%20tribute%20to%20murdered%20Leeds%20teacher%20Ann%20Maguire%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F03%2Fsisters-pay-tribute-murdered-leeds-teacher-ann-maguire-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F3%2F1415026532026%2FShelagh-Connor-001.jpg>
 Ann Maguire was a ‘beautiful, caring, and compassionate’ person who embraced 
life, say her family 
Maguire was Cornick’s Spanish teacher, the court heard. The boy, whose parents 
had sat with him in the dock at Leeds crown court as he admitted the killing, 
had been a model pupil in year 7, was “amicable, enthusiastic and 
conscientious” but changed after being diagnosed with diabetes. The diabetes 
had a major impact on his mood and personality. His mother had noticed evidence 
of self-harming.

He was upset that his diabetes would prevent him from joining the army. He 
started to harbour a hatred for Maguire, the court heard.

Cornick told other pupils he had been carrying a knife and wanted Maguire 
dead: police discovered many images of knives on his mobile phone. On Christmas 
Eve last year he told a friend on Facebook that he wanted to “brutally kill” 
Maguire and spend the rest of his life in prison.

Cornick told one friend he planned to kill two other teachers as well as 
Maguire – one of whom was young and pregnant.

On the day of the murder Cornick took knives to school and a bottle of Jack 
Daniel’s whiskey to “celebrate afterwards”.

The attack took place at Maguire’s desk as Cornick was in her Spanish lesson. 
He had told a pupil of his plan and winked as he left to kill her.

The court heard that he had attacked Maguire from behind. She was 5ft 2in 
(158cm): a foot shorter than her killer. He was expressionless as he stabbed 
her in the neck and back.

After stabbing the teacher and chasing her out of the classroom Cornick calmly 
returned to his desk and, according to witnesses, said: “Pity she didn’t die.”

The court then heard harrowing video testimony from pupils who witnessed the 
attack. “I was in absolute panic,” said one classmate.

Susan Francis, a colleague of Maguire’s, heard screaming. She rushed into the 
corridor and was confronted by pupils running and screaming. Maguire was 
holding her neck and said: “He’s stabbed me in the neck.” The boy followed her. 
Francis pushed Maguire into another classroom and held her foot against the 
door to stop the boy entering. She could see his “emotionless” face through the 
door window. Francis sat with Maguire comforting the victim and telling her she 
was loved.

Cornick then returned to his seat and said: “Good times”, according to 
witnesses. He also spoke of an adrenaline rush. One pupil said that it appeared 
that Cornick was pleased with what he had done.

Two teachers entered the room and the boy put his hands in the air as if in 
surrender. He told them of “other naughty stuff” in his bag. When police 
arrived they were struck by his “calmness and air of normality”. He chatted 
with officers about their hobbies, the court heard.

Cornick told a psychiatrist he killed Maguire because “life is pretty fucking 
shit” and that he had planned a triple homicide. He said he did not regret his 
actions and was pleased to have killed the teacher but “it didn’t live up to” 
his expectations.

He later said: “I know the victim’s family will be upset but I don’t care. In 
my eyes, everything I’ve done is fine and dandy.”

A paramedic with 30 years’ experience said Maguire’s wounds were the worst she 
had ever seen. All of them had been inflicted from behind.

At an earlier court hearing in July Cornick accepted responsibility for 
unlawfully killing Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/11/teenager-admits-unlawful-killing-teacher-ann-maguire>
 but stopped short of admitting he had murdered her. Following this admission, 
the judge ordered a series of psychiatric assessments, which concluded that he 
was of sound mind when he was carrying out the attack. That conclusion meant he 
was deemed fit to stand trial for her murder.

Since his arrest at the school he has been remanded in youth detention. He has 
not spoken in court, other than to give his name and date of birth and indicate 
that he understood proceedings.

Cornick is the first secondary school pupil to have murdered a teacher in a 
British classroom. After the attack Maguire was taken by ambulance to Leeds 
general infirmary but died about an hour after being admitted.

A postmortem established the cause of death as shock and haemorrhage. 
“Although there were a number of stab wounds, a stab wound to her neck had 
severed her jugular vein and was the fatal injury,” a pathologist, Brian Roger, 
told a coroner earlier this year.
 