
The veteran Victorian powerbroker Kim Carr will remain on Labor’s frontbench 
after abruising factional stoush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/push-to-dump-kim-carr-from-labor-frontbench-in-favour-of-linda-burney>
 that split the left faction and required intervention from the opposition 
leader, Bill Shorten.


While the majority of the left faction wanted to dump Carr from the shadow 
ministry, the right faction marshalled on Friday to support the Victorian left 
winger, whosestability pact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/bill-shorten-election-2016-labor-alp-essay>
 with the right in his home state helps underpin Shorten’s leadership.

While Carr was ultimately spared the wrath of his left-wing colleagues at 
Friday’s special Labor caucus meeting to elect shadow ministerial candidates, 
another key Shorten ally, the right faction’s David Feeney,had to vacate  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/11/bill-shorten-expected-to-dump-david-feeney-from-labor-frontbench>
the frontbench ticket in favour of Clare O’Neil, who is one of the next 
generation talents for the ALP.

The Labor leader has been forced to expand the size of the shadow ministry 
from 30 to 32 to accommodate Carr, who was not backed by his faction, and the 
factionally non-aligned MPAndrew Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-leigh>.

The maximum number permitted in the shadow ministry is 30. This means two 
Labor frontbenchers – Leigh and the NSW right’s Sam Dastyari – will be paid as 
backbenchers while holding shadow ministerial positions.

In Leigh’s case, this will mean a $40,000 pay cut. Leigh, like Carr, survived 
the current reshuffle because Shorten insisted he remain in the frontbench 
line-up.

Push to dump Kim Carr from Labor frontbench in favour of Linda Burney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/push-to-dump-kim-carr-from-labor-frontbench-in-favour-of-linda-burney>
There are a number of reasons for the factional brawling that has run for the 
best part of a fortnight . Some left figures resent Carr for backing Shorten in 
the 2013 leadership ballot over the left candidate,Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese>.

Others resent what they regard as poor behaviour on Carr’s part. Some disagree 
with his policy inclinations. And there has been a push for generational change 
after the election.

In Friday’s caucus meeting, during a procedural debate about whether the two 
expanded shadow ministry spots would be appointed by the leader like 
parliamentary secretaries, or elected by the caucus, Albanese – the key 
powerbroker in the national left – rounded on Carr for not accepting the 
verdict of the majority of his faction.

Albanese is understood to have noted that people demonstrate their character 
not when they are successful, but when they are unsuccessful, a caustic 
observation that colleagues took as a public rebuke to Carr.

Bill Shorten expected to dump David Feeney from Labor frontbench
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/11/bill-shorten-expected-to-dump-david-feeney-from-labor-frontbench>
One element of the backroom jockeying remains unresolved.

When Carr learned his faction intended to dump him from the frontbench, he 
formed a sub-factional grouping within the left with a handful of colleagues, 
including fellow left-winger Gavin Marshall.

Marshall is now a deputy president in the Senate. The national left will no 
longer support him for that position. The ballot to elect a new Senate deputy 
leader has consequently been deferred.


Labor has managed through this process to bring on new talent, including 
O’Neil,Linda Burney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/02/linda-burney-first-indigenous-woman-elected-australia-lower-house>
 – the first Indigenous woman to be elected in the House of Representatives – 
and Dastyari, a key figure in the NSW right.

Ed Husic, another NSW right figure, will also step into the shadow ministry 
after the vocational education spokeswoman, Sharon Bird, chose not to contest 
the right faction’s frontbench ballot.

Now that the caucus has nominated its picks for the frontbench, Shorten will 
move on to the business of allocating new portfolios. Those are expected to be 
announced shortly.
 