 As armies mass again on the borders of Mesopotamia, film-makers are fighting 
to be first over the top with a movie about the original and most rapacious 
western imperialist of them all - Alexander the Great.
Four of Hollywood's most prodigious talents have long wanted to measure 
themselves against the upstart Macedonian who conquered nine-tenths of the 
known world in his 33 years. But for decades film-makers have shied away from 
fully portraying the complex personality of the most feared and revered leader 
in history.

Now at last the time seems to have come for the first bisexual action hero - 
withAlexander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander> hopping, in one 
script, from the bed of his boyhood friend and lover Hephaestion, to that of 
the Queen of the Amazons and onward through a host of eunuchs and catamites.

Oliver Stone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oliver-stone>, Martin Scorsese 
and Ridley Scott have all laboured on pet projects about the messianic king who 
led a modest army out of his father's Balkan kingdom and brought it to the 
borders of India, demolishing empires and civilisations in his wake.

More than 2,300 years on, the very name Alexander still sends a shudder down 
the spine of Iranians and central Asians weaned on tales of his cruelty, while 
barely a decade ago Greece almost went to war with its newly independent 
neighbour, the Republic of Macedonia, over its use of his star on its flag.

Ridley Scott's Roman blockbuster Gladiator proved to sceptical studios that 
swords-and-sandal epics - which went out of fashion in the late 1960s - could 
still sell. But their prohibitive cost and the risk of being beaten to the 
screen has set off a cat-and-mouse game of false starts and shifting alliances 
among the chief players to rival Alexander's own battle of wits with the 
Persian emperor Darius.

Having done a deal with Scorsese, and watched Scott bail out, Buz Luhrmann, 
the maker of Romeo and Juliet, Moulin Rouge and Strictly Ballroom, now looks 
favourite to be the first off the blocks.

Typically Luhrmann's Alexander will not be short on flamboyance, despite being 
based on the Italian historian Valerio Manfredi's trilogy of novels about the 
all-conquering hero.

After taking three male lovers, and diverting himself with the odd eunuch, he 
will be shown putting politics before pleasure to do his duty with the 
single-breasted queen of the Amazons, according to scriptwriter Ted Tally. 
Leonardo DiCaprio is in the process of signing on the dotted line to play him. 
But as in war, nothing can be taken for granted.

Luhrmann was to start shooting the $150m (Â£93.5m) saga in Morocco in the early 
spring, having persuaded King Mohammed VI to lend him 5,000 soldiers and 1,000 
horses for his battle scenes, but filming has been put back to the autumn.

In a bold flanking move, Vietnam veteran Stone, who has admired Alexander 
since his days as a GI, has stepped into the breach.

Only a month ago his own project seem to be dead in the water, but now he is 
back with the Irish actor Colin Farrell in Bucephalus's saddle, and a big 
studio budget. Stone hopes to start shooting in Morocco in June, having 
abandoned his first choice of locations in India. Neither he nor Luhrmann would 
be drawn on whether there was room for two big Alexander films.

While Luhrmann and Tally's script is believed to stick closely to Manfredi's 
take on Alexander as the great expander of Greek and thus western cultural 
influence, Stone's take is more heretical, as one would expect from the man who 
made JFK. It also gives full play to the whirl of conspiracy theories that 
surrounded Alexander's life and death.

Pointedly, Stone believes Alexander was probably poisoned by his own generals, 
fearful of his increasing megalomania and cruelty.

"I was intrigued to discover that his famous father, Philip II, had been 
assassinated under mysterious circumstances," Stone said. "Alexander, not far 
from his side that day, was immediately suspect. The assassin himself was 
quickly slain, and the murder remains an enigma. In Alexander's own untimely 
death at 33 we have again strong evidence of a conspiracy of family clans. Did 
he die of fever or from poisoned wine? I choose to believe the latter."

There are however, two more Alexanders waiting in the wings. Mel Gibson, who 
rekindled the vogue for historical martial epics when he covered himself in 
woad for Braveheart, has a $120m 10-part TV series for HBO, the US cable 
channel which made Steven Spielberg's Band of Brothers, ready to roll.

It was due to start shooting in the autumn but was delayed without any reason 
being given. Gibson, a Catholic who is also trying to get a film about the 
Passion shot in Aramaic, the language Christ is believed to have spoken, is 
unlikely to dwell on Alexander's omnivorous sexual appetite.

A fourth, relatively low-budget project by Alfonso Arau, which will be shot in 
Mexico, is also awaiting the green light.

But the race for who will be first is only half the battle. The other, with 
Greece and the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia at each others' throats 
over the right to use the word Macedonian, is about the much more thorny 
question of who the real Alexander was. Was he a Greek, or was he an ancestor 
of the Slav-speaking people of the former Yugoslavia and northern Greece who 
now call themselves Macedonians?

Some Greek nationalists have already protested at the mention of Alexander's 
supposed homosexuality, describing it as a "disgrace" and a "slur on Greece" - 
although the ancient Hellenes had a more relaxed view of these things. Stone 
has blamed the Greek government for orchestrating the outrage, and its culture 
minister, Evangelos Venizelos, has withdrawn support from the project. But he 
has stopped short of condemning it outright. Faced with protests from 
opposition MPs, he said: "We cannot censor Hollywood. I don't know what I can 
do."

The Macedonians are also worried about how the film will portray their hero. 
While they seem more relaxed about his sexual preferences, activists have 
bombarded studios with letters and emails pointing out that Alexander was not a 
Greek but a Macedonian, who spoke a different language and who was regarded by 
the ancient Greeks as different.

The Great and the not so good

Alexander the Great has inspired surprisingly few biopics, chiefly because of 
the extremity of his character and personal peccadillos scared off the 
directors of historical epics, which tend to be made for family audiences.

Alexander the Great (1956) 

Richard Burton donned the golden armour and plumed helmet for a workmanlike 
but creaky attempt to do justice to Alexander's amazing achievements. A stellar 
British cast that included Claire Bloom and Michael Hordern couldn't hide the 
fact that battle scenes shot in Spain were more cast-of-hundreds than thousands.

Megaleksandros (1980) 

The Greek master Theo Angelopoulos won a Golden Lion at the Venice Film 
Festival for his long, plodding and pretentious meditation of the great general 
filtered through the story of a 19th-century Macedonian brigand and folk hero. 
Like Angelopoulos's two best-known films, Ulysses' Gaze and Eternity and a Day, 
Megaleksandros was shot in the haunting mountain landscape of Greek Macedonia.

Of the multitude of failed attempts to bring Alexander and his exploits to the 
screen, the most unlikely had William Shatner - aka Captain Kirk from Star Trek 
- leading the Macedonian phalanx across Asia. Alexander's name, however, has 
been used to sell a number of films with little or nothing to do with him. The 
best of these was by the Swedish director Mauritz Stiller, the man who 
discovered Greta Garbo, who made a biting silent social satire in 1917, set in 
the Alexander the Great hotel.
 