
Q Our kitchen fitting was completed in May, and we are still struggling to 
choose the right flooring and curtains for the room. Which colours best go with 
a maple kitchen with a dark-brown work surface? At the moment, we are favouring 
Karndean [a PVC flooring that mimics natural materials and is laid to resemble 
planks or tiles], although ceramic tiles are another - noisy - possibility.
Margaret Wragg

A Kitchens are a demanding area for interior designers, what with all the hard 
wear that goes with them, plus spillages. Choosing the surfaces is 
traditionally an aesthetic, functional and financial choice, but now we need to 
think about the environmental consequences, too. Vinyl flooring is a 
petrochemical product whose production and disposal produces quantities of 
dangerous toxins (seewww.greenpeace.org.uk <http://www.greenpeace.org.uk>), so 
if we can avoid them, we should. Try natural-material flooring alternatives 
such as lino made from linseed oil, rosins, wood flour, jute (
www.forbo-flooring.co.uk <http://www.forbo-flooring.co.uk>) or cork tiles for 
natural warmth, colour and texture (www.expanko.com <http://www.expanko.com>; 
their current range has a very contemporary look). Get a feel for different 
material or colours by creating photographic montages of your kitchen on your 
computer. Then follow your instincts!

Q Some of the Victorian cornicing in our house is damaged. Is there a service 
that will make cornicing to match? Any other ideas?
Kate Chamberlayne

A Unfortunately, many of the mouldings in Victorian homes were created in situ 
by the craftsman at the time of building, so it's very unlikely that you'll be 
able to match what you have at plaster or cornicing showrooms. Bearing in mind 
it's generally considered that a bad repair is much worse than a missing 
section, it's best to leave it to the experts, such as Butcher Plaster Works (
www.butcherplasterworks.com <http://www.butcherplasterworks.com>). They can 
come to your home, make a 'squeeze' (a copy of the undamaged cornicing) then 
recreate it in perfect plaster detail. After that, they return to seamlessly 
reinstate the missing section. Prices depend on the level of ornate detail.

Â· If you have a decorating question for Oliver, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk
 <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 