
Giant kites could supply green energy without the need for taxpayer-funded 
subsidies within years, according to one of the firms developing the technology.

Kite Power Solutions <http://www.kitepowersolutions.com/the-company/> expects 
to open the UK’s first kite power plant in March 2017 at the Ministry of 
Defence’s West Freugh site in Stranraer, Scotland.

It hopes to roll out the technology onshore and at sea, building systems with 
the capacity to produce “hundreds of megawatts” of power within the decade.

The company believes the technology, developed by a handful of firms around 
the world, could slash the cost of wind energy supplied by conventional 
turbines. And it predicted that kite power would cost so little that developing 
countries would be able to use it to wean themselves off polluting diesel 
generators and other carbon-heavy energy sources.

The technology involves rigging two giant kites, each up to 70 square metres, 
to either side of a turbine. The first kite rises with the wind, up to a height 
of 450 metres, moving in a figure-of-eight pattern. The movement pulls a rope 
that turns a turbine, generating power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9858ca0cf3f0f2d3f9b66519d13876aeea203562%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kite%20power%20to%20take%20flight%20in%20Scotland%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kite%20power%20to%20take%20flight%20in%20Scotland%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9858ca0cf3f0f2d3f9b66519d13876aeea203562%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 The kites are attached to hydraulic winches. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the 
Guardian 
As one kite descends, the other rises in tandem, meaning that electricity can 
be generated almost constantly.

A spokesman for Kite Power Solutions said the technology could halve the cost 
of offshore wind energy, dispensing with the need for governments tosubsidise 
wind <https://www.carbonbrief.org/uk-renewables-auction-pushes-down-costs> in 
an effort to reduce carbon emissions.

David Ainsworth said offshore wind energy was predicted to cost about 10 euro 
cents (9p) per kWh by 2022, meaning governments would be forced to pay the 
difference between that and the wholesale cost of energy, currently about 5.5 
cents per kWh.

BVG Associates energy consultancy estimates that kite power could cost just 
five cents per kWh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa80279c0aeed0969eeb372aaf1a3f5e23ba9a042%2F0_186_5468_3280%2F5468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kite%20power%20to%20take%20flight%20in%20Scotland%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kite%20power%20to%20take%20flight%20in%20Scotland%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa80279c0aeed0969eeb372aaf1a3f5e23ba9a042%2F0_186_5468_3280%2F5468.jpg>
 Kite testing in Essex. The technology could curb rising CO2 emissions in the 
developing world. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Ainsworth said the technology was easy to install and maintain, meaning it 
could be deployed in deep water, on floating structures far from shore. “If we 
do that, it opens up a global deepwater offshore wind market,” he said.

The technology could curb rising CO2 emissions in the developing world, where 
the need to save money forces people to resort to polluting technologies such 
as diesel, Ainsworth said.

The company has tested the technology on a small scale in Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/04/british-team-designs-high-tech-kites-to-harness-wind-energy>
 and will move its headquarters to Glasgow in readiness for next year’s launch. 
It has won planning permission for a 500kW demonstration system but plans to 
build a 3MW power station after that and is identifying other sites to develop.

A 3MW system would be comparable in power to smaller wind turbines but can 
produce up to 20% more energy, the company claims. It will also be less than 
20% of the weight of a conventional horizontal axis wind turbine, which is made 
partly out of steel. The kite can fly higher than the tip of a wind turbine, 
reaching heights where wind tends to be stronger and more consistent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F937cc0fe6f26fb631ff4aed7a2dd97a929cb5742%2F1252_868_2197_2746%2F2197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kite%20power%20to%20take%20flight%20in%20Scotland%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kite%20power%20to%20take%20flight%20in%20Scotland%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fkite-power-solutions-scotland-green-energy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F937cc0fe6f26fb631ff4aed7a2dd97a929cb5742%2F1252_868_2197_2746%2F2197.jpg>
 Bill Hampton, left, and David Ainsworth test their alternative energy 
solution. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
The UK’s green energy trade body, RenewableUK, welcomed the technology but 
warned it was not a silver bullet. The deputy chief executive, Maf Smith, said: 
“This is an ambitious project to harness wind power at extraordinary heights 
and it shows the level of innovation within the renewables industry.

“Kite power is at an early stage of development and it will be interesting to 
see how the technology progresses. We will need a wide range of energy sources 
in the future to meet our needs in a sustainable way.”

Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates has said there is a 10% chance kite power 
could be the “magic solution” for global renewable energy needs.

Kite Power Solutions has received funding from the former Department of Energy 
and Climate Change, theEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/energy> 
Entrepreneurs Fund and private backers. Its largest shareholders are Kite Power 
Solution’s chief executive, Bill Hampton, and chief operating officer, John 
Hardy.
 