
When South Africa’s ruling party no longer wanted Thabo Mbeki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mbeki> to be head of state after allegations 
he had abused his power, the former president had the “decency” to exit 
gracefully, senior ANC sources say. But no one expects Jacob Zuma to do the 
same.

“Zuma will cling on by his fingernails because of all these people who stand 
to lose out if he leaves,” said one party leader, adding: “This man must be 
held to account for what he did to the ANC.”

Pressure has been mounting on the South African president this week amid fresh 
claims about his close ties to a wealthy business family, the Guptas, who are 
said to wield extraordinary power over the affairs of state – offering around 
cabinet positions to make sure their business interests are protected.

Jacob Zuma denies influence of wealthy Gupta family in South African cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/jacob-zuma-denies-outside-influence-in-south-african-cabinet>
On Thursday Zuma had the opportunity to distance himself from Guptas ahead of 
this weekend’s meeting of the ANC’s most senior leadership, the National 
Executive Committee (NEC), when he answered questions on the scandal in 
parliament.

He was expected to address a claim by the deputy finance minister, Mcebisi 
Jonas, that the Guptas had offered him the finance minister’s post shortly 
beforeZuma fired the incumbent, Nhlanhla Nene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/south-africa-says-zumamustfall-after-shock-sacking-of-finance-minister>
. But instead, the president said it had nothing to do with him. “Don’t ask me. 
Ask the Guptas or Jonas. I have no business with that,” he said.

Zuma insisted that no ministers had been appointed by the Guptas. “I am in 
charge. No minister was ever appointed by the Guptas or anyone else. I appoint 
the ministers.”

Yet the allegations have continued. Today the former head of Eskom, South 
Africa’s state electricity company, said his exit had been engineered by the 
Guptas. “They called me and said they will have me fired because I am not 
playing the game. I was forced to resign shortly after that,”Zola Tsotsi told 
the weekly Mail & Guardian 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2016-03-17-gupta-family-edged-me-out-of-eskom-says-tsotsi/>
.

Former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor has also said that the Guptas 
<http://www.iol.co.za/news/politics/i-love-the-anc-but-i-love-sa-more---vytjie-mentor-1999262>
 offered her the job of public enterprises minister, replacing then minister 
Barbara Hogan.Hogan has outlined how she was pressurised 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/politics/2016/03/17/I-was-put-under-pressure-to-meet-Gupta-linked-company-Hogan>
 to favour an airline company linked to the Guptas while in the post.

Cabinet minister Ngoako Ramatlhodi has confirmed he was invited 
<http://ewn.co.za/2016/03/17/Ngoako-Ramatlhodi-joins-the-Gupta-confession-chorus>
 to dinner by the Guptas while he was mineral resources minister. He declined, 
and was later moved out of the position tomake way for the inexperienced 
Mosebenzi Zwane 
<http://ewn.co.za/2015/09/25/Mosebenzi-Zwanes-relation-with-the-Guptas-raises-concerns>
, who has close links to the family.

Zuma’s decision to dismiss all these claims rather than condemning his wealthy 
allies has put the ANC in a difficult position.


“I hate to admit it but [opposition leader] Julius [Malema] is right,” said 
another prominent ANC member. “Zuma does not deserve the respect due to a 
president.” He added that he was so angry about how Zuma had allowed the Guptas 
to control his presidency that he could not bear to greet him anymore.

A leader in South Africa’s ruling alliance said he had tried to speak to Zuma 
about the Guptas and advised him to end the relationship. “He just laughs and 
says ‘Don’t worry Baba. It is being handled.’ I don’t know what that means.” 
Asked what happens now, the alliance leader said “Well he must face what’s 
coming”.


The question is, what is coming?

Asked whether Zuma could be recalled 
<http://www.enca.com/south-africa/exclusive-mantashe-guptagate> at this 
weekend’s executive meeting, the influential ANC secretary general Gwede 
Mantashe answered with a technicality: No ANC member has asked him to put a 
recall on the agenda, Mantashe said.

But his further responses offer an insight into how the ANC will deal with the 
matter: “The ANC has a capability and capacity to deal with issues. … We have a 
responsibility and a duty to ensure that the ANC cannot be dragged down,” he 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjacob-zuma-knives-out-south-africa-guptagate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F824ac256b0e5aa2ddcee5d00000d535d0a057d41%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Knives%20are%20out%20for%20Jacob%20Zuma%20as%20South%20Africa's%20Guptagate%20grows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjacob-zuma-knives-out-south-africa-guptagate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Knives%20are%20out%20for%20Jacob%20Zuma%20as%20South%20Africa%27s%20Guptagate%20grows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fjacob-zuma-knives-out-south-africa-guptagate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F824ac256b0e5aa2ddcee5d00000d535d0a057d41%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Members of the ANC women’s league, whose representatives support Zuma. 
Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
Mantashe also encouraged more ANC members to come forward. “If people have 
experiences they must come to the ANC. We’ll listen very carefully. We’ll deal 
with the broader picture. We are refusing to be narrow in dealing with this 
matter because it is bigger than this one incident.”

Some ANC members suggest that Mantashe’s office should be mandated to 
investigate Gupta contagion in the ANC and the state. Others believe that a 
special tribunal should be set up for ANC members to come forward with 
information on attempts to corrupt them.

The South African Communist party, part of the governing alliance, has called 
for an investigation and a judicial commission of inquiry into “growing 
evidence of the manipulation of political appointments by the Gupta family”..

With the political fallout intensifying 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NdA63Z3VD6o&feature=youtu.be>, the Guptas have 
further enraged the party by claiming that the allegations against them are 
“political point scoring between rival factions within the ANC”. Mantashe said 
this showed the Guptas’ disrespect for the ruling party.

“It is arrogance to the superlative degree of a family that believes that the 
ANC is nothing to them,” he said. “The ANC must not be blackmailed into 
inaction by being accused of being in a factional battle. It is not in a 
factional battle.”

While Mantashe is expected to lead the charge against the Guptas at the NEC, 
he is unlikely to be as forthright over the president’s role in this surrender 
of his powers. It will be up to the committee to take this on. While the 
executive committee was previously tipped heavily in Zuma’s favour, his support 
rests largely with the ANC Youth League, Women’s League and the military 
veterans association, as well as the so-calledpremier league faction 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-09-07-ancs-leadership-race-the-rise-of-the-premier-league/#.VuwER2ThDAw>
.

Other NEC members, including cabinet ministers, are being canvassed to speak 
out against Zuma and the Guptas.

“The important thing is that we do not rush to get results. There cannot be a 
recall outcome this weekend. It is a process but in the end he [Zuma] will go,” 
said one source. “Gwede’s approach is to give you a long rope to hang 
yourself,” he added.

Another ANC member believes that treasurer general Zweli Mkhize, a close ally 
of Zuma’s, will try to broker a deal for harsh action against the Guptas and no 
action against the president. As he had done repeatedly, Zuma is washing his 
hands of culpability and denies knowing what the Guptas were doing.

While his allies might buy Zuma some time, a surge of anger from ANC 
structures and the public, as well as the pending Constitutional Court ruling 
on the use of taxpayers money tofund his home in Nkandla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/south-african-president-to-partly-pay-back-cash-used-for-home-upgrade>
, will keep up the pressure.


Mantashe has made the point that it was a lot more complicated for the ANC to 
deal with Zuma than had been the case in the dispute with Mbeki.When the 
executive recalled Mbeki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/21/mbeki.resignation> he was no 
longer a serving leader in the party.

“Here we are talking about the president of the ANC who is the president of 
the republic. Remember that you are dealing with two people in one,” Mantashe 
said.

South Africa playing a high-stakes game as president and treasury square off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/south-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma>
It will be extremely difficult for the ANC to act against its senior most 
leader, particularly in an election year. There are some fears that the 
opposition would exploit this, pointing out the ANC’s leadership weaknesses. 
However, there are also concerns about how much damage Zuma is doing to the ANC 
and the impact on the party’s electoral base.

Zuma has survived numerous scandals by getting others to take the fall for him 
or denying responsibility for wrongdoing. From his performance in parliament on 
Thursday, he clearly wants to adopt the same approach now. But he has lost 
political capital and credibility and is also clearly vested in the Gupta 
business empire.

His refusal to acknowledge that his friends have compromised him and the 
integrity of the state points to his dependence on the relationship with the 
Guptas.

The ANC is now faced with one of the biggest decisions in its 104-year history 
– whether to put up with the Zuma-Gupta contagion or can purge itself of the 
poison. Either way, the party will bleed. But it must face the fact that it 
canot rely of its electoral dominance forever.

A version of this article first apepared on Daily Maverick 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-03-18-the-gupta-contagion-can-zuma-escape-culpability/#.VuwFD2ThDAw>
 