
Hello Flo: “Auntie Flo” (Starts at 00:04) – Canada

Auntie Flo is the personification of a woman’s period in a funny new 
commercial for Hello Flo – a company with a reputation for employing a more 
grown-up attitude than its competition. In three very different scenarios, 
Auntie Flo copes admirably – if a little unwillingly – with everything that’s 
thrown at her.
Director: Max Sherman <http://www.blinkprods.com/a/6189> 

Nike: “Enjoy the Chase” (Starts at 02:13) – USA

We all know it didn’t quite work out for Rory McIlroy at this year’s Masters 
but when this advert was broadcast, he was yet to hit a ball in earnest. Anyone 
who considers golf a pastime rather than a sport will be given pause after 
watching the young Northern Irishman’s ‘Groundhog Day’ training regimen.
Agency: Wieden + Kennedy (Portland) <http://www.wk.com/work/from/portland>
Director: Derek Cianfrance 
<http://www.radicalmedia.com/usa/advertising/derek-cianfrance>

Apple TV: “Father Time” (Starts at 03:16) – USA

Having impressed critics and audiences alike with his performance in ‘Creed’, 
Michael B Jordan appears to be on the brink of another choice role in a sports 
movie in this funny commercial for Apple TV. But his opportunity to play Los 
Angeles Lakers great Kobe Bryant may not work out if he doesn’t learn a little 
tact.
Agency: TBWA / Media Arts Lab (USA) <http://www.mediaartslab.com/> 

Road Safety (Republic of Ireland): “Never Let Go” (Starts at 04:21) – Ireland

Irish International BBDO’s impressive work for the country’s road safety 
campaign continues with an unsettling film focusing on loss of control. The 
revolving visuals disorient the viewer as a man tumbles through a dark vacuum. 
There’s little chance to cling to those he most treasures, but the desperation 
in his eyes shows he cannot bear to be parted from them.
Agency: Irish International BBDO (Dublin) <https://www.irishinternational.com/>
Director: Gioacchino Petronicce <http://gioacchinopetronicce.com/> 

Jason Stone is the editor of David Reviews <http://www.davidreviews.tv/>
 