
On Friday 2 September it will be exactly 350 years since The Great Fire of 
London <http://collections.museumoflondon.org.uk/online/object/102171.html> 
swept through the capital. While the Museum of London has an exhibition marking 
the anniversary, we’d like to invite readers to share their artwork on London 
in general. The great Rhinebeck Panorama of London depicts the capital at the 
peak of its naval power and position as a global city in the 19th century. 

Artists’ flames mark 350th anniversary of Great Fire of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/31/artists-flames-mark-350th-anniversary-of-great-fire-of-london>
The Rhinebeck Panorama 
<http://collections.museumoflondon.org.uk/online/object/431604.html> gives us a 
stunning birds eye view of London around 1806. It is a watercolour painted on 
four sheets of paper, almost nine feet wide, and gets its name from Rhinebeck, 
in the USA, where it was found in 1940.

We are high above the River Thames, looking west from roughly where Tower 
Bridge now stands. Below, daily life in the city is laid out before us: a man 
flies a kite, a building is on fire, soldiers are on parade, a funeral takes 
place, elegant ladies stroll arm-in- arm, carriages cross London Bridge, and 
shipping jostles for space in the Pool of London.

The streets of Southwark and Lambeth spread out to the left, the City to the 
right. In the middle-distance lies Westminster. Beyond are the suburbs of 
Battersea and Chelsea, and the villages of Fulham, Hammersmith and Kew. Farther 
off, the panorama embraces the surrounding countryside. On the horizon, Windsor 
Castle can be seen, a subtle reminder that London is part of the wider national 
landscape.

The teeming cargo vessels are evidence of London’s mercantile significance and 
economic power. Yet, despite the sense of peace and prosperity the panorama 
gives, Britain was then embroiled in the Napoleonic Wars. In fact, the Battle 
of Trafalgar took place only about a year before this picture was made. And 
amongst the colliers, lighters, barques and barges, is a receiving ship for men 
press-ganged into the Royal Navy.

Although the overall impression is convincing, the scene is not quite 
accurate. There are some discrepancies in scale, for instance. Still, this is 
about as close to an overall view of pre-Victorian London as we’re likely to 
get. But accuracy wasn’t the main point of an image like this: the main point 
was to amaze. Panoramas were extremely popular in the late-18th and early-19th 
centuries. Probably this is a study for a much larger painting, which would 
have been displayed on a curved wall, giving the illusion that the viewer 
really was hovering over the city. Today, we get a similar view from the Shard.


Share your images and depictions of London and what the capital means to you. 

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork viaGuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

The Fire! Fire! exhibition 
<http://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/museum-london/whats-on/exhibitions/fire-fire>
, documenting the Great Fire of London is at the Museum of London until 17 
April 2017.

 