
 Labor will use the resumption of parliament to force a determination on 
whether leaked material from the NBN Co seized incontroversial police raids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
 during the federal election campaign attracts privilege.

The documents seized during the late night raids have been sealed in the 
parliament since the resolution of alegal wrangle with the AFP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/20/labor-furious-that-nbn-staff-member-sent-photos-of-police-raid-to-colleagues>
 during the campaign – and Labor will now move to refer the case to the 
parliament’s powerful privileges committee for resolution.

Australian federal police raid Labor senator's office over alleged NBN leaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
The Melbourne parliamentary office of Labor’s deputy Senate leader, Stephen 
Conroy, and a house in Brunswick, were raided by theAustralian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> in the 
second week of the election campaign.

The raids followed a number of damaging leaks from the NBN Co that had called 
into question the management of the project when Malcolm Turnbull was the 
communications minister.

Both the raids themselves, and their timing, infuriated Labor, and prompted 
Conroy towrite to the AFP commissioner, Andrew Colvin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/24/nbn-leak-raids-labor-takes-fight-to-assert-privilege-to-senate>
, formally asserting a claim of privilege.

Labor lodged a complaint with the AFP after the raids alleging a member of 
staff from the NBN Co, present on the night, took and circulated pictures of 
documents obtained during the operation which could have included Labor’s then 
confidential broadband policy for the election.

Following that complaint an interim agreement was reached that all the 
material taken during the operation was covered by parliamentary privilege and 
would be sealed and stored by the clerk of the Senate.

Labor anger after NBN employee spread raid photos before files were sealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/20/labor-furious-that-nbn-staff-member-sent-photos-of-police-raid-to-colleagues>
Conroy on Friday told Guardian Australia he had now sought advice from the 
clerk about how to proceed. “We will be pursuing these matters at the earliest 
opportunity,” he said. “We will be seeking a referral to the privileges 
committee.”

Labor had the option of pursuing the privileges claim through the courts, but 
pushing the issue back into the parliamentary arena will not only revive the 
political controversy over the management of the NBN project – it will trigger 
a vote on whether material supplied to politicians by whistleblowers in the 
course of parliamentary business should attract privilege or not.

During the campaign, Nick Xenophon, who now has a Senate bloc of three, 
signalled willingness to support Conroy in the referral to privileges and he 
indicated he would urge theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> to vote for the referral.

Xenophon said the issue of whether whistleblowers could come to Senators with 
confidential material was a significant one for all parliamentarians, and 
consequently, this was an issue bigger than partisan politics.
 