
Steam billows from an energy plant in a stretch of Kenya’s Great Rift Valley, 
about 180km north of the capital, Nairobi. But the white clouds rising from the 
tidy grid of pipes aren’t a sign of polluting greenhouse gas emissions 
contributing to climate change. They are a signal that the country of more than 
44 million, where some 65% of the population does not have access to 
electricity, is one giant step closer to delivering clean, reliable, renewable 
power to its people.

The first phase of the $746m Menengai geothermal development project 
<http://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cifnet/sites/default/files/Kenya%20Menegai%20Geothermal%20Development%20Project%20-%20Approved.pdf>
 is well under way, with already proven steam resources capable of generating 
130 megawatts of electricity and working toward commissioning the first power 
plants in 2016.

Sustainable development quiz: what do you know about the global goals?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/sustainable-development-summit-2015-quiz-global-goals>
At its full 400MW potential, the project aims to provide stable, low-cost 
power to about 500,000 households and 300,000 businesses, and avoid nearly 2m 
tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions annually.

The expansion of Menengai is just one of many projects the government is 
pursuing as part of its plan to generate 5,500MW ofgeothermal power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/nov/22/kenya-geothermal-power-energy-revolution>
 by 2031. Kenya’s current geothermal capacity is 595MW, but the ministry of 
energy estimates the country has the potential to produce about10,000MW 
<http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/Kenya-eighth-largest-global-geothermal-producer-/-/539546/2629336/-/fdrl5uz/-/index.html>
.

Across Africa and around the world, low-carbon renewable energy is emerging as 
the go-to green growth and poverty reduction strategy. Kenya’s neighbours
Ethiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/feb/13/ethiopia-geothermal-energy-potential>
andTanzania <http://www.ippmedia.com/frontend/?l=74636> are also pursuing 
geothermal power, while countries in the Middle East and north Africa are 
focusing their efforts on expanding solar power. Still others are exploring 
mini-grid and off-grid solutions in wind and solar to supply the poorest and 
hardest-to-reach rural communities.

More than 1 billion people <http://www.iea.org/topics/energypoverty/> 
worldwide still lack access to electricity that could enable them to light 
their homes, cook or pump clean water.

During my 15 years working in development in Africa and Asia, and now at the 
helm ofClimate Investment Funds <http://www-cif.climateinvestmentfunds.org/>, I 
have seen how a lack of electricity handcuffs poor families to poverty – 
especially women and girls, who have to gather fuel and carry out the household 
chores. The success of every one of the17 sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
,formally adopted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/25/global-goals-summit-2015-new-york-un-pope-shakira-malala-yousafzai>
 at the UN in September, depends on a swell of renewable, sustainable and 
affordable energy.

Global goals can deliver on 2C and new development finance – here's how | Owen 
Barder, Alex Evans and Alice Lépissier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/24/global-goals-climate-change-2c-development-finance-emissions-trading>
The greatest barrier facing Kenya and other developing countries is a lack of 
funding to develop their renewable energy potential.Renewable energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/renewableenergy> plants are expensive 
to build. But once they are up and running, they can deliver cheap flows of 
energy. Reaching that point, however, takes millions of dollars in investment 
that most poor countries cannot easily access.

One way to surmount this barrier is to provide countries with the starter 
funds they need to get their renewable energy operations off the ground, 
supported by policies that inspire confidence and growth. Once countries have 
made progress, they can more easily convince new investors to chip in, 
especially from the private sector.

Climate Investment Funds has provided $25m in concessional financing for 
Menengai in Kenya to help cover exploratory drilling – a critical but risky 
stage of development and a cost that most private investors are unwilling to 
bear. In fact, the company has earmarked $810m to advance geothermal power 
projects in 15 countries. This could potentially yield 3.5GW of new geothermal 
capacity, more than a quarter of current global installed capacity of almost 13 
GW. 
<http://geo-energy.org/reports/2015/2015%20Annual%20US%20%20Global%20Geothermal%20Power%20Production%20Report%20Draft%20final.pdf>
 Prospects are promising, and more than $10bn is expected from other financiers.

This is a start, but so much more must be done to make geothermal and other 
renewable energy markets viable in developing countries. The risks are high, 
but so are the rewards if forward-thinking countries like Kenya and early 
investors, like Climate Investment Funds, are willing to lay the groundwork. 
Meeting the ambitious targets set in the SDGs, and fulfilling the commitments 
each country makes in a hoped-for global agreement after UN climate talks this 
winter, means developing countries have to advance along a low-carbon pathway. 
For the good of our planet and our people, we must invest in this progress.

 * Mafalda Duarte is manager of Climate Investment Funds
 