
Trees at four different sites in the Lake District have been found infected 
withash dieback disease <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ashdieback>, according to 
the Forestry Commission. The sites include areas of woodland near Ambleside and 
Keswick.

It is not known how the trees became infected with the Hymenoscyphus fraxineus 
fungus (which was originally calledChalara fraxinea). Charlton Clark, a 
spokesman for the Forestry Commission, said: “The disease can be spread either 
by spores of the fungus being carried by the wind or by movement of infected 
ash plants, whose spores can then be blown to neighbouring trees. It could have 
arrived in the Lake District by either or both these means.”

The disease has spread widely across Europe since trees were first reported 
dying in large numbers in Poland in 1992. It was first confirmed in the UK in 
February 2012, when it was found in a consignment of infected trees sent from a 
nursery in the Netherlands to a nursery in Buckinghamshire, England.

Ash dieback 'could affect 75% of trees in worst-hit areas'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/30/ash-dieback-trees-2018> 


Clark said the commission’s focus was now on helping woodland owners limit the 
impacts of the disease and replace ash trees with the most appropriate 
alternative species. It is also conducting genetic research to improve 
tolerance and resistance so that tolerant ash trees can be bred for the future.

“We want to ensure that the graceful ash tree continues to have a place in our 
forests and landscapes. That’s why we’re protecting non-infected areas where we 
can, and conducting a range of research to understand the disease, including 
genetic research to improve tolerance and resistance,” he said.


About 90% of Denmark’s ash trees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/07/disease-killing-denmarks-ash-trees>
 are already infected with the disease and in October 2012 the UK government
banned imports of ash trees from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/oct/26/ash-dieback-imports-banned>
 in an attempt to halt the spread of the disease.
 