
Lambeth council has published a tender for the supply, implementation, 
operation and support of a mobile telephone parking payment system, worth up to 
Â£30.5m.

According to a notice in the Official Journal of the European Union, the three 
year deal will cover online parking software and other "innovative" 
applications. The chosen supplier will be expected to support and manage a cash 
payment option available through local outlets for members of the public 
wishing to pay for parking spaces.

"The service provider will be required to ensure customers can set up a 
parking session in a variety of ways to include payment by SMS, touchtone, 
mobile and web," it says.

A website service and call centre operation will also be required to support 
the service and the service provider must ensure their system integrates, if 
necessary, with the current parking systems used by each contracting 
organisation.

The council also expects the chosen supplier to allocate unique pay by phone 
location references to all parking bays and to supply and install signage about 
the system in relevant locations.

"The system proposed must allow for expansion for future variations which may 
incorporate other areas of the contracting organisations' service provision, 
for example, permit payments, suspensions, penalty charge notices and other 
non-parking related payments," says the notice.

Other public bodies expected to participate in the deal include Brighton and 
Hove, Westminster and City of London councils and Transport for London.

The contract is expected to begin by July 2012, and has a one year extension 
option.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Government 
Computing Network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 