
Some remarkable names have been honoured at the Observer Ethical Awards since 
they began in 2005: Caroline Lucas, Annie Lennox and David Attenborough have 
all stood onstage to accept prizes, and campaigners as diverse as Jane Goodall,
Al Gore <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/algore>, Malala Yousafzai, Lenny 
Henry and Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall have also been recognised.

But what really makes each year's awards special is that they are an 
opportunity to honour those who work under the radar to make the world a 
better, cleaner, kinder place.

We've celebrated Pestival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/jun/13/lucy-siegle-observer-ethical-awards-pestival-conservation-project-year>
 (a three-day Glastonbury for the insect world), clothes made of fungus by
schoolchildren on the Isle of Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/16/observer-ethical-awards-grow-clothes>
 and a Yorkshire man who's established wildflower meadows in his Ilkley home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/16/observer-ethical-awards-2013-francis-mccrickard>
.

Each year we get to bring these amazing ideas and good people into the pages 
of theObserver Magazine and on to the stage at our awards event.

This week is the last before voting closes for this year's awards, and we want 
to give you one last reminder to nominate not just the faces you see on the 
telly but those people in your local school, your local allotment or working 
away on other projects for your community.

As well as our established awards, such as Campaigner of the Year, Ecover's 
Young Green Champions and Travel, sustainable fashion will take centre stage 
this year with work by the finalists displayed on awards night.

You can also vote or nominate for the community energy award, sponsored by 
National Grid. This rewards communities that have real vision in producing 
home-grown power.

B&Q is overseeing the Great Energy Race, a competition among 20 UK households 
to see which can save the most energy. The winner gets £10,000 to improve their 
home.

Make a name you care about a winner this year. Make sure your nomination 
counts.

How to nominate

Nominate your ethical heroes – the closing date is 21 March. For more 
information on the different categories and how to vote, go to
theguardian.com/observer-ethical-awards 
<http://theguardian.com/observer-ethical-awards>
 