
It’s nearly 10pm at Aldershot’s Safe Haven cafe 
<http://www.sabp.nhs.uk/gpnews/surrey-heath/spring2014/service-developments/new-out-of-hours-safe-haven-in-aldershot-for-people-with-mental-health-problems>
 and there is a knock at the door. It’s quickly opened and a young man rushes 
in. He takes a seat in the corner of the bright room and a friendly member of 
staff joins him. Nearby a young woman is playing cards. She’s laughing softly 
with her companions, aware that the man is clearly upset.

She knows what it’s like. At age 25, Kimberley Russell (not her real name), 
who has borderline personality disorder as well as an eating disorder and 
depression, has had her share of crises. The cafe, which is open every evening 
to anyone who needs mental health support out-of-hours, has become a lifeline.

She started coming a year ago. “I was a bit anxious to begin with,” she says. 
“I would only come for 15 minutes and then I would scurry out of the door. But 
as time has gone on, I’ve got to know people and we’re like a happy community.”

A&E staff attitudes to patients in mental health crisis ‘often shocking’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/12/ae-staff-attitudes-to-patients-in-mental-health-crisis-often-shocking>
Kimberley, who self-harms, comes every night to prevent crises. Before the 
cafe opened, she would often end up in A&E. “I don’t know where I’d be without 
it. In A&E, it was just painful to be sitting and waiting to speak to someone. 
But here, you walk through the door and there are three members of staff who 
are really supportive.”

The impact of the cafe, which is open every weeknight from 6pm until 11pm, and 
every weekend and bank holiday from 12:30pm to 11pm, on service users is clear.
Independent research <http://www.sabp.nhs.uk/news/safehaven> by the consultants 
Mental Health Strategies found that in the first six months after its launch, 
psychiatric admissions from the cafe’s catchment area fell by 33%. While not 
all admissions come through A&E, there were 63 confirmed reports of people 
using the Safe Haven cafe as an alternative to A&E in its initial three-month 
trial, resulting in savings of £20,223. Those with mental health problems 
typically only have A&E to turn to if they are reaching a crisis point in the 
evening.

Lisa Tilston, assistant team leader of  MCCH <http://www.mcch.org.uk/>, a 
mental health charity, that runs the cafe in partnership withSurrey and Borders 
Partnership NHS trust <http://www.sabp.nhs.uk/> and Catalyst 
<http://www.catalystsupport.org.uk/>, a charity whichsupports those with 
alcohol and drug addiction as well as people with mental health problems, says: 
“It’s not clinical like A&E, so people really enjoy coming here and they use it 
as a preventative measure. It’s become hugely popular.”

In its first year just under 3,000 people used it; now 300 people a month 
visit the cafe. Opened in 2014, with just £70,000 fromNHS North East Hampshire 
and Farnham clinical commissioning group 
<http://www.northeasthampshireandfarnhamccg.nhs.uk/> for the three-month trial, 
the cafe has since won a string of awards and has secured annual funding of 
£237,000.

In the first six months after its launch, psychiatric admissions from the 
cafe’s catchment area fell by 33%

With £600m more funding promised for mental health services in the spending 
review, and a portion earmarked for crisis care, interest in the cafe’s 
approach is growing. Last week, a second cafe opened in Camberley and five more 
are planned across Surrey and North East Hampshire by March 2016. “We 
constantly have CCGs or other organisations dropping in or calling us about the 
service,” Tilston says. “I’ve got Redhill [mental health service] coming in a 
few weeks time. There is an enormous amount of interest because people think it 
will work for them.”

In January, mental health admissions to A&E reached record levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/01/mental-health-emergency-highest-winter-burstow>
, but some argue A&E is notappropriate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/15/a-e-suicidal-patients-emergency-departments>
 for someone in crisis. A recentCare Quality Commission report 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/content/public-services-must-%E2%80%98wake-up%E2%80%99-gaps-mental-health-crisis-care-warns-cqc>
 found that 86% of those who had received care from charities and volunteers 
felt that their concerns had been taken seriously, but only 37% said that they 
felt this from A&E staff. In Aldershot, anyone in need is welcome at Safe 
Haven, regardless of their condition, age, background, gender or whether they 
have accessed services before. Colette Lane, a service-user representative who 
helped Surrey and Borders shape the project, thinks its success, especially 
with men – who are notoriously hard to reach – lies in its simplicity. “I think 
it’s popular because of the cafe environment. It’s a safe place. Going to a 
cafe is an acceptable thing to do.”

Some users come every day, while others come only when they feel that they are 
near crisis point. Lane says: “If you’re at home and tension is building, by 
seven o’clock, it’s too late to go to the doctors and the night just draws out. 
Now, people have a place to go.” Iain Watkins, 46, relies on the cafe. Ten 
years ago, he ended up in a coma after a messy divorce and redundancy led him 
to attempt to take his own life. Battling mental health problems since then has 
not been helped by the loneliness he feels. “The first time I came to the cafe, 
I stood outside in the rain smoking for 20 minutes plucking up the courage to 
go in,” he says. “Now I come here most nights. I still self harm, but less so 
and I haven’t had to go to A&E since coming.

“I’ve had to learn that it’s OK to talk about how I feel. The cafe helps with 
that, but you don’t have to talk, you can just come to hang out.”

Another user, Heather Evans, a mother of two, has schizoaffective disorder and 
comes every evening without fail. “The loneliness is the worst part of having a 
mental health problem. The other people who come here … we understand each 
other. We’re all in the same boat.”

She sums up the impact the cafe has had simply: “I would have ended up dead 
without it.”
 