
 A lawyer says she has received a violent threat over her role at the centre 
of a high-profile race discrimination case and that her client is preparing a 
dossier of online abuse to send to police.


Solicitor Susan Moriarty contacted Queensland police about a “particularly 
distressing” threat over her handling ofa lawsuit targeting Queensland 
University of Technology students 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-computer-lab-racial-discrimination-lawsuit-thrown-out>
 under section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act, which included the threat: 
“We are coming to get you.”


It forms part of a bid to appeal against the federal circuit court’s dismissal 
of proceedings 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/australia-news/2016/dec/09/court-asked-to-close-off-search-for-origin-of-racist-qut-facebook-post>
 against the students by Moriarty’s client, former QUT Indigenous studies unit 
staffer Cindy Prior.


Court asked to close off search for origin of racist QUT Facebook post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/court-asked-to-close-off-search-for-origin-of-racist-qut-facebook-post>
Prior also plans to lodge a complaint with the Australian federal police over 
the abuse she has received after publicity about her case.


This included a Facebook private message last Friday telling her she was a 
“racist bitch” who was “not fit to shovel shit”.

Moriarty has detailed in court papers a message, which nominated the 
Australian’s letters to the editor email address as a point of contact, and 
linked to a story by the newspaper about her role in the case.

An affidavit filed by Moriarty states that police attended her Brisbane law 
firm on 14 November after her office manager “forwarded emails on to me emailed 
to the firm over the weekend, one of which, linked to the Weekend Australian 
article, read: ‘We are coming to get you’.


“For reasons relating to my particular family circumstances I found that 
particularly distressing,” she said.


The message contained the subject line “blackmail and extortion”, stating it 
was from “Readers of The Australian <letters@theaustralian.com.au 
<mailto:letters@theaustralian.com.au>>”.

Prior’s lawyers have argued in court that the Australian’s extensive coverage 
of her case has enabled a “platform” for those campaigning to wind back section 
18C of the Racial Discrimination Act, which makes it unlawful to “offend, 
insult, humiliate or intimidate” others on the grounds of race, colour or 
ethnicity.


They filed material showing coverage of the case, mainly by the Australian, 
had received 24,500 online comments, include alleged calls for violence against 
Prior.


Moriarty told Guardian Australia a female police officer investigating her 
complaint had advised her to contact the Australian and ask them to disable 
online comments on its coverage of the case “because they were inciting 
violence”.

A Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> police 
spokesman confirmed officers provided that advice but said they did not launch 
an investigation, as Moriarty did not make a formal complaint. Moriarty said 
she did not contact the Australian as she doubted it would take action.

The solicitor said she was shocked at this response by police, adding: “I can 
assure you they attended my office because I made a complaint.”

“What on earth were they doing at my office on 14 November after my office 
manager telephoned and said that I needed to speak with police about a death 
threat?

“As an employment lawyer, I can tell you the words ‘formal complaint’ mean 
something and at no stage did they tell me I needed to ‘formalise’ my complaint.

“Better still, they phoned 30 minutes to an hour later and said they were 
trying to track down the [threatening] emails and how difficult it was because 
they were false email addresses.”

Moriarty said she has asked Prior to collate a dossier of abusive and 
threatening online messages to report to the AFP.

“This has been the subject of commentary not just in North America but in 
Europe as well,” she said. “There are many other Facebook posts but the problem 
is they’ve been travelling at such a rate over the past six months, I’ve not 
been able to keep up.


“But certainly I’ve asked her to prepare a dossier and we’re going to the 
federal police because this has got to stop.”

Moriarty said Prior had been lambasted by trolls who wrongly assumed she had 
not worked since her successful WorkCover claim against QUT.

In fact, Prior had been working for the past 15 months but Moriarty decided 
against including details of her employer in court material out of concern that 
she could be targeted at her workplace.

Moriarty’s account of the alleged threats forms part of her case for the 
federal court to allow Prior’s appeal outside the deadline for lodging it. The 
application will be heard on Friday.

The Australian story referred to in the alleged threat towards Moriarty 
involved former QUT student Kyran Findlater, whospoke of correspondence with 
Moriarty 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/plight-unmasks-the-injustice-of-18c/news-story/c996e4c63d49a13b0a2cc0192bbb7eba#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C17%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CHedley_Thomas%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1481509995396>
 over her client’s request to settle her complaint out of court for $5,000.

Moriarty claimed that Findlater had breached confidentiality terms of the 
settlement by giving the interview.

Findlater was among students who commented on the QUT “Stalker Space” Facebook 
page after Prior asked three white students, including Alex Wood, to leave an 
Indigenous-only computer room in 2013.

Prior, in a $250,000 lawsuit that ultimately went to court naming QUT and 
three students, argued unsuccessfully that the Facebook comments breached 
section 18C. On Friday a court ordered her to pay the students’ estimated legal 
costs of more than $200,000.


QUT, racial discrimination and why the Liberals' fight over 18C will lead to a 
sequel | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/04/qut-racial-discrimination-and-why-the-liberals-fight-over-18c-will-lead-to-a-sequel>
















 