
Business leaders have been burying their heads in the sand when it comes to 
issues such as climate change. While there are a few, often cited, stand-out 
examples, such as Paul Polman at Unilver and Ian Cheshire of Kingfisher, there 
is a worrying lack of new leaders snapping at their heels.

In November, we launched the leadership hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/leadership> to seek 
out the unfamiliar faces and explore the qualities and skill-sets required for 
good leadership. Jo Confino kicked off our coverage with a manifesto for 
business leaders to create a sustainable society. He found that a willingness 
to be both vulnerable and authentic were the top qualities for great leaders.


Lack of board support and stasis in middle management were cited as reasons 
that leaders feel powerless to drive sustainability in their businesses.

Marc Gunther suggested that Starbucks’ chief executive Howard Schultz deserved 
recognition for his leadership, having built a company that provides ownership 
and healthcare coverage to workers, invests in the environmental practices and 
wellbeing of coffee growers, supports marriage equality and honours America’s 
veterans.

Ian Cheshire argued that the EU target for energy efficiency improvements 
should be binding and at least 40%, not the “unhelpful” 27% set by politicians.


Here we look at the five most popular pieces that have featured on the 
leadership hub since its launch.


1. 29 qualities for business leaders to create a sustainable society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/nov/12/29-leadership-qualities-business-leaders-sustainable-society>

A manifesto for executives to embrace new ways of leading their corporations 
at a time of unprecedented challenges.

2. 10 top tweeters on sustainable leadership: from Al Gore to Sheryl Sandberg  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/nov/12/10-top-tweeters-sustainable-leadership-al-gore-sheryl-sandberg>

Some of the most compelling Twitter users talking about true sustainability 
leadership.

3. Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz: retail employees have some of the worst pay 
and benefits of any industry
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/nov/12/starbucks-ceo-howard-schultz-retail-employees-have-some-of-the-worst-pay-and-benefits-of-any-industry>

Despite criticism of the coffee giant over tax and fair trade coffee, Schultz 
has used his platform to call for social and political change in the US, 
including working to honour veterans.


4. 6 reasons CEOs feel powerless to drive sustainability into their companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/22/6-reasons-ceos-powerless-sustainability-companies>

More chief executives are searching for purpose but feel stuck and 
disillusioned by a lack of support and a lack of investor interest


5. 27% target for energy efficiency isn’t just unambitious; it’s unhelpful 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/30/weak-targets-energy-efficiency-ian-cheshire-bills-emissions>

Ian Cheshire argues that if political leaders want to help lower bills and 
emissions, they should help businesses create demand for energy efficiency, not 
set weak targets.

Get involved!

Let us know your favourite leadership story from 2014. Tweet us 
@GuardianSustBiz <https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz> with #GSB2014. To get in 
touch with ideas for coverage in 2015, email tess.riley@guardian.co.uk

The leadership hub 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/sustainable-business/series/leadership> is funded 
byXyntéo. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 
‘brought to you by’. Find out morehere 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/sponsored-content>.


Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
 <http://www.unil.ch/index.html>
 