
Media magnates Evgeny and Alexander Lebedev have pumped close to £100m into 
The Independent titles and London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/30/independent-titles-losses-evgeny-lebedev-enening-standard>
.

Figures from the father and son-controlled Lebedev Holdings Ltd, parent 
company of the newspapers, show that the amount lent to subsidiaries of the 
group to date is around £93.5m.

The group’s accounts for the year ended 29 September 2013 reveal that: “The 
amount due to MrAlexander Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev>, and companies in which 
he has an interest, and Mr Evgeny Lebedev at 29 September 2013 was £88,861,650, 
a rise of almost £12m over the previous year’s £76,362,650.

In addition interest payable amounted to £4,621,014 at the end of September, 
compared to £2,377,068 the previous year.

Alexander Lebedev gave the group interest free loans last year of almost £2m 
and “interest bearing loans” of £9.5m, according to records filed at Companies 
House published on Friday.

The accounts give a strong warning about the company’s dependence on the 
largesse of the Lebedevs, who earlier this year puttentative feelers out for a 
possible buyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jan/16/theindependent-alexander-lebedev>
.

“The company continues to make significant operating losses and requires 
significant further funding to continue in operational existence about which 
there is uncertainty,” according to the directors’ report that preface the 
accounts. “[This circumstance] represents material uncertainty that casts 
significant doubt upon the company’s ability to continue as a going concern.”

Lebedev Holding’s incurred a net loss of £14.5m and net liabilities of £53.5m 
for in the 12 months to 29 September 2013.

“Mr Lebedev and the company’s shareholder have expressed their willingness to 
continue supporting the company as and when required, however there is no 
formal funded facility agreed and therefore there is inherent uncertainty as to 
the continued availability off funding,” the report notes. “Nevertheless, the 
directors currently have no reason to believe that the company will not have 
access to adequate resources to continue in operational existence for the 
foreseeable future.”

The Lebedevs bought the Evening Standard in 2009 for £1, when the paper was 
losing money, and The Independent andIndependent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> in 2010.

Since then the Evening Standard, which is still 24.9% owned by Daily Mail 
publisher DMGT, hasbecome a free title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/02/london-evening-standard-free> 
with a circulation of almost 1m.

Lebedev Holdings’ subsidiary Independent Print, home to the Independent and 
Independent on Sunday, has launched successful cut price national title i, and 
in March the group – via another subsidiary, ESTV – launched local television 
stationLondon Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog/2014/apr/09/local-tv-operators-london-live-mustard-estuary>
.

Independent Print’s figures show a fall in losses from £17.5m last year to 
£12.3m, while the Evening Standard has moved into profit.

Evening Standard Ltd’s accounts to 29 September last year show that the title 
– which had been making a loss of £30m as a paid-for newspaper prior to the 
Lebedevs’ acquisition – made an operating profit of £1.75m, compared with 
£82,000 year on year.

The average number of people employed per month was up by ten on the same time 
last year to 244.

Signs of the cross-promotional relationship between London Live and the 
Lebedevs’ print interests emerge in the Evening Standard accounts, with the 
company making sales of £71,532 to ESTV. The accounts state: “The net amount 
owed to the company in respect of these services on 29 September 2013 was 
£16,686.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 