
 An electric storm as people arrive at the more northerly of the Reading and 
Leeds festival's two sites is an appropriate beginning to what is traditionally 
the loudest, most tattooed, raucous of the UK festivals. In this three-day 
parallel universe, you will encounter once sensible young men painted blue with 
their underpants on their head, normally demure young ladies removing delicate 
items for the benefit of the stage cameras, people summoning up deep guttural 
primal screams of angst and alienation – and some of them may even be in bands. 
Meanwhile, you will experience more American pop-punk bands than you ever 
thought existed, who noisily raise a middle finger to our British notions of 
art and cool and have thousands singing along to choruses about dicks. Well, 
sort of.

This year's festival gets off to an unusually quiet start. I don't see my 
first authentically drunk punter until 2.10pm and you can virtually walk right 
up to festival veteransHadouken! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/aug/26/readingandleedsfestival2007.readingandleedsfestival5>
, whose rave/metal/backwards baseball cap/Supremes samples'n'cheese combo gets 
arms in the air for all of 20 rows.
 embed code: Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9QXX3hHadjY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9QXX3hHadjY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9QXX3hHadjY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to see Green Day performing at the Reading 
branch of the festival <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QXX3hHadjY>

But don't be fooled. Beyond the eerie calm, war has broken out between what 
the festival has been like for the last 20 years or so and where it may be 
heading in the future. Traditional indie rock bands – the staple since the dawn 
of time, or at least sinceMeat Loaf was pelted with bottles of pee in 1988 
<http://www.virginmedia.com/music/features/worst-festival-sets.php?page=4> – 
aren't quite being fed like Christians to lions but facing equally slow deaths 
in front of tiny audiences in the Festival Republic tent ("hotly tipped" guitar 
typesMerchandise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/19/new-band-of-day-merchandise> and 
California X, that's you).

While much of the main stage bill still resembles a 2001 throwback, out in the 
fields and the tents, Leeds festival is undergoing the first stages of a 
pop/dance revolution. Any suspicion thatAlunaGeorge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alunageorge>'s shimmering electro would 
prove too airy for this festival are unfounded as their brilliant blend of 
innocence, old and new skool beats and a hint of subversion ("You know you like 
it but it drives you insane") fills the NME/Radio 1 tent past bursting. Even 
the rock tent has been invaded by dance beats in the form of political 
grime/metal mixersHacktivist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/01/hactivist-uniting-people-djent>, 
whose shout of "Who's coming on tour with us?" gets such a massive response 
they'll need a Jumbo Jet, not a tour bus.

A horde assemble to hear US Mumford types the Lumineers' one big hit Ho Hey 
and people literally sprint into the dance tent to hear hot panted CharliXCX 
blast into Icona Pop's No 1I Love It 
<http://www.muzu.tv/icona-pop/i-love-it-feat-charli-xcx-music-video/1523966/> 
(lest we forget, "a song I featured on and wrote").
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfQshpedbrZc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfQshpedbrZc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfQshpedbrZc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch Major Lazer perfomring at the Reading 
branch of the festival <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fQshpedbrZc>

With the event clearly no longer the bastion of male guitar rock, female 
musicians are a big hit this year withHaim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/haim>'s funky LA party jams proving the 
perfect soundtrack for the end of summer. Meanwhile, over on the main stage, 
traditional pop punk fights back withFall Out Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/falloutboy>, although even the US veterans 
seem to have acquired a disco beat. Their enormous fanbase marches over the 
hill to see them and promptly march away again, leavingNine Inch Nails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nineinchnails> facing a half-empty field, 
helping Trent Reznor deliver a shortish but glowering, magnificent set perhaps 
aimed personally at whoever put them up againstDisclosure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/may/31/disclosure-settle-album-stream>
. The deep house/dubstep/whatever-they-are-next duo promise surprises and bring 
on guest vocalists (Aluna Francis, Sam Smith and Friendly Fires' Ed McFarlane) 
to throw a bleepy party which extends half way across the top field. Azealia 
Banks's sassy hip-hop also proves hugely popular.

Perhaps this year will be a watershed, although main stage headliners Biffy 
Clyro <https://www.theguardian.com/music/biffy-clyro> show that a traditional 
warm welcome still awaits bare-chested, tattoeed Scotsmen whose songs can 
soundtrack the act of chucking lager into the air. However, they are most 
certainly not to be trusted as weathermen. "Rain can suck a dick, music is more 
powerful than nature," they cry, unwisely, as their ardour faces a monsoon.

At time of writing, some 10 hours later, it still hasn't stopped raining.
 