
If I said I wanted to die, the press, celebrities and the public would support 
my choice, seeing it as rational and understandable. Hell, they would probably 
set up a go-fund-me campaign to help me make it happen.

Yet when a healthy, non-disabled person wants to kill themself it’s seen as a 
tragedy, and support and prevention tools are provided. If nothing else 
convinces me that to legalise assisted suicide is not a safe option for many of 
us then this does. Suicide is not seen as socially desirable – so why is 
assisted suicide seen as compassionate when it’s for ill or disabled people?

Marieke Vervoort, the 38-year-old Belgian Paralympian gold medallist, is only 
the most recent disabled person to announce that she isconsidering euthanasia 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/rio-2016-paralympics-athlete-marieke-vervoort-considering-euthanasia-after-tournament-because-of-a7228841.html>
, saying her “body is exhausted”. She is not imminently dying. Yet no one seems 
to be trying to persuade her that life is worthwhile. Would Usain Bolt be met 
with the same reaction if he announced his decision to end it all after his 
last Olympics?

Paralympics: Belarus stages pro-Russia protest during opening ceremony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/paralympics-belarus-stages-pro-russia-protest-during-opening-ceremony>
Although proponents of assisted suicide legislation say it’s only for those 
with six months or less to live, they propagandise with cases like that of
Daniel James <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/oct/18/11>, the 23-year-old 
man paralysed (but not dying) following a rugby accident, who killed himself at 
the Swiss clinic Dignitas after he said he did not want to live a 
“second-class” (that is, disabled) life.Jeffrey Spector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/26/jeffrey-spector-assisted-dying-dignitas-tumour-paralysis-explains-decision>
, a 54-year-old man also not imminently dying, also killed himself at Dignitas.

The Netherlands, which legalised euthanasia to provide relief for the 
terminally ill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/17/euthanasia-assisted-suicide-laws-world>
, now regularly provides euthanasia for disabled people who can demonstrate 
“unbearable suffering”. Canada, the most recent nation to legalise euthanasia 
and assisted suicide, allows it for “serious and incurable illness, disease or 
disability”.

Usually, the two sides of the argument are characterised as “religious” 
(opposed to legalisation) or “secular” (in favour). But it’s not that simple.

Frustrated by the lack of opportunity to have the voices of people like me – 
of disabled people – heard on this issue, I have decided to combine my activism 
with my career as a performer.

I’ve never seen a piece of art or theatre which expresses opposition to 
legalising assisted suicide from a disabled person’s perspective – so I decided 
to try to rectify that. The result isAssisted Suicide: The Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/24/quality-is-crucial-for-disability-arts-poor-work-fails-artists-and-audiences>
 – a show which premieres this weekend at the Royal Festival Hall, London, and 
marks the first anniversary of thedefeat of the assisted dying bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/11/mps-begin-debate-assisted-dying-bill>
 in parliament.

The Netherlands now regularly provides euthanasia for disabled people who can 
demonstrate ‘unbearable suffering'

There were of course religious people there with me and many others outside 
Westminster, on Friday 11 September 2015. But MPs who glanced out the window 
would have seen more Not Dead Yet (NDY) T-shirts and banners than religious 
ones. NDY is made up of disabled people opposed to a change in the law. Every 
major disabled group in the UK, it should be stressed, is opposed to this 
legislation.

Suicide is, of course, an individual choice. Disabled people who are 
determined to take their lives may even find it easier to do so than abled 
people, given the often precarious nature of their existences. But that does 
not mean that when a fellow human being – disabled or abled – expresses the 
wish to die because their life is shit, that we should agree with them. The 
value of a life is not just in its physicality but in our relationships with 
those around us.

The bill, had it passed, would have licensed doctors to assist in the deaths 
of terminally-ill people who had less than six months to live, were mentally 
competent and requested such assistance. But the direction legislation has 
taken in other countries shows that the sympathy we disabled people evoke can 
be used to justify support for us to kill ourselves while non-disabled people 
are told they have “everything to live for”. How many times has someone come up 
to me and said how much they admired me just for existing because they could 
not, in my condition?

There is a fine line between those who are terminally ill and those who are 
disabled in public perception and the emotional power behind the campaign for 
assisted suicide is based on misplaced pity. Rather than telling us we have 
everything to live for – and we do – we are helped to the proverbial cliff edge 
and offered a push.

People – disabled and not, with many years or only a few months ahead of them 
– become suicidal for many, many reasons. We know fromsurveys in Oregon 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2265314/>, one of just four states 
in the US where assisted suicide is legal, that the reasons people choose this 
option have little to do with pain, although this is always the emphasis of 
supporters of assisted dying.

In fact, loss of dignity, loss of autonomy, loss of ability to do daily 
activities, and fear of being a burden – reasons which are essentially more 
about the realities of living with a disability in our society – are all more 
important than pain.

Quality is crucial for disability arts: poor work fails artists and audiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/24/quality-is-crucial-for-disability-arts-poor-work-fails-artists-and-audiences>
It is worth keeping in mind, too, that, in the context of economic arguments 
about a health service overly concerned with “waste” of resources, disabled 
people may be seen as a drain, just like the elderly. We also know from the US 
that some people have been denied life-extending treatments because they are 
too costly while the cheaper assisted suicide option has been offered as an 
alternative. Think this won’t happen here? Medical rationing is thereality of 
our overstretched NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/03/hospitals-to-cut-costs-by-denying-surgery-to-smokers-and-the-obese>
.

No one wants us, those we love or even those we don’t to suffer and die in 
pain. But shouldn’t we try to get end-of-life care right before we throw 
physician-assisted killing into the mix? Currently hospices and palliative care 
are only available to the few, and hospices continue to rely on donations for 
their survival.

Please, don’t wish death upon us because you feel pity for our condition. It 
is demoralising when disabled people like Vervoort express – understandably – 
exhaustion with the everyday struggle of existence and discouragement with life 
and are met with sad, understanding nods. OnSaturday 
<https://www.iasp.info/wspd/>, it is world suicide prevention day. Can we be 
included in suicide prevention efforts, too, please?

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
 