
Aim

"To enable provision 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060051_en_1#Legislation-Preamble> 
to be made for the purpose of removing or reducing burdens resulting from 
legislation; to make provision about the exercise of regulatory functions; to 
make provision about the interpretation of legislation relating to the European 
Communities and the European Economic Area."

Main provisions

• Replaces the powers granted in the Regulatory Reform Act 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2001/ukpga_20010006_en_1> 2001 to make 
Regulatory Reform Orders. RROs are a legislative vehicle for amending primary 
legislation by ministerial order, without the need for parliamentary debate or 
the creation of new primary legislation (an act of parliament).
• Ministers are given greater powers to enact RROs in order to reduce a burden 
on a government department.
• The act defines 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/en/ukpgaen_20060051_en_1> a burden as a 
financial cost, an administrative inconvenience, an obstacle to efficiency, 
productivity or profitability, or a sanction, criminal or otherwise, that 
affects the carrying on of any lawful activity.
• Reduces the amount of domestic legislation required to implement an EU 
directive in the United Kingdom.

Background

Cast by the government as a simple way to "reform outdated, unnecessary 
<http://nds.coi.gov.uk/environment/fullDetail.asp?ReleaseID=183823&NewsAreaID=2&NavigatedFromDepartment=True>
 or over-complicated legislation" this bill was partly based onrecommendations 
<http://archive.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/brc/publications/lessismoreentry-2.html> 
made by the government'sBetter Regulation Task Force 
<http://archive.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/brc>.

By early 2006, the bill was attracting widespread criticism from the press and 
agrass roots movement <http://www.saveparliament.org.uk/index.php> that claimed 
far from its stated purpose of cutting red tape, this bill wouldremove  
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/article1082114.ece>parliamentary 
scrutiny and could be used to remove rights or freedoms.

In a letter to the Times in February 2006, six Cambridge law professors warned 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/letters/article731111.ece> that the 
bill would allow the government to "rewrite almost any Act and, in some cases, 
enact new laws that at present only Parliament can make".

Despite ministerial assurances that RROs would not be used to implement "
highly controversial 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200506/cmhansrd/vo060209/debtext/60209-20.htm>
 reforms", the bill was quickly dubbed the "Abolition of Parliament Bill 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article705323.ece>". Opponents 
claimed it would allow ministers to curtail or abolish jury trial, rewrite laws 
on nationality and immigration, and permit the home secretary to place citizens 
under house arrest.

In the face of sustained opposition in the Lords the government was forced to 
make a number amendments to the bill, includingdropping 
<http://www.parliament.uk/commons/lib/research/notes/snpc-03998.pdf> a key 
clause that would have allowed ministers to enact RROs based on recommendations 
made by the Law Commission. This would have granted the government the ability 
to amend common law.

Criticism

During committee stage the Liberal Democrat MP David Howarth warned that the 
bill could even be used to modify itself and thus grant ministers greater 
arbitrary powers.

Clifford Chance, the world's largest law firm, claimed the bill "usurps the 
power 
<http://www.cliffordchance.com/showimage/showimage.aspx?LangID=UK&binaryname=/henry%20viii%20redux%20the%20governments%20new%20law%20making%20powers.pdf>
 of parliament" and would remove "parliamentary scrutiny for primary 
legislation".
 