
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> will turn 195 in 
2016. If we could step back 50 years and let the staff of 1966 know that the 
newspaper would be alive and well today, they would undoubtedly greet the news 
with relief, and probably a good dose of surprise.

the whole London thing had really gone prospectively belly-up
Jim Markwick 
Fresh from its gutsy leap south, the Guardian of 1966 had a huge challenge 
ahead. Printing in two cities put a strain on the company and it would take 
more thana change of name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-september-2011>
 to wipe out the provincial feel of the former Manchester Guardian and set it 
up as a real competitor in the London market. Unfortunately, circumstances were 
not exactly favourable. Evidence for this is scattered throughout the records 
of theGNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>. 


Laurence Prestwich Scott’s records from his time as chairman 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f1%2f3>
 of the Manchester Guardian & Evening News (1949-1973) contain disappointing 
circulation and advertising figures and, more worryingly still,correspondence 
relating to his plans to merge the Guardian with the Times 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f1%2f3%2f4%2f1%2f28>
. The merger was abandoned because editorAlistair Hetherington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/oct/04/guardianobituaries> won the 
support of the Scott Trustees in opposing it, and because the Times found a 
more attractive solution to its own financial insecurities, rather than because 
Scott was convinced that the Guardian could make it in London alone.Jim Markwick
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/30/jim-markwick>, later GMG Chief 
Executive, admits inhis oral history interview 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f110&pos=4>
 that he felt ‘the whole London thing had really gone prospectively belly-up in 
late 1966’, and he only decided to return to it from New York in 1967 because 
he had a Harvard place lined up for ’68 anyway, and might as well ‘give it a 
whirl’ in the meantime.


Guardian and Observer advertising: teaching resource from GNM archive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/gallery/guardian-and-observer-advertising-teaching-resource-from-gnm-archive>
Some of the causes were external (Markwick tells a ‘tale of fast growing 
interest rates, devaluation … investment revenue had slumped’), but some were 
not. He recalls that ‘it was the advertisement condition that was exercising 
everyone’s mind’ and it was this that, according toScott’s Chairman’s Statement 
for April 1967 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f1%2f1%2f2%2f7&>
, left the company in ‘a most dangerous situation ... in which it was 
momentarily trading at a loss’. It wasn’t a problem unique to the Guardian, but
Gerry Taylor <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/22/gerry-taylor>, who 
joined in 1967, remembers how bad things were - the paper announcing his 
arrival carried only one display advertisement. Circulation figures and 
advertising rates were caught in a vicious circle: the Guardian could not 
charge more to place adverts in the paper unless they could show they had 
enough readers to make it worthwhile; it could not reach more readers without 
lowering the paper’s cover price, which would spell bankruptcy for the Guardian 
while income from adverts was so low.


Meanwhile, London printing wasn’t going to plan 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=FGR%2f1%2f1&pos=1>
 and, according to Geoffrey Taylor’s history of the Guardian, a lack of funding 
and attention for the editorial side of things meant that ‘the paper was stale. 
The sport was pedestrian, the financial news unreliable, the features 
unreadable’.

The Guardian was being kept alive by the profits of the more lucrative 
Manchester Evening News (MEN) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/09/manchester-evening-news-theguardian>
, also owned by the Scott Trust. InGerry Taylor’s words 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f90>
, at best ‘The Manchester Evening News made a million, and the Guardian lost a 
million’ – an unfortunate arrangement when the MEN was, according to journalist 
Harry Jackson, ‘going through a bad patch’ itself. In 1967, Markwick was tasked 
with separating out the concerns of the two publications, leaving managers free 
to make changes to each according to its own needs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcrisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa56800594d68a3ede25b0780f21592459a0a5d55%2F0_0_1872_2809%2F1872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lessons%20from%20a%20Guardian%20Crisis%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20January%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcrisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lessons%20from%20a%20Guardian%20Crisis%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20January%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcrisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa56800594d68a3ede25b0780f21592459a0a5d55%2F0_0_1872_2809%2F1872.jpg>
 Sir Peter Gibbings (Archive ref.OBS/6/9/2/6/G 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f6%2f9%2f2%2f6%2fG&>
) Photograph: Guardian News & Media Archive 
A more separate Guardian needed a managing director of its own - and got one 
in the form ofPeter Gibbings 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons&id=DS%2fUK%2f66&>
, a barrister then working as circulation manager and deputy director of the 
Observer. Harry Jackson is by no means alone in identifying this as the turning 
point for a newspaper in need of dramatic change – inhis oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f39&>
 he claims that Gibbings ‘frankly did save the paper’. Gibbings’ commercial 
background made his attitude to advertisements and marketing refreshing at a 
newspaper steeped in editorial tradition. He brought in an advertising director 
- Gerry Taylor - straight from advertising agency Ogilvy and Mather, and 
together they set about reforming, and rescuing, the newspaper.


On 3 February 1969, in spite of job losses and money-saving cuts, readers 
received a newly redesigned Guardian, with a fresh masthead and extensive 
editorial reorganisation. Gone were the days, though, when staff could sit back 
and hope that the redesign would automatically raise circulation and 
advertising income by its merits alone. A new energy had been injected into the 
Guardian’s commercial affairs. Instead of raising advertising fees,Taylor 
recalls in his oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f90>
 how he ‘slashed rates and bargained and did deals’. He swept through the 
advertising reps’ torpid culture of long, boozy lunches - even retitling the 
job ‘sales executive’ in an effort to ‘smarten it up’.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcrisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14799911f040e68badf8ef0cccffcbdadd56f09e%2F0_0_2490_3541%2F2490.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lessons%20from%20a%20Guardian%20Crisis%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20January%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcrisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lessons%20from%20a%20Guardian%20Crisis%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20January%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fcrisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14799911f040e68badf8ef0cccffcbdadd56f09e%2F0_0_2490_3541%2F2490.jpg>
 Gerry Taylor in October 1978 (Archive ref.OBS/6/9/2/6/T 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f6%2f9%2f2%2f6%2fT>
) Photograph: Edward Hamilton West for the Guardian 
He had time for marketing (historically a ‘concept somewhat foreign at the 
Guardian’, according to Geoffrey Taylor) and together with Gibbings made an 
effort not only to identify and celebrate the Guardian’s existing qualities and 
readers, but also to use these strengths to focus ad sales techniques. As a 
result, he recognised the potential value of small ads, and rapidly hired ‘a 
team of girls’ to sell more classifieds. He was building on the Guardian’s 
existing reputation as ‘a place where women worked’, as well as his own 
memories of life on the other side of the negotiating table (where ‘it was so 
unusual to be sold to by a woman’, that he’d once been put on the back foot 
with embarrassment about paying for a saleswoman’s business lunch).


Culture change is rarely welcomed and journalist Tim Radford remembers 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f69&>
 that ‘people could be snobby about [Taylor]’, who often seemed to be ‘saying 
the wrong thing’. Taylor himself acknowledged that, as his Guardian career 
progressed, he ‘may have had a reputation for being a bit frivolous with jobs 
and getting rid of people quickly ... but it was jolly hard to find people who 
were good enough to stick!’ Universal popularity proved unnecessary though, and 
Taylor went on to become managing director when Gibbings took over Laurence 
Scott’s role as chair in 1973.


we imagined we were read by teachers and social workers who wore leg warmers 
and drove Volvos
Tim Radford 
The 1970s saw a great investment in small ads at the Guardian, and a renewed 
focus on marketing. Radford recalls the effect this had on journalists’ 
knowledge of their readers. Having previously assumed that they were read by 
‘teachers and social workers who wore leg warmers and drove Volvos and gave 
lots of money to Oxfam and were inclined to have a son on the dole or 
something’, they learned that ‘Guardian women spent more on cosmetics, and 
especially the sort thatwere tested on rabbits, than any other paper and that 
they flew the Atlantic more than any other paper and that they spent more on 
hi-fi equipment than in any other paper’. Beyond the obvious advantages to a 
writer of knowing who is reading your work, this kind of information had clear 
benefits from an advertisement sales point of view and it was not wasted.


By 1972, the financial crisis had settled down, and Markwick felt that things 
were going ‘much, much better’ at the Guardian, which had reached ‘a level 
playing field’ with the rest of the London press and begun to feel like a bona 
fide national newspaper (‘it even had racing!’). As Peter Preston has noted, 
‘there’s never a safe haven’ in newspapers. The next challenge was, and always 
is, just around the corner. Nevertheless, the Guardian emerged from its 60s 
crisis a little more secure, a little more flexible and a little better 
acquainted with its readers - and so a lot more prepared for the ups and downs 
of the 50 years that followed.

Further Reading:

 * Geoffrey Taylor, Changing Faces: The History of the Guardian 1956-1988 
(1993) 
 * Peter Preston, Success has many fathers in Michael McNay (ed), Newsroom: 
The Guardian past and present (2002) 
 * Goodbye to Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-september-2011>
 * Records of the Chairman of the  
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f1%2f3>
Manchester Guardian and Evening News Limited <> (1920-1978) <> 
 * Jim Markwick oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f110&pos=4>
 * Gerry Taylor oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f90>
 * Harry Jackson oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f39&>
 * Tim Radford oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f69&>
Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.

The catalogue for the GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> is 
available to browsehere <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>. 
Please seethis page <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for 
further information on the archive collections and how to access them.

Every effort has been made to locate the copyright owner(s) of the images 
displayed on this page in order to obtain their permission to publish them. If 
you have further information concerning these images, please send an email to
archives@theguardian.com <mailto:archives@theguardian.com>.
 