
 One of classical music's greatest evangelists believes there's no difference 
between "high art" and popular entertainment. One of ballet's greatest 
enthusiasts runs his empire from New Barnet, and wants to persuade us that 
Carmen is as much fun as Cats.

Raymond Gubbay has quite possibly done more than anyone else in the UK to 
bring "higher" art forms to the masses. His 1998 production of Madame Butterfly 
was seen by 80,000 people; the "Classical Spectacular" series of concerts at 
London's Albert Hall have played to packed houses twice annually for 14 years. 
Not that he thinks there's anything "higher" about what he does.

"It's all about entertaining people. The distinction between "high" and "low" 
art is an artificial barrier. People go to be entertained whether it's a 
so-called art form or whether it's popular entertainment."

He snorts at the idea that the widely discussed dumbing down syndrome has hit 
classical music and opera hard. "I don't see any evidence for that." For 
Gubbay, it's all a matter of image.

"You need to go out and give people the message that what they're going to see 
is above all good. It's going to be spectacular in our case, and it's going to 
be a very special experience. And that's what you are really selling: something 
that's going to be, if not unique, then very special."

He cites the Royal Opera House as a lesson in how not to attract audiences: 
earlier this year top-price tickets to a 90-minute opera by Hans Werner Henze 
were over Â£100.

"That seems to me the craziest way of doing it," says Gubbay, famed as one of 
Covent Garden's most persistent critics. "If you're going to put on a 
contemporary opera then at least present it in the best possible circumstances. 
So if it's going to be short then have a seat price that's reflective of that, 
and encourage people to come in for a great experience."

The impresario can normally be relied on for a few well-aimed left hooks at 
the Opera House. But today he acknowledges that the remit of subsidised arts 
organisations is different from that of a commercial producer and promoter, and 
insists that the two should work side by side.

"Nobody has their own exclusive audience. There is an audience out there 
wanting to be brought in and you have to attract that audience in; you have to 
build new audiences."

But where's this new audience to come from? Most of my 30-something 
contemporaries, I point out, have grown up with Radio 1. Old music for us is 
vintage Beatles, and classical music is perceived as "difficult" and 
unapproachable.

Gubbay blames the government. The gradual disappearance of free music tuition 
in schools is "disgraceful" - people are no longer being given the opportunity 
to realise "the sheer joy of music making".

Not that the arts establishment helps. "Sometimes it takes such a narrow view 
of itself that it limits the audience it's appealing to. We've had in the past 
a prime example of that with the Opera House where they have limited it by 
image, price and perception."

He cites the cultural buzz in cities such as Birmingham, or the success of 
Tate Modern as evidence of "public subsidy really working".

"The Tate has put out a message that it's somewhere exciting and accessible. 
It's ironic it opened the year the Millennium Dome was falling flat on its 
face. Now that was a case of huge amount of public money just wasted."

Last month, Gubbay collected a CBE. It will sit nicely alongside his honorary 
music fellowships ("God knows why") from the Royal Academy of Music and Trinity 
College of Music. Are you in danger of becoming respectable and part of the 
establishment? I tease.

"It's something I really am quite nervous about," he admits, before adding, 
with relish: "You have to be a bit outrageous and challenging sometimes. 
Perhaps I was given it to shut me up. BUT I'M NOT GOING TO." I hope he doesn't.
 