
In office, we in the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
Party took the devilishly difficult decisions needed to revive and rebuild our 
science base and replenish the funds for universities. The result? A system 
that has never, ever been stronger.

So it's frankly alarming to see the clear and present danger that this 
magnificent forest is being poisoned at the roots. Why am I so alarmed? For 
three big reasons:

1) The financing system is slowly going bust

New cuts have been handed down – hurting the poorest students and risking them 
turning to loan sharks to pay their way – all to finance a dogma that puts 
private colleges at the front of the queue.

Unfettered, unplanned, uncontrolled access to the student loan system now 
means students atSt Patrick's International College 
<http://www.st-patricks.ac.uk/> (yes, the one with a designation suspended by 
BIS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/nov/28/government-stops-colleges-taking-new-students>
 in November) now draws down more funding for teaching than the London School 
of Economics.

But worse, the write-off of student loans has now spiralled to over 40%. David 
Willetts, a man I like, has not ruled out the write-off reaching 50%.

In other words, it'll be more expensive than the old system despite the 
government having tripled fees. That, I'm afraid, is not a system fit for the 
future. And please don't be fooled by the promises of the autumn statement. 
There are huge holes in the government's projections for extra money from 
selling the student loan book – in fact the funding gap may be as high as 
£1.3bn by 2017. That's a large black hole by anyone's reckoning.

2) Immigration policy is damaging our global reputation

I'm worried that our world class system needs to draw on the world's best 
talent and that's being damaged by a Little England immigration policy.

Everywhere I go, vice-chancellors tell me about the difficulty of assembling 
global research teams. This summer, I was emailed by visiting students who had 
read my book, Turning to Face the East, to tell me how they had to queue for 
six hours outside a police station in the rain to register their presence here. 
What kind of signal, they asked, is Britain trying to send?

Is it any surprise that despite a global boom in the higher education market, 
we now havefalling numbers of international students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jan/23/indian-students-uk-universities-policy>
? This is hugely damaging for the short term, medium term and long term, and 
it's why our shadow home secretary had said it's ridiculous to put students in 
the net migration target.

3) Lack of support for vocational and part-time students 

There is a lack of meaningful reform to create a genuine earn-while-you-learn 
route through to high education and beyond.

I represent the constituency with the highest youth unemployment with Britain. 
What my young constituents tell me is the same thing I heard from apprentices 
at Rolls Royce. They want a choice of good post-secondary vocational routes to 
the highest possible skills at university.

But in Britain, (a) we don't have enough apprentices and (b) just 6% of 
apprentices go on to level 6 skills. That's pitiful. Out of 200 apprenticeship 
frameworks, just 13 stretch up to level 5. And botched student finance reform 
means the number of part-time higher education students – many earning while 
they're learning – are down by nearly 20%.

Why do I feel strongly about this? Why is this bad for higher education? 
Because it means our universities are not genuinely open to all our talent.

The talented who want a vocational path to higher skills are practically shut 
out the system. And at postgraduate levels, the situation is just as serious.

The lack of a student finance system means many are denied the chance for 
further study because they simply cannot get a career development loan. So, the 
future of advanced level skills for our young people is being arbitrated by a 
handful of mid-level bank-managers. Is that wise? Of course not.

This poisoning of the roots isn't just bad for higher education. It's bad for 
Britain.

There's only one way we earn our way out of today's cost of living crisis and 
that's by expanding knowledge intensive sectors and training people for the new 
jobs on offer. Yet witness the terrible struggle James Dyson recently described 
trying – and failing – to hire the engineers he needs to expand his business 
here in Britain. Somehow this government has contrived to create both sky high 
youth unemployment and growing regional skills gaps.

What great books like The Second Machine Age now make clear is that unless our 
skills system starts to catch up with the speed of scientific and industrial 
change, we'll become a low pay, low skill, low value added nation.

While others streak ahead in the global science race, we will begin to 
languish. And you don't need a PhD in history to conclude that few nations 
prosper with a plan like that.

Liam Byrne is shadow higher education minister for Labour – follow him on 
Twitter@LiamByrneMP <https://twitter.com/LiamByrneMP>. He will be speaking at 
theGuardian University Forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/university-forum> on 26 
February, 2014 –book your place here 
<https://www.medivents.co.uk/webivents/portal/guardian/forum.asp>. 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 