
1. Write to casting directors - not film directors 

Jen McGowan, director of Kelly & Cal 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=FB02DF6E-55F9-4C43-84B8-C1C8C2FB5BAF&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=2B34EBED-3DCF-4854-8FFB-D84677777FC9>
, starring Juliette Lewis: "I think there's a misconception among young actors. 
They think they have to make contact with directors. But the chance that I'm 
going to have a role that you're suitable for in the next four years is highly 
unlikely. However, the chance that a casting director will have a role for you 
soon is increasingly likely.

"I'm in the Hollywood system and I know that over there all casting is done 
through casting directors, so it's important to meet them so you're on their 
minds. You want to be someone's solution."

2. Keep an eye out for exciting new projects - however unconventional

Simon Baker, director of Night Bus 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=ED0E12A8-8D5E-4518-A948-973AAC7FFA75&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=5DC6187E-60C8-453B-A083-6F07687B8FB9>
: "When I was casting Night Bus it was easier for me to put an advert onCasting 
Call Pro <http://www.castingcallpro.com/uk/> and see who came forward than to 
go through agents, because at that point I didn't have a cast iron idea of what 
I wanted.

"I was looking for a cast that represented multicultural London. I knew I'd 
get a mixed bag of applicants, but I trusted myself to pick the diamonds out of 
that. Some people had showreels, some had headshots, some had nothing. In the 
early days, I didn't know how attractive it was as a project, but I was trying 
to fill up my castings so that I had people to choose from. Some of those 
original auditionees were brilliant and ended up in the film and we even based 
characters on them."

3. Learn your material

Jen McGowan: "You've got to learn the sides (an audition reading that involves 
at least two characters). 100 other people are going to come in having learned 
it, so why would I give you any attention if you can't even learn the lines 
that someone spent time writing for you?"

Simon Baker: "Practise, practise. You need to take the emotional baggage out 
of it and become a professional. There's a temptation as an actor to worry that 
you've only got a short slot, and to try and fit in everything you can do. But 
that's not the best thing. Just take the moment that you can do beautifully and 
create that moment. A monologue that plays to your strengths can be 60 seconds 
- it's enough."

4. Make a bold acting choice, but take direction

Desiree Akhavan, a New York filmmaker who wrote, directed and acted in 
Appropriate Behaviour 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=93DB362F-9A0B-4A76-BEF1-5EC43C322C68&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=5D5A68EA-F4B5-42C3-B635-09A824B14576>
: "Sometimes an actor comes in and makes a really strong choice, and I won't 
agree with it. But if they take notes and are able to be flexible and let go of 
what they came in with, I like that a lot.

"I give people two attempts - they came all the way out there, I don't want to 
waste their time. I try and see what kind of conversation I can build and 
whether or not they're open to a different idea."

Tom Harper, director of War Book 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=846CEE48-8C77-43FA-9587-2B4D3644AA50&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::context_id=178E63EE-ED89-4C48-9E4E-D6BFAF83D07D>
: "The best thing an actor could do is watch a whole load of auditions. Some 
casting directors will let actors sit in on auditions, or read in with other 
people. That would be invaluable, because you so quickly see what works and 
what doesn't."

5. Bring your true self into the audition room

Saverio Costanzo, director of Hungry Hearts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/01/hungry-hearts-review-venice-adam-driver>
 starring Alba Rohrwacher and Adam Driver: "Whenever I cast somebody, I look 
for the person behind the acting. If a person has heart and his feet on the 
ground, but is also capable of a spiritual dimension then you impress me - 
that's it.

"Adam Driver (rising star of Girls and the much hyped Star Wars: Episode VII) 
is a guy who makes a statement all the time he acts. All the great actors in 
the history of cinema are there in the moment, owning it. Jack Nicholson, 
Daniel Day Lewis - they are present. They share themselves on screen."

6. Understand the movie business is bigger than you

Sophie Barthes, director of Madam Bovary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/06/madame-bovary-review-toronto-film-festival>
: "It's so tricky to make independent films. I was working on Madam Bovary for 
two year because we couldn't get it financed, then the shoot was done in just 
37 days. If investors are risking private funds, they want to make their money 
back. Directors can be under pressure to cast people who finance approve of – 
it's like a stock market.

"Build a relationship with the new generation of filmmakers. Connect with the 
film schools, the young directors making their shorts. Jessica Chastain was in 
a 13-minute short film by an unknown director called Ned Benson when she wasn't 
famous. She said: 'I loved working with you, I'll be in all your movies', and 
then she became Jessica Chastain. They just madeThe Disappearance of Eleanor 
Rigby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/17/cannes-2014-review-disappearance-eleanor-rigby>
 together. The relationship lasted. Bypass the system and see what happens."

7. Keep working, however tough it gets

Tom Harper: "I've just cast an actor who's been struggling and struggling for 
the past 15 years. He's never had much money and for whatever reason I haven't 
been able to cast him until now, but I've just offered him a part in my next 
project. He's always been wonderful and suddenly he's started to take-off. It's 
a difficult world, and there's luck and timing but it can work out."

Simon Baker: "There's benefit in everything – short films, profit share 
theatre – everything. Even if no one sees it, you've learned something. Every 
learning experience is valuable and may well come in handy when you need it the 
most."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
. To get more content and advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our 
weekly update and careers ebook. 
<https://register.theguardian.com/careers/?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 