

People like to pass landmark birthdays in meaningful places, so it seems right 
that DameAngela Lansbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury> should be 
celebrating her 90th on American television and on Broadway, where she will 
receive the Oscar Hammerstein Award for lifetime achievement in musical theatre 
this weekend.

 These honours acknowledge the London-born performer’s contribution to the 
small screen, where she played writer turned crime-fighter Jessica Fletcher in 
Murder, She Wrote for 12 years and to the evolution of the American musical, 
winning five Tony awards for roles in Stephen Sondheim’s productions including 
the cannibalistic baker Mrs Lovett in Sweeney Todd and acclaimed revivals of 
older female parts in Gypsy and A Little Night Music.

 She has acknowledged in interviews that her only regret is that her movie CV 
has been spottier than her theatre and TV credits – although her films include 
the classic conspiracy thriller The Manchurian Candidate (1962) and Disney’s 
children’s hit, Bedknobs and Broomsticks (1971) which introduced her to a 
youthful audience which grew up to watch her in Murder, She Wrote.

Michael Blakemore <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-blakemore>, who 
recently directed Lansbury in London, New York and US touring productions of 
Noel Coward’s Blithe Spirit, said: “She’s the utmost professional. I think 
people such as her, who have been acting since they were teenagers, develop 
special gifts because they learn the basis of their craft when they are young 
and impressionable.”

 Blakemore’s theory that one key to Lansbury success as a prodigy – she was 
nominated for an Oscar at 19 for her performance in the thriller Gaslight 
(1944) – is supported by the fact that one of her closest showbiz friends was 
Elizabeth Taylor, a child-star with whom she worked on National Velvet. But 
where Taylor’s acting was increasingly hampered by illness and addictions, 
Lansbury followed a lifestyle that increased the chance of a long career. 
“She’s incredibly disciplined,” said Blakemore. “ She keeps herself very 
physically fit.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdame-angela-lansbury-marks-90th-birthday-with-oscar-hammerstein-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0058b50177ddd04c04ff7e108f3dcabc68ae645%2F32_32_1570_943%2F1570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lithe%20spirit%3A%20Dame%20Angela%20Lansbury%20at%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdame-angela-lansbury-marks-90th-birthday-with-oscar-hammerstein-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lithe%20spirit%3A%20Dame%20Angela%20Lansbury%20at%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdame-angela-lansbury-marks-90th-birthday-with-oscar-hammerstein-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0058b50177ddd04c04ff7e108f3dcabc68ae645%2F32_32_1570_943%2F1570.jpg>
 Angela Lansbury with Laurence Olivier in ‘A Talent for Murder’ (1984) directed 
by Alvin Rakoff. Photograph: Warner Bros/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
The script of Blithe Spirit demands that Lansbury’s character, the 
spiritualist Madame Arcati, performs a bizarre dance routine to summon the 
spirits. Although in her late 80s, the actress insisted on no concessions to 
her age, creating, with whirling arms and legs, a jokier, floatier version of 
the New Zealand rugby team’s pre-match haka dance.

 Last year’s run of Blithe Spirit at the Gielgud theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/18/blithe-spirit-review-fine-noel-coward-revival>
 in Shaftesbury Avenue was a homecoming for Lansbury whose grandfather, George 
Lansbury, was leader of the Labour party in the 1930s. She was moved to 
discover, when acting in a play about a haunting that her own mother, the 
Northern Irish actress Moyna Macgill, had once appeared at the same theatre.

 Even before she officially became a Dame in the 2014 new year’s honours list, 
Lansbury acknowledged the obligations of the role of the theatrical grande dame 
without the temperamental behaviour that accompanies it. Blakemore remembers 
watching her leaving the theatre after performances of Blithe Spirit: “She was 
incredibly courteous and conscientious with her fans. There’d be a line on each 
side of the stage door, behind barriers, and she’d always do exactly the same 
number of autographs or photos on both sides before going to the car.”

 In her birthday special for the New York-based station Thirteen, Lansbury, 
given the traditional veteran’s invitation to offer advice to younger members 
of her profession, counsels them to “leave who you are at home ... all that 
daily stuff”. This radically contradicts the common encouragement in drama 
schools, especially in the US, for actors to draw on their own personality and 
experiences. Lansburyexplains that the actor has to leave holes to be filled by 
the roles: “If I allow my experiences to encroach on the character’s life and 
experience, I’m putting a stumbling block that will prevent me from becoming 
someone totally different from the person that I am.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdame-angela-lansbury-marks-90th-birthday-with-oscar-hammerstein-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc09cd9b139dac9286e455f2e21217665f2af31d9%2F14_44_2708_1625%2F2708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lithe%20spirit%3A%20Dame%20Angela%20Lansbury%20at%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdame-angela-lansbury-marks-90th-birthday-with-oscar-hammerstein-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lithe%20spirit%3A%20Dame%20Angela%20Lansbury%20at%2090&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fdame-angela-lansbury-marks-90th-birthday-with-oscar-hammerstein-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc09cd9b139dac9286e455f2e21217665f2af31d9%2F14_44_2708_1625%2F2708.jpg>
 Angela Lansbury with actor Basil Rathbone during a day of filming for The 
Court Jester (1955) directed by Melvin Frank and Norman Panama. Photograph: 
Alfred Eisenstaedt/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
 This technical insight into how Lansbury works may also be autobiographically 
revealing, as she seems to have used acting as an escape from daily “stuff” 
from an early age: the death of her father when she was 11; the discovery that 
her first husband was gay; the death of her beloved second husband, and helping 
both her children overcome serious personal problems.

 If work is a distraction she has always made sure, between screen successes, 
to come back to the stage, where Blakemore noted her continued delight in 
performing: “Theatre for a young actor can be terrifying and painful because of 
all the possible humiliations. But if you get through that and get to Angela’s 
age, you feel brimmingly alive on stage. With Blithe Spirit, she’d do a run of 
it and then go home for a while and then suddenly want to be back in front of 
an audience again.”

 There may be further curtain calls in her 90s. She is reported to be having 
conversations with the director Michael Grandage over a possible production in 
London or New York of Enid Bagnold’s drama, The Chalk Garden. Lansbury would 
play an ancient matriarch, Mrs St Maugham, a role that seems suited to her 
apart from the fact that the theatrical dame would have to age-down for a role 
that has generally been played by actors in their 70s.

 The only shadow that might hang over Lansbury as she enters her tenth decade 
is Robert Peston’s decision to move to ITV, as the most obvious slot for his 
planned Sunday morning political show is currently occupied by repeats of 
Murder, She Wrote. Jessica Fletcher, though, will surely find a new home in the 
schedule, while the actor could be a guest on the replacement programme, 
talking about what George Lansbury might have made of Jeremy Corbyn.


 