
On Wednesday the  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>United 
Nations urged global business leaders todouble investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/27/un-urges-business-leaders-to-double-investment-in-green-energy-by-2020>
 in wind and solar energy to $600bn (£400bn) a year by 2020. The announcement 
comes one month after the Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
, wherenearly 200 countries 
<http://newsroom.unfccc.int/unfccc-newsroom/finale-cop21/> agreed to 
dramatically cut emissions. This week UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon urged 
business leaders to act decisively to hasten the transition away from the 
fossil fuel economy – or they would put the historic accord in jeopardy.

But even if business leaders do reach this ambitious target, it only marks the 
start of the investment needed to meet the agreed 1.5 degree target. The 
International Energy Agency has estimated that to hit this taget the world will 
need to spendmore than $16trn (£10.55trn)  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-change/cop21-hitting-the-climate-change-targets-agreed-in-paris-will-cost-165trn-a6771816.html>
over the next 15 years, to cover the costs of replacing coal and gas-fired 
power stations with emissions-free sources of energy such as wind, solar and 
nuclear as well as the costs for improving existing energy efficiency in homes 
and businesses.

So who’s going to foot the bill? What can developing countries do to help 
ensure we reach the 1.5 degree target? How can markets be used to promote 
private-sector solutions to climate change? And what can be done to create 
effective alliances to deliver the ambition of the Paris agreement?


Join an expert panel on Thursday 4 February, 1-3pm GMT, to discuss these 
questions and more.

Panel
George Wamukoya, member of the African Group of Negotiators, Nairobi, Kenya
George was a co-facilitator of some of the elements of the Paris Agreement.

Sam Barnard, research officer, Overseas Development Institute 
<http://www.odi.org>, London, UK @samuelmarch <https://twitter.com/samuelmarch>
Sam conducts research on how international finance can best support low-carbon 
and resilience building investments in developing countries


Brandon Wu, senior policy analyst, ActionAid <http://www.actionaid.org>, 
Washington DC, USA@brandoncwu <https://twitter.com/brandoncwu>
Brandon works on generating climate finance for developing country 
mitigation/adaptation. Former representative to Green Climate Fund Board.


Virginie Fayolle, senior economist, Acclimatise <http://www.acclimatise.uk.com>
, London, UK@VirginieFayolle <https://twitter.com/VirginieFayolle>
Virginie focuses on climate adaptation planning. As part of the Seychelles 
COP21 delegation, she provided advisory support to the Indian Ocean Commission.

Anthony Hobley, CEO, Carbon Tracker Initiative <http://www.carbontracker.org>, 
London, UK@arhobley  <https://twitter.com/arhobley>@CarbonBubble 
<https://twitter.com/CarbonBubble>
Anthony has 20 years experience working on the financial market solutions to a 
climate secure economy. @carbonbubble

Aaron Atteridge, research fellow, Stockholm Environment Institute 
<http://www.sei-international.org>, Stockholm, Sweden @SEIclimate 
<https://twitter.com/SEIclimate>
Aaron co-leads SEI’s research initiative on the effectiveness of climate 
finance.

Karen Orenstein, senior analyst, Friends of the Earth US <http://www.foe.org>, 
Washington DC, USA @KarenOrenstein <https://twitter.com/KarenOrenstein> @foe_us 
<https://twitter.com/foe_us>
Karen’s work focuses on the provision of funds by developed countries for 
developing countries to take environmentally-sound, socially-just climate 
action.

Joe Thwaites, research analyst, World Resources Institute <http://www.wri.org/>
, Washington DC, USA@WRIFinance <https://twitter.com/WRIFinance>
Joe researches ways that international climate finance can enable 
transformative low-emissions, climate-resilient development.

Remco Fischer, programme officer, UNEP Finance Initiative 
<http://www.unepfi.org>, Geneva, Switzerland @UNEP_FI 
<https://twitter.com/UNEP_FI>
Remco oversees projects aimed at helping align the operations of the finance 
sector with economic development which is ‘low-carbon’ and ‘climate-resilient’.

Tim Ash Vie, head of climate change, Adam Smith International 
<http://www.adamsmithinternational.com/>, London, UK @AdamSmithInt 
<https://twitter.com/AdamSmithInt>
Tim leads the direction and implementation of large donor-funded climate 
change programmes across Africa and Asia.

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or
@GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter to recommend someone 
for our expert panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.
 