
Globally, 20 million people live with HIV but are not getting treatment 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/fact-sheet>. They may not know they have 
the virus or the stigma associated with it might have discouraged them from 
seeking medical help. These people are considered the next frontier in the 
fight to end the epidemic.


UNAids is working towards achieving its 90-90-90 targ 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/documents/2014/90-90-90>ets 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/resources/documents/2014/90-90-90> by 2020. The goal 
is for 90% of all people with HIV to know their status, that 90% of all people 
diagnosed with HIV will receive sustained antiretroviral therapy and that 90% 
of all people receiving antiretroviral therapy will have achieved viral 
suppression (whereby the virus is at an undetectable level).

But money is tight. Donors pledged almost $13bn 
<http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/news/2016-09-17_Global_Fund_Donors_Pledge_Nearly_$13_Billion_to_Help_End_Epidemics/>
 to theGlobal Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
<http://www.theglobalfund.org/en/> earlier this month, but $19.3bn will be 
needed in 2017 alone 
<http://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_asset/UNAIDS_Reference_FastTrack_Update_on_investments_en.pdf>
 (pdf) for efforts to meet UNAids treatment targets in low- and middle-income 
countries. Global support for HIV/Aids is falling. In South Africa, for 
example, there is a30% shortfall in the funding needed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/03/aids-hiv-antiretroviral-drugs-treatment-prevention>
 to achieve these aims.

So how do we do more with less money and ensure effective spending? Which 
interventions are better value for money? And where might alternative funding 
be found?


Join an expert panel on Thursday 6 October, from 3pm to 4.30pm BST, to discuss 
these questions and more.

Panel

David Wilson, global HIV/Aids director, World Bank <http://www.worldbank.org>, 
Washington DC, US
David’s work on HIV/Aids spans almost 25 years. He has developed prevention 
programmes recognised as best practice by the World Bank, WHO and DfID.

Anand Reddi, public health and medical affairs – access operations & emerging 
markets,Gilead Sciences <http://www.gilead.com/>, Foster City, US, @ReddiAnand 
<https://twitter.com/ReddiAnand> @GileadSciences 
<https://twitter.com/GileadSciences>
Anand’s work for Gilead Sciences focuses on HIV and viral hepatitis in 
resource-limited settings.

Mandeep Dhaliwal, director of HIV, health & development, UN Development 
Programme <http://www.undp.org>, New York US, @Mandeep_Dh 
<https://twitter.com/Mandeep_Dh>
Mandeep has more than 20 years experience working on HIV, health, human rights 
and evidence-based policy and programming in low and middle-income countries.

Mike Podmore, director, STOPAIDS <http://www.stopaids.org.uk>, London, UK, 
@MichaelPodmore <https://twitter.com/MichaelPodmore> @STOPAIDS 
<https://twitter.com/STOPAIDS>
Mike directs a UK network of 70 member organisations working on the global HIV 
response. He came to STOPAIDS from the International HIV/Aids Alliance

Joel Goldman, managing director, The Elizabeth Taylor AIDS Foundation 
<http://elizabethtayloraidsfoundation.org/>, Los Angeles, US, @etaf_joel 
<https://twitter.com/etaf_joel> @ET_AIDS_FDN <https://twitter.com/ET_AIDS_FDN>
Since being diagnosed with HIV in 1991, Joel has dedicated his career to 
educating and raising awareness for the global HIV/Aids epidemic.

Kevin Fisher, policy director, AVAC <http://www.avac.org>, New York, USA 
@HIVpxresearch <https://twitter.com/HIVpxresearch>
Kevin oversees the annual HIV prevention research funding reports from 
Resource Tracking for HIV Prevention R&D.

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Want to recommend someone for the panel or ask a 
question in advance? Get in touch viaglobaldevpros@theguardian.com <mailto: 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com> or @GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP>
 on Twitter. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.
 