
The contrast between bailed-out Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/27/lloyds-pays-antonio-horta-osorio-11m-resumes-dividend-after-six-years>
 andRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/26/rbs-paid-out-421m-in-bonuses-in-2014-royal-bank-scotland>
 was thrown into sharp focus as the former paid out its first dividend since 
the banking crisis (and handed its boss an £11.5m pay deal) while the latter 
reported its seventh consecutive year of losses (and its boss waived his bonus).

Why the difference? Because they started in different places. After their 
bailouts in 2008 and 2009, the taxpayer had a 43% stake in Lloyds and owned 81% 
of RBS. The government’s controlling stake in RBS made it an easier target for 
politicians at the outset.

The banks also had different problems to fix. Lloyds – especially the HBOS 
bank it absorbed in 2008 – had lent too much to commercial property developers 
in Ireland and was too reliant on the financial markets to keep financing its 
business.

RBS faced the same fundraising headache but it had also bought a major 
investment bank, the Dutch bank ABN Amro, in 2007 which left it a wafer-thin 
layer of capital to absorb losses on bad loans. At the time of its bailout RBS 
broke the record for the biggest loss in UK corporate history of £24bn.


The official verdict into what went wrong at HBOS has yet to be published 
although the parliamentary commission on banking standards concludedin 2013 
that HBOS had racked up £47bn in bad loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/04/bankers-brought-down-hbos>, 
enough to sink it. The report into the problems at RBS found ithad gambled when 
buying ABN Amro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/12/rbs-abn-amro-fsa-report> and 
that the bank was short of capital.

The management brought in to fix the problems faced contrasting challenges. 
Stephen Hester <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stephen-hester>, boss of 
RBS from the bailout until September 2013, brought the bank back from the brink 
but did not shrink the investment bank as quickly as politicians had hoped. His 
successor, Ross McEwan, on Thursday spelled out the problem, saying the 
investment bank was too expensive and could no longer operate on a standalone 
basis. From the 51 countries in which it operated in 2009 it will have a 
presence in just 13 after the latest cutbacks.


RBS, in balance sheet terms, will end up (roughly) a quarter of the size it 
was at the time of its bailout. It hopes to generate enough capital to 
eventually pay a dividend once it starts to make a full-year profit. However, 
it’s no surprise that Lloyds will pay a dividend first.


António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio> joined Lloyds in 
2011. He discovered a bank dependent on the money markets for its day-to-day 
survival: on Friday he said that at the time the bank’s future remained far 
from certain. He cut costs, retrenched from the more-limited international 
expansion of the kind RBS had embarked upon, and reduced the reliance on money 
markets for funds. An improving economy and a government policy to help the 
housing market – Lloyds is the UK’s biggest mortgage lender – gave him a fair 
wind.

The resumption of paying dividends at Lloyds – a symbolic 0.75p per share – 
was accompanied by an announcement of an £11.5m pay deal for Horta-Osório. When 
RBS reported a further £3.5bn loss on Thursday, McEwan moved quickly to make it 
clear he would not take any top-ups on his salary.
 