
The boss of Lloyds Banking Group, António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, could be in line 
for shares worth more than £7m under a three-year deal scheduled to pay out in 
the coming weeks.

Seven members of the bailed-out bank’s top management team working with the 
Portuguese banker, who is on a £1m salary, could also share in payments worth a 
further £20m under the same bonus scheme.

Horta-Osório is just beginning his second three-year plan for the bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/28/lloyds-banking-group-axe-9000-jobs-200-branches>
, which will involve 9,000 job cuts and the closure of 200 branches.

The payouts relate to awards of shares handed to Horta-Osório and his 
executive team in March 2012 under a long-term incentive plan linked to the 
bank’s performance over three years to the end of 2014.

The precise scale of the payments will not be known until the spring when the 
bank releases its annual report, by which time the precise number of shares 
handed to each executive will have been determined by the bank’s remuneration 
committee.

If all the performance criteria are met in full – 60% of them are linked to 
the bank’s stock-market performance, with the rest connected to measures such 
as consumer satisfaction and selling off businesses and assets – the top staff 
stand to receive shares that have more than doubled in value since they were 
awarded three years ago.

When the shares were awarded, they were valued at 34.7p each, but the share 
price has since risen to 75p. Horta-Osório’s maximum possible payout has 
increased from £3.2m in 2012 to £7.2m at current prices.

A Lloyds spokesman said: “No decisions have yet been made. Since the initial 
award, the share price has more than doubled, which has enabled taxpayers to 
start getting their money back. This reflects the hard work undertaken over the 
last three years to make Lloyds a safe and profitable bank that is supporting 
the UK economy.”

In addition to Horta-Osório, payouts could be due to George Culmer, the 
finance director, who stands to receive up to £3.5m, and Alison Brittain, the 
head of the high-street banking arm, who could be handed up to £3.4m in shares.

The government is scaling back its stake in the bank to 20% over the next six 
months bydrip-feeding up to £3bn of Lloyds shares into the stock market  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/government-resume-sell-off-stake-lloyds-banking-group-election>
in the runup to the general election in May.

The disposal of government-owned shares – which stood at 43% after the rescue 
of HBOS six years ago – began in September 2013.

Horta-Osório could also receive another £1.7m in shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/13/lloyds-bank-ceo-antonio-horta-osorio-bonus-profit>
, which were awarded to him last year, if the taxpayer stake falls to around 
16% or if the share price remains above 73.6p for six months – the breakeven 
point of the bailout.

In 2014, he received around £1m in shares – alongside his £1m salary and a 
£500,000 pension contribution – as part of a scheme by Lloyds to sidestep the 
EU cap on bonuses. Lloyds is not alone in handing these extra shares to its top 
up high-ranking staff’s pay following the bonus cap, which restricts bonuses to 
100% of salary or 200%, if shareholders approve.

The bank was fined £226m for rigging Libor in 2014 and is expected to cut its 
bonus pool for 2014 to reflect the penalties.
 