
Lloyds Banking Group is cutting 1,755 jobs and closing 29 branches as part of 
a plan by its chief executive,António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, to cut costs as he 
prepares the bank for privatisation.


Staff at Britain’s biggest retail bank were told about the job losses, which 
cover large parts of the group, on Wednesday, but union officials said they 
hoped that the reductions could be achieved by voluntary means.

The bank said it would add 170 new jobs in retail and commercial banking and 
in its legal team, taking the net figure for job losses to about 1,585.

Horta-Osório is continuing with the cost reduction programme even though the 
chancellor, George Osborne, hasadmitted that he cannot press on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/george-osborne-postpones-sale-sell-off-last-publicly-owned-lloyds-bank-shares>
 with a sale of the government’s remaining Lloyds shares to the publicbecause 
of market turmoil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/24/why-is-global-economy-suffering-turbulence>
, which has knocked the bank’s share price.


The posts that are being axed are part of the 9,000 job cuts announced by 
Horta-Osório in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/28/lloyds-banking-group-axe-9000-jobs-200-branches>
, when he said that a need to “digitise” the business would also result in the 
closure of 200 branches. According to officials at the Accord union, which has 
23,000 members, about 60% of those cuts have now been announced.


The Guardian view on the Lloyds sale: better never than late | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/28/the-guardian-view-on-the-lloyds-sale-better-never-than-late>
Lloyds, which operates under a number of brands, will close 19 Lloyds, seven 
Bank of Scotland and three Halifax branches in June. The bank employs about 
77,000 people and has more than 2,000 branches.

Accord officials said: “This is a difficult time for those affected. However, 
Accord’s agreement with the bank means that no employee will be redundant other 
than through voluntary means. We will provide advice and support to colleagues 
who will be impacted by the branch closures.”


The roles that are going include 140 at assistant branch manager level, and 
followthe 1,000 job cuts announced in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/lloyds-set-to-cut-more-jobs>. 
Accord said it was concerned that workers who remained at Lloyds would be 
forced to take on more work, as positions continue to be scrapped.


The union told its members: “While the initial focus will be on the 
individuals who are impacted by the announcement, Accord will also be engaging 
with Lloyds regarding the impact on those who will remain with the bank.

“Resources are already stretched and we are concerned that further reductions 
in staffing levels could exacerbate the existing problems in relation to 
security, keyholding, booking holidays, absence etc. There comes a point where 
it is not possible to achieve more with less; only less can be achieved with 
less.”

Lloyds said: “The group’s policy is always to use natural turnover and to 
redeploy people wherever possible to retain their expertise and knowledge 
within the group. Where it is necessary for employees to leave the company, it 
will look to achieve this by offering voluntary redundancy. Compulsory 
redundancies will always be a last resort.”


Lloyds cut 45,000 jobs after it bought HBOS in a rescue deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness> 
during the financial crisis in 2008.

The government owned 43% of Lloyds after it bailed out the bank in 2008, but 
that stake has been reduced to less than 10% through aseries of sales to 
institutional investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/government-sells-further-stake-lloyds-banking-group-share>
.

With stock markets in a volatile state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/global-market-turmoil-10-charts>
 because of worries about the global economy, the Treasury will wait until 
after Easter to launch the Lloyds share sale.
 