
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> will be left with a 
50% stake in its TSB banking arm after kickstarting a share sale.

The bailed-out bank sold off 38.5% of TSB in June, when shares were priced at 
260p each 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/20/lloyds-tsb-branches-valuation-share-sale>
, andintends to sell a further 11.5% 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/lloyds-banking-group--lloy-/rns/proposed-placing-of-shares-in-tsb-banking-group/201409251712126675S/>
. TSB shares closed on Thursday at 280p, suggesting Lloyds would raise about 
£160m.

The sale of the TSB shares was kickstarted as Lloyds revealed 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/lloyds-banking-group/rns/director-pdmr-shareholding/201409251402266300S/>
 it had given £1.2m shares to 11 of its most senior staff – including chief 
executive António Horta-Osório –` under new payments made to sidestep the EU 
bonus cap.

All the major banks are handing top staff “allowances” in shares to get round 
the bonus cap, which restricts bonuses to one times salary unless shareholders 
approve payouts of twice the size of a salary.

Lloyds, in which the taxpayer has a 24% stake, is spinning out 631 branches 
under the TSB brand because of conditions imposed at the time of its £20bn 
bailout. The second tranche is being sold now because a 90-day period between 
sell-offs has elapsed since the previous sale, and because of the no vote in 
the Scottish independence referendum, whichTSB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tsb> and Lloyds had said would cause them 
to move business from Scotland.

The branches were supposed to be have been sold by now but the process has 
been delayed because of the failed attempt to sell them to Co-operative Bank. 
Royal Bank of Scotland, 81% owned by the taxpayer, has to sell more than 300 
branches under the terms imposed by the EU at the time of its £45bn bailout. 
Those branches are to be branded Williams & Glyn – a name last seen on the high 
street 30 years ago.
 