
Shareholders in Lloyds Banking Group are being urged to vote against a “highly 
excessive” £11.5m pay deal forAntónio Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, the boss of the 
bailed-out bank.

The call from Pirc <http://www.pirc.co.uk/>, a leading advisory service on 
corporate governance for major investors, came before the bank’s annual general 
meeting on Thursday.

According to Reuters, Pirc also raised concerns about Norman Blackwell, the 
bank’s chairman, because he holds other boardroom positions. Lord Blackwell is 
also chairman of support services company Interserve although has indicated his 
intention to step down.

Other advisory bodies are not thought to have raised concerns about the £11.5m 
cash and shares deal for Horta-Osório. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/27/lloyds-pays-antonio-horta-osorio-11m-resumes-dividend-after-six-years>
 The package was announced in February when the bank announced a rise in 
profits and the resumption of its dividend for the first time since the 2008 
banking crisis. At the time, Frances O’Grady, the general secretary of the TUC, 
said voters would want to know why the government had not done more to hold 
back the pay deals at the bank.

The taxpayer owns just over 20% of Lloyds – down from 43% at the time of the 
2008 bailout following the rescue of HBOS. The most recent sales have taken 
place as a result of a sell-off programme put in place by the previous 
government in December to cut the stake in six months to just below 20% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/government-resume-sell-off-stake-lloyds-banking-group-election>
 by drip-feeding shares into the market. The shares have rallied recently, 
which has led to reports that the government is likely to achieve this goal.

The shares were trading at 86p on Monday, above the 73.6p average price at 
which the government bought them during the bailout.

In the last budget before the election, the chancellor, George Osborne, said 
he intended to raise a further £9bn from the sale of more Lloyds shares over 
the coming 12 months, possibly with a retail offering to investors.

Lloyds already has the largest private investor base in the UK with about 3 
million small investors, a legacy of its rescue ofHBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hbos> which was created from the former 
Halifax Building Society.

The bank did not comment before its AGM.
 