
A union jack cushion is plumped up on the white leather sofa, a white teapot 
is on the desk and there is a view to St Paul’s cathedral. The office belongs 
to Portuguese bankerAntónio Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, and his mission, 
he says, is “to help Britain prosper”.

Known to his staff as Horta or AHO, the 51-year-old has been at the helm of 
Lloyds Banking Group <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group>
 – bailed out with £20bn of taxpayer cash in 2008 and still one-fifth publicly 
owned – for the last four years.

He now considers the UK – where he is member of Queen’s tennis club and chair 
of the Wallace Collection (the appointment letter signed by David Cameron is on 
display in the office) – as a home from home.

“I think the British people with their self-deprecating style – being humble 
and wanting to do better – do not see how good they are,” he says. Our other 
outstanding qualities, he says, are tolerance and a sense of fairness.

If you have a boat letting in water in the middle of a storm, you had better 
be at the wheel
António Horta-Osório 
He is no doubt hoping that these characteristics will mean a ruckus can be 
avoided over his £11.5m pay packet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/27/lloyds-pays-antonio-horta-osorio-11m-resumes-dividend-after-six-years>
 - which has to be approved at the bank’s annual meeting on 14 May, just a week 
after the general election. He clearly reckons he is worth the money: “I hope 
that people will judge pay for performance,” he says.

While some bosses shirk from defending their personal pay deals, Horta-Osório 
– whose 10-strong management team cashed in on £23m through the same bonus 
scheme – does not.

The bank’s stock-market value has increased by £30bn over the period, he says. 
Since his 1.3m bonus shares were awarded, the share price has climbed higher, 
from 34.7p to 79p, increasing the value of the payout still further.

The turnaround story on AHO’s watch – even though it is not complete – also 
includes the return of dividend payouts to shareholders for the first time 
since the crisis. It is a performance in stark contrast to that of bailed-out 
rival Royal Bank of Scotland, where the government has yet to sell any of its 
79% stake. As of this week, taxpayers own just 22% of Lloyds – down from 43% at 
the time of the bailout.

But it might not have worked out this way. Horta-Osório was written off by 
some in November 2011 when, just six months after taking over, he was forced to 
take two months off to recuperate from fatigue.

It was a very public setback for a man who is so driven that when he broke his 
right wrist aged 30 he taught himself to write and play tennis with his left 
hand rather than ease up temporarily on work or play. While a student, he 
re-sat his tax exams so he could improve his already high score. For pleasure, 
he scuba dives with sharks.

What drives him? He reckons it was his Jesuit education: “That had an 
influence. Jesuits are a great school in terms of being humble, austere, 
dedicated, hard-working. I think life is a marathon and resilience is one of 
the most important features, ” he says.

Except that by the end of 2011, Horta-Osório’s tough approach had deserted 
him. He was exhausted, but unable to rest. Afterfive days without sleep,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/dec/15/lloyds-chief-horta-osorio-sleeping-problems>
 he checked himself into the Priory clinic to recover from “fatigue”: and the 
experience, he says, “has made me much more resilient”.

Looking back to that experience, he is reluctant to speak about the problem or 
the cure, but likens running a bank on the brink to captaining a sinking ship. 
Both, he explains, need their leader in charge at all times: “If you have a 
boat letting in water in the middle of a storm, you had better be at the wheel. 
If you fix your boat and you are in blue skies and no waves, you can go to 
sleep and leave somebody else at the wheel.”

He has since rationalised his working life: he has fewer people reporting to 
him, chairs fewer internal committees, no longer convenes meetings on Sundays 
and tries not to look at emails after 8pm.

When he took the helm, he recalls, the bank was in a dire position. It had 
£300bn of debt, half of which was on very short repayment schedules. It was in 
the middle of the eurozone crisis, and the bank was over-extended in 30 
countries.

Now he has retrenched: Lloyds operates only in six countries and 95% of the 
business is in the UK: focused, as he puts it, on families and small 
businesses. The debt position has also stabilised.

His well-rehearsed patter about his record does not mention the toll on jobs. 
Some 30,000 staff were already lined up for the axe following the rescue of 
HBOS at the height of the 2008 banking crisis. Horta-Osório took out another 
15,000 under his first three-year plan. His latest plan involves another 9,000 
job losses, along with 50 branches a year. “Unfortunately, we had to lower the 
number of people,” he says, in something of an understatement, adding that he 
used redeployment and natural turnover as much as possible.

His latest three-year plan – outlined in October – involves cutting another 
200 branches as more of Lloyds’s banking services move online.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Flloyds-boss-antonio-horta-osorio-defends-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427490683412%2Feae3e338-4d62-4bfc-a1aa-5dd3506ed2bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lloyds%20boss%20defends%20his%20record%20as%20four%20years%20of%20%E2%80%98doing%20the%20right%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Flloyds-boss-antonio-horta-osorio-defends-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lloyds%20boss%20defends%20his%20record%20as%20four%20years%20of%20%E2%80%98doing%20the%20right%20thing%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fmar%2F28%2Flloyds-boss-antonio-horta-osorio-defends-record%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427490683412%2Feae3e338-4d62-4bfc-a1aa-5dd3506ed2bd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 TSB, spun out of Lloyds on the instructions of the EU, is to be sold to 
Spanish bank Sabadell. Photograph: Tim Ireland/AP 
The banker, who learned his trade at Goldman Sachs and spent time in Portugal, 
Spain, the US and Brazil before arriving in the UK 10 years ago – says that if 
he had been running Lloyds in 2008 he would never have taken over the near-bust 
HBOS. At the time, he was running Santander’s UK arm, and he did take over 
struggling rivals during the crisis, including Bradford & Bingley, but only the 
branches and clients: he left their toxic mortgage books for the government to 
nationalise.

Earlier this month, Spanish bank Sabadell agreed a £1.7bn takeover of TSB, the 
bank created from 631 branches that were carved out of Lloyds under the terms 
imposed by the EU at the time of the bailout. The Portuguese banker – who 
points out it cost £1bn more to perform the separation, in line with EU orders, 
than the new bank is now worth – always thought TSB, with its 4.6% share of 
current accounts and, unusually, more deposits than loans, would attract an 
offer.

He also hopes it will be a strong bank – if only to appease the politicians. 
Labour has talked about creating two new banks on the high street to boost 
competition. Moreover, the Competition and Markets Authority has already 
embarked on an 18-month investigation into the sector, which could ultimately 
be bad news for Lloyds because the bank still has a 25% share of current 
accounts even after the TSB disposal.

Horta-Osório, however, insists he is more concerned about improving 
competition in the small business market than in personal banking.

With the reputation of the banking industry continuing to take a battering – 
most recently HSBC has been back in the headlines after theGuardian and other 
publications published details of its Swiss arm helping customers avoid tax – 
Horta-Osório believes there will always be mistakes: “I say to my people … the 
only person who does not miss a penalty is the one who never plays football. 
Even Ronaldo and Messi miss penalties: fortunately, they miss one out of 10 or 
100. It is human to err: to be human is to make mistakes.”

Lloyds has paid some huge fines and penalties for its huge, past mistakes. It 
was fined£28m for using a bonus scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/11/lloyds-banking-group-fined-misselling-scandal>
 that put staff under so much pressure to meet targets that they sold products 
to themselves. There was also a £226m fine for rigging Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/28/lloyds-suspends-seven-people-rigging-rates-libor>
 anda £4.3m punishment for being slow to make payouts for mis-sold payment 
protection insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/feb/19/payment-protection-insurance-insurance>
. But, Horta-Osório says, he is instilling a new culture, one where people must 
try to do the right thing.

It was he who kicked off the huge PPI compensation movement, which has now 
totalled more than £20bn across the banking business. After a legal battle that 
pre-dated Horta-Osório’s arrival, the Lloyds boss unexpectedly gave up the fight
in March 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/05/lloyds-loss-payment-protection-costs>
 and set aside more than £3bn to cover the expected bill. But the impact was 
far bigger than that. The bill at Lloyds has now mushroomed to £12bn, but 
Horta-Osório insists he has no regrets in terms of the cost to shareholders: 
“It was about doing the right thing.”

There have been rumblings that AHO might be ready to move on once the 
government stake is gone. Osborne, in his last budget of this government, 
outlined plans to sell another £9bn shares – which would take the taxpayers’ 
stake down to 7% next year if the Tories form the next government. And 
Horta-Osório expects Labour to follow a similar policy of selling down the 
stake.

But for now, his mind is on his new business proposal: “I am just starting the 
new three-year plan. It’s a new plan: it’s a new job.”
 