
Cut-price shares in Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> are to be sold to 
the public next year in a move that will complete the sale of the taxpayer’s 
stake in the bailed-out institution but risk exposing the government to a loss 
on the stock offering.


About £2bn shares – half the amount first signalled by prime minister David 
Cameron in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/19/conservatives-pledge-to-sell-public-discounted-shares-in-bailed-out-bank>
 – are to be sold directly to retail investors, who could begin registering 
their interest on a governmentwebsite launched on  
<http://www.gov.uk/lloydsshares>Monday.
Lloyds Banking Group share price 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/lloyds_shares-zip/giv-31114h76OOMDsHKrV/>
 Lloyds Banking Group share price. 
The sell-off was described by George Osborne, at the Conservative party 
conference, as the “biggest privatisation for 20 years” and was announced even 
as City analysts warned Lloyds faced a further bill of at least £1.5bn for 
mis-selling of payment protection insurance.

 While the public is already able to buy Lloyds shares on the stock market, 
the Treasury plans to sell the £2bn stake at a discount of 5%. Investors who 
hold their shares for a year will be given a bonus share for every 10 held, 
with the bonus capped at £200 per investor. People applying for less than 
£1,000 worth of shares will be given priority. A massive advertising campaign - 
hoping to repeat the success of the“tell Sid” British Gas advertising campaign 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nedVpG-GjkE> almost 30 years ago - is promised.

The chancellor said the proceeds would be used to pay down the national debt.

Announcing the retail offering, which featured during the general election 
campaign, theTreasury said 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/hm-treasury/rns/statement-re---lloyds/201510050701281827B/>
 it expected Lloyds to be returned to private ownership next year. “It is the 
government’s intention to fully exit from its Lloyds shareholding in the coming 
months, and as part of this at least £2bn of shares will be sold to retail 
investors.”

Lloyds bank share sale: all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/lloyds-bank-share-sale-all-you-need-to-know>
António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, the Lloyds chief 
executive, has previously supported the strategy of dribbling out shares into 
the market to big City investors and hedge funds to reduce the government stake 
- which stood at 43% following the bank bailouts in 2008 and 2009 and has now 
fallen to 12%. A Lloyds spokesperson said: “The decision about any sale of the 
UK government’s shares in Lloyds Banking Group is up to the government”.

That dribbling out of shares is expected to continue until the end of the year 
. The promise of a discount - the government breaks even on sale sales above 
73.6p - could mean a loss on the retail offering depending on the share price 
next year. On Monday the shares closed up 1% at 77.3p.

The rise in the shares in February mean that a bonus 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/lloyds-banking-group--lloy-/rns/director-pdmr-shareholding/201503121527163234H/>
 of 1m shares - worth around £800,000 - has already been triggered for 
Horta-Osório although he will not be able to sell the shares until 2020.

The shares have been buoyed since the surprise announcement on Friday by the 
City regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority,that it is proposing a Spring 
2018 deadline for PPI compensation claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/ppi-2018-deadline-fca-proposal>
. Consumer groups said the FCA move intended to help the Lloyds sale. Andrew 
Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, also 
questioned the motivation last week.

 Lloyds has set aside more than £13bn to tackle PPI claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/31/ppi-bill-rises-again-at-lloyds>
 - half the entire industry’s bill of £26bn - and Ian Gordon, analyst at 
investment bank Investec, estimated that Lloyds alone could face a further 
provision of at least £1.5bn.

“The government’s decision to press ahead with a retail offer is a political 
one,” said Gordon.

 Some estimates expect the industry to face a further £33bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/30/banks-face-ppi-compensation-bill-commission>
 PPI bill because of a legal case involving a customer who was sold the 
insurance without knowing how much commission was being paid.

.”

The sale is also being announced ahead of a Competition and Markets Authority 
review into competition in the banking sector, which could signal a breakup of 
the big banks. Lloyds has a 25% market share of current accounts, more than any 
other bank. The CMA is due to publish its preliminary findings in a fortnight.


Lloyds already has more private investors – around 2.7 million – than any 
other listed company and the prospects of hefty dividend payments have already 
been attracting investors to the shares. But Darren Hepworth, director of 
global trading at share dealer TD DirectInvesting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/investing>, warned: “It is worth noting 
however that investors who have held onto the stock for over a decade will not 
have seen their stock return to its earlier valuation, with the share prices 
still a third of those in 2005. This perhaps serves as a reminder to investors 
that shares can go down as well as up”.



 