
Lollapalooza's just-announced bill <http://www.lollapalooza.com/2014-lineup/> 
includesSkrillex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/sep/29/skrillex-dubstep-interview>, 
Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/11/arctic-monkeys-america-finally-victory>
,Eminem <https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem>, Calvin Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/23/calvin-harris-controversy-artistry-club-culture>
, andKings of Leon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kingsofleon>. In fact, 
its biggest names easily make up at least a partial list of the acts on offer 
from just about any major summer music festival over the past five years. These 
are curiously stale choices on the part of the big-ticket festival bookers – 
particularly as this is Lollapalooza's fourth year running without a female 
headliner (their last wasLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/23/lady-gaga--video-artpop-guy-watch>
 in 2010). The three-day Chicago event's uninspired curation is a staunch 
reflection of years gone by, and headlinersOutKast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/outkast>, who last released an album in 
2006, will play over 40 other festivals this season.

OutKast's participation could have created the most excitement about (and 
ticket sales for) Lollapalooza, given their voraciously talked-about return 
after a seven-year hiatus – if only they weren't making so many other 
appearances this season. They begin with a highly anticipated debut show at 
Coachella in April and play several European dates, including one at the UK's 
Bestival in September. Lollapalooza will be the 17th of these shows, which is a 
less-than-thrilling position on the timeline of OutKast's international 
comeback.

The rest of Lolla's big names paint a less extreme, but still puzzling, 
picture of festival monotony. Calvin Harris will be performing at Coachella 
this year, as will Skrillex andArctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys>, both of whom will also 
appear at Bonnaroo and various international festivals – including, 
respectively, dates in Portugal, the UK, Canada, Spain, and France. Many 
festivals, of course, continue to book a variety of fledgling acts in addition 
to their big moneymakers, but their main stages are increasingly populated by 
familiar faces and sounds.

Although Lollapalooza is 2014's starkest example of the increasing 
homogenization of music festivals, it's far from alone. In Arcade Fire, 
Coachella shares a headliner with over a dozen festivals worldwide this summer, 
including Barcelona's Primavera in May and Italy's Rock in Roma in June. Some 
years back, it was conceivable that a person might want to see more than one 
festival in the same year in order to take in a wider range of artists. But if 
you did this in, say, 2011, then you would have already seen 2014's crop of 
A-list festival performers – Arcade Fire headlined Coachella, Bonnaroo, Spain's 
Benicassim and plenty of other international showcases then, too.

But Lollapalooza is a repeat offender. Barring OutKast, five of the festival's 
six headliners have played at Lollapalooza post-2008 before (with Eminem and 
Kings of Leon appearing in headlining spots), making this year's offering feel 
especially warmed-over. Just to keep score, that's five recycled acts, one 
reunion show out of 40, and nary a woman in sight at the top. This is strange, 
consideringLorde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/10/lorde-just-freak-royals-pure-heroine>
 is on the bill, but not in one of its top-tier positions.

Lorde, a recent Grammy winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/26/grammy-awards-grammys-live-coverage>
 whose record Pure Heroine has sold over 1.5million copies worldwide, would 
surely draw a fresher, more multifaceted crowd than a bland stalwart like Kings 
of Leon – a band, if you've been to a American music festival sometime since 
the late noughties, you've likely already seen, intentionally or otherwise. But 
then, if you don't catch her at Lollapalooza, it doesn't matter. She's also 
appearing at Coachella. Just like everybody else.
 