
This weekend you can visit Chicago from the comfort of your sofa. In 
association with Red Bull TV, we’re livestreaming the best bits of the 
Lollapalooza festival, with three separate channels making sure there’s no need 
to miss anything (you can see the full schedule, with local timings, at the 
bottom of this page. Add six hours for the UK time). So if, say, Kings of Leon 
aren’t to your taste as the festival closers, you can flick over toSkrillex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/skrillex> or Chance the Rapper instead. And 
you don’t need to change pages to do it – our player will be fully interactive, 
and it will be the same one for the whole weekend. So that’s 63 sets, brought 
to you on one player on one page, for nothing, with video on demand, to boot. 
We think that’s a pretty good deal. And in the meantime, here are some of the 
acts we’re going to be looking out for.

FRIDAY

Blood Orange (11pm BST, 6pm ET – channel 3)

He may be between albums, but that hasn’t prevented Dev Hynes from perfecting 
his Prince-like performance. The singer, now resident in New York, not only 
shreds like the Purple power force but attempts to dance like him too (for a 
quick guide to his elbowcentric grooves check out the video for Chamakay). With 
the shape shifting artist now settling for his soft-focus 80s R&B guise for 
good, this show will be an opportunity to indulge in a slight smattering of 
pretentiousness (Hynes’ passion for all-white outfits and leather caps is 
unprecedented) as well as a chance to hear brand new Blood Orange material, too.
HG

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDfZMvTHJLUs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDfZMvTHJLUs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDfZMvTHJLUs&media=>
Lorde (1am BST, 8pm ET – channel 1)


Fans of The Hunger Games franchise should pay close attention to Lorde’s set 
at the festival, as the 17-year-old singer has been announced as the “sole 
curator” of the forthcoming Mockingjay Part 1 soundtrack. With news of her 
score announced this week, perhaps she’ll perform new material during the 
event. Even if she doesn’t, tune in for the singer’s compellingly stark set up 
– the minimal production, the convulsing dance moves and bountiful hair tossing 
has split reviewers since her debut erupted last year – with some suggesting 
her show is “a little monotonous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/08/lorde-review-brixton-academy-london>
”, and other hailing it as “nothing short of awesome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/08/lorde-review-nothing-short-awesome-shepherds-bush-empire>
”. Find out for yourself.HG

Lykke Li (2am BST, 9pm ET – channel 3)

If you’re feeling gloomy, then a set by Swedish songwriter Lykke Li should 
both satisfy your sullen woes and lift you spirit. Li’s most recent album is a 
letter to the lonesome and lovelorn, but her festival shows are known for their 
theatricality, and won’t drag you into a spiral of despair: “I’m full of wonder 
for the festival beast,”she told the Observer earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/30/lykke-li-pop-culture-underestimates-people-swedish>
. Older tracks like I Follow Rivers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vZYbEL06lEU> inject a jerky, quirky pop-pace 
to the aloof artist’s sophisticated setlist, while the singer has been known to 
mix old hip-hop joints, from Rick Ross to A Tribe Called Quest, into her 
performances.HG

Arctic Monkeys (2.30am BST, 9.30pm ET – channel 1)


Alex Turner and his band will be jostling for viewers on the Bud Light stage. 
The band have been tight-lipped since claims that they wereembroiled in a tax 
avoidance scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jul/11/arctic-monkeys-tax-avoidance-liberty>
 arose a few weeks ago and while ithey’re unlikely to choose a US festival set 
to address the nitty-gritty of HMRC returns during their slot, fans may be 
interested to see whether it will impinge on their choice of earlier tracks – 
after all, songs likeWhen the Sun Goes Down 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUatH8zI6Qc> don’t sound quite so scathing in 
light of recent news. Plus, it’s always fun to hear how far Turner’srecently 
acquired onstage accent <http://www.nme.com/news/arctic-monkeys/71153> will go, 
especially in front of a crowd of real, actual Americans.HG

SATURDAY

Jungle (8.15pm BST, 3.15pm ET – channel 2)


Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/21/jungle-secretive-duo-the-heat-london-gig>
 have had to learn the ropes quickly. As one of the buzziest of the current 
crop of buzz bands, the genre-skipping collective found themselves flung into 
the spotlight at this year’s SXSW and having to deal with fresh challenges such 
as “no time to soundcheck” and “crowds too busy talking about which bands 
they’re going to sign this summer”. Yet by June they were proving themselves 
masters at packing out festival tents with their horn-powered brand of funky, 
futuristic pop: their John Peel tent show at Glastonbury had punters spilling 
out of the canvas, and dancing while they did so, which certainly bodes well 
for Lollapalooza.TJ

Jenny Lewis (2am BST, 9pm ET – channel 2)


Former Rilo Kiley singer Jenny Lewis may trade as an introspective 
singer-songwriter but don’t let that fool you into thinking she’s a stranger to 
the visual spectacular.Her recent performance on Jimmy Fallon 
<http://www.nbc.com/the-tonight-show/segments/9306> featured not just a trippy 
rainbow guitar but also some Adidas tracksuit-clad female dancers, replicating 
the eye-catching video for her recent single Just One of the Guys. With current 
songs tackling her estranged father’s death and the disintegration of her old 
band, this should be one to listen to as well as one to watch.TJ
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrvcf6dCk-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrvcf6dCk-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrvcf6dCk-k&media=>
Outkast (2.15am BST, 9.15pm ET – channel 1)


Outkast’s much-hyped comeback performance at Coachella in April was a bit of a 
letdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/12/outkast-at-coachella-review-one-of-the-most-anticipated-reunions-proves-underwhelming>
 by most accounts: a flat performance that wasn’t helped by an equally flat 
crowd. Yet it seems like the Atlanta duo might have just been rusty, with their 
recent show at Wireless in London attracting rave reviews. “The only 
conceivable complaint is that they’ve wasted 13 years not doing what they do so 
brilliantly,” gushed Dorian Lynskey  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/07/outkast-bruno-mars-review-wireless-festival>
of a set that involved goofy dance-steps, future-thinking pop music and 
platinum wigs. Let’s hope they maintain such trajectory for their Lolla 
headline spot.TJ

Calvin Harris (2.45am BST, 9.45pm ET – channel 2)

You can be as sniffy as you like about Calvin Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/calvin-harris> but he certainly seems to 
know how to make Americans dance. The Scot has been honing his craft with a 
20-month residency at Vegas superclub Hakkasan and his understanding of UK 
dance culture – albeit softened with a huge commercial edge – means that he 
stands way ahead of the more braindead exponents of EDM. Of course, all of this 
is besides the point; the main reason you should watch Harris is because when 
he played T In The Park recently he brought Will Smith along as his personal 
hype man. Which Hollywood A-lister can we expect on MC duties this time?TJ

SUNDAY

Lindsay Lowend (8.15pm BST, 3.15pm ET – channel 3)

To be honest, curiosity about Lindsay Lowend was piqued by the name. But then 
we had a listen to some of the music Tony Mendez makes, and realised there was 
more to him than a good pun. The young Washington DC producer has described his 
sound as “neon music”, taking inspiration from music-themed video games. But 
what does neon music actually mean?He said last year 
<http://www.gottadancedirty.com/2013/10/10/exclusive-lindsay-lowend-interview/>
: “People ask what genre of music I make pretty frequently and I always end up 
responding with ‘electronic’ or ‘instrumental hip-hop’. I mean, of course it’s 
electronic, but I sure as hell wouldn’t call this stuff instrumental hip-hop. 
Neon music isn’t about a BPM or a drum pattern–it’s about a vibe. I realize 
that sounds pretty nebulous, so I’ll name a few artists I feel fall into this 
category: Alizzz, Wave Racer, AWE, Deon Custom, and Bo En. If those names don’t 
ring a bell, Google them immediately. There’s a certain light-heartedness 
associated with neon music. It doesn’t take itself too seriously.” All clear? 
Good.MH

White Denim (8.45pm BST, 3,45pm ET – channel 2)

The Texas quartet have been gradually assembling a startling and varied 
catalogue since first springing to attention in 2008. There’s garage rock in 
there, but also jazz, country, prog, funk and anything else that catches their 
attention – they are truly in the lineage of the Texas experimentalists of the 
late 1960s (the Red Krayola spring to mind, particularly). Whether what they do 
will work in the baking heat of a Chicago afternoon, in front of a crowd that 
may not yet be fully refreshed, remains to be seen. But if they fall flat, it’s 
unlikely to be as a result of playing too safe. “It’s the danger and surprise, 
the element of the unknown, that keeps it exciting,”guitarist Austin Jenkins 
told the Guardian last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/26/white-denim-corsicana-lemonade>. 
“Not just for us but for people watching, too. I like seeing musicians 
communicating with each other rather than replicating exactly what’s on their 
records.”MH

The 1975 (11.30pm BST, 6.30pm ET – channel 2)

At this point, after touring their debut album since some point a little 
before the outbreak of the first world war, the 1975 are a finely honed 
hit-delivery machine. Unlike so many other young British bands setting out to 
“conquer America”, they’ve actually put in the work: their frequent visits to 
the States have seen them venture beyond New York and LA and into the vast 
interior, which means they’ll likely attract a sizable and enthusiastic crowd 
for their Lolla set. Matt Healy’s got his stagecraft down to a turn now – the 
bottle of wine, the unburdened dancing, the flirting with the girls in the 
front row – and while it may come across as shtick, there’s no doubting his 
sincere desire to be a fantastic pop star. He’s also able to carry it off. It’s 
easy to be cynical about the 1975; it’s also easy to find yourself unexpectedly 
carried away by their artful synthesis of 80s pop and alt-rock styles.MH

Skrillex (2.30am BST, 9.30pm– channel 2)

Even if you don’t care for the music – and plenty are sniffy about the king of 
what’s been dubbed “brostep” – Skrillex offers one of the most spectacular live 
shows in music. At Glastonbury he played his set from inside a spaceship on the 
stage, making up for the fact that his performance is, at heart, a bloke in 
glasses standing still and pressing some buttons by amping up everything else 
that could possibly be amped up for a son et lumiere thrill ride. Admittedly, 
it might lost a little something from being watched on a small screen, but on 
the bright side, you won’t have a drunk man in a vest bellowing “Awesome, 
dude!” in your ear for the duration.MH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Flollapalooza-2014-day-by-day-guide-to-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406886016755%2F7c5f5577-bac9-439b-8058-844a843e1dd7-1020x822.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lollapalooza%202014%3A%20A%20day-by-day%20guide%20to%20the%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Flollapalooza-2014-day-by-day-guide-to-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lollapalooza%202014%3A%20A%20day-by-day%20guide%20to%20the%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F01%2Flollapalooza-2014-day-by-day-guide-to-highlights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406886016755%2F7c5f5577-bac9-439b-8058-844a843e1dd7-1020x822.png>
 Lollapalooza … Your viewing options  