
If bookies took bets on the lineup at film festivals, whoops and cheers would 
be shaking the Guardian HQ this lunchtime. As they don't, the noise is more 
muted: a smile, a shrug – even a meh.

The programme for this year's London film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/08/london-film-festival-programme> 
is precisely as predicted: a comprehensive mop-up of the best of the premieres 
in the five big festivals that will have already happened this year (Sundance, 
Cannes, Tribeca, Venice, Toronto). We've listed our highlights below, and 
there's loads of titles to tempt the cineaste who lives within spitting 
distance of London. The way that this year's festivals have panned out – a 
fairly low-key Cannes, followed by stellar lineups at Venice and, especially, 
Toronto (which kicks off next week) – helps, too. London may be be serving 
seconds, but they won't spend too long on the hotplate.

Still, it's a challenge for Sandra Hebron and her team. They know London can't 
compete with the big hitters on the circuit, and so they've taken care to 
plunge their energies elsewhere – to brand the LFFas a people's festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2009/oct/27/london-film-festival-an-education>
. Hence the heavy emphasis on restored archive classics (personally, I can't 
wait for the restored print ofThe Great White Silence 
<http://ftvdb.bfi.org.uk/sift/title/224417?view=synopsis>, Herbert Ponting's 
version of Scott's Antarctic expedition), education drives and event 
screenings. The success of theSomerset House season last month 
<http://www.somersethouse.org.uk/film/default.asp> was testimony to the 
smashing combo of al fresco London landmark and mainstream crowd-pleaser. Thus, 
thoughThe American <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/123622/american> 
will have been out in the US for a month before its LFF screening, George 
Clooney and Trafalgar Square, together at last, are still a good draw.

So, is it churlish to be just a touch deflated by the lack of surprises in the 
mix (granted, we don't know what the "surprise film" is yet, butI'll bet it 
isn't the Terrence Malick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/29/terrence-malick-tree-of-life-cannes>
). Last yearopened with a bona fide world premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2009/oct/15/london-film-festival-fantastic-mr-fox>
: Wes Anderson'sFantastic Mr Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/131171/fantastic-mr-fox> – the perfect 
LFF combination of Hollywood A-listers indebted to an English imagination. This 
year there are 11 world premieres in amongst the 197 features, but none are 
galas, and all are what you'd call interesting rather than show-stopping 
(Hannah Rothschild's documentary about Peter Mandelson, a movie about Mott the 
Hoople).

What's your take on this year's programme? What films are you most looking 
forward to? And how would you like us to cover the festival? We have – or will 
have – already run reviews of the major films. What would you like to see more 
of this year? Blogs, interviews, galleries, multimedia content? Step up our 
coverage of the special events? Or should we just ignore the whole thing?

10 key films at this year's London film festival

127 Hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/aug/13/danny-boyle-127-hours-festival>

Danny Boyle's follow-up to Slumdog Millionaire, which premieres in Toronto, 
stars James Franco as a mountaineer who has to hack off a limb and distil his 
own urine after a boulder manoeuvre goes awry.

Black Swan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137726/black-swan>

Darren Aronofsky's ballet psychodrama kicked off Venice in fine style. Natalie 
Portman plays a twinkle-toed bisexual who goes into psychological meltdown 
ahead of a Swan Lake performance.

Uncle Boomnee Who Can Recall His Past Lives  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/135882/uncle-bonmee-who-can-recall-his-past-lives>

Apichatpong Weerasethakul's ghost drama winner may have been recently slated 
by the French critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/01/palme-dor-winner-uncle-boonmee> 
whose countrymen awarded it the Palme d'Or at Cannes earlier this year, but 
appetite will have been whetted in the capital by lavish press and 
Weerasethakul's photo exhibition at the BFI.

The King's Speech  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/nov/16/the-kings-speech-colin-firth>

Colin Firth <https://www.theguardian.com/film/colin-firth> stars as stuttery 
King VI, Helena Bonham Carter as his wife and Geoffrey Rush his speech 
therapist in this Toronto-premiering comedy drama directed by Tom (Damned 
United) Hooper.

Never Let Me Go  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/06/kazuo-ishiguro-london-film-festival>

Britain's key three young stars - Keira Knightley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/keiraknightley>, Carey Mulligan and new 
Spiderman Andrew Garfield – star in this adaptation of Kazio Ishaguro's novel

Neds

Peter Mullan's first film as a director since 2002's The Magdelene Sisters is 
a crime coming-of-age story set in Glasgow in 1973.

Little White Lies

Guillaume Canet's first film since 2006's Tell No One sounds like a classy 
version of Tyler Perry's marital holiday comedy Why Did I Get Married Too? It 
stars Benoît Magimel and Canet's partner Marion Cotillard.

Contre toi

One of the two world premieres that isn't British is a drama written and 
directed by French director Lola Doillon (the wife of Cédric Klapisch) and 
starringKristin Scott Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kristin-scott-thomas>.

Submarine

Richard Ayoade's comedy stars Sally Hawkins and Paddy Considine as parents 
being kept together by their 15-year-old son. It premieres in Toronto, 
inevitably, but chances are it'll get better billing in London.

Tabloid

Errol Morris's documentary is about a former Miss Wyoming charged with 
abducting and imprisoning a young Mormon missionary.
 