
London Live <https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-live> has unveiled an 
on-screen look that uses bright, multi-coloured vistas of the capital's 
landmarks, including Wembley and the Southbank, designed to set the fledgling 
channel apart from rivals such as the BBC and ITV.

The series of on-air trails that will promote London Live, the Evening 
Standard's TV channel whichwill launch on 31 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/london-live-launch-31-march>, 
aim to give "vibrancy, colour and life" to the channel.

London Live has unveiled a series of five 25-second trails, which will be used 
as an intro to news coverage and shows on the channel, featuring locations 
including Boxpark in eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Oxford 
Circus and the Gherkin building in the City. Eight idents will be developed for 
the launch.

The branding has been developed by Israeli-born, London-based artist Yoni Alter
 <http://www.yoniishappy.com>, who is known for using bright, colourful 
imagery, with ad agency Kemistry animating the graphics.

"The brand identity fits the brief perfectly, adding vibrancy, colour and life 
to our channel," said Jane Mote, launch programme director for London Live. 
"Kemistry's concept of giving artists a space on our channel is genius and they 
are continuing to extend the concept across our on and off-air look."

A new artist will be selected each year to create a new-look for London Live, 
"ensuring the channel's brand evolves keeping it fresh and contemporary."

London Live's commercial team has begun the process of luring in TV 
advertising for the channel.

According to media buyers, a key strand of the commercial plan is to tap into 
the Evening Standard's strong base of print advertisers.

The idea is to convince them to also buy airtime, or to bundle an offer of 
print and TV deals, in a similar vein to Richard Desmond's strategy with 
Express Newspapers and Channel 5.

"Their heritage is through the newspaper, so they are trying to look at what 
they can do cross-platform to make a stronger sell," said one media buyer. "We 
are approaching the advanced booking deadline [for TV ad deals with 
broadcasters] for April in a few weeks, so they had better get moving."

London Live has decided to sell its own TV ad space instead of striking a deal 
to let a third party, such as Channel 4 or BSkyB, sell it as part of a much 
stronger portfolio.

BT Sport went down this route, appointing Channel 4 Sales, the TV ad sales 
house that represents the broadcaster and partners including UKTV.

London Live has also signed up seven video journalists to join its news and 
current affairs team, as the TV station continues togrow the ranks of its 
presenting line-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/london-live-launch-31-march>.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 