
They say the early bird catches the worm – and the same applies to the whelk, 
the whiting and the winkle. If you want to see moules rather than mops atNew 
Billingsgate Market 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/corporation/LGNL_Services/Business/Markets/Billingsgate+Market/>
, London's seafood hub you'll need to be there by 6am at the latest – the 
market opens for business at 5am (and is closed on Sundays and Mondays), and 
most of the pros have done their shopping by half past, but there's still 
plenty to see if you get there a bit later, and boxes of bream aren't something 
you want to be carting around with you all day in any case. Once you've had a 
wander round (and enjoyed the famously salty language on the market floor) head 
for one of the cafes for a restorative cuppa and a kipper bap - breakfast 
proper is better left until a bit later.

By now it should be around 7.30am and most of London is yet to rise, so you've 
got a couple of options. You can linger over your tea and some papers and then 
take the DLR from Poplar or West India Quay to Mudchute where you'll have a two 
minute walk intoMudchute City Farm <http://www.mudchute.org/> which opens at 
9am, for a wander among the pigs, donkeys, llamas and geese until the kitchen 
opens at 9.30am, serving breakfasts made from the farm's produce.

View London food walk: Billingsgate to Balham 
<http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?msa=0&ie=UTF8&vpsrc=6&msid=201634927544199255477.0004ab5598fa621f0240d&ll=51.483949,-0.091324&spn=0.196695,0.31517&z=11&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Or if you feel like something a little more urban and don't want to hang 
about, there's a cafe not too far away which opens at 7:30am on weekdays and 
9am at the weekend. Join the DLR at Poplar and head north to Stratford, then 
change on to the London overground and go one stop east to Hackney Wick.

This arty area has developed a number of good cafes in the last couple of 
years, but for breakfast, my money's onCounter Café 
<http://thecountercafe.co.uk/> in Roach Road, a 10 minute walk from the 
station, which serves good Antipodean-style coffee and excellent cooked 
breakfasts; it's a great place to linger with the papers and people watch. 
(Later Saturday arrivals may prefer to visit theH Forman & Sons Smokehouse 
<http://www.formans.co.uk/> restaurant at Pudding Mill Lane for a taste of 
their famous salmon, and stunning views of the Olympic Park. Brunch is from 
10am.)

Once you've recharged your batteries, it's back to the DLR for a trip south to 
theMuseum of Docklands <http://www.museumoflondon.org.uk/Docklands/> at West 
India Quay. The former warehouse offers a fascinating glimpse into the trade in 
spices, sugar and spirits which once fuelled an Empire – and the slaves which 
it depended on. It's a fascinating place to spend an hour or so.

There's a restaurant on site, but I'd wander down to the river and take a boat 
across to Rotherhithe, from where it's an easy bus ride toZucca 
<http://www.zuccalondon.com/> in Bermondsey for lunch – take the C10 westbound 
from Rotherhithe Street and get off at Bermondsey Street – the acclaimed 
Italian restaurant is at 184, and booking is essential. (For a side trip to the
Surrey Docks City Farm <http://www.surreydocksfarm.org.uk/>, which also has a 
café turn left out of the Hilton Hotel just after you disembark the boat, and 
it's a 10 minute walk along Rotherhithe Street.)

From Bermondsey, you're within a custard doughnut throw of Maltby Street 
<http://www.maltbystreet.com/>, the Borough offshoot where the likes of St 
John, Neal's Yard Cheeses and the Kernel Brewery sell their wares on a Saturday 
– and a brisk trot from London Bridge station.

Take the northern line south to Tooting Broadway, then turn right into Tooting 
High Street and you'll find yourself in a completely different world –Tooting 
Indoor Market <http://www.allinlondon.co.uk/directory/1326/42877.php> may not 
have organic salads or artisan breads, but for Caribbean vegetables, enormous 
cooking pots and sheer exuberance, it's hard to beat. Continue along the road 
to the heartland of the area's diverse Asian community, from thePooja 
<http://www.poojasweets.com/> Indian sweetshop at 168 Upper Tooting Road to the 
venerablePatel Brothers <http://www.patelbros.com/> grocers at 187, which 
specialises particularly in Gujarati goods.

The Apollo Banana Leaf 
<http://www.apollobananaleaf.co.uk/bananaleaf/order.php?ref=home> Sri Lankan 
restaurant on Tooting High Street is great value if you just can't help 
yourself – but, after such an early start, I'd save your appetite for an early 
dinner instead.

From Tooting Bec station to Balham is a 2 minute ride – or a 15 minute walk – 
and three minutes up Balham High Road is one of the capital's most esoteric 
watering holes, the BBC, orBalham Bowls Club <http://www.balhambowlsclub.com/>, 
round the corner in Ramsden Road. The clubhouse has a shabbily genteel feel, 
with defiantly unfashionable squashy settees, making it just the place for a 
relaxed pint before proceeding to our final port of call,Lamberts 
<http://www.lambertsrestaurant.com/> restaurant, which is just the other side 
of the station.

Time Out reckons the seasonal modern British food make it "one of the best 
upscale local restaurants in London", Hardens reviewers laud it as "ludicrously 
good value", and it's definitely off the beaten track. It's small though, so 
make sure you book ahead, or a long day could well end in disappointment! Bonus 
points to anyone who orders fish here.
 