
Benjamin Zephaniah: ‘Everything seems to happen in London – you can understand 
why the north is angry’


Poet and writer, Lincolnshire


I lived in London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> most of my life but 
moved to Lincolnshire eight years ago. A doctor friend of mine showed me a 
medical report and had a word with me about jogging down busy streets, 
especially the road I lived by in East Ham, and how many people in the area had 
lung diseases. I looked at it and went ‘Oh my god, I’m out of here.’

I miss the multiculturalism, the fact there’s 300 languages spoken. I learned 
to speak – not brilliantly – some Urdu and some Mandarin. When I was in London 
I could practise every day, but here I hardly ever get a chance to speak it. I 
remember once looking at my musicians and thinking, they’ve got so many 
influences from so many parts of the world, and they were just on my doorstep. 
I also miss having somewhere to go any time of the day; where I live, when the 
lights go out, the lights really do go out. But then I love the fresh air here, 
I really appreciate it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb53c0b17d95814f1f1550cdf60f6854f63fd73aa%2F0_117_5616_3512%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb53c0b17d95814f1f1550cdf60f6854f63fd73aa%2F0_117_5616_3512%2F5616.jpg>
 Benjamin Zephaniah in Lincolnshire: ‘I miss the multiculturalism of London.’ 
Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
There’s a wonderful little town where I live and I love the independent shops, 
old-fashioned sweet shops run by little old ladies, an entertainer on the 
street just for the sake of it, not necessarily busking. In London, high 
streets all look the same, and they seem to just be about business. If you come 
from certain groups – a group of young black men on a street corner – talking, 
you get told to move along. Once a policeman wanted to arrest me for loitering. 
I went, I’m not loitering, I’m just hanging out here.

I think England is missing a trick – everything seems to happen in London, and 
I think that’s a shame. I had to go to London to further my career, and for a 
black person in Birmingham back then, or in most cities, it was difficult to 
move out of our little ghettoes. The amount of people I know from around here 
who work in film and journalism and so on, they say they had to leave here to 
further their career. I know a lot of artists who refuse to move to London, but 
they’re always commuting there, for auditions or meetings. So that is an issue, 
but that’s not the people of London’s fault. It’s great to have all that, but 
we should have it in other cities as well. Especially the high north – when you 
go up there you can understand why they look down at London and they’re rather 
angry, because they think everything’s been taken to London.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would make pollution my priority, and making roads safe for pedestrians and 
cyclists. I’ve lost two friends in bicycle accidents in London. I say that as 
somebody that loves cars also, but a cyclist is not much danger to a car, nor 
is a pedestrian, and I’ve got to think about the underdog here.KB

Ian Rankin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianrankin>: ‘It’s a different 
city if you’ve got money in your pocket’

Author, Edinburgh
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a10617b0792c8dfa928e28c579853ba8dc27277%2F0_84_2608_1720%2F2608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a10617b0792c8dfa928e28c579853ba8dc27277%2F0_84_2608_1720%2F2608.jpg>
 Crime writer Ian Rankin: ‘The worst thing about London is getting around.’ 
Photograph: David Fisher/Rex Features 
I lived in London when I was first married, 1986 to 1990, and we didn’t get a 
lot out of the place. We didn’t have much money and I had a 90-minute commute. 
After four years we thought, this is pointless, so we moved. Since then I’ve 
visited London often and now I love it. It’s a different city when you’ve got 
money in your pocket. It’s lovely to walk around, it’s got proper 
neighbourhoods and lots of secret bits that you can find if you go for a wander 
or get lost. It bothers me when London gets all the attention. Whenever I read 
the restaurant reviews in the national press, I go, “It’s bloody London and the 
south-east again.” Once a year, if you’re lucky, a London reviewer comes up to 
Scotland, usually during the festival (surprise, surprise), and they go to a 
restaurant so they can be patronising about it. But I like that, because some 
of Britain’s best restaurants are in Edinburgh and I want them kept quiet so I 
can get a table. The worst thing about London is getting around. The best is 
that everything’s there. If you want theatres, restaurants, weird music, 
parkland, a canal, a zoo, you’ll find it in London. And jobs, let’s be honest.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would pedestrianise Oxford Street. KF

Jilly Cooper <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jilly-cooper>: ‘Look up at the 
buildings – it’s the most beautiful place in the world’

Author, Gloucestershire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f99ddd367606e72477d45d83bfa4837582c65d9%2F0_172_3152_2049%2F3152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f99ddd367606e72477d45d83bfa4837582c65d9%2F0_172_3152_2049%2F3152.jpg>
 Jilly Cooper: ‘ I’d vote forZac Goldsmith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>. He’s lovely: he’s very 
good looking.’ Photograph: Geoffrey Swaine/ReX 
I adore London. It’s home, completely. It’s where I had my children. It was a 
fantastic time in the 60s and 70s and 80s. We did that awful Sloane thing of 
living in Earl’s Court, then Fulham, and we ended up in Putney for the last 10 
years, which was perfect. We came to live in Gloucestershire in 1982. I mean, 
the country’s heaven but it’s just different, isn’t it? I’ve got a marvellous 
quote here from Nigel Nicolson about his father [political diarist], Harold: 
“He needed London as an Athenian needed Athens; he loved the country but London 
was the place where things happened, where people met and talked, where he 
recharged his intellectual batteries.”

I’m going to London tomorrow, but I haven’t been at all in the past year and I 
miss it so much; it’s been heartbreaking. It’s the buzz, the beauty – look up 
at the buildings and sculptures, it’s the most beautiful place in the world. 
The parks are phenomenal and I love the art galleries. And isn’t it awful but I 
adore journalists, and they live in London mostly, and the wonderful gossip, 
you won’t get that anywhere else. The restaurants – the Ivy and the Dorchester 
and we used to go to the Garrick – and all that chat and meeting of all one’s 
mates. And you do see absolutely beautiful people up in London. It’s nice to 
look at and I always pick up tips there.

I just think it’s exciting. People get quite naughty in London and then they 
come back to the country to be good, which is silly because everyone behaves 
really badly in the country too. I can’t really think of anything I dislike 
about London... except there aren’t any stars, and I’m very, very keen on stars.

If I had a vote I’d definitely go for Zac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>. He’s lovely: he’s very 
good looking and very, very nice. He has a very big heart and a lovely mother.

If I were mayor for a day… 

I would completely change all these stupid rules about keeping dogs on leads 
in parks. Dogs need to run. So I’d knock down a lot of horrid houses and make a 
huge new park for the dogs to have a nice time to themselves.KB

Kwame Kwei-Armah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/02/kwame-kwei-armah-center-stage>: 
‘I sense a troubling anti-immigrant feeling’

Artistic director of Center Stage, Baltimore
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd505843fd1994d7cb97622c0c606f11dcc82bfcf%2F3342_701_1811_1163%2F1811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd505843fd1994d7cb97622c0c606f11dcc82bfcf%2F3342_701_1811_1163%2F1811.jpg>
 Kwame Kwei-Armah: ‘I love the energy and sophistication.’ Photograph: Karen 
Robinson for the Observer 
I love London. I love coming home, I love walking along the South Bank and 
going on public transport, I love the energy and the sophistication of London. 
It’s a magnificent city.

I love how London is really finding itself in terms of the arts and the 
creative industries. It’s so vibrantly creative and the people in those 
industries are among the best in the world.

What’s been troubling me of late is the anti-immigrant feeling I’ve been 
sensing in London, especially in relation to eastern Europeans. As the child of 
an immigrant, I find that very painful. I was in central London a few weeks ago 
and I saw a sign in a restaurant window that said: “Waiters wanted – must speak 
immaculate English.” It was a breath away from “No blacks, no dogs, no Irish.” 
I took a photograph of it; I was that perturbed.

I’m very excited about Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> running for mayor. I love the 
narrative of a working-class Pakistani boy becoming the mayor of London in one 
generation – that would be a wonderful symbol of where we find ourselves in 
terms of meritocracy as a nation. I also respond to many of Sadiq’s policies, 
including his housing policies. As a father who has three children living in 
London, it’s a huge worry for me that they won’t be able to buy their own 
houses and get on the ladder as I did 20 years ago, so I’m encouraged by 
Sadiq’s ideas on housing.KF

If I were mayor for a day…

I would invest heavily in the homeless. The thing that hurts me the most when 
I walk the streets of London is seeing the increase in homelessness.

Andrew Hussey: ‘I get off the Eurostar at St Pancras and I think, bloody hell…’

Academic, writer and broadcaster, Paris
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F095b5b2dbee409078344c3e71c6f65e117f97e5c%2F209_1174_2868_1925%2F2868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F095b5b2dbee409078344c3e71c6f65e117f97e5c%2F209_1174_2868_1925%2F2868.jpg>
 Andrew Hussey: ‘London is still my intellectual centre of gravity.’ 
Photograph: Franck Ferville / Agence VU 
I used to love London more than I love it now. When I lived there in the late 
80s, I found it very exciting. It was a mythic rock’n’roll place – the Clash, 
the Jam, the Marquee Club – and when I first visited aged 14, having never been 
outside the north-west in my life, I couldn’t quite believe it was real.

But since moving away I can see the things that I didn’t like about it, things 
that would stop me moving back. The big one is accommodation. I had a decent 
salary back then, but I could never afford a decent flat and I ended up miles 
away in the suburbs when I really wanted to be in Soho, Brixton or Camden.

The other thing is the transport system. I live in a city where everything 
works and then I get off the Eurostar at St Pancras and think, bloody hell… I 
find journeys in London a nightmare. The tube is just a big jumble of linguine 
that I could never disentangle and the city is very cycle-unfriendly compared 
with Paris.

But I still like London. London is my intellectual centre of gravity. It’s 
much more open and fast moving than any European city I’ve lived in and more 
connected to popular culture. It’s a very creative place.

If I were mayor for a day…

I’d sort out the transport system. You couldn’t do it in a day but I’d make it 
cheaper and get it working better.KF

Jackie Kay: ‘I’m really shocked by the speed of things, the rush’

Poet and author, Manchester
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2598fe49b87031de5c6a8ae8156c500a49e2ca5%2F27_338_4840_2987%2F4840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2598fe49b87031de5c6a8ae8156c500a49e2ca5%2F27_338_4840_2987%2F4840.jpg>
 Jackie Kay: Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
I’m in Manchester now, but I’ve lived in London, Glasgow and Stirling. Coming 
down to London was exciting: I found this group called Women of Asian and 
African Descent and I made a lot of really good friends. In Scotland I didn’t 
really have any black friends, I didn’t know many people of colour at all.

I lived in London for around 12 years. I loved the city’s energy and the way 
it seemed to be culturally mixed and at ease with itself. I like how each place 
has its own distinct identity – Green Lanes and the Turkish area, Stamford Hill 
and Hasidic Jewish people. You move just from one area to another and people’s 
faces change. It’s a shame that wee areas like Deptford or New Cross are 
changing in the sense that people can’t afford to live in them anymore, and 
that’s changing the deep demographic of London.

When my son was about to start secondary school the one he would have gone to 
wouldn’t have been very good, and Carol Ann [Duffy], who I lived with at the 
time, had a wee girl, so we thought it would be better for the kids to go to a 
smaller city. I’d been to Manchester quite a few times so we just started 
again. It’s a fantastic city to live in, there’s such a lot going on. We’ve got 
a really good transport system and there’s lots of green around. I like cities 
where you can get out of them fast.

When I go to London I’m really shocked by the speed of things: the overcrowded 
tubes and the rush on the escalators, you just feel like you could topple very 
quickly. There isn’t any other city in this country where I’ve seen people be 
in such a hurry.

I think the idea of Londoners as being selfish isn’t true – young guys there 
always seem to be over the moon to help. Everyone’s in their own wee bubble, 
but that’s one of the things I like about London, you can be private and social 
at the same time, you can go to any film or cafe on your own and still feel 
completely part of things.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would change the price of the rented properties and make much more 
affordable housing, so people wouldn’t have to move out of the places they’ve 
lived for a long time.KB

Kully Thiarai: ‘The cost of living is driving a lot of artists out’

Incoming artistic director, National Theatre of Wales, Cardiff, currently at 
director at Cast, Doncaster
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771bd85b0bdcd8e65c33e07147d89999c22a8c22%2F0_721_3503_2191%2F3503.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771bd85b0bdcd8e65c33e07147d89999c22a8c22%2F0_721_3503_2191%2F3503.jpg>
 Kully Thiarai: ‘Diversity is what makes London thrilling.’ Photograph: Gary 
Calton for the Observer 
I’ve often thought about living in London but it’s becoming ever more 
prohibitive, especially if you want to buy a home there. I’m conscious that the 
cost of living is driving a lot of artists out. In Cardiff and Manchester, I’ve 
seen the artistic communities grow as people return to their roots or decide 
not to leave in the first place. There’s more opportunity now in these cities 
and sometimes, interestingly, more room for experimentation and innovation.

That said, the focus on London in the media makes it seem like it’s the 
provider of all things great, even though a lot of work is being generated 
elsewhere and showcased in London.

What I love most about London is that you can access the world there, both in 
terms of arts practice and people. What I dislike is how difficult it is to get 
around due to the sheer numbers of people. Londoners sometimes forget how 
difficult it can be for people outside the city to engage in its cultural life, 
especially if finances are an issue, and for most artists they are.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would do something to prevent diverse communities – not just artists – from 
being priced out of the city. Diversity is what makes London a thrilling place 
to be but it’s in danger of becoming a playground for the rich.KF

Ann Widdecombe: ‘In London there’s no such thing as fresh air’

Former MP, Devon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7581c1b208c8158235fc1797127f0ef0e162a916%2F2_108_1836_1044%2F1836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7581c1b208c8158235fc1797127f0ef0e162a916%2F2_108_1836_1044%2F1836.jpg>
 Ann Widdecombe: ’There isn’t a dire necessity to get into London.’ Photograph: 
Geoffrey Swaine/Rex 
I’ve lived in Devon since I retired in 2010. I moved about a great deal as a 
child – Portsmouth, Bath, Singapore. When I started work and particularly 
because I had political ambition, I worked in London. But nowadays – unless you 
choose politics – there isn’t a dire necessity to get into London. In this day 
and age of technology there’s no real reason why everything should be 
concentrated around the capital.

I was very glad when I retired so I could go to the country. I’ve always liked 
Dartmoor because I like walking and that sort of thing, and I wanted to be 
moderately isolated. Devon has spectacular views. If I looked out of any of my 
windows in London, the most I could see would be a patch of garden, other 
people’s front doors. But here I can see right across to the sea on a clear 
day. In London there’s no such thing as fresh air, you walk down the street and 
try not to breathe. Here you just take great lungfuls of fresh air. I’ve got 
sheep, cows, all these things near me. And of course you can see the stars at 
night.

If I were mayor for a day… 

I would relieve traffic congestion. We seem to rejoice in making the streets 
ever narrower with cycle lanes, bus lanes and taxi lanes. Instead of trying to 
discourage traffic, what you’ve got to do is make it possible for traffic to 
move, because it will come in anyway.KB

Emma Jane Unsworth: ‘As a kid I felt I was being trained to fear London’

Author, Brighton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb831fdeb9c1d2b2ce428ef0b69137e07c29f5034%2F633_375_5127_3177%2F5127.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb831fdeb9c1d2b2ce428ef0b69137e07c29f5034%2F633_375_5127_3177%2F5127.jpg>
 Emma Jane Unsworth: ‘I still feel the north gets ignored or sidelined.’ 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
I think I’m a city girl at heart and in many ways London is the ultimate city.

As a kid growing up in the north I remember feeling as though I was being 
trained to hate or fear London. I do still feel that the north gets ignored and 
sidelined – and more cash for arts and culture please. I think it’s the south 
in general that gets too much attention, not just London. London’s the capital, 
so I think in some ways it is right that it gets what it gets. But there is a 
certain kind of businessman on the Tube, usually in a suit, who feels entitled 
to having a bit more platform than you, and that really riles me.

For now Brighton has a great vibe, it’s like the Sunday at Glastonbury. 
Anything goes: you could be having brunch and someone rocks up in a tutu and no 
one bats an eye. And the sea is good for my soul.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would slash the ridiculous rents. On my watch it would be illegal to charge 
extortionate amounts for tiny flats.KB

Jason Williamson: ‘It did my head in having to travel an hour for a pint with 
a friend’

Musician, Sleaford Mods <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sleaford-mods>, 
Nottingham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cb02e997273ac4bd91eadc30c72d1180bf007e3%2F572_341_5174_3173%2F5174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cb02e997273ac4bd91eadc30c72d1180bf007e3%2F572_341_5174_3173%2F5174.jpg>
 Jason Williamson (right) of Sleaford Mods: ‘Now that I don’t live there I much 
prefer it.’ Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
I’ve always viewed London as kind of unobtainable. I lived there for two years 
but really struggled and in the end I moved back up to the Midlands. It was 
obvious that you needed quite a bit of extra money to live in London and it did 
my head in having to travel an hour and a half just to have a pint with a 
friend. But now that I don’t live there I much prefer it. It’s not this 
horrible fang-toothed monster that’s going to swallow you up the minute you 
arrive.

As a musician, you can exist happily enough outside London. The only advantage 
to living there is meeting people – and now that our band has reached a certain 
level of success it’s opened up to us certain circles that would have been 
inaccessible before. Sometimes people go to London, become semi-successful and 
are absolute wankers when they come back to Nottingham, acting like they’re 
James Brown or something. I was never like that: I always came back up and 
thought, ‘Oh it’s really good to be back’.

If I were mayor for a day…

I’d channel funding into areas, such as social housing, that would help people 
in troublesome financial conditions. London needs that.KF

Matt King: ‘It’s got a mad energy that’s good in small doses’

Actor and comedian, Hove
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4025bee0962fdb3727c96fd3ebb515f01745327%2F0_5_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4025bee0962fdb3727c96fd3ebb515f01745327%2F0_5_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Matt King, who lived in Crouch End for around 10 years. Photograph: BBC 
I live in Hove now, although I just got back from living in Bali for seven 
months – my kids went to school in the jungle and had an amazing time. I lived 
in London for around 10 years in total, in the Crouch End area. One of the 
things I liked about it was that it hasn’t got a tube station, so it’s got a 
slightly different population to a lot of other areas of London. Around the 
clock tower it has a sort of central villagey feel. But I think it has changed 
quite a lot since we left eight years ago. It’s now got a big Waitrose where 
there used to be a Woolworths before. So it’s slowly becoming gentrified I 
guess. We moved away when we were expecting our second child, and just saw one 
too many signs out the front of the newsagent’s saying [something like] “Boy, 
15, stabbed”. You just notice that stuff more. Before having kids we didn’t 
really notice it.

My wife is from Melbourne, so she grew up with surf culture, by the sea. The 
best we’ve got to offer is Brighton, in terms of me having access to work and 
London. London’s got this mad, frantic energy, which is good in small doses, 
but very wearing to live among all the time.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would put in place plans for a tube line from Brighton to Soho. KB

Gwenno: ‘I think it has changed quite dramatically’

Musician, Cardiff
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c37120b82350e93621922dd8440a1cdad18905a%2F1589_1258_940_619%2F940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20%E2%80%93%20the%20view%20from%20outside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Flondon-from-the-outside-mayoral-elections-zephaniah-rankin-jackie-kay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c37120b82350e93621922dd8440a1cdad18905a%2F1589_1258_940_619%2F940.jpg>
 Gwenno: ‘it’s just really difficult to live there as an artist.’ Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
I live in Cardiff, which is where I was born. I lived in Las Vegas as a 
teenager, I’ve lived in Brighton, and London for probably a decade on and off. 
I’ve always felt a connection with the city – a lot of my friends and family 
are there. But I think it has changed quite dramatically. Now there are fewer 
cracks for artists to work their way into and create their own thing. It’s just 
really difficult to live there as an artist, even if you work hard and have 
quite a stable career.

I made my home near Dalston in the end, and actually it reminded me so much of 
Cardiff I thought I might as well go back: the multiculturalism and all the 
small shops, and all the different music. It’s not a rich part of London, it’s 
just normal people trying to get on with their lives and make the place their 
home.

If I were mayor for a day…

I would make sure the difference between lowest and highest wages wasn’t so 
ridiculous – the people who keep London running deserve a living wage.
 