
Turn right out of Marble Arch tube, ignoring (for now!) the tempting smells of 
the Edgware Road's Middle-Eastern enclave and walk down Oxford Street. Turn 
left up Orchard Street and cross the road to enter theSelfridges 
<http://www.selfridges.com/> Food Hall – a fascinating place for browsing 
everything from Jack O'Shea's world-class butchers counter to Persian "fairy 
floss" and a brilliant selection of spirits (the Wonder Bar is a must for wine 
lovers).

View London food walk: 2 hours from Marble Arch to Baker Street 
<http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?msa=0&msid=201634927544199255477.0004ab5104426f63de723&ie=UTF8&vpsrc=6&ll=51.518464,-0.156813&spn=0.012284,0.019698&z=15&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Restaurateur Mark Hix has a branch inside <http://www.hixatselfridges.co.uk/>, 
if you're feeling peckish – otherwise, head back out on to Orchard Street and 
turn left on to the south side of Portman Square, passing a brace of Michelin 
stars withTexture <http://texture-restaurant.co.uk/> on your left, and Locanda 
Locatelli <http://www.locandalocatelli.com/> on your right as you walk down 
Seymour Street. Turn right up Great Cumberland Place, and then left on to Upper 
Berkeley Street. To your left you'll seeThe Portman 
<http://www.theportmanmarylebone.com/>, a decentish gastro pub from the people 
behind Mayfair's The Only Running Footman and Islington's The House, and 
slightly further down on your right,Green Valley 
<http://chowhound.chow.com/topics/260110>, a Lebanese supermarket with a great 
line in take-away mezze and pistachio-coloured sweets – both good places to 
refuel.

Turn right to enjoy Edgware Road's cornucopia of Middle-Eastern cafes and 
juice bars, and then zip back up Harrowby Street, left on to Shouldham Street, 
and then immediately right on to Bryanston Place in the direction of 
Marylebone. Carry straight on, crossing Montagu Street and Gloucester Place and 
turning right down Rodmorton Street and then left onto Blandford Street, home 
to a number of excellent restaurants, including theRoyal China Club 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2006/mar/25/restaurants.restaurants4> for dim 
sum,Trishna <http://www.trishnalondon.com/>, for southern Indian seafood, and 
the Michelin-starredL'Autre Pied 
<http://www.lautrepied.co.uk/default.asp?V_SITE_ID=16>, as well as the 
experimental, and hugely enjoyable cocktail barPurl 
<http://www.purl-london.com/> at number 50-54. 

If you cross straight over Marylebone High Street, you'll find yourself in the 
foodie hotspot of Marylebone Lane, where Giancarlo and KatieCaldesi's 
<http://www.caldesi.com/> Italian cookery school jostles for space with 
no-frills Parisian steak restaurantLe Relais de Venise 
<http://www.relaisdevenise.com/> (no bookings taken, entrecote and chips the 
only thing on the menu), while opposite is the Golden Hind, where the chips are 
distinctly fatter, and come with a hefty portion of battered cod on the side.

Back on Marylebone High Street, you'll see Peter Gordon's palace to fusion 
cooking,The Providores <http://www.theprovidores.co.uk/> on your left; there's 
an all-day café on the first floor, serving Britain's largest selection of Kiwi 
wines, alongside such ambitious snacks as Cornish squid with sumac and aioli. 
Poke your nose down Moxon Street to your left, and you'll smell one of the UK's 
finest cheese shops, Patricia Michelson'sLa Fromagerie 
<http://www.lafromagerie.co.uk/>, which stocks all manner of gourmet delights, 
from wild mushrooms to goose rillettes – there's a small café if you can't wait 
til you get home. Next door is theGinger Pig butchers 
<http://www.thegingerpig.co.uk/>, which stocks meat from the company's North 
Yorkshire farm, as well as a wide selection of pies, pates, and their justly 
celebrated sausage rolls. (They'll also be able to give you information about 
their butchery classes.)

If it's Sunday morning, carry on to the end of the road to find Marylebone 
Farmer's Market <http://www.lfm.org.uk/markets/marylebone/> in Cramer Street 
car park – with between 30 and 40 stalls, it's one of the capital's best – 
otherwise, turn back on to the main road, pausing to gaze at the display in the 
window ofFish Works <http://www.fishworks.co.uk/>. 

Be warned – from this point on, cooks with a weakness for beautiful 
kitchenware may well have to exercise serious self control, because the top end 
of Marylebone High Street is a nester's paradise.Divertimenti 
<http://www.divertimenti.co.uk/>, on your right, is one of London's finest 
cookware shops, and also holds regular demonstrations – I can confirm that it 
is actually impossible to leave without at least a wooden spoon – whileSkandium 
<http://www.skandium.com/> opposite stocks the very best of Scandinavian 
design, from Moomin mugs to gorgeous Rosendahl glassware.

Further up, just before you meet the roaring Marylebone Road, is the Conran 
Shop <http://www.conranshop.co.uk/>, where you can easily splurge a few hundred 
pounds on the most beautiful copper pan you've ever seen in your life. Perhaps 
better to spend a more modest amount in theRococo <http://rococochocolates.com/>
 chocolate shop instead – before turning left on to the main road and rejoining 
the tube at Baker Street with your goodies.
 