
The company behind the London Live TV channel has reported a loss of more than 
£1m in its first financial figures – supported by £2m in loans fromAlexander 
Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev> and his son, 
Evgeny.

ESTV, the company set up by Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev> to deliver his vision of a 
TV channel for the capital, ran up a loss of £1.25m in its first 13 months as 
it went through the bidding process to win the Ofcom TV licence.

Lebedev – the owner of the Independent titles, Evening Standard and cut-price 
i – set up ESTV on 6 August 2012 and the first accounts run until 29 September 
2013.

The loss includes £370,000 in "office reorganisation and studio build costs" 
spent on carving out space forLondon Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-live> within the publisher's 
headquarters in Kensington High Street, London.

A further £20,000 was invested in designing and launching the London Live 
website.

Ofcom awarded the London TV licence to Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/04/lebedev-london-local-tv-licence> 
in February 2013.

In the pre-launch accounts just six staff are listed as employed by the 
company, but numbers swelled to about 60 in the runup to launch on 31 March 
this year.

Total wage costs were £342,000 for the period, with the unnamed highest-paid 
director receiving £97,000.

The accounts show that as at 29 September last year Alexander Lebedev had 
provided a £1m loan, with Evgeny Lebedev supplying £999,999.

"The company requires significant further funding and intends to meet its 
day-to-day working capital requirements through long-term finance provided by 
Mr Evgeny Lebedev and Mr Alexander Lebedev, directors of the parent company and 
companies under their control," said ESTV.

The £2m in loans are due for repayment in April and August 2016.

The channel has got off to a rocky start since launch, attracting small 
audiences and losing editorial director Stefano Hatfieldwithin weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/25/local-tv-london-live-bbc-funding-stefano-hatfield>
.

Evgeny Lebedev is no longer a director of ESTV – he resigned on 18 September 
last year – but he is listed as the ultimate controlling party in the company 
accounts.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 