
There is a palpable sense of excitement in the offices that house the 
capital's latest multimillion pound media venture – London Live. The new 
television station, the metropolitan version of the "local TV" project,is just 
a week away from launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/13/london-live-launch-31-march> and 
the place is bubbling with an infectious optimism, understandably mixed with 
just a hint of apprehension.

Pilot shows are being tested in the studios that have been built from scratch 
in the Kensington headquarters of the Independent titles and the London Evening 
Standard. Presenters are preparing for their key roles.Video journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2014/jan/14/london-live-tv-channel-ident-video>
 are running through their paces. Even so, the relative state of calm among the 
trio of senior executives I met during my visit last week was unmistakable. 
They appeared to be well-prepared and exuded a confidence I have rarely 
witnessed during previous newspaper and broadcasting launches.

London Live is the result of an enthusiastic punt by the newspapers' 
proprietors, Alexander and Evgeny Lebedev.After being granted the licence by 
Ofcom in February last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/04/lebedev-london-local-tv-licence> 
Evgeny said he was expecting "our excellent team of journalists" to apply their 
skills to the venture. He handed his chief executive, Andrew Mullins, the task 
of bringing it to fruition. "I started from the viewpoint of huge naivety, 
which turned into terror," he says. "Now I believe we're going to surpass 
people's expectations."

The Lebedevs are expected to spend more than £15m, possibly £18m, before the 
channel reaches break-even in about three years. By that time, if the 
predictions work out, revenues are expected to hit the £25m mark. GreaterLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> is, of course, a unique region. It has 
4.4m homes with a population of 9.2 million, although the original audience 
targets for the channel are very modest indeed: just 0.7% up to 1.2% share. "I 
shall be very disappointed if the numbers are that low," says Mullins.

He stresses that the channel, which will have its own website up and running 
from today <http://www.standard.co.uk/londonlive/>, is part of the group's 
multiplatform attempt to appeal to as wide a range of Londoners as possible. To 
that end, the Standard has increased its free distribution to more than 900,000 
a day. Cross-promotion between all the group's outlets is seen as essential to 
attracting audiences. But he accepts that the channel is bound to be judged on 
its own merits, as do the two key people he hired to head London Live: Vikki 
Cook, head of news and current affairs, and Jonathan Boseley, head of 
programming. A great deal rests on their shoulders. Can they attract a large 
enough audience to ensure that advertisers come aboard? In an increasingly 
fragmented TV landscape, will they make the channel distinctive enough to 
change viewers' habits?

As the spine of the station is news content, Cook is under particular pressure 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/13/london-live-tv-station-launch>
in having to produce five-and-a-half hours of watchable material a day. A 
veteran of BBC and Sky News, she feels capable of rising to the challenge, 
extolling the virtue of starting with a blank sheet of paper.She has recruited 
a team of 35 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/09/london-live-tv-channel-recruit-staff-evening-standard>
after receiving 5,000 applications from people wanting to be video journalists, 
production crew and presenters.

"I realised that the presenters needed to have experience," she says. They had 
to be young professionals who had not yet become household names. Soher chosen 
quartet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/11/london-live-unveils-news-current-affairs-anchors>
 are Marc Edwards who has presented on France 24 and CCTV in Beijing; 
Claudia-Liza Armah, who most recently read the 60-second bulletins on BBC3; 
Louise Scodie, a stand-up comedian, who once fronted a TV shopping channel; and 
Gavin Ramjaun, a former news and sport presenter on Newsround and Daybreak. 
These 30-something news anchors will be fronting three major news programmes - 
morning, lunchtime and evening - plus reading half-hourly bulletins throughout 
the day.

Cook has devised a "big fat breakfast programme" called Wake Up London, 
running for three hours from 6am, with "travel and weather at the heart of it". 
"It will be fast-paced," she says, "and there will not, absolutely not, be a 
bloody sofa." Both she and Boseley believe they will be able achieve "a similar 
tone of voice" between her news output and his entertainment material. He says 
he has commissioned hundreds of hours of original London-focused content, 
pointing out that the capital has lacked London-specific programming since 
Thames TV's demise in 1993.

So expect Food Junkies, a character-driven series about restaurants that have 
"never been seen before" plus eating reviews by a London cabbie; a show 
featuring football freestylers set challenges by the public; some stand-up 
comedy and urban music; plus a documentary strand. Boseley enthuses about 
hour-long, single-story, issue-based documentaries that will be followed by 
debates run by Cook's team on the issues raised.

"The scale of the canvas in London is huge," he says. "This won't be niche 
programming or hyper-local stuff because we're not in a small pond, we're going 
to be big and mainstream and competing for attention with the BBC and ITV and 
Channel 4."

Roy Greenslade is a columnist for the London Evening Standard
 