
Come out of Stoke Newington station on to Stamford Hill – heartland of 
London's orthodox Jewish community. Although the main shopping area is further 
up, you'll pass a Kosher butchers on your way down the hill and as you cross 
Northwold Road, a salt beef and bagel shop. To your right, opposite theJolly 
Butchers <http://jollybutchers.co.uk/> pub (a worthwhile, if early, stopping 
point for cider and ale fans) is Stoke Newington Church Street, which hides a 
brilliant new butchers,Meat 16 <http://www.meatlondon.co.uk/>, the Spence Bakery
 <http://www.thespence.co.uk/> and some decent bars and restaurants amongst the 
toyshops and hipster emporia.

Carry on down Stoke Newington High Street however, and you'll cross from 
yuppie to Turkish territory (although the 24-hour bagel shop, on the corner of 
Evering Road, and now catering for late night party animals as well as 
hard-working Jewish folk, is a reminder of how quickly London neighbourhoods 
can change).Stoke Newington Farmers' Market 
<http://www.growingcommunities.org/market/> takes place on Saturday mornings in 
the churchyard to your left, while on your right is Gallo Nero 2, a small but 
well-stocked outpost of the Newington Green Italian deli.

This is the last you'll see of cosmopolitanism for a while however, because 
from here to Dalston it's all Anatolian. Vegetarians may not enjoy the 
all-pervasive smell of grilled meats, but may well find solace in the 
fascinating sight of women turning out piles of flatbreads in the restaurant 
windows; although you're unlikely to be disappointed anywhere, one of the best,
Mangal Ocackbasi <http://www.mangal1.com/>, is off the main drag on Arcola 
Street. Look out for the bakeries too, with their sticky trays of baklava; 
throw in a thick Turkish coffee and you're back in business.

Opposite Dalston Kingsland Station is Ridley Road Market 
<http://www.hackney.gov.uk/ridley-road-market.htm> – again, not an ideal place 
for a vegetarian, it caters largely for the local West Indian community with 
displays of goat meat and cows' feet, as well as a variety of unfamiliar (and 
often rather aromatic) seafood, spices and fresh produce – and the biggest 
cooking pots you've ever seen. There's always good deals to be had on fruit and 
veg here, and theTurkish Food Centre <http://www.tfcsupermarkets.com/>, or TFC, 
on the corner does a nice line in baklava if you haven't already gorged 
yourself silly up the road.

Carry on down Kingsland Road until you hit the canal, and then turn left and 
walk along the towpath for about 10 minutes until you spot the steps up to
Broadway Market <http://www.broadwaymarket.co.uk/>. On Saturdays it's Hipster 
Central, with a thriving street market offering all manner of gluten-free 
goodness, vintage clothes and fixie bikes – but also a hint of old Hackney inF 
Cooke <http://www.realhoxton.co.uk/f-cooke.htm>'s beautifully tiled pie and 
mash shop. (For those who don't fancy eel,Fin & Flounder 
<http://www.finandflounder.com/>, a sustainable fishmongers is just down the 
road.)Climpson's <http://webcoffeeshop.co.uk/> serve decent coffee, and makes a 
good spot to enjoy the fashion parade outside. Head on to London Fields with a 
picnic, or rejoin the canal and walk east to Victoria Park.

Once you've reached the park (which should take about 15 minutes), head 
towards the Royal Gate East, and you'll find yourself on Lauriston Road, where 
the hipsters go when they grow up. As a result, it's east London's undisputed 
foodie hotspot, with theGinger Pig <http://www.thegingerpig.co.uk/> butchers, 
Bottle Apostle <http://www.bottleapostle.com/> wine merchants and Jonathan 
Norris' fishmongers jostling for space with Bill Hall's greengrocersThe Deli 
Downstairs <http://www.thedelidownstairs.co.uk/>. To whet your whistle, there's 
The Lauriston <http://www.thelauriston.com/>, a child-friendly freehouse which 
serves good pizza, Spit Jacks, a highly-recommended tapas joint, andLoafing 
<http://maps.google.co.uk/maps/place?oe=utf-8&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&client=firefox-a&um=1&ie=UTF-8&q=Loafing+cafe&fb=1&gl=uk&hq=Loafing+cafe&hnear=0x48761b5dedeb3be5:0x54f085cb18ec65c9,Islington&cid=8120060903052982656>
, a café serving Monmouth coffee and enormous, Ottolenghi-style meringues.

If you're feeling energetic, you can walk to our final destination, Hackney's 
City Farm <http://www.hackneycityfarm.co.uk/> in Haggerston Park (closed 
Mondays): it should take around half an hour, but if you're flagging, walk up 
Lauriston Road to the junction with Well Street and leap on the 26 bus towards 
Waterloo, getting off at Warner Place.

From here, it's an easy stroll into the park, and the farm itself, which 
boasts all manner of livestock, from pigs to guinea pigs, as well as a rather 
good Italian café,Frizzante 
<http://www.hackneycityfarm.co.uk/docs/cafe/index.htm>, which has a focus on 
simple, seasonal food. From here it's a 15 minute walk west along Hackney Road 
to Hoxton station where you can leap on to the London overground and home to 
put your feet up.
 