
Three NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> franchises will play in 
London for the first time next year as part of a four-game schedule that will 
see back-to-back contests staged at Wembley and successive matches hosted at 
Twickenham.

The Cleveland Browns, who are yet to win a game in 2016, will be the home team 
against the Minnesota Vikings at Twickenham, which will also be the venue for a 
Los Angeles Rams “home” game again, this time against theArizona Cardinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals>, who were one win away 
from last year’s Super Bowl.

The robots aren't coming for the NFL – they're already here
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/13/nfl-rex-ryan-chip-kelly-head-coaches>
As well as the Browns and Cardinals, the Baltimore Ravens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baltimore-ravens> will make a maiden 
transatlantic voyage to face the Jacksonville Jaguars at Wembley, where the New 
Orleans Saints meet the Miami Dolphins either seven days earlier or a week 
later.

Having four games in London, the equivalent of half of an NFL team’s home 
schedule, is seen as another significant landmark on the road to a possible 
UK-based franchise further down the line.

Wembley has hosted fixtures since 2007 and at least two per year since 2013, 
whileTwickenham was turned into an NFL venue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2016/oct/24/nfl-comes-to-twickenham-a-picture-essay>
 for the first time in October as part of a three-year deal that will see at 
least three games staged there.

The 2017 games to be played at Wembley will take place on 24 September and 1 
October, while the Twickenham fixtures will be played on 22 and 29 October.

With Cleveland, Baltimore and Arizona all due in London, 26 of the 32 teams 
will have played at least one game in England since the International Series 
was first introduced in 2007.

The only clubs who not to have played in England’s capital by the end of next 
year are the Philadelphia Eagles, Tennessee Titans, Green Bay Packers, Seattle 
Seahawks, Carolina Panthers and Houston Texans.

The NFL has been encouraged by the constant sellouts in London, though a 
further litmus test of the American football fandom over here will be provided 
by the interest in Cleveland’s game with Minnesota. The Browns are currently 
0-13 and will join the 2008 Detroit Lions as the only non-expansion team to 
endure a full winless NFL season since the second world war should they fail to 
win any of their final three fixtures.

The fact that eight teams will travel means the NFL has also held off testing 
the interest in having a side play more than one of their 16 regular-season 
games in London.

The Jacksonville Jaguars, over in 2017 for the fifth straight year, seem the 
most likely candidates to be the guinea pigs in the future given they have a 
deal to play at Wembley until 2020.
 