
Some things are agreed on by just about the entire world - well, the entire 
world of London housing policy debate. The largest piece of common ground is 
that the largest single answer to getting many more homes built is to build 
them on land that is owned by public sector organisations, notably London’s 32 
boroughs and Transport forLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> (TfL), 
but also an array of others, including the Met, the NHS, Network Rail and even 
the Ministry of Defence.


So far, so harmonious. But then the trouble starts. When is it right to 
redevelop public land and when is it better to leave well alone? What’s the 
best way to get stuff built on the public land that’s suitable? Who will pay 
for it? What sorts of homes should be built and, perhaps most importantly, who 
should decide?


Andrew Adonis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis>, Labour 
peer, ex-Labour minister and tireless policy thinker, has been burrowing into 
the housing supply issue, especially in the urgent case of London and the 
south-east.


He’s already edited a collection of essays for the Institute for Public Policy 
Research entitledCity Villages 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/city-villages-more-homes-better-communities> 
in which he advocates the large scale demolition and redevelopment of housing 
estates on borough-owned land - council estates, to use the term loosely - in 
order to increase their density (the number of dwellings fitting into the space 
they occupy), improve their “connectivity” with their surrounding areas and 
create a more even mix of tenure types, so that social housing tenants, 
middle-income households and more affluent ones live side by side in “mixed 
communities”. He’s now written ahefty piece 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/features/how-to-fix-the-housing-crisis> for 
Prospect Magazine, restating and refining his case. It’s a truly informative 
read and it addresses, to some extent, criticisms of City Villages which were 
made by,among 
<https://redbrickblog.wordpress.com/2015/03/26/city-villages-or-ghettoes-for-the-rich/>
others 
<https://redbrickblog.wordpress.com/2015/03/31/city-villages-the-wrong-solution-to-londons-housing-crisis/>
,me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/mar/26/andrew-adonis-and-estate-regeneration-some-pros-and-cons>
.


I’d been particularly troubled by the enthusiasm Adonis expressed for the 
Earls Court redevelopment project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/earls-court-project>, which I regard, for 
a number of reasons, asthe worst major “regeneration” scheme in town 
<http://londonist.com/2015/09/earls-court>. Already, it has entailed the 
demolition of the Earls Court exhibition centre to make way fora pseudo 
“village” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/jan/21/earls-court-project-village-economics>
 of over 1,300 flats, not one of which will be even remotely “affordable”, on 
land owned by TfL.


It also envisages the destruction of 760 homes on two neighbouring estates in 
north Fulham in the face of heavy opposition from people who live on them. It’s 
not that the estates are incapable of “densification” or enhancement. The 
problem is that the decision to level them, like so many that have shaped the 
project as a whole, were taken behind closed doors with a top down attitude 
that put private interests in the driving seat to the detriment of the public 
good.


Adonis’s Prospect piece stresses that the capital’s estimated 3,500 estates - 
a number whose size took me rather by surprise - are each “home to hundreds or 
thousands of families, and gaining their participation and consent to change is 
essential.” Very true.


He also frames his analysis within the context of “the withdrawal of the state 
and local authorities from planning and developing new settlements since the 
mid-1970s, including new towns.” He says: “Housebuilding has been almost 
entirely left to the private and voluntary sectors, which cannot meet demand 
alone.” No question about that either. If there’s a clearer example of the 
state persistently neglecting its duty to alleviate market failure, it’s kept 
itself well hidden.

How, though, does the Adonis recipe deal with the sorts of questions posed at 
the top of this article? He wants central and local government using their 
planning powers and “vast ownership of land” to be “leading development with 
the private and voluntary sectors.” That could be OK and austerity Britain 
can’t be too choosy. But, as Earls Court shows, it’s often commercial private 
developers that end up doing the leading to detrimental effect. With public 
money so scarce the risk of that recurring increases.


Experience also suggests - not least with the ongoing redevelopment of 
Woodberry Down in Hackney, which Adonis singles out for praise - that market 
fluctuations can slow the process down dramatically. Promises get broken. The 
“affordable” element of the development, often puny in the first place, 
shrinks. Costs spin out of control. Should the land be retained by a public 
body or sold off? What is the right way to secure residents’ input? What about 
the interests of the wider community? Every case is different, but some 
principles need to be hammered out and some lines need to be drawn.

There’s a social balance sheet to consider. Too often, this fails to recognise 
the value of the status quo. If an estate is functioning well and in reasonable 
condition, shouldn’t it be left in peace? Adonis is a strong advocate of 
facilitating “mix”, but do any benefits of using housing policy to engineer 
this - and thoseappear elusive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davehillblog/2012/nov/27/london-housing-mixed-communities-consensus>
 - outweigh the losses felt by those forced to move home against their will?


Many council estates are, in any case, not quite the “monotenure” dependency 
ghettos their critics claim. For one thing, right to buy has fostered at least 
some owner occupation on them. For another, are neighbourhoods containing large 
percentages of households that aren’t well off to be deemed inherently 
undesirable and in need of richer folk pepper-potted among them to sow seeds of 
aspiration? There’s nothing wrong with “mixed communities” - on the contrary. 
But planners and politicians forcing them on people because they have decided 
that it’s for the poor’s own good doesn’t sound very “progressive”.

Such are the complexities of the estate regeneration equation. Another problem 
is that the entire debate about London housing and redevelopment is, not 
unnaturally, often so fraught and polarised. The political right are suspected 
- often rightly, in my view - of being motivated by an urge to flog off every 
inch of public turf to the highest bidder (even if that bid is low), and to 
clear the city of social housing as we know it altogether.


The left, meanwhile, has its own equally ingrained failings: defending poorly 
built estates without a thought for the drain they can have on stretched 
borough finances, to the disadvantage of tenants on other estates; refusing to 
even acknowledge that residents’ opinions will always cover a spectrum, from 
those fiercely opposed to “regeneration” (they’re the ones who phone the 
Guardian) to those who cannot wait for it (they’re the ones who don’t). Clear 
dividing lines between “defending our community” and “not in my back yard” can 
sometimes be quite hard to find.

Somewhere in the midst of this we find the Adonis analysis. It’s a very 
interesting read 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/features/how-to-fix-the-housing-crisis>. I 
think he still has work to do, but - note to self - I don’t think he’s alone.

 