
West London isn't all pricey restaurants and fancy delis – although this walk 
takes in a fair few of those. The appetites of the cosmopolitan population of 
the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea are well catered for – as you'll 
see when you step out of the tube at Notting Hill Gate (take the Portobello 
Road exit).

Across the road is James Knight 
<http://www.james-knight.com/retail/NottingHill1.html>, fishmonger to the 
Prince of Wales – although commoners are also welcome. The shop has the largest 
selection of organic seafood in the UK, and offers significant discounts to 
customers who opt for sustainable species. Just behind Waterstone's is the 
distinctly chichiNotting Hill Farmers' Market 
<http://www.lfm.org.uk/markets/notting-hill/>, which runs from 9am­–1pm every 
Saturday.

Turn your back on the delights of Kensington Church Street, with its myriad 
antiques shops and one of the area's best pubs, the flower-bedecked Churchill 
Arms, and head north up Pembridge Road, then branch left into Portobello Road. 
Beyond the vintage clothing and suspiciously sparkly jewels is a thriving food 
market selling everything from potatoes to paella – it generally starts around 
the Elgin Road junction.

You won't go hungry on the way though: cupcake junkies will swoon at the sight 
of the famousHummingbird Bakery <http://hummingbirdbakery.com/> at 133 
Portobello Road, while those with a more savoury tooth should head forGail's 
Bakery <http://www.gailsbread.co.uk/> at 138, which also serves coffee that 
will put a spring in your step.

Turn left on to Elgin Crescent to find Mr Christian's delicatessen 
<http://www.mrchristians.co.uk/>, a good spot for a poke around (wine and 
whisky lovers should check out sister-shop Jeroboams next door), and, opposite,
The Grocer on Elgin <http://www.thegroceron.com/thegrocer.html>, which offers 
an intriguing insight into how the other half live (on ready meals of guinea 
fowl tagine and Tahitian vanilla creamed rice, it turns out), as well as 
take-away sandwiches and pastries. Back on Portbello,Dri Dri Gelateria 
<http://www.dridrigelato.com/>, on the left-hand side, serves up superlative 
Italian ice cream, flavoured with Sicilian pistachios and lemons, Himalayan 
pink salted caramel and Sao Tome grand cru chocolate. Very west London.

If Hawaiian black lava salt is more your bag, however, head for the Spice Shop 
<http://www.thespiceshop.co.uk/> at 1 Blenheim Crescent, the next left off 
Portbello Road, which sells it by the boxful, along with the likes of Berber 
Ethiopian Wat seasoning – and all the usual suspects. Across the road is the 
self-explanatoryBooks for Cooks <http://www.booksforcooks.com/>, where you 
could easily lose an hour or two – as well as cookery demonstrations, the 
kitchen at the back of the shop offers a great value set lunch for those who 
just can't tear themselves away.

A couple of doors down is Pescheria Mattiucci 
<http://www.pescheriamattiucci.com/>, a far-flung outpost of the Neapolitan 
original, whose Mediterranean flavours are the first signs of an encroaching 
southernness – because from here, Portobello Road turns distinctly Iberian. A 
rash of Spanish and Portuguese shops and delicatessens continues beneath the 
Westway and all the way up to Ladbroke Grove.

R Garcia and Sons <http://www.garciacafe.co.uk/> has been selling its 
paellaras at 246–250 since the late 1950s, and now runs a Spanish café next 
door too. Further up, turn right (past the west London outpost of Shoreditch's 
deservedly famousPizza East <http://www.pizzaeast.com/pizza-east-portobello>) 
on to Golborne Road for Portuguese pastries at the Lisboa delicatessen, dates 
and tagines at the north African grocers and butchers and grilled seafood from 
the Moroccan fish vans parked on the kerb (notice the enormous tins of olive 
oil in the window of the Cash and Carry).

If you carry on up Portobello Road, you'll find Cockney's 
<http://maps.google.co.uk/maps/place?oe=utf-8&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&client=firefox-a&um=1&ie=UTF-8&q=Cockneys+pie+and+mash&fb=1&gl=uk&hq=Cockneys+pie+and+mash&hnear=0x48761b5dedeb3be5:0x54f085cb18ec65c9,Islington&cid=1832380249887748323>
, one of west London's last pie and mash shops – but the old boozer on the 
corner has become the elegantAnar Persian Kitchen 
<http://www.anarpersiankitchen.co.uk/>, so there'll be no Knees Up Mother Brown 
round the old Joanna there.

Instead, retrace your steps under the flyover (notice some of the last 
remnants of the area's hippy past in the whole food shop under the arches, and 
the bakery and café on the right), then turn left on to Westbourne Park Road 
(ignoring the smell of theBanger Bros <http://www.bangerbros.co.uk/> sausage 
emporium on the other side of the junction) and then right on to Ledbury Road. 
At 127 is the two Michelin-starredThe Ledbury <http://www.theledbury.com/> – 
scene of gastro heroism during the riots – while at 63, and hardly less 
difficult to get into, is the diminutiveOttolenghi 
<http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk/>; the place where it all started for the London 
legend.

Turn left on to Westbourne Grove where the fashionable men's boutique 
Woodhouse is the unlikely venue for an outpost of the fabulousPrufrock Coffee 
<http://www.prufrockcoffee.com/> chain. On the same side of the road is the 
jewel-like Tavola grocers and delicatessen, owned by chef Alastair Little, and
Taqueria <http://www.taqueria.co.uk/>, a sustainably-minded Mexican taco joint 
from the people behind the Cool Chile Company.

Turn left on to Chepstow Road if you fancy poking your nose into Tawana 
Oriental supermarket <http://www.tawana.co.uk/tawanaorientalsupermarket.html>, 
or one of the unusual deep-dish cornmeal pizzas atOtto 
<http://www.ottopizza.co.uk/> – alternatively, carry on walking along 
Westbourne Grove, past the baby brother of Mayfair's feted Spanish jointEl 
Pirata Detapas <http://www.elpiratadetapas.co.uk/>, the well-stuffed Kitchen 
Ideas cookware shop, andArtisan du Chocolat <http://www.artisanduchocolat.com/> 
opposite, until you hit the rude traffic of Queensway.

Turn right past Whiteley's shopping centre, which boasts branches of north 
London'sEuphorium Bakery <http://blog.euphoriumbakery.com/> and Oddono's 
<http://www.oddonos.com/> acclaimed gelateria, as well as Rowley Leigh's Café 
Anglais <http://www.lecafeanglais.co.uk/>, justly celebrated for its unctuous 
parmesan custard with anchovy toast – but good bread and Italian ice cream are, 
thankfully, two a penny in London these days, while Russian grocers remain 
thrillingly exotic.

Kalinka <http://www.kalinkafood.co.uk/>, at number 36, caters for Russian 
embassy staff and other expats with an assortment of sausages, sweets and 
mysterious vegetables entombed in vinegar. A working knowledge of Cyrillic is a 
definite advantage here, but in my experience, staff are unusually helpful when 
confronted with a novice pickle purchaser. With a smile on your face, gelato on 
your chin and a vodka in your belly, head into the tube at Queensway.
 