
Leave Oxford Circus underground, moving quickly down Regent Street – the 
perennial smell of elderly fried onions means this is not a place you want to 
linger – heading left on to Great Marlborough Street and then right on to 
Kingly Street, home to the central London outpost of the excellent Wright 
Brothers oyster house. (As you pass Ganton Street, markMother Mash 
<http://www.mothermash.co.uk/> – presumably the world's only restaurant chain 
devoted to mashed potato – andCha Cha Moon <http://chachamoon.com/>, a more 
authentic take on noodles from the man behind Wagamama, Alan Yau.) Turn right 
at the end, and then left down Warwick Street, past Yotam Ottolenghi's newest 
venture,Nopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com/> (it stands for north of 
Piccadilly, apparently), which serves his distinctive brand of fusion cuisine 
all day long, then right on to Brewer Street. You're now in Soho's foodie 
heartland.

View London food walk: Soho and St James's 
<http://www.google.co.uk/maps/ms?msa=0&msid=201634927544199255477.0004ab5266008cd1e37ec&ie=UTF8&vpsrc=0&ll=51.510212,-0.136685&spn=0.012286,0.019698&z=15&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Try and contain yourself in the Lebanese pastry shop on your left – although, 
if it's the cocktail hour (and it so often is in this part of town), you're 
well advised to pop down into the bar atMark Hix's restaurant 
<http://www.hixsoho.co.uk/> – voted the best in London, and with a menu by Nick 
Strangeway of Hawksmoor fame, it pours a mean martini). If clean lines and 
clean living appeal more than mixed drinks, however, pop up Upper John Street 
to theNordic Bakery <http://www.nordicbakery.com/> on the south side of Golden 
Square; one of the pioneers of Scandinavian food in this country, they do a 
rather lovely cinnamon bun.

Continuing on Brewer Street, past Mrs Kibble's old-fashioned sweet shop 
<http://www.mrskibbles.co.uk/our-shops/> (bull's eyes and sarsparillas anyone?) 
the rather dusty looking windows of theArigato Japanese supermarket 
<http://www.fifteenpickles.com/2011/02/19/arigato-japanese-supermarket/>, and 
the decadent delights of theScoop gelato parlour <http://www.scoopgelato.com/>, 
we come to a true London legend. The 1950s-style façade ofLina Stores 
<http://www.linastores.co.uk/> has welcomed in the likes of Jane Grigson in its 
time, and continues to delight with its fresh pastas and other Italian 
delicacies to this day. Across the road, the neon sign ofCox Cookies and Cake 
<http://www.coxcookiesandcake.com/>, a joint venture between shoe designer 
Patrick Cox and French master patissiere Eric Lanlard, and much beloved of 
those famous gluttons Elizabeth Hurley and Kate Moss, is new Soho at its least 
apologetic.

Stay with old Soho for a while longer though, and turn left up Berwick Street 
for the last vestiges of a once great street market, where "foreign fruitiers" 
now compete with artisan bakers for trade (if you're flagging, pop intoFlat 
White <http://www.flatwhitecafe.com/> on the right hand side for a proper 
Aussie style caffeine hit.)Yauatcha <http://www.yauatcha.com/>, on the corner 
with Broadwick Street, is another of Alan Yau's achievements: an all-day dim 
sum bar with a nice line in tea and pastries. Turn right down Broadwick Street 
to the junction with Wardour Street, perhaps popping intoPaul A Young 
<http://www.paulayoung.co.uk/> for a chocolate fix, and passing our third, and 
most incongruous Yau establishment of the walk, thePrinci 
<http://www.princi.co.uk/> Milanese bakery. (Wisely, he let someone else 
mastermind the menu here.)

Turn left on to Old Compton Street to come face to face with Gerry's Wines and 
Spirits <http://www.gerrys.uk.com/>, another local stalwart with a vast range 
and notably well-informed staff, and the justly famousAlgerian Coffee Stores 
<http://www.algcoffee.co.uk/scripts/default.asp>, before veering right down 
Frith Street to findBar Italia <http://www.baritaliasoho.co.uk/> (Pulp fans 
should visit in the early hours for the full experience). Just before the 
junction with Charing Cross Road, we meet our first taste of Chinatown, in the 
form of Fuchsia Dunlop's Sechuan restaurantBar Shu <http://www.bar-shu.co.uk/>, 
and café Bar Shan, both well worth a visit if you've never ventured beyond the 
Cantonese canon. Turn right along the main road, passing Leon Jaeggi and Sons, 
a fascinating clutter of catering equipment, and then cross into Macclesfield 
Road, and Chinatown proper.

On your left, newcomer Manchurian Legends offers another unfamiliar take on a 
Chinese with the grilled meat and dumplings of the country's north-east, while 
the main drag, Gerrard Street is stuffed full of duck and dim sum joints (and, 
in an unmarked door just to the left of the junction, the Experimental Cocktail 
Club – if you can persuade the doormen to let you in).Loon Fung 
<http://www.loonfung.com/> is the largest of the supermarkets, and a great 
treasure trove for the curious shopper: note that most shops here sell Thai and 
other far eastern goods as well.

At the western end of Gerrard Street, turn left down Wardour Street, right on 
to Coventry Street, and then cross Haymarket and Regent Street (making a detour 
to the mightyJapan Centre <http://www.japancentre.com/> at 14-16 Regent Street 
if you're running low on dashi kelp) to find yourself in the distinctly more 
British environs of Jermyn Street.

Nestled amongst the shooting and shirt shops is royal cheesemonger Paxton & 
Whitfield <http://www.paxtonandwhitfield.co.uk/>, while on your right, with its 
superb, if aristocratically priced, British food hall is Piccadilly institution
Fortnum & Mason <http://www.fortnumandmason.com/>. You'll also spy the back 
entrance to Waterstone's, which has a very large food and drink section, and a 
decent top-floor café in which to enjoy your purchases.

If, after sauntering down Jermyn Street for about 10 minutes, you turn left 
down St James's Street, you'll find yourself spoiling the discreet façade of 
one of the country's finest old wine merchants,Berry Bros & Rudd 
<http://www.bbr.com/> where, until recently, not a single bottle was to be seen 
– instead, one sat down with a well-informed gent in a suit to discuss one's 
requirements. Turn around and make your way back up to Piccadilly, passing the
Caviar House 
<http://www.caviarhouse-prunier.com/u-k/en/stores/united-kingdom/pl__25_83-1-1357/>
 on the corner, and reward yourself with a bite to eat at the all-day celebrity 
magnetThe Wolseley <http://www.thewolseley.com/>, before heading, sore footed, 
but hopefully not empty handed, into Green Park tube.

• This article was amended on 27 September 2011 to correct the spelling of 
"Fuschia Dunlop".
 