
When it comes to buying green finger chillies and rice wine, we Londoners have 
got it made. Flourishing Bangladeshi, Pakistani, Chinese and Gujarati 
communities have meant that Asian produce was available in the city long before 
the big supermarkets cottoned on. In the last decade alone, Vietnamese, Korean, 
Japanese, Sri Lankan and Thai communities have bloomed across the capital and 
with them so has the availability of authentic ingredients.

While it's easy to overspend in certain shops, there are always some excellent 
bargains to be had (think sacks of rice or big bottles of fish sauce) and 
exotic products to be pored over. In cities across the land, fresh tamarind 
pods and galangal are proving easier and easier to locate, and for those 
further afield, online options are improving (although these can add up and 
it's always nicer to handle produce when checking for freshness).

Yes, supermarkets have started selling pak choy and wasabi powder, and have 
special "ethnic aisles" with bulk bags of lentils and spices, but while these 
are competitively priced, they're limited in variety; if you're trying to find 
that special brand of miso or roasted curry powder, nothing beats a specialist 
shop.

Korean
 Kimchi Village, New Malden. Photograph: Rejina Sabur 
Boasting the UK's largest Korean community, New Malden – and Burlington Road 
in particular – is the epicentre of Korean food in the UK. For paper-thin 
chadol baki (brisket), samgyeopsal (unsalted bacon) or an assortment of 
ready-prepped bulgogi, head to the New Malden Butchers (104 Burlington Road, 
New Malden, KT3 4NT). Nip next door toKimchi Mal 
<http://kimchivillage.co.uk/index.php> (Kimchi Village) for an excellent range 
of home-made pickles and side dishes or check outHyun's Bakery 
<http://tamarindandthyme.wordpress.com/2009/07/13/korean-food-festival-2009-and-finally-getting-to-hyuns-bakery>
 for mochi doughnuts (94 Burlington Road, Town Centre, New Malden KT3 4NT).

Back on the High Street, K Mart sells tubs of fantastic home-made chive and 
chonggak kimchi and hefty sacks of Rhee Chun rice, or there's Jinmi for 
takeaway Korean sushi (127 Kingston Road, New Malden, KT3 3NX). While you're in 
the area, don't forget to pick up persimmons (plumper and cheaper than usual) 
and deeply fragrant nashi pears. It's also worth seeking out bulgogi sauce with 
a high fruit content (for example, the "Choripdong" brand has around 17%) which 
will cost a little more, but that extra pear factor makes the dish.

Hannah Paek of Su La restaurant 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/may/07/su-la-london-restaurant-review>
 (where the bargainous barbecue galbi is a must) has seen major improvements in 
the availability of ingredients over the past 15 years. Her folks once ran a 
local supermarket and she recommends the newH Mart <http://www.hmart.co.uk> for 
its sheer variety. Offering rarities like fresh, pink pistachios, bunches of 
dropwort, sesame leaves (their vegetables are flown in on Thursdays), unusual 
cuts of meat and a live crab counter, if they don't stock something they'll 
happily order it in.

Further down the road, Korea Foods <http://www.koreafoods.co.uk/en> has served 
the community for a decade and does a great line in traditional rice cakes. 
It's a good idea to take a car and fill up with long life products and value 
sacks of rice. Other decent (but slightly dearer) places include the Centre 
Point Food Store (20 St Giles High Street, Covent Garden, London, WC2H 8LN), 
the K Mart in North London (869 Finchley Road, London NW11 8RR) and Arigato 
(48-50, Brewer Street, London W1F 9TG).

Japanese

The Japanese tend to be fairly evenly distributed across town, although there 
are steadily thriving enclaves in Finchley, Acton and Ealing. Reiko Hashimoto 
(http://www.hashicooking.co.uk) reckons the price of ingredients in the UK is 
still too high and the availability of supplies too limited, although the 
basics of soy, mirin, miso, rice and wasabi have gained prevalence over the 
past few years. She often seeks cheaper alternatives in Korean supermarkets, 
but would advise against using Korean seaweed or Thai pickled ginger as 
substitutes for Japanese nori or gari. For Japanese food it has to be Japanese 
soy sauce (as the Chinese stuff tends to be saltier). She also recommends 
splashing out on good miso and particularly rates "kyo kaiseki" paste.

Unfortunately, Japanese food is pricey wherever it's sold, so for the widest 
selection theJapan Centre <http://www.japancentre.com> is the place to try. For 
top quality sashimi / sushi grade fish it has to beAtari-Ya 
<http://www.atariya.co.uk>. Fumio runs the ShoFooDoh okonomiyaki stall 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Okonomiyaki-Sho-Foo-Doh/129974707080867> at 
Chatsworth Road market and prefers the slightly cheaper Rice Wine Shop (82 
Brewer Street, London W1F 9UA) and Arigato (see above) as well as buying online 
fromTK Tradings <http://www.japan-foods.co.uk/catalog/index.php>. Every now and 
again he'll indulge in the oddJapasta sauce 
<http://www.japan-foods.co.uk/catalog/shopping_u.php?cPath=80_81&language=en> 
(cod roe with cream, pickled vegetable and tuna mayo flavours are guilty 
favourites), some quality pickles or shochu. When it comes to eating out he 
recommends Asakusa 265 Eversholt Street NW1 1BA and the udon atKoya 
<http://www.koya.co.uk/>.

Thai
 Jasmine rice at Muay supermarket in Earls Court. Photograph: Rejina Sabur 
Like the Japanese, Thais are spread across the capital. However the heart of 
the community is around Earls Court, Putney, Hammersmith and Bayswater. Many 
will happily purchase Thai specialities in Chinatown'sNew Loon Moon 
<http://www.newloonmoon.com> or See Woo <http://www.seewoo.com/stores/1>; but 
for treats like homemade layer cake, they'll head to Thai shops like Muay in 
Earls Court (8a Hogarth Road, London SW5 0PT). Also specialising in a cracking 
range of fresh curry pastes (made by a local restaurant), they sell home-made 
chilli pickle sauces, tiny pea aubergines, sweet, glutinous rice, fresh pig's 
blood, galangal root and holy basil leaves.

Over in Hammersmith, Thai Smile 
<http://www.thaismile.com/supermarket/supermarket.html> sells popular brands 
like Aroy-D and Chao Koh coconut milk. It's also a great place to stockpile 
frozen coconut cream desserts, fresh banana leaves, saw leaves and turmeric 
root. For great value Thai jasmine rice it has to be Tawana Oriental (18-20 
Chepstow Road, Bayswater, London W2 5BD).

Mark Dobbie of Nahm restaurant tells me that for fresh lime leaves he always 
goes toTalad Thai <http://www.taladthai.co.uk/>. For an up-market Thai 
restaurant experience theNipa Thai <http://www.niparestaurant.co.uk/?cid=5> 
does a gorgeous soft shell crab with spicy mango salad, or for a more casual 
bite Rosa's Ta Lae Pad Cha (seafood stir fried with mixed spices, chilli and 
galangal) is a popular choice.

Vietnamese
 London Starnight Vietnamese supermarket, Mare Street, London. Photograph: 
Rejina Sabur 
If it's fresh ho fun noodles or pho herbs you're after, then the shops of 
Hackney and specifically Mare Street are your best bet. London Starnight 
(203-213 Mare Street, London E8 3QE) is a firm favourite of the Hung Viet 
restaurant on Kingsland Road (Hung Viet's char grilled quail is just 
incredible) and Hoang-Nam supermarket (187 Mare Street, Dalston, London E8 3RH) 
have myriad fruits, vegetables and herbs including rau ngot and cai cuc.

Uyen Luu <http://www.leluu.com> has lived in Hackney for 30 years and is a big 
fan ofLongdan <http://www.longdan.co.uk/?mod=contact&ctid=6>. She prefers 
buying her fresh goods on Thursdays (the main delivery day for the area) and 
likes to spend a bit extra on decent fish sauce. Her favourite is Viet Huong, 
"the Three Crabs brand. It's expensive [around a fiver] compared to other 
sauces, but tastes a thousand times better".

Bangladeshi
 Inside Taj Stores on Brick Lane. Photograph: Rejina Sabur 
For anything from Bangladesh, whether it's a carrom board or a fresh 
jackfruit, Aldgate (or "Banglatown" as it's called) has it all. Established in 
1936,Taj Stores <http://www.tajstores.co.uk/outer_frame.htm> is the 
longest-established Asian greengrocers in London. The meat counter brims with 
alternative cuts and they sometimes have goat, venison, pheasant and pigeon. 
The fresh Bangladeshi fruits and vegetables vary according to the season (on my 
visit I spotted four varieties of lemon, countless types of spinach, water 
pumpkins and five kinds of aubergine) and traditional utensils and cookware are 
piled high at the back.

A few doors down, the slightly cheaper Banglacity (86 Brick Lane, London E1 
6RL) also stocks towering aisles of spices, lentils and exotic vegetables. 
Around the corner off Hanbury Street is the massiveBanglatown Cash and Carry 
<http://www.banglatown-uk.com/homepage.htm> which is a great place to stuff the 
boot of a car with giant bags of rice or a whole spectrum of frozen fish or 
halal meats.

For the best take away samosas in the area, try the (Punjabi) Needo Grill 
<http://www.needoogrill.co.uk/> or for other savouries the Ambala 
<http://www.ambalafoods.com/info/Stores.html> on Brick Lane also has a 
reasonable selection. For one of the better curries on Brick Lane, ask for the 
(off menu) paneer shashlik at Muhib Indian Restaurant (73 Brick Lane, London E1 
6RL).

Sri Lankan

Turn left out of South Harrow station and you could quite easily picture 
yourself in Colombo. Northolt Road is lined with Sri Lankan and Tamil grocers, 
takeaway shops and restaurants. South Harrow Food and Wine has been around 
since 1997 and is the biggest in the area. With a roaring trade in the more 
unusual Sri Lankan vegetables like fresh niwithi leaves, mukunuwenna and white 
kerala, the shop is a fascinating Aladdin's cave of rare-find chilli sauces, 
Sri Lankan noodles, rice flours, dried fish and soy products. They also have a 
takeaway snack counter, Seeraga samba rice (the tiniest grains imaginable), 
millet flour, palmyrah cream, red rice and kithul treacle.
 Curry powder at Shankar Superstore, South Harrow. Photograph: Rejina Sabur 
Across the road there's Best Foods (249 Northolt Road, South Harrow, HA2 8HR) 
and also the Shankar Superstore (231-233 Northolt Road, South Harrow, Middlesex 
HA2 8HN), both of which have a good, if slightly smaller selection.Sambal 
Express <http://www.sambalexpress.co.uk/index.php?page=home> is the place to 
assuage an aubergine sambal or mutton roll craving and for authentic Sri Lankan 
food the devilled chicken atPapaya <http://www.papaya-uk.com/about.html> comes 
highly recommended.

Chinese

Chinatown is the obvious place to pick up anything from a new wok to bags of 
fresh gai lan. For live seafood, extremely fresh sea bass or pomfret, head to 
the Good Harvest Fish Market (65 Shaftesbury Avenue, W1D 6LH).New Loon Moon 
<http://www.newloonmoon.com/> is crammed with interesting staples and has a 
decent array of fresh vegetables and fruit as well as an irresistible wall of 
instant noodles.See Woo <http://www.seewoo.com> has plenty of Thai and 
Vietnamese fare as well as Chinese, and bloggerSu-Lin 
<http://tamarindandthyme.wordpress.com/> likes to throw a bottle of her 
favourite Way-on brand of chilli oil in her basket whenever she's there.

She also gives the Wing Yip in Cricklewood 
<http://www.wingyip.com/page-494.html> the thumbs up (she especially adores 
their selection of Tean's Gourmet Malaysian curry pastes) and also recommends
Hoo Hing <http://www.hoohing.com)> on the North Circular. London is of course, 
full of Chinese restaurants, and two particularly good ones areHunan 
<http://www.hunanlondon.com> (where it's best just to put yourself in the hands 
of the owners) and for top dim sum try theRoyal China Club 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2006/mar/25/restaurants.restaurants4> (40-42 
Baker Street, W1).

Indian

Indian shops are as evenly distributed around the big smoke as the people 
themselves. Having said that, suburban shops worth making the pilgrimage to, 
include V B and Sons in Kingsbury (738 Kenton Road, HA3 9QX) Deepak foods with 
its lengthy corridors of spices (953-959 Garratt Lane, SW17 0LR) and Bhavins 
(193-197 Upper Tooting Road, Tooting, SW17 7TG) for its astonishing vista of 
Indian fruits and vegetables.

Wassim Tayyab, the owner of Tayyabs restaurant (where the tandoori paneer is 
addictive) likes theAsian Mega Mart <http://www.asianmegamart.com> in Beckton 
"it's like the Asian equivalent of Tesco" he tells me. He also shops atQuality 
Foods <http://www.quality-foods.co.uk/main.htm> in Ilford (there's also a 
branch in Southall).

For fantastic snacks, try the fryer fresh Bombay mix or the jalebis at Natraj 
<http://www.natrajfood.co.uk>. For good vegetarian food, there's Saraswathy 
Bhavan, where you can order asix foot family dosa 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mn84gbNVCyE> if you're that way inclined (70 
Tooting High Street, Tooting Broadway, SW17 0RN).
 