
In her simple, starched white dress, Lydia Eduki Kamar stands out among the 
highly decorated Turkana woman; their braided hair coloured bright red and 
their necks lost in a surplus of beaded necklaces. Lydia is a nurse, the lone 
staff member at Nanaam dispensary in Turkana - the only facility for nearly 
18,000 people in the area. There is a dire shortage of health workers in the 
district, a fact accepted by Dr Sheriff, the director of health services for 
Kenya, who partly blames the poor security situation which prevents people from 
accepting positions. Lydia works with sparse resources but with fervour and an 
abundance of energy.

The river in the area has long dried up and the only borehole with its hollow 
gurgling noises, is threatening to stop working altogether. Lydia thinks the 
situation in Turkana is dire. The scarcity of water is forcing people, looking 
for pastures, to cross the border into Sudan, resulting in fatal skirmishes. 
Lydia recounts one such encounter, where the Topoza tribe from Sudan pursued 
the Turkana all the way to Nanaam and stole their cattle after slaughtering 
some people.

Lydia has solutions - numerous ideas to harness water in the area. She points 
excitedly to mountains in the distance and says when it rains at the Mogila 
ranges water just flows away, wasted into the plains. This could easily be 
channelled, diverted to the village and stored for dry seasons. She also 
believes that the Turkana, to supplement their livelihood, with a little help 
can diversify and grow crops suited to the arid climate. She says she has read 
of crops such as sorghum and aloe vera being grown in similar climates in other 
parts of the world.

"I have hope, even in harsh times like this" she says placing a 
three-month-old baby, she helped deliver, on a scale. "All that is required is 
some persuasion".
 