
AlunaGeorge <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alunageorge>, Angel Haze and 
King Krule all feature on the longlist for the BBC's newly published Sound of 
2013 poll. Industry tastemakers have predicted 15 breakthrough acts for the 
coming 12 months, including purveyors of Glaswegian synth-pop, Birmingham soul 
and Canadian hip-hop.

Two hundred and 13 voters, including British DJs, critics, bloggers and 
broadcasters, compiled their favourite emerging artists for the BBC's annual 
survey. The nominees range from the nearly famous to the belovedly obscure, 
including London singer Arlissa,who recently recorded with Nas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/19/arlissa-new-band>, Dublin rock 
band Kodaline and Toronto rapper the Weeknd, who almost wonCanada's top music 
prize <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/dec/29/the-weekndfree-music-model> 
back in 2011. There's also Chvrches' echoing anthems, Savages' wiry post-punk, 
and a full slate of bleepy, hooky art-pop.

Reading on mobile? Listen here 
<https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fapi.soundcloud.com%2Ftracks%2F70624453>

From the initial 15-act long list, five Sound of 2013 finalists will be ranked 
and announced, one by one, starting on New Year's Eve. BBC Radio 1's Huw 
Stephens will reveal the overall winner on the morning of 4 January. To be 
nominated for the award, musicians cannot be "well-known" or have had a UK top 
20 single or album before the nomination period began.

Launched in 2003, BBC's Sound of â€¦ poll is held in high esteem: while its 
runners-up have included almost forgotten debutantes such as Tali, Air Traffic 
and VV Brown, the top slot has been a reliable predictor of success. Adele, the 
Bravery, 50 Cent and Keane were all past recipients.

In 2012, the prize went to Michael Kiwanuka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-kiwanuka>.

The BBC Sound of 2013 longlist

AlunaGeorge

Listen to Your Drums, Your Love <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VfCSx5641U4>

A*M*E

Listen to Heartless <https://soundcloud.com/ameofficial>

Angel Haze

Listen to Werkin Girls <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szj7efHG-00>

Arlissa

Listen to Hard To Love by Arlissa vs Nas 
<https://soundcloud.com/arlissa/sets/arlissa-vs-nas-hard-to-love>

Chvrches

Listen to the Mother We Share 
<https://soundcloud.com/chvrches/the-mother-we-share>

HAIM

Listen to Don't Save Me <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kiqIush2nTA>

King Krule

Listen to Octopus <https://soundcloud.com/king-krule/octopus>

Kodaline

Listen to The Answer <https://soundcloud.com/kodaline/kodaline-the-answer>

Laura Mvula

Listen to Can't Live With the World 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbGK-dwFWqo>

Little Green Cars
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVJEVkuNsEi0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVJEVkuNsEi0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FVJEVkuNsEi0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Listen to The John Wayne <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VJEVkuNsEi0>

Palma Violets

Listen to Best of Friends <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poFXWUTEs1k>

Peace

Listen to Wraith <https://soundcloud.com/p-e-a-c-e/wraith>

Savages

Listen to Husbands <https://soundcloud.com/pop-noire-radio/savages-husbands>

The Weeknd

Listen to Wicked Games <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O1OTWCd40bc>

Tom Odell

Listen to Another Love <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwpMEbgC7DA>
 