
The soaring value of Lonmin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/lonmin> shares 
helped theFTSE 100 index to nose into positive territory this morning.


The platinum mining group's shares were up by around a half - adding £1.8bn to 
the company's market value - after rival groupXstrata 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/xstrata> made a takeover approach.

This helped the FTSE 100 to climb 13.1 points to 5467.6 - just a 0.2% increase 
on yesterday.

Lonmin's share price of £34.65 - some 49% up on last night's close - was above 
the £33 per share Xstrata offered.

Lonmin rejected the bid, branding it an "opportunistic and entirely unwelcome 
attempt to acquireLonmin <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lonmin> at a 
price which undervalues its unique assets".

Other mining stocks benefited from Xstrata's move.

Vedanta <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/vedantaresources> lifted 6% to 
£18.73, while copper specialistAntofagasta 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/antofagastabusiness> was up 5% to 547p.

Eurasian Natural Resources <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/enrc> increased 
by 4% to 987p, whileAnglo American 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/angloamericanbusiness> rose by a similar 
amount to £27.98.

And Johnson Matthey <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/johnsonmattheybusiness>
, the British platinum distributor and processor, rose 4% to £15.71.

Aquarius Platinum <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/aquariusplatinumbusiness>
 was the top gainer in the FTSE 250, up 18% to 453.75p.

Oil services group Hunting 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/huntingplcbusiness> rose 11% to 879p after 
selling Canadian division Gibson Energy for £626m and outlining plans for 
acquisitions.

The FTSE 100 fallers were led by broadcaster ITV 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/itvbusiness>, which revealed an extra £35m 
in cost cuts and said advertising would be down 20% in September.

Shares dipped 8% to 42.4p, and at one point touched 38.3p, equivalent to the 
stock's all-time low recorded last month.

Insurer Old Mutual <http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/oldmutual> reported 
problems in the US and warned that sales there could fall in 2008, sending 
shares down 7% to 99.3p.

Shopping mall owner Liberty International 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/libertyinternational> lost 5% to 917.5p 
after reporting a fall in the value of its assets.
 