
Lonmin shares have lost more than 3% after the platinum miner reported growing 
production problems.

It has shut down a key furnace after an incident, which fortunately did not 
lead to any injuries. ButLonmin <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lonmin> 
estimates it could take 30 to 40 days for a full repair. This follows the 
closure of another furnace for a planned upgrade.

On top of that, operations at its K3 shaft have been suspended following a 
fatality last week.

News of the closures has sent Lonmin shares down 8.8p at 276.5p. Investec 
analyst Marc Elliott said:
 It is too early to gauge the impact on the company from the two incidents, 
and consequently our valuation and recommendation are under review. The 
disruption to nearer term output could well be meaningful, but perhaps not 
longer term. Ironically, if the interruption leads to stockpiling of ore for 
processing later in a stronger price platinum group metal pricing environment, 
it could be value enhancing, since the current pricing environment is 
relatively poor. Platinum prices may also react to the imminent news due from 
Amplats on possible capacity closures, which was due at the end of April and 
could impact the whole sector.

Nick Hatch at Westhouse Securities said:
 We estimate that the problem at the furnace could reduce 2013 sales by 
anywhere between 15,000 and 35,000 ounces, which would mean platinum sales of 
between 625,000 and 645,000 ounces this financial year versus the company 
target of 660,000.

We always suspected Lonmin would fail to meet its sales target. This is 
disappointing and will impact the company's earnings recovery. We maintain our 
sell recommendation.

Meanwhile there was better news from Aquarius Platinum, which added 3.5p to 
42.75p after it reported higher production figures and an improving cash 
position. Alison Turner at Panmure Gordon said:
 Aquarius Platinum has released positive third quarter results reflecting a 
$10m improvement in the cash position to $93m. That marks a very significant 
turning point for Aquarius and should reassure investors for whom the balance 
sheet has been top of mind. Continued improvement in the operating performance 
of Kroondal is also reassuring. On [the potential acquisition of] Booysendal 
the statement is notes only that if [South Africa's department of mining and 
resources] does not approve this by 30 April the agreement will lapse â€“ 
investors must wait one more day for this key piece of news.
 