
Miners are mounting a strong recovery as metal prices rise, but analysts also 
continue to speculate on takeover prospects for the likes of platinum specialist
Lonmin.

Xstrata owns around 25% of Lonmin and although Xstrata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/xstrata> has proposed a merger of equals 
withAnglo American - a move rejected by its target - some believe a deal with 
Lonmin could be revived instead. RBC Capital Markets thinks this possibility 
puts Lonmin in a better position than some of its rivals. Moving its 
recommendation from sector perform to outperform, RBC said:

"Under new management, we think things are starting to look better, albeit not 
by a lot – Lonmin is essentially in the same boat as the other majors vis-à-vis 
low metal prices and rand strength. That said,Lonmin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lonmin> was the first major to start 
taking steps to reduce losses and increase margins.

"However, we believe the key factor differentiating Lonmin from the other 
majors is that Takeover Panel restrictions on a potential acquisition by 
Xstrata end in early October 2009. With an Xstrata-Anglo American merger 
looking ever less likely, we believe a Lonmin acquisition looks more so."

Lonmin is currently 79p higher at £14.40 while Xstrata has added 30.5p to 
809.5p. As for Anglo, it is up 57.5p at 1948.5p.

On the back of the strong gold price, Randgold Resources is currently leading 
the way among top shares, up 293p at £39.82.Peter Hambro Mining, meanwhile, is 
heading theFTSE 250 risers, up 59p to 799p, with Aquarius Platinum, up 16.9p to 
269p, not far behind.

Despite all this - plus some upbeat UK services sector data 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/sep/03/services-sector-two-year-high> 
- theFTSE 100 is barely in positive territory, up just 1.91 points at 4819.46. 
The mid-cap index has fared better, though, up 73.41 points to 8593.34.
 