
See Rob's Arctic diary 
<http://travel.theguardian.com/gallery/2007/apr/27/green.climatechange?picture=329795847>
 in pictures


Setting off ... the team drag supplies over the ice at Svalbard. Photograph: 
Rob Bell

It's 4am, I've had three hours' sleep, it's minus 19 outside - and I've just 
been woken up for an hour's polar bear watch over our camp. How did I find 
myself in this position?

On the second night of our trek into Svalbard's Arctic wilderness, we set off 
from the relative civilisation of Longyearbyen on skis, carrying everything 
we'd need for our three-day camping trip. It took us six hours to cover the 
20km or so across the ice fields to the mountains where our next task was 
finding a suitable spot to set up camp at the foot of the glacier. We would 
have to build our own snowholes - no Eurocamp facilities out here.

First you dig the entrance to the tunnel, then comes the challenge of 
sculpting out sleeping chambers. It took two of us a good seven hours to dig 
the cave which was to be our home for the next three nights. Now I'm quite a 
fan of DIY, but building my own house is definitely a first and I was rather 
proud of the results.

Not only did our snowhole give us shelter, it also provided an endless supply 
of drinking water by melting the snow on our stoves. It's quite an experience 
living so close to the elements - we were in negative temperatures continuously 
for three days and - despite the sun - the air temperature never rose above 
about minus 5. It's tough, and not just on the body, as the cold can affect 
your mood as well.

So that's how I found myself, alone at 4am in 24-hour Arctic daylight, on 
polar bear watch over my sleeping companions, armed only with my trusty 
distress pistol and the knowledge that the chance of seeing a polar bear in a 
region of limited sea ice was extremely small. Hardly an incentive to stay 
awake, but I'm glad I did. My shift must have coincided with the Arctic 
rush-hour; I saw Reindeer plodding past, Ptarmigan swooping overhead and an 
Arctic fox darting across the fresh white surface.

It's moments like this that really bring home the necessity of protecting this 
unspoilt environment. And for us that means making changes back home in the 
comfort of our everyday lives.

Â· Rob Bell has been selected as a Ben & Jerry's Climate Change College 
Ambassador in partnership with WWF and is running his own campaign to cut down 
energy waste from charging mobile phones. To find out more check out
climatechangecollege.org <http://www.climatechangecollege.org> and

unpluggit.co.uk <http://www.unpluggit.co.uk>.
 