
One of Labour’s pre-eminent thinkers is to resign his party’s whip in the 
House of Lords after being recruited byGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> to head a newly created 
National Infrastructure Commission.

Andrew Adonis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-adonis>, Tony 
Blair’s former policy chief, will sit as a cross-bench peer to allow him to 
chair the new statutory body that will advise the government on new 
infrastructure projects.

The chancellor – addressing the Conservative party conference on Monday – will 
hail the appointment of Lord Adonis as a sign of his determination to occupy 
what David Cameron has called the “common ground” as the Labour party “runs to 
the hills” under the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn.

Osborne will seek to portray the Tories as the real “workers’ party” in his 
speech to the Tory conference on Monday, where he is expected to reiterate his 
announcement in his summer budget of a “national living wage” that is due to 
rise to £9 an hour by 2020 for workers over the age of 25.

Andrew Adonis and the UK’s real infrastructure needs | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/andrew-adonis-and-the-uks-real-infrastructure-needs>
The poaching of such a high-profile New Labour figure – the father of Blair’s 
schools academy programme and of theHS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> 
rail line – will be seen as a highly political move by the chancellor as he 
follows the former Labour prime minister’s “big tent” approach as a way of 
occupying the centre ground. “I think you can see what Andrew Adonis thinks of 
Labour’s prospects under Jeremy Corbyn by this move,” said one Tory source.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&media=>
George Osborne: heir to the Tory throne? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/oct/05/george-osborne-party-conference-video>
Treasury sources added the appointment of Adonis was designed to take the 
politics out of infrastructure projects as the government seeks to create a 
permanent and wide-ranging body, in the mould of the Davies commission that 
examined airport expansion.

This suggests the chancellor is keen to endorse the findings of the 
independent commission, chaired by Sir Howard Davies, which recommended the 
building of a third runway at Heathrow.

A spokesperson for Jeremy Corbyn said: “We have heard it all before from 
Osborne and theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> on infrastructure and 
their record is one of complete failure to deliver. There is still nothing to 
indicate that the Tories understand the desperate need for serious long-term 
investment in infrastructure - and the real story of their conference remains 
their attack on working people through the cut on tax credits.”

Adonis was a member of the SDP before moving to the Labour party, where he 
served as head of Blair’s No 10 policy unit in his first term in office before 
his elevation to the House of Lords.

He served as schools minister under Blair and was promoted to the cabinet as 
transport secretary by Gordon Brown to allow him to indulge his love of 
railways.

Downing Street and the Treasury know they are vulnerable to concerns raised by 
a series of Tories, including the influential thinker and former minister David 
Willetts, about plans to cut tax credits by an average of £1,000 a year for 
three million of thepoorest working families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/14/tory-welfare-cuts-would-hit-poorest-third-of-uk-families-research-shows>
. Lord Willetts warned in the Times last week that the changes could “turn 
sour”.

Willetts spoke out after the Institute for Fiscal Studies said it was 
“arithmetically impossible” for the new national living wage to compensate 
low-paid workers for the cut in tax credits.


The prime minister said the average family, whose main breadwinner works full 
time on the minimum wage, would be better off by some £2,400 a year when all 
the tax changes were taken into account. Cameron told The Andrew Marr Show on 
BBC1: “We are protecting the lowest-paid people with the child tax credit and 
what goes with it.”

The new commission, which will be modelled on the independent fiscal watchdog 
the Office for Budget Responsibility, set up in legislation after the 2010 
election, will advise the government on which infrastructure projects should be 
prioritised.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Flord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4745e87108e0696cb6a4f7c50582a8b0442eafa5%2F0_75_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lord%20Adonis%20to%20resign%20Labour%20whip%20and%20chair%20George%20Osborne's%20infrastructure%20body&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Flord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lord%20Adonis%20to%20resign%20Labour%20whip%20and%20chair%20George%20Osborne%27s%20infrastructure%20body&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Flord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4745e87108e0696cb6a4f7c50582a8b0442eafa5%2F0_75_3000_1802%2F3000.jpg>
 George Osborne. Photograph: Joel Goodman/PA 
These will cover roads and rail, including the east-west HS3 rail line, the 
new north-southCrossrail <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> 2 line 
linking Surrey and Hertfordshire, and energy projects such as the new 
generation of nuclear power stations.


Adonis wrote a major report for Labour in the last parliament on how to revive 
Britain’s cities outside London. But he was frustrated the leadership was slow 
to follow on his ideas and watched with envy how Osborne drew on the thinking 
of the former deputy prime minister, Michael Heseltine, which provided the 
template for the chancellor’s “northern powerhouse”.

The appointment of Adonis to the new infrastructure commission shows the 
chancellor is so confident politically that he is not averse to stealing ideas 
from Labour. Ed Miliband pledged to establish an almost identical commission in 
the Labour manifesto for this year’s general election.

This was modelled on the Armitt commission established by Ed Balls in 2012, to 
examine how to speed up infrastructure projects. John Armitt’s work was 
undermined the following year when Balls questioned the HS2 project, sending 
Labour’s northern municipal leaders into the arms of Osborne.

The North East needs to break free from its isolation to grow its economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/the-northerner/2013/apr/11/north-east-economic-review-transport>
Adonis will say: “Without big improvements to its transport and energy 
systems, Britain will grind to a halt. I am pleased to accept the chancellor’s 
invitation to establish the National Infrastructure Commission as an 
independent body able to advise government and parliament on priorities.

“Major infrastructure projects like Crossrail and building major new power 
stations span governments and parliaments. I hope it will be possible to forge 
a wide measure of agreement, across society and politics, on key infrastructure 
requirements for the next 20 to 30 years, and the assessments which have 
underpinned them.”

The chancellor will say in his speech: “I am delighted to tell you that the 
former Labour cabinet minister and transport secretary Andrew Adonis has agreed 
to be the commission’s first chair. He’ll now sit as a cross-bench peer and 
help us create Britain’s plan for the future – working together in the national 
interest.”

Osborne will add: “Where would Britain be if we had never built railways or 
runways, power stations or new homes? Where will we be in the future if we stop 
building them now? I’m not prepared to to turn to my children – or indeed 
anyone else’s child – and say: I’m sorry, we didn’t build for you. We have to 
shake Britain out of its inertia on the projects that matter most.”

In his speech, Osborne will announce that he will encourage the 89 local 
authority pension funds to invest in infrastructure projects by pooling their 
resources into half a dozen British Wealth Funds. They will each control assets 
of more than £25bn.

 