
Lord Drayson, the millionaire businessman, Labour party donor and former 
science minister, has released a pollution monitor that he hopes will drive 
efforts to improve air quality around the world.

The gadget is designed to be carried in a pocket and is powered by a new 
technology which constantly harvests energy from the ambient radio waves that 
mobile phone and wireless networks emit. As such, its battery never needs 
replacing.


Lord Drayson takes on UK air pollution crisis with new smart sensor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/10/lord-drayson-takes-on-uk-air-pollution-crisis-with-new-smart-sensor>
It works with a mobile phone app called CleanSpace <https://our.clean.space/> 
to record local air pollution levels, and pools the data with that from others 
to create a high-resolution, dynamic map of pollution hotspots and areas where 
the air is cleaner.


“We can use this to create a much more detailed map of air pollution across 
the country and around the world,” Lord Drayson said at the Royal Institution 
in London on Wednesday. “We want to use this to create a social movement for 
cleaner air.”

Drayson believes that giving people live readings of local air pollution will 
alert them to the worst air quality they encounter, and put pressure on 
councils and governments to clean up the air in their regions.


The £50 CleanSpace tag, as the device is known, records levels of carbon 
monoxide, one of the many gases released by vehicles that run on petrol or 
diesel. It has an internal lithium ion battery that is constantly recharged by 
energy gathered from radiowaves in the air.

Drayson, who lives in London, suffers from asthma, as do four of his children. 
The condition is exacerbated by air pollution which irritates the air ways. He 
said air pollution had become one of the most serious threats to public health, 
an issue made more acute by the recent revelations that VW subverted emissions 
tests on some of its diesel cars. Air pollution exacerbates respiratory and 
heart disease, and is responsible for about 2 million deaths a year, according 
to the WorldHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Flord-drayson-launches-pollution-sensor-powered-by-radio-waves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443627542155%2F314cb0bc-a646-47f1-805a-fb642846c240-1041x2040.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lord%20Drayson%20launches%20pollution%20sensor%20powered%20by%20radio%20waves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Flord-drayson-launches-pollution-sensor-powered-by-radio-waves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lord%20Drayson%20launches%20pollution%20sensor%20powered%20by%20radio%20waves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Flord-drayson-launches-pollution-sensor-powered-by-radio-waves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443627542155%2F314cb0bc-a646-47f1-805a-fb642846c240-1041x2040.png>
 CleanSpace app Photograph: PR 
Software built into the CleanSpace app works out when people are walking, 
running or cycling, rather than taking the car, and notches up “CleanMiles”, 
that users can cash in for rewards, such as bicycle accessories or money off 
gym membership.


The energy harvesting system at the heart of Drayson’s pollution monitor 
cracks a problem that scientists have been puzzling over for years. The 
difficulty has been extracting useful amounts of power from weak radio waves 
that are nearly always in the air because of mobile phone and other wireless 
networks.


Drayson Technologies, the firm Lord Drayson runs, worked with Imperial College 
in London, to create its device, calledFreevolt <http://www.getfreevolt.com/>. 
It uses an antenna to capture radio waves, and an efficient rectifier to 
convert the alternating currents from the waves into direct electrical 
currents. A power management system picks out the highest-power waves in the 
air and locks on to them.

Even so, the FreeVolt device can harvest only a tiny amount of power from the 
airwaves. At best, it can run a 2 mW electrical device, such as a simple 
sensor. Drayson sees the technology powering smoke alarms, simple cameras, and 
even smart bins that know when they need to be emptied.

 