
Lord Adonis, one of the original architects of Britain’s next-generation 
high-speed rail plans, is to join the board of the £50bnHS2 project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2>.

Adonis has been appointed as a non-executive director of HS2 Ltd and will 
dedicate two days a month to the role. The former Labour transport secretary 
will sit on the board for three years, by which time the scheme’s backers 
expect work to be under way on the first phase of HS2,linking London and 
Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/interactive/2012/jan/10/hs2-rail-route-map-interactive>
. They also hope it will have gained royal assent for extending the network to 
Manchester and Leeds.

Adonis said: “HS2 is a vital project of national significance. We must not 
duck this challenge of providing Britain with a railway fit for the 21st 
century.”


The position will formalise the peer’s unofficial role as a champion of HS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2>, since he introduced the scheme while he 
was transport secretary during Gordon Brown’s leadership in 2010. Adonis will 
be paid £950 a day.


HS2: if they build it, will people come?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2015/jun/28/hs2-high-speed-rail-midlands-london-transform-economies>
Announcing the appointment, the transport secretary, Patrick McLoughlin, said: 
“Lord Adonis has been a huge supporter of HS2 right from the start, helping to 
turn the initial concept into a reality. His support and expertise will be 
invaluable as we move towards construction of the railway. HS2 will have a 
transformational effect on the country, bringing jobs and growth and is a vital 
part of our long-term economic plan.”


The HS2 Ltd chairman, David Higgins, said: “As we move from concept to 
construction, [Adonis’s] drive and focus will be of immense help in ensuring we 
deliver a lasting legacy that will be an integral part of our transport system 
for the decades to come.”


The hybrid bill granting planning permission for the first phase of HS2 is 
expected to complete its passage through parliament by the end of 2016. The 
government has reaffirmed its commitment to the project despiteshelving other 
planned rail upgrades last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/24/network-rail-funding-gap-scuppers-five-year-investment-plan>
.

 