
The decision of Lord Adonis to chair the first Conservative National 
Infrastructure Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
 is a political coup for George Osborne even if the politically well-travelled 
peer is not defecting to the Tory party and is, in truth, implementing a policy 
he and the then shadow chancellor, Ed Balls, advocated at the last election.


Every governing party loves the imprimatur of an opposition politician, and 
Adonis is one of the most respected figures on theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> benches in the Lords. 


The Corbynite left will doubtless see his decision to sit as a cross-bencher 
as the first betrayal by the Blairites since Labour’s summer democratic 
revolution. As a former chair of Progress, Adonis will be denounced as part of 
the Blairite virus and his semi-departure will be taken wrongly as a sign that 
others who share his politics are about to defect.

His decision is certainly a sign of how much some of the most talented minds 
on the left sense Labour is not going to be anywhere near power in the 
foreseeable future, but Adonis is very much a one-off.


Lord Adonis to resign Labour whip and chair George Osborne's infrastructure 
body
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
Unlike many in politics he combines a flair for practical policy-making and a 
burning desire to cut through Whitehall conservatism to implement those 
policies, making connections across party lines to do so. He is a doer as well 
as a thinker, and as such was highly rated not just by Tony Blair, but Gordon 
Brown and Ed Miliband. All three came to see his thinking as indispensable.

At one point he considered whether to run as Labour mayor next year, but 
sensed he could not beat Dame Tessa Jowell for the Labour nomination and her 
surprise defeat in the primary may have blocked off his chief route to 
influence in London where he has been doing much of his recent work both on 
housing and Crossrail 2.

But his recruitment by Osborne is also a visible symbol of the chancellor’s 
willingness, jackdaw-like, to grab policies and personnel from the Labour party 
if he thinks a policy – like the living wage - is worth stealing. A National 
Infrastructure Commmission was Balls’s policy – indeed it was his chief calling 
card with business.

It has been less noted but Osborne also managed to recruit Lord Jim O’Neill, 
the left-leaning economist, to become a Treasury minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/14/jim-oneill-gains-peerage-and-ministerial-role-in-treasury-team>
 and the true brains behind the northern powerhouse. O’Neill had chaired the 
RSA report on the future of cities, largely expecting the policy to be adopted 
by Labour, but is now cheerfully negotiating on behalf of Osborne with largely 
Labour-run northern councils to change the face of the British state.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&media=>
George Osborne: heir to the Tory throne? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/oct/05/george-osborne-party-conference-video>
Adonis has that same pragmatism. A former head of the No 10 policy unit under 
Blair, and once a Liberal Democrat, Adonis surprised himself as a schools 
minister in the Blair government, becoming as much an entrepreneur as a 
theoretician and devoting much of his ministerial time successfully persuading 
businesses to act as sponsors to academies, Almost from that point, his 
politics has been marked by a determination to get things done, irrespective of 
party politics, acting as a catalyst for change, constantly challenging the 
forces in Whitehall and local government that prefer the quiet life and the 
deferred decision.


His philosophy is brilliantly summated by himself in the current issue of 
Prospect, arguing often essential reforms are simple, and too often simple and 
easy become muddled in public policy. “If simple reforms are controversial and 
difficult to implement because they radically challenge the status quo then 
politicians tend to default or waffle, half-measures of complex tweaks of the 
status quo, achieving little. The inaction or avoiding action, can last 
decades.”

He is not a half-measures man. Not surprisingly with his record of practical 
action he has been in high demand – chairing Crossrail 2 and then being 
appointed to the board of Network Rail.

He may lack his distinguished mane or private wealth, but he is in some 
respects a younger, more social democratic version of Lord Heseltine, in 
politics to secure practical change. If that means a bit of state dirigisme, 
much of it sitting uncomfortably alongside his devolution agenda, so be it.

Andrew Adonis and the UK’s real infrastructure needs | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/andrew-adonis-and-the-uks-real-infrastructure-needs>
It has always meant working across party lines such as during his period as 
transport secretary when he continually argued HS2 would only be built if both 
sides of the political divide remained committed. It was his influence with 
Miliband that probably more than anyone prevented Balls from dropping Labour 
support for HS2 in opposition.

But he also worked closely with Balls to develop the review on infrastructure 
led by Sir John Armitt that appears to be the model for what Osborne is 
announcing on Monday.

There will be many that cavil at the way in which a National Infrastructure 
Commission tramples over democratic rights, or rides roughshod over the long 
cherished system of planning inquiries. On paper, the commission’s powers to 
make decisions over transport, energy and housing look daunting. He will be a 
big advocate of the use of local authority public land to build houses, and 
will also be on to the government night and day to make a decision over 
Heathrow.

Much of this will be controversial. Taking the politics out of infrastructure 
decisions sounds easier in abstract than in reality. But it is going to be a 
lot harder for Labour to oppose these measures since they advocated them in 
opposition.

Finally all this does not mean he shares Osborne’s economics. He has 
repeatedly pointed out that Osborne, for all his rhetoric, was forced in the 
first parliament to back off from the planned austerity, deferring the deficit 
timetable because – faced with global recession – it simply was not 
appropriate. Osborne simply never admitted he had dropped Plan A, Adonis 
argued. He will be banging at the door of the Treasury to increase capital 
spending.


Nor is he a Tory. Although he has always been willing to work on a cross-party 
basis, notably with Heseltine, he has his tribal loyalties. His bookFive Days 
in May <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/13/5-days-may-adonis-review>
, an account of the abortive coalition talks in 2010, demonstrates he worked 
harder than anyone to form a Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition to keep the 
Tories out.

But with Labour maybe a decade away from power, this is his last best shot to 
change the face of Britain.
 