
Brian Rix, Lord Rix, who has died aged 92, devoted his life almost equally to 
stage farce – as one of the most brilliant comic actors in the postwar years – 
and to campaigning for people with learning disabilities. He was successful at 
both. In the theatre, both in management and on stage, his name became 
synonymous with the “Whitehall farces”, named after the London venue and with 
plotlines usually involving a lie, a comic deception and someone being caught 
with his trousers around his ankles. Rix also ran repertory companies and 
presented more than 90 farces on television in the 1960s – to huge audiences – 
starring the big names of the day, such asDora Bryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/23/dora-bryan>, Sid James, Sheila 
Hancock and John Le Mesurier.

Then, as the father of a child with Down’s syndrome, he changed the direction 
of his life and became a campaigner and fundraiser for people with learning 
disability, in particular for the charityMencap <https://www.mencap.org.uk/>. 
He was its secretary general for seven years from 1980, and by the time he left 
the role, Mencap – and learning disability in general – had a much higher 
profile in the UK. He served as Mencap’s chairman, 1988-98, then its president 
until his death.

Letters: Lord Rix obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/aug/26/letters-lord-rix-obituary> 
Born in Cottingham, east Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>, Rix was the son of Herbert, a 
Hull shipowner keen on cricket, and his wife, Fanny, who loved amateur theatre. 
He maintained that being the youngest of four children meant he always had to 
fight for attention. His sister, Sheila, later Sheila Mercier, became an actor 
before him and is well known for her part as Annie Sugden in Emmerdale Farm.

When Brian was four, the family moved to Hornsea, on the coast. Rix was sent 
as a boarder to Bootham school, in York, but hated it, admitting later to being 
a “precocious brat”. He had an instinctive flair for self-projection that did 
not help with his academic studies. His father wanted him to go to Oxford to 
distinguish himself as a cricketer, but the second world war broke out and Rix 
became a pilot, navigator and bomb-aimer with the RAF. Then, faced with a 
10-month wait before he was called up for duty, he wangled himself a tour with 
Donald Wolfit in King Lear and worked for Ensa (the Entertainments National 
Service Association). Further deferred, he took to rep in Harrogate.

By the time he was demobbed in 1947, remembering Wolfit as an actor-manager he 
decided that this was the role for him. His father and two uncles shelled out 
£900, and Rix put in £100 of his own, to hire the King’s Hall, Ilkley. 
Appearing in his first production there, the American farce Nothing But the 
Truth, he found the door through which he was supposed to enter the stage 
blocked and had to come in through the window of what was supposed to be a New 
York 28th-floor apartment. The £1,000 investment produced a £3,000 loss, but 
luckily a season of Babes in the Wood at Bridlington kept him afloat.

It was at Bridlington that he laid the foundation of his future success as a 
shrewd picker of farces. He alone saw the commercial potential of the forces 
play Reluctant Heroes, which had been turned down by all the leading 
managements. By the time it reached London at the Whitehall theatre in 
September 1950, taking over from the long-running Worm’s Eye View, Rix had made 
himself a force to be reckoned with in theatre management. He was to be 
associated with the Whitehall theatre for 25 years.

In 1952 Reluctant Heroes became one of the first West End plays to be partly 
televised. As a result, there were huge queues outside the Whitehall. Rix 
negotiated a contract with the BBC that lasted 17 years. The TV work included a 
number of Sunday NightTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> 
productions under the Brian Rix Presents banner in the late 50s and early 60s.

Management was the art that mattered to him. For years he put on and appeared 
in the most noted farces of the West End, including Dry Rot by John Chapman, 
who had understudied him in Reluctant Heroes. Rix also appeared in the film of 
Dry Rot (1956), one of 11 film credits.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmTqdS-b1zW8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmTqdS-b1zW8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmTqdS-b1zW8&media=>
 The 1956 film Dry Rot, starring Brian Rix, Peggy Mount and Sid James 
For three years, 1977-80, he became controller to the ragbag of theatres run 
by the new masters of farces and musicals, the cinema owner Laurie Marsh and 
the playwright Ray Cooney. He vowed never to work as a subordinate again.

Around this time, an activity that had been secondary to his stage work 
started to take over. In 1949 he had married the actor Elspet Gray; the first 
of their four children, Shelley, was born with Down’s syndrome. Rix had already 
done some work with the Stars Organisation for Spastics (now the Stars 
Foundation for Cerebral Palsy) and in the late 70s, after 30 years of almost 
non-stop farce production and acting, he felt “the audience was going to get 
bored because I was getting bored,” he said in an interview with theGuardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jan/22/brian-rix-actor-learning-disabilities-mencap>
 in 2014. He threw himself instead into fundraising for learning disability 
charities, and in 1978 he began the Let’s Go! TV programmes for people with 
learning disabilities – he made 40 of them.

In 1979 a job advert in the Guardian caught Rix’s eye, for the position of 
Mencap’s secretary general. He applied and was initially turned down, but was 
later accepted and started work in 1980. Those who thought Rix might be a 
humorous figurehead misjudged his passion and his management skills. His first 
act was to get the heads of the many departments together for one of the usual 
conferences – to tell them that such unwieldy meetings would be redundant in 
future, as he proposed to create four group heads. He visited regions, local 
societies, schools and adult training centres.

He was not in the slightest bit afraid of controversy. In 1987 he clashed with 
Lord Hailsham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/oct/15/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
, the lord chancellor, over the involuntary sterilisation of a 17-year-old girl 
with learning disabilities; even years later, Rix could not bring himself to 
say anything good about the man. Ministers who were late in living up to 
promises received blunt, if polite, letters or deputations.

Once he moved on from the secretary general role to became chairman of Mencap, 
he was able to resume his theatrical career with a revival of Dry Rot at the 
Lyric theatre in 1989. But he tore a muscle on the opening night and received 
mixed notices. From 1986, Rix served as chairman of the Arts Council of Great 
Britain Drama Panel, resigning in 1993 over cuts being made to drama.

He was appointed CBE in 1977, was knighted in 1986 and in 1992 was made a life 
peer. In 2006 he voted against a bill on assisted dying because of concerns 
that it might be misused in relation to people with learning disabilities, but 
in recent weeks had written to the speaker of the House of Lords urging a 
change to the law “as soon as possible” to allow “the many people who find 
themselves in the same situation as me to slip away peacefully”.

Shelley died in 2005, and Elspet in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/19/elspet-gray>. Rix is survived by 
three children, Louisa, Jamie and Jonathan.
Dennis Barker

David Brindle writes: What drove Brian Rix to campaign so tirelessly, and so 
effectively, for people with learning disabilities was a burning anger at their 
marginalisation by society. Never did he forget how he and Elspet had to fight 
pressure from the establishment – and family – to place their young daughter 
Shelley in a spartan institution and walk away.

Some present-day disability-rights activists have mistakenly seen Rix as an 
apologist for residential care. It is true that he was concerned at the 
isolation of some disabled people living in the community, following the 
rundown of the long-stay hospitals, but it was under his chairmanship that 
Mencap laid plans forGolden Lane Housing <http://www.glh.org.uk/>, which today 
provides homes for more than 1,700 people with support needs. He believed that 
learning disabled people should live in family-sized groups, rather than alone.

As its secretary general for seven years, he modernised Mencap and raised its 
turnover sixfold. As chairman for 10 years thereafter, his proudest achievement 
was to drive through the constitutional changes that created a national 
assembly, made up of people with learning disabilities, their families and 
carers, and that gave majority control of the charity to elected trustees, of 
whom at least one must be a person with a learning disability.

In the Lords, as a crossbencher, Rix spoke and lobbied on learning disability 
and autism at every opportunity. He was shocked by theWinterbourne View scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/jun/01/panorama-care-home-abuse-investigation-government-review>
 in 2011 and deplored the “monstrous” treatment of 1,300 people subsequently 
found living in similar “assessment and treatment” units in a reinvention of 
long-stay care.

• Brian Norman Roger Rix, Lord Rix, actor-manager and learning disability 
campaigner, born 27 January 1924; died 20 August 2016

• Dennis Barker <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/03/dennis-barker> 
died in 2015
 