
What did Zac Goldsmith’s Tory conference speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d43T7NFMLKY> add to our knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/oct/05/what-zac-goldsmith-has-and-hasnt-said-about-london-housing-so-far>
 about his remedies for London’s housing problems? “The answer is not easy but 
it is simple,” he said. This rang a bell. Last month, Labour peer Andrew 
Adonis, wrote a largearticle for Prospect magazine 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/features/how-to-fix-the-housing-crisis> 
called “How to fix the housing crisis.” It began:


In my experience of public policy and government, big challenges do not always 
require complex solutions. Often the essential reforms are simple. I am also 
wary of the gibe: “If it were simple, it would have been done already.” This 
confuses “simple” with “easy”. If simple reforms are controversial and 
difficult to implement—because they radically challenge the status quo—then 
politicians tend to default into waffle, half measures or complex tweaks of the 
status quo, achieving little.

Not easy, but simple. Well fancy that. Goldsmith also claimed in his speech 
that there are around 3,500 estates dating from the 1950s and 1960s in London 
which could be rebuilt. He used the same figure in aTelegraph article 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/11897033/How-to-build-50000-homes-a-year-in-London.html>
 published on 28 September. Where had that number appeared before? As an 
estimate of the number of London estates as a whole in Adonis’s Prospect piece.


Adonis, of course, is an eminent Labour thinker and former policy chief to 
Tony Blair who supported kindred spirit Tessa Jowell during Labour’s candidate 
selection race - a race she lost to the “soft left” Sadiq Khan. More recently, 
Adonis resigned the Labour whip in the Lords after beingrecruited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/lord-adonis-to-resign-labour-whip-and-chair-george-osbornes-infrastructure-body>
 to head George Osborne’s National Infrastructure Commission - amove 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2015/10/recruiting-andrew-adonis-coup-george-osborne-and-victory-jeremy-corbyn>
 that may not be unrelated to Blairite dismay over the election of Jeremy 
Corbyn as Labour leader.

Now, the Evening Standard reports from Manchester 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/zac-goldsmith-labour-figures-are-advising-me-on-tory-mayor-bid-a3083411.html>
 that Goldsmith claims to have had approaches from “some fascinating people, 
even from the Labour Party” bearing “ideas and offers of help” with his mayoral 
campaign. He declines to name names - “it would be unfair to do so,” he 
protests - but Adonis’s tie-up with the Chancellor is noted in the Standard 
article.

I asked the Goldsmith campaign if Adonis is one of the “fascinating people” 
the Tory candidate referred to. Its answer was neither yes nor no, though I 
gather that Adonis himself firmly denies any covert Zac-backing - Labour has 
promised some formal words to that effect - leaving the identities of those 
“fascinating people” a mystery. Until it is solved we must content ourselves 
with pondering what Goldsmith’s speech seems to reveal about his - or his 
researchers’ - reading material and, more intriguingly, the similarities 
between the Tory candidates’ recipe for building more homes in the capital and 
that of the Labour lord.


As well as echoing Adonis’s stats and his turn of phrase, Goldsmith has 
displayed much the same enthusiasm for knocking down council-owned estates and 
replacing them with better designed, higher density housing and streets, along 
with offering similar assurances about securing the consent of the communities 
affected and giving guarantees that they won’t be fragmented by the process. 
And it raises the same, absolutely vital, questions raised by Adonis’s City 
Villages vision, as well as recent experience of estate regeneration schemes in
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. Who defines the community to be 
engaged with? How would its consent be measured and secured? How solid can any 
guarantees of the type Goldsmith mentions really be?


Meanwhile, Sadiq Khan’s position on the issue is that no estate should be 
demolished except in very exceptional circumstances, preferring instead to look 
at building new homes on existing estates such as is planned atKing Square in 
Islington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/aug/07/estate-regeneration-the-king-square-solution>
. More on all this to come.

 