
As library closures 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/books/2014/nov/11/liverpool-library-closure-plans-carol-ann-duffy-caitlin-moran>
 grow ever more prevalent, the Scottish Book Trust has chosen to focus Book 
Week Scotland <http://www.bookweekscotland.com/> on a campaign to illustrate 
what these temples of free culture mean to readers. High-profile authors have 
joined thousands of borrowers in writing love letters to their favourite 
library, where they will be displayed.

During the week, we will be publishing letters that top authors have written. 
If you also want to share your appreciation for a library,you can do it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/nov/14/love-letters-to-libraries-share-your-tribute-to-your-favourite>
.

AL Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alkennedy> could not choose one 
library to which to dedicate the words below: “Oh, it’s a load of libraries – 
it would have to be. Perth Road Library [also known asBlackness Community 
Library <http://www.leisureandculturedundee.com/library/blackness>], Dundee; 
Wellgate Library, Dundee;Clydebank Library 
<http://www.west-dunbarton.gov.uk/libraries/library-branches/clydebank-library/>
;Warwick University Library <http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/services/library/> ... 
Loads.” Here is what she wrote:


Dear Library,

Thank you for being the first place I realised how beautiful books were, how 
many books there were and for teaching me that they should all be available to 
me, that I could learn whatever I wanted and go wherever I wanted to in my 
mind. Thank you for opening the world to me.

Thank you for being somewhere peaceful and familiar that I could go to when I 
needed to get away and my parents were fighting.

Thank you for being somewhere I could go to when I needed to revise for exams 
and was stressed and lonely.

Thank you for being somewhere I could learn about who I was and where I was 
from.

Thank you for helping me study when I’d made it to university, but couldn’t 
afford to buy all the books I needed – you had them all.

Thank you for being somewhere I could go that was warm and dry when I had my 
first job as a community arts worker. You were full of people taking shelter 
and being in books. In the space between the afternoon sessions and the evening 
sessions you loaned me all kinds of things to keep me cheerful and alive.

Thank you for teaching all of my friends who weren’t taken care of at school 
and who didn’t make it to a university. Thank you for letting them start at A 
and move on.

Thank you for giving my friends who were in prison a way on being free and 
staying free.

Thank you for being a place where I could go and chat with my friends who had 
kids.

Thank you for being there today at the bottom of my street with film shows 
some evenings and people having fun and being part of somewhere good and kids 
playing and finding out how wonderful you are – just the way I did.

Thank you for giving me a way to earn my living and a way to keep my heart 
alive and a way to wake up my mind and more paths into the world than I could 
ever have imagined. Thank you for being a palace for everyone and riches for 
everyone and dreams and adventures and peace and words for love.

I can’t thank you enough.

Love,

A.L.Kennedy

AL Kennedy’s handwritten letter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-al-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416585036437%2F45c8ac1b-40cf-47a6-8778-1e3474906153-722x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%20letters%20to%20libraries%3A%20AL%20Kennedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-al-kennedy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%20letters%20to%20libraries%3A%20AL%20Kennedy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fnov%2F24%2F-sp-love-letters-to-libraries-al-kennedy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416585036437%2F45c8ac1b-40cf-47a6-8778-1e3474906153-722x1020.jpeg> 