
Belarus president Alexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko> has been inaugurated 
for his fifth term in office, using his speech to suggest that he intends to 
stay in power until he dies.

Lukashenko, who won a landslide victory in presidential elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/alexander-lukashenko-expected-to-remain-as-belarusian-president>
 boycotted by most credible opposition figures, has been in power in Belarus 
since 1994.

 Three of his sons attended the ceremony - including 11-year-old Kolya, who 
Lukashenko is said to begrooming as his successor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/belarus-president-alexander-lukashenko-kolya>
.

The president, referred to as the “last dictator in Europe” by the Bush 
administration in the US, rejected calls for economic reforms demanded by the 
IMF in return for much-needed financial aid.

“Too many people talk about structural reform these days but nobody has 
mentioned what these reforms are,” he said. “This would mean smashing the 
political system, the entire government ofBelarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, in pieces, divide and give away 
state, people’s property.”

Belarus president shows how to win five elections – without even trying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/belarus-lukashenko-election-dictator>
About 80% of the Belarusian economy remains in state hands. 

Lukashenko’s standing on the world stage has increased since the outbreak of 
conflict in neighbouring Ukraine because of his role as a broker between Russia 
and the west. Talks between Ukraine, Moscow, Russia-backed rebels and European 
leaders wereheld in Minsk in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/10/minsk-summit-talks-ukraine-ceasefire>
, paving the way towards a ceasefire.

“The west was able to see Belarus as a decent partner,” he said during his 
speech. “We have always argued that attempts to isolate Belarus, like other 
countries, lead to a dead end. In this situation, everyone loses.”

Despite having close historical ties to Moscow, Lukashenko has been keen to 
emphasise his country’s autonomy since the war in Ukraine. “We will ensure the 
interests of both the east and the west in Belarus,” he said. “Don’t try to rip 
us apart; don’t try to make us collide with Russia or with the west.”

He ended the speech with a promise to serve the country until his final days – 
seen by his pro-democracy opponents as an ominous ambition to stay in power 
indefinitely: “I have only you, the people of Belarus, and I will serve to the 
last of my days.”

Max Tyrkalov is the assumed name of a journalist living in Minsk
 