
The popularity of the Belarusian president, Alexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexander-lukashenko>, has increased since 
the start of the Ukrainian crisis, a survey found, as voters show their 
appreciation for stability in their country.

Despite deteriorating economic conditions, Lukashenko’s ratings have increased 
by five percentage points since December, reaching 39.9%. Over the past six 
months the number of Belarusians who think that the country is heading in the 
right direction is up by nearly 10 points from 31.9% to 42.3% – the highest 
approval rating in three years.

“It’s been good to have Lukashenko in power for 20 years. There is peace and 
stability. InUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> they had four 
presidents and now we see how bad it turned out,” says Volha Migitskaya, a 
30-year-old accountant from Minsk.

Known for its authoritarian leadership and disputed elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-post-soviet-world-need-to-know-belarus>
, Belarus depends heavily on Russia to support its planned economy, and has 
joined Russian President Vladimir Putin’s regionalEurasian Economic Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2014/feb/18/brief-primer-vladimir-putin-eurasian-union-trade>
 along with Kazakhstan.


The crisis in neighbouring Ukraine began when former president Viktor 
Yanukovych moved to join the EEU at the expense of closer ties with the EU, 
sparking pro-western demonstrations thatled to his downfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/22/ukraine-president-yanukovych-flees-kiev>
.


In Belarus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus>, however, most people 
have followed developments in their southern neighbour on Russian media, and 
there is no visible support for the pro-EU movement.

A survey by the Independent Institute for Socio-Economic and Political Studies 
<http://www.eldis.org/go/home&id=4383&type=Organisation#.U-DHkIBdUWA>, an 
independent polling agency, found that 63.2% of Belarusians do not support the 
Euromaidan protesters and more than half believe the new Ukrainian government 
to be fascist.

“Historically, the majority of Belarusians are pro-Russian. Though the 
domination of the Russian media also played its role,” said Aleh Manayeu, the 
head of the research institute. “More than 60% of Belarusians watch, and most 
importantly trust, the Russian media.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F14%2F-sp-belarus-lukashenko-popularity-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F5%2F1407242958358%2Fb7efc7de-4845-43b1-ae92-39deaf2dfefc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lukashenko's%20popularity%20in%20Belarus%20on%20the%20rise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F14%2F-sp-belarus-lukashenko-popularity-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lukashenko%27s%20popularity%20in%20Belarus%20on%20the%20rise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Faug%2F14%2F-sp-belarus-lukashenko-popularity-ukraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F5%2F1407242958358%2Fb7efc7de-4845-43b1-ae92-39deaf2dfefc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pro-European protesters at Maidan square in Ukraine. Photograph: Tatyana 
Zenkovich/EPA 
Television remains the most popular medium in Belarus, with Russian channels 
dominating coverage although more than 22% of Belarusians have access to 
satellite television and Ukrainian channels.

“I have been on vacations to Ukraine in February and watched Ukrainian 
channels, but I rather trust the Russian media,” said Vitaly Rybachenka, a 
53-year-old teacher. “They report on many more stories. And Ukrainians conceal 
them and pretend these horrible things never happened.”

Political analyst Yury Chavusau said Russian media was extremely influential 
in shaping public opinion. “Lukashenko is unable to control the moods in the 
society,” he said. “With independent media space severely limited, and the 
state Belarusian media only following Lukashenko’s cautious example, we’ve let 
the Russian media form the views of our society.”

Lukashenko has been careful not to be seen to be taking sides over Ukraine, 
recognising Crimea as a Russian territory but maintaining economic and 
political ties with the new government in Kiev.

At the request of the new Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, he agreed to 
host a crisis meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/30/belarus-ukraine-crisis-talks-mh17-crash-site>
 of the Ukrainian, Russian and OSCE officials as well as representatives of the 
self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic at the end of July.

But the Russian propaganda appears to have had another effect. Months of news 
about violence and aggression seems to have also strengthened the Belarusian 
resolve to remain independent fromRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Research found 54% against a union 
and 24% in favour. Ten years ago the majority of Belarusians favoured forming a 
union with the former motherland.

“The mobilising effect of the Russian media has started to wear off,” said 
Manayeu. “The hysteria has become tiresome and there have been too many deaths. 
Everybody likes peace, while Russia is associated with war now.”
 