
Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> captain Ken Owens was 
delighted with the way his side came back from behind to win their first LV Cup 
match of the campaign at Parc y Scarlets.

The hosts battled from 13-6 behind at the interval to topple London Irish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> 27-18, although both teams 
cannot now qualify for the knockout stages.

“It was a tough game,” said Owens. “We started pretty well but we couldn’t get 
a foothold in the game. There was a bit of error that crept into our game and 
we went down to 13 men [Owens and Steven Shingler were yellow-carded in the 
space of a minute]. [But] we did well in the second half and got our rewards.”

London Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish> backs coach 
Richard Whiffin said his side had only themselves to blame for the defeat. “We 
were the masters of our own downfall, to be honest,” he said.

“We did well in the first half and they were down to 13 men, but we went away 
from our gameplan in the second half and we just weren’t able to control the 
middle third of the field.”

Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> first-team coach Toby Booth was 
full of praise for young half-backs Will Homer and Rory Jennings as they guided 
his side to a 23-21 LV Cup victory againstHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> on their senior debuts.

The pair, who were both recently included in the England Under-20 Six Nations 
squad, were instrumental in Bath’s victory as Homer kicked 10 points while 
Jennings stepped up to slot the late penalty which ultimately proved the winner 
at the Stoop.

“It’s a massive step up but they’re young lads who are playing exceptionally 
well,” said Booth. “They are a big part of England U20’s plans and they are the 
long-term future forBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath>. From that 
point of view, there will be errors, but that’s part of the learning process.”

Bath led 10-0 with less than four minutes on the clock thanks to a Homer 
penalty and an early Matt Banahan try, but found themselves 21-13 down after a 
resounding Quins fightback, before Booth’s inexperienced side found the resolve 
to come back themselves.


Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> assistant coach 
Nick Walshe was delighted his side maintained their winning run after they held 
off a sustainedOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> revival to 
record a bonus point 32-25 victory at Kingsholm.

The home side scored tries through Aled Thomas, a penalty award, Ollie Thorley 
and Dan Thomas, while Billy Burns added a penalty and three conversions, Aled 
Thomas also kicking a late penalty.

“We didn’t really concentrate on the LV Cup table as ultimately it’s out of 
our hands,” said Walshe. “However, it was really important that we got a win 
and maintained the momentum as this is our fifth win on the bounce since the 
start of the New Year.”

After going in 22-13 down at the interval, with Ben John grabbing a first-half 
try forOspreys <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, the visitors fought 
back with further touchdowns for Richard Fussell and Tom Grabham, while Sam 
Davies kicked 10 points, to give them a fighting chance when it looked like 
they could fold.

But the visitors then picked up two yellow cards, for Tom Habberfield and 
Davies, which helped seal their third consecutive defeat in the competition.

Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> backs coach 
Geordan Murphy praised centre Jack Roberts after his fine performance in the 
Tigers’ 17-8 LV Cup home win overNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>.

Roberts, a 23-year-old Welshman who signed from Rotherham in October, set up 
one of Leicester’s two tries on their way to a win which keeps them on course 
for a semi-final spot.

Murphy believes Roberts has a bright future and said: “He’s a nuggety little 
centre who reminds me of Tom Youngs; he had a great turn of pace and good 
skills.

“He’s exciting and one of those players who gets the crowd excited when he 
gets the ball. Hopefully he can kick on through to the first team. He’s a 
genuine option.”

Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> scored 
first-half tries through lock Sebastian De Chaves and No8 Laurence Pearce to 
lead 14-3 at the break. Howard Packman scored for the Saints in the second half 
but the visitors’ errors cost them several tries.

Leicester’s third successive win keeps them top of Pool Three on 13 points and 
they will go through to the semi-finals ifWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> lose at home to Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> on Sunday. Northampton still 
top Pool Two on nine points, one ahead of Cardiff.
 