
A powerhouse performance from the American forward Samu Manoa helped 
Northampton beat Saracens 20-16 to secure a home LV Cup semi-final. Manoa 
scored two tries and played his part in another for James Wilson asNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> ensured they will have 
home advantage against Saracens when the two teams meet in the final four.

Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> had gone ahead with 15 
minutes to go when Ben Spencer, who scored a first-half try, used his boot to 
take his personal tally to 16 points. But it was not enough as Manoa had the 
final say with an unstoppable score in the corner.

The young Northampton fly-half Will Hooley kicked five crucial points on his 
debut to help ensure the victory.

Exeter qualified for the semi-finals with a 42-3 win over Worcester at Sixways 
Stadium. The Chiefs top Pool Two, which gives them an away tie in the last four 
as they seek to secure a place in the final on their home ground.

Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> were always in control and 
ran in five tries through Tom James, Haydn Thomas (two), Ceri Sweeney and 
Gareth Steenson, who also kicked four conversions and three penalties for a 
22-point individual haul.

Exeter's pack had too much power for their opponents. Behind the scrum, Dave 
Lewis was a livewire at scrum-half.

Matt Cox and Henry Trinder scored two tries each as Gloucester eased their way 
to a final LV Cup victory of the season – a 36-5 win overWasps at Kingsholm. 
There was nothing riding on the outcome but, with big Aviva Premiership clashes 
next week –Gloucester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> at 
Sale Sharks and Wasps tackling Harlequins at The Stoop – there was much for 
both coaches to ponder.

With prop Dan Murphy grabbing a fifth try for the home side – and full-back 
Rob Cooke kicking 11 points via a penalty and four conversions – against a 
solitary Ashley Johnson try,Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> were never in the match.

The Wales centre Jonathan Davies played a solid 40 minutes on an early return 
from injury but in a losing cause asScarlets were overpowered by their hosts 
London Irish. Davies, who suffered a pectoral tear playing for Wales against 
South Africa in November, was originally expected to be out until the end of 
February. But, even though his outgunned side suffered a 29-10 defeat, he 
proved a handful for the Exiles before going off at half-time.

Andrew Fenby, Shane Geraghty, Jamie Hagan, Sailosi Tagicakibau and Myles 
Dorrian ran in tries for Irish.Scarlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> replied with a penalty from Josh 
Lewis and a try from George Earl.
 