
The A to Z of Reader’s Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/a-z-of-readers-art> series has 
reached the letter M. This month we want your artworks that show visions of 
majesty – and who better for inspiration than James Thornhill, whose Painted 
Hall for the Old Royal Naval College in London, is one of the great unsung 
wonders of British art.


Good thinking: your art on the theme of knowledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/gallery/2016/sep/02/good-thinking-your-art-on-the-theme-of-knowledge>
Thornhill created the epic series of paintings for the hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/02/greenwich-painted-hall-restoration-naval-college>
 between 1707 and 1726. Although he was knighted by George I, and kicked off 
the British painting tradition of the 18th century, he tends to be remembered 
as the father-in-law of William Hogarth.

A new exhibition I’ve helped to curate aims to address this. A Great and Noble 
Design <https://www.ornc.org/Event/thornhill> explores the story of Thornhill 
and the Painted Hall through numerous preparatory sketches made by the artist, 
including rarely seen original drawings. They provide abundant proof of his 
abilities as a draughtsman and skilful improviser. Thornhill’s facility with 
pen and wash are reminiscent, in some respects, ofInigo Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/sep/10/renaissance-architecture>
, born roughly 100 years before. Both men designed for theatres, and 
demonstrated confident handling of architecture. Unlike Jones, however, 
Thornhill’s drawings show a consistent mastery of perspective, and he used 
innovative techniques such as the convention in architectural drawing known as 
the laid-out wall elevation, where each face of a building is laid flat around 
the floor plan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fm-is-for-majesty-share-your-artwork-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c2f1a993c5b48690640b215e130e90846119d5b%2F0_0_742_927%2F742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M%20is%20for%20Majesty%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fm-is-for-majesty-share-your-artwork-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M%20is%20for%20Majesty%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fm-is-for-majesty-share-your-artwork-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c2f1a993c5b48690640b215e130e90846119d5b%2F0_0_742_927%2F742.jpg>
 James Thornhill’s central oval at the Painted Hall,1707-08. Photograph: Old 
Royal Naval College 
The little-known Painted Hall sketches are art objects in their own right, but 
they are also vital evidence. We can piece together the way the artist 
conceived this opulent and complex work, and how he deftly adapted its 
iconography in response to the fast-moving politics of theAugustan age 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augustan_literature>.

The Painted Hall was highly praised by contemporaries. In his history of 
18th-century British architecture, published in the early part of the century, 
Colen Campbell declared of the lower hall ceiling: “Here Foreigners may view 
with Amaze, our Countrymen with Pleasure, and all with Admiration, the Beauty, 
the Force, the Majesty of a British Pencil! Rich in Invention, correct in 
Design, noble in Disposition, in Execution admirable.”

As early as the 1720s, however, tastes were changing, and mural painting began 
to be derided as vulgar. But hopefully we can revive some of the passion and 
emotion evoked by Campbell in 1715, and restore to Thornhill the honour and 
esteem his immediate contemporaries clearly felt for him.

So with Thornhill’s sheer brio and vision in mind, please submit your work on 
the theme of majesty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fm-is-for-majesty-share-your-artwork-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c8923f2aca38c92effcbd4a658eba9f9993cbc7%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M%20is%20for%20Majesty%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fm-is-for-majesty-share-your-artwork-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M%20is%20for%20Majesty%3A%20share%20your%20artwork%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Fm-is-for-majesty-share-your-artwork-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c8923f2aca38c92effcbd4a658eba9f9993cbc7%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
 A conserver clean a section of St Paul’s Cathedral, London, which was painted 
by James Thornhill. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Guardian’s art and 
design <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your 
pictures you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have 
permission to do so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence 
to publish your pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may 
reuse your pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms>.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear immediately – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

•A Great and Noble Design 
<https://www.ornc.org/Event/thornhill?gclid=COm4lLakvs8CFc-6Gwodg9ULCA> is at 
the Stephen Lawrence Gallery, London, until 28 October.
 