
Thousands of migrants rushed past baton-wielding Macedonian police who were 
attempting to stop them enteringMacedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> from Greece. Police fired stun 
grenades and several were injured in the clashes.

The conflict started when police decided to allow a small group of migrants 
with young children to cross the frontier. Then the crowds at the back squeezed 
them towards the wall of police. Several women and children fell to the ground 
apparently fainting after pushing past the cordon. Thousands of others, 
including women with babies and men carrying small children, used the moment to 
run across a field unprotected by barbed wire to enter Macedonia. Police fired 
stun grenades, but failed to stop the push.

There were no immediate reports of the number and extent of injuries. Several 
hundred, mostly elderly and children, remained on the Greek side of the border 
when order was restored. It was the second day of clashes between the migrants 
and Macedonian police who are attempting to block them from heading north.

On Friday, police clashed with the migrants, a day after Macedonia’s 
government declared a state of emergency on the frontier to stop the human 
tide. At least 10 people were injured.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Fmacedonia-police-thousands-migrants-clashes-stun-grenades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff252c3a44971d388e4452cb8d30f6f0dd9f71de1%2F0_0_2330_3500%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Macedonia%20police%20fire%20stun%20grenades%20as%20thousands%20of%20migrants%20rush%20border%0D%0A%20%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Fmacedonia-police-thousands-migrants-clashes-stun-grenades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Macedonia%20police%20fire%20stun%20grenades%20as%20thousands%20of%20migrants%20rush%20border%0D%0A%20%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Fmacedonia-police-thousands-migrants-clashes-stun-grenades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff252c3a44971d388e4452cb8d30f6f0dd9f71de1%2F0_0_2330_3500%2F2330.jpg>
 Migrants at Gevgelija train station in Macedonia after crossing from Greece. 
Photograph: Ognen Teofilovski/Reuters 
Both Greece and Macedonia have seen an unprecedented wave of migrants this 
year, most fleeing wars in Syria, Afghanistan or Iraq. More than 160,000 have 
arrived so far inGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, mostly 
crossing in inflatable dinghies from the nearby Turkish coast, an influx that 
has overwhelmed Greek authorities and the country’s small Aegean islands. Some 
45,000 have crossed through Macedonia over the last two months.

Few, if any, of the migrants want to remain in Greece, which is in the grip of 
a financial crisis. Most head straight to the country’s northern border with 
Macedonia, where they cram on to trains and head north through Serbia and 
Hungary on their way to more prosperous EU countries such as Germany, the 
Netherlands or Sweden.

On Friday night, the police allowed only small groups of families with 
children to cross the border by walking on railway tracks to a station in the 
Macedonian town of Gevgelija, where most take trains to the border with Serbia 
before heading further north toward EU-member Hungary.Those who could not cross 
spent the rainy and chilly night in the open with little food. They massed 
close to a razor wire separating them from machine-gun toting Macedonian 
policemen. Some raised their babies above their heads to try to persuade the 
policemen to let them through.A police officer told theAssociated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press> that the force is only 
following the government’s orders to block the refugees from entering the 
country.

“Until we receive another order, the situation here will remain like this,” 
said the officer, who refused to be named because he was not authorized to 
speak to reporters.As heavy rain poured, some migrants took off their shirts 
and booed and shouted insults at the policemen in camouflage fatigues. Others 
took shelter inside dozens of small tents or under a few trees on a muddy field.

Europe could solve the migrant crisis – if it wanted | Daniel Trilling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/europe-migrant-crisis-political-choice-toxic-waste-sanctuary>
Last week, there were chaotic scenes at the Gevgelija train station involving 
hundreds of migrants trying to board the trains.

Rama Kabul from Syria walked the railway track in the opposite direction from 
the station pleading with two Macedonian policemen pushing her back with riot 
shields to let her brother who remained trapped behind the razor fence on the 
border join her.

“They took me out and left him there,” Kabul said with tears in her eyes. “I 
just want to talk to him.”

Macedonian police said they started blocking the refugees on the 50km 
(30-mile) frontier “for the security of citizens who live in the border areas 
and for better treatment of the migrants.”

“Macedonian authorities should be protecting migrants, including children and 
those among them who may be fleeing war and persecution, not giving the police 
a green light to fire at them,” Emina Cerimovic, research fellow at the rights 
group, said in a statement.

Until now, the border has been porous, with only a few patrols on each side. 
Sealing it disrupts the Balkan corridor for migrants who start in Turkey, take 
boats to Greece or walk to Bulgaria, then make their way through Macedonia and 
Serbia before heading further north.
 