
Women's erotic fantasy is so subversive, so deeply shocking that it can only 
be written in code. The archetypal themes that bask under the mask of incident, 
dialogue and location in women's romantic literature are the seduction of the 
father by the daughter, and the destruction of the mother. Most romantic 
literature stops short after the seduction of the father by the little girl, 
leaving the mother to be annihilated by inference alone.

Whether it's Pride and Prejudice, Jane Eyre, Bridget Jones's Diary or any old 
Mills and Boon novel, the grist that feeds the fantasy mill is the same.

Daphne Du Maurier's Rebecca may be a superior example of deeply encoded female 
pornography but, nearly 70 years after it was written, the code seems to have 
worn so thin that the unsuspecting reader is slightly revolted. In Rebecca, 
Maxim de Winter is the Daddy (obviously), the mother has three faces, being the 
appalling Mrs Van Hopper, the ever-present Mrs Danvers and, of course, the 
absent Rebecca. The nameless narrator is the seducing child. If, as her 
sister-in-law says, she is an "absolute child", it follows that Rebecca is the 
classic novel of paedophilia.

So infantile is the second Mrs De Winter that we can hardly stand her in prose 
or on celluloid. It is not just that she is clumsy, inarticulate and has lank 
hair (in the novel, though not the movie); it is that she does as she is told. 
Her meekness might get her to inherit the earth of Manderley, but to a 
21st-century sensibility it is simply disgusting. To fit the template, Maxim 
has to be masterful, but even in a Mills and Boon novel the heroine puts up 
more of a fight.

The disturbing truth is that the second Mrs De Winter seduces Maxim simply 
because she is so young. She has nothing else going for her. Maxim wants to 
marry her - not despite the fact that she is, in his phrase, a "little fool", 
but because of it. When she snivels, which is often, he provides the 
handkerchief. He orders her about unmercifully. When she knocks over a glass of 
port and fusses to clean it up, he orders her to leave it, as if she were a dog 
sniffing excrement. Every now and then, he kisses her on the top of the head, 
just as she does Jasper the dog. By way of endearment, he calls her "you sweet 
child" or "my good child".

The unseen Rebecca was a full-grown woman, with long legs and broad shoulders, 
who could sail a boat, ride a horse, throw a party and furnish a room. The 
infant interloper is incapable of any kind of adult activity but spends whole 
days creeping round the house and hiding behind doors, eavesdropping on adult 
conversations.

All this, you may say, must be deliberate. Du Maurier must have known what 
monsters lurked beneath her impressionistic narrative. There are odd signs that 
the narrative is not under conscious control, such as the nameless narrator's 
disquisition on her family with its "lovely and unusual" name, and her dead 
father's misunderstood artistic temperament. Du Maurier had already written a 
biography of her father, the actor-manager Sir Gerald Du Maurier but, as often 
happens with gifted daughters, at the age of 31, she still had not got her 
father out of her system. His irruption is, however, momentary; Maxim remains 
undisturbed as the silver-back, the dominant male. Still, at one of the murkier 
levels, Maxim De Winter equals Gerald Du Maurier.

When Alfred Hitchcock takes over Du Maurier's narrative to make a movie, we 
can expect that what is suggested in the novel will be made blatant. By casting 
Joan Fontaine, he made sure that the second Mrs De Winter was a breastless, 
almost pre-adolescent figure; in shot after shot, she is made to appear tiny 
and super-fragile next to the brooding hulk of De Winter, played by Laurence 
Olivier as if he were Heathcliff. In two shots, her head is always below or 
under his. She often wears a version of school uniform: shapeless skirt and 
shirt, and sensible shoes. Under stress, she twists her hands in front of her 
empty shirt like a schoolgirl, and when she is happy (briefly) she skips. The 
only time we suspect she has breasts is when she chooses the wrong costume for 
the fancy dress ball, which, of course, incurs the wrath of her father-husband 
because it makes her look like an adult woman. He wants her to come as Alice in 
Wonderland: "You look like it now, with your finger in your mouth." Olivier was 
not happy with the choice of Fontaine for the part, and apparently did his best 
to increase her nervousness, which just shows how little he understood what he 
was supposed to be doing: she is convincing, in unsubtle movie terms, as he is 
not. She takes direction; he does not.

In giving us a first sight of de Winter standing over a precipice, looking as 
if he might commit suicide and allowing the nameless narrator to intervene, 
Hitchcock allows the phallic immovability of the father figure to be 
contradicted. With Olivier playing the part in a rather showy fashion, the 
balance never does come quite right, but Fontaine's wimpishness is so 
unrelieved that eventually the dynamic rights itself. By the end of the film, 
Du Maurier's denouement has been achieved; Mrs Danvers has gone up in flames 
and the child-bride has finally assumed her mother's place as the sexual 
partner of her father.

Producer David O Selznick was determined that the film should be true to the 
novel - that is, to the plot of the novel - but he lost out when it came to 
allowing Maxim to get away with murder and had to turn Rebecca's death into an 
accident. When it came to the subtext, he was quick to see that it could not be 
tampered with - but not smart enough to see that Olivier could never play a 
proper toff, that he was too actorish by half, and that close-ups of his 
mannerisms would undo all credibility. Selznick edited the film himself, and 
did his best to modify Olivier's performance. Americans tend to think he 
succeeded.

The other misunderstanding is Manderley. Hitchcock turns it into the kind of 
garbled Gothic horror that might have been thrown up by a Californian magnate. 
There is no sense of the Cornish coast of the western reaches of the English 
Channel. As they are part of the masking detail across the archetypal 
structure, we do not miss them.

Compared with the movie imagery of today, Hitchcock's Rebecca is low 
definition. This week's re-release will only make sense if screenings can 
convey some notion of the context of the piece. If the image is too big and too 
close to the viewers, if the sound is wrap-around, the impact of its obsessive 
camerawork will be lost. Only by entering into its narrow compass can its 
impact be felt. If it is, we might even hear a suggestion from the paedophile 
hysteria wing that it should be banned.

Â· Rebecca goes on limited re-release on Friday. See bfi.org.uk/rebecca 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/rebecca> for details.
 