
Let's face it, "feminism" is one retro label a lot of young women today 
wouldn't be seen dead in. It's associated with being uptight, sexually prudish 
and unable to take a joke ("'How many feminists does it take to change a light 
bulb?' 'That's not funny'"). But that's notthe whole story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/awomansplace>. Many of the women I'm 
lucky enough to call my friends are not afraid to call themselves feminists. 
Far from the dogmatic stereotype, these women are creative, beautiful and 
sharp. And they're not acting in isolation.

Feminist blog sites like the f-word <http://www.thefword.org.uk/>, feministing 
<http://www.feministing.com/> and Jezebel <http://jezebel.com/> are expanding 
as young women realise that mainstream magazines just make them feel ugly 
rather than feeding their brains.

Organisations like the Fawcett Society <http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/> and 
Object <http://www.object.org.uk/> are witnessing surges in membership. And 
reclaim the night <http://www.reclaimthenight.org/> marches are bringing 
thousands of people on to the streets who want to state publicly that violence 
against women is unacceptable.Women's direct action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/10/women> is once again 
having an impact. Last month's vote over the 24-week limit on abortion was so 
close it is likely that the women clamouring at the gates of parliament for 
their right to choose made a crucial difference.

Some men - and women - argue that, 90 years after women in the UK won the 
vote, equality has already been achieved and that anyone who calls themselves a 
feminist today must want female superiority. But the women I know aren't after 
matriarchy; they're after equality.

They know that the 17% pay gap still exists, that there is a continuing 
trade-off between care and career, and that a fat bald woman is still a hell of 
a lot less acceptable than a fat bald man. They call themselves feminists 
because they know these inequalities still exist, and they want to even the 
score. Of course, the young women I know aren't immune to the pressures of our 
culture. I might wear the feminist badge, but I still worry if where I've 
pinned it draws too little or too much attention to my breasts. I still fret 
about calories, armpit hair and the lack of a perfect partner to make my life 
complete.

Being a feminist doesn't make these and other worries vanish – it just means 
you're aware that your neuroses are socially created rather than inevitable. 
That's an empowering thought. It means you can turn to that male colleague on a 
power trip and say "compensating?" It means you can look at a L'Oréal advert 
that makes you feel bad about yourself and think "that's not worth it". In 
short, young women who call themselves feminists are bloody cool.

They're not moaning in the mainstream; they're living out an alternative 
that's sexy, hilarious and strong. I'd like to invite all women –and men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/08/gender.politics> – to 
come and join us. Like all the best fashions, 21st-century feminism started on 
the fringe. Let's take it to the high street.
 