
The recent reports about the return of public anatomy lectures 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/features/public-anatomy-classes-return-can-they-escape-the-shadow-of-the-bodysnatchers-10144768.html>
 to the UK have divided opinion. As a trained modern pathology technician who 
runs aVictorian pathology museum <http://www.qmul.ac.uk/bartspathology/>, I 
have dissected cadavers myself and spent a long time researching and teaching 
the history of pathology. I have one foot in the past and one in the future 
(albeit both firmly attached to my legs), which gives me a unique perspective 
on the topic.

Recent headlines such as “First public dissections to be held since Burke and 
Hare 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/11480902/First-public-anatomy-lectures-planned-in-the-UK-since-Burke-and-Hare.html>
” are damaging to anatomy and are not isolated occurrences. The retained organs 
scandal which came to light in the 1990s atAlder Hey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/alderhey> and other hospitals, was widely 
covered in the media, which employed terms like “ghoulish” and also referred to 
“body snatchers” to fan the flames of public outrage. It led to the formation 
of theHuman Tissue Authority <https://www.hta.gov.uk/> (HTA) in the UK, a 
regulatory body which licenses premises where human remains are held – 
mortuaries, labs and pathology museums – and ensures that consent is properly 
obtained. It’s beneficial to most of us, but it is also the reason that many 
medical museums are not open to the public or, as in mine, thatonly half the 
specimens are on show 
<http://www.orderofthegooddeath.com/curating-uk-medical-museum-two-heads-better-one>
.

We’ll all die one day. Isn’t it time we got used to the idea? | Tim Lott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/20/death-inevitable-but-should-live-with-courage>
The use of cadavers was not always seen in such a negative way. If we go back 
to the heyday of medical museums and public dissections in the 18th century, 
there was a zeitgeist of enlightenment, and learning anatomy was considered an 
agreeable hobby. In 1857 however, theObscene Publications Act 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Obscene_Publications_Act_1857> resulted in many 
of these museums and their beautiful waxworks and mounted specimens being 
destroyed, condemned for being titillating and obscene.

There is nothing salacious about wanting to witness the intricacies of the 
human body: we all have one. There is also nothing particularly morbid about 
considering death and contemplating decay. In Buddhism for example, the 
practice of Maranasati involves meditating on death and decomposition in all 
its stages (from fresh, to bloat, to consumption by animals, to bone). This is 
said to be a way to increase mindfulness, improve the quality of life and 
relieve fear. Its legacy lives on in the Japanese art ofKusozu 
<http://thechickandthedead.com/2015/03/13/desiring-decay/> – images of decaying 
women used for contemplation – which you can view atthe British Museum 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=3168105&partId=1>
 and at the Wellcome Collection’s current exhibition,Forensics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/24/wellcome-collection-forensics-exhibition-crime-scene>
.

Nothing is new and everything comes in cycles. Just now there seems to be a 
vogue for events and campaigns discussing death, such as last year’sDeath Salon 
<http://thechickandthedead.com/2014/01/28/the-death-salon-uk/> at my museum, as 
well asDeath Café <http://deathcafe.com/>, Death over Dinner 
<http://deathoverdinner.org/>, and Dying Matters <http://www.dyingmatters.org/>
. We are being encouraged to explore green funerals, to be more closely 
involved with our loved ones while they are dying, and to face our own 
mortality. It seems the attempt to engage the public with anatomy, in 
Edinburgh, is part of this more positive culture.

And it’s with good reason: a 2009 psychological study by Nathan Heflick of 
Kent University 
<http://www.kent.ac.uk/psychology/people/heflickn/?tab=selected-publications> 
indicated that thinking about death for five minutes a day reduced depressive 
thoughts after only one week, and had a generally positive effect on mood. A
separate study <http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/releases/225981.php> found that 
students who were asked to write about their own death showed more positive 
emotions than those asked to consider the prospect of dental pain. 

The climate created by the retained organs scandal in the UK still exists 
(although it’s slowly changing). As it stands, in my museum, a member of the 
general public cannot see a real human forensic specimen from the collection. 
Let’s say this is a female victim of torture: a visual confrontation such as 
this, in its stark reality, may provoke an empathetic and perhaps even 
charitable response. A member of the general public can however, watch a woman 
be tortured in various films and even carry out torture themselves in some 
computer games, leading to a disassociation with pain and suffering. There is 
unease at the idea of the public dissection of a leg (from a deceased 
individual who consented to such activity), yet I can buy a computer game and 
beat someone to death in it with ease.

We have things the wrong way round. Confronting death and being “death 
positive” are natural ways to confront our mortality, rather than vicariously 
through increasingly violent media. It isn’t wrong for people to spend time 
with deceased loved ones, or to be curious about decomposition and medical 
specimens, and it isn’t strange to consider your own death. Indeed, by 
contemplating death, we gain a deeper awareness and appreciation for nature and 
life, and greater awareness and happiness, too.
 