
Malcolm Turnbull has acknowledged Australian aircraft were involved in US-led 
airstrikes in easternSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> that 
mistakenly killed Syrian army troops but has blasted Russian for politicising 
the error.

According to Russia’s military the airstrike, reported on Sunday, killed at 
least 62 soldiers near Deir ez-Zour, with more than 100 wounded.

The Australian defence department has explained coalition aircraft were 
conducting airstrikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/australian-warplanes-us-airstrikes-killed-syrian-troops-isis-russia>
 in eastern Syria against what was believed to be a Islamic State fighting 
position that the coalition had been tracking for some time.

Russia says ceasefire at risk after US bombing of Syrian troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/us-accuses-russia-of-grandstanding-over-deadly-syria-air-strikes>
At a doorstop on Sunday in New York, Turnbull confirmed Australian aircraft 
were involved in the sortie. “As soon as the coalition commanders were advised 
by the Russian command in the region that Syrian forces had been affected, the 
sortie was discontinued,” he said.

“We regret the loss of life, and injury to any Syrian personnel affected. That 
is all I can say about the incident at the moment.”

The airstrikes were the first on Aleppo since the ceasefire began on Monday 
evening, causingRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> to warn there 
is a “very big question mark” over the precarious ceasefire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/us-accuses-russia-of-grandstanding-over-deadly-syria-air-strikes>
.

Asked about whether it was hypocritical of Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> to raise the matter in the UN 
Security Council given it had “deliberately bombed hospitals in Aleppo”, 
Turnbull said “those contradictions are obvious”.

“You can point out those contradictions, there is obviously a lot of politics 
involved in this.”

Turnbull said he had discussed the Syrian ceasefire with the Russian 
president, Vladimir Putin, a few weeks ago and the countries were “seeking to 
achieve a lasting peace” rather than make political points.

The Australian prime minister said it remained to be seen whether the 
airstrikes would put the ceasefire in jeopardy.

“It is a very, very complex operating environment. As you know there is such a 
wide range of groups operating there, our rules of engagement are focused on 
Daesh.

“But there are a number of other groups involved, not least of which of course 
are the Syrian government forces.”


Asked about Russia’s call for greater coordination between it and the US-led 
coalition on airstrikes, Turnbull said: “Clearly coordination is desirable … I 
don’t think anyone would argue with that.”

He refused to engage in “speculation” about “why there wasn’t more 
coordination, or who was meant to be advising whom”.

The independent MP Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, a former army 
officer and intelligence analyst, said in a statement on Sunday that reports of 
Australian involvement were a “terrible tragedy if true”.

“It might have been incompetence,” he said. “But even the best military 
[personnel] can’t avoid accidents when fighting in such a complex environment 
including the US-led coalition, Russian military, the Syrian and Iraqi 
militaries as well asIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> and 
countless other actors.”

Wilkie – an outspoken critic of the Iraq war who has called for an inquiry 
into Australia’s involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/australia-needs-its-own-chilcot-inquiry-into-iraq-war-former-defence-head-says>
 in the war – said the incident showed “Australia should not have helped 
invade, occupy or have stayed in the Middle East”.

Australian warplanes took part in airstrikes that killed Syrian troops
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/australian-warplanes-us-airstrikes-killed-syrian-troops-isis-russia>
The US and its coalition allies will investigate the military error, but the 
leader of an influential Australian minor party, Nick Xenophon, has called for 
an independent inquiry into it.

Xenophon said an inquiry by someone “outside defence, outside the US military” 
was needed because “the consequences of not learning from these mistakes could 
be quite catastrophic”.

Australian defence minister, Marise Payne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/marise-payne>, told the ABC’s AM on 
Monday that the coalition aircraft “were conducting airstrikes ... against what 
was believed to be a Daesh fighting position that they had been tracking for 
some time”.

“It remains to be seen what led to this particular outcome,” she said, adding 
it was premature to discuss what had happened before the coalition review.

“Australia would never intentionally, knowingly target a known Syrian military 
unit or in any way shape or form actively support Daesh.”

Payne said recent legal changes to allow Australia to target Daesh combat 
support forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/australia-to-change-law-to-allow-strikes-on-more-isis-combatants>
 had no bearing on the strikes, because the strikes were against what was 
believed to be a Daesh fighting position.
 