
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
will press on in 2017 with his plan to cut taxes for big business despite 
Senate opposition, and says the government hopes Donald Trump will boost its 
economic case by cutting the US corporate tax rate.

In an interview marking the end of the 2016 political year in which the 
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> was returned 
to office after the federal election with a slender one-seat majority, the 
prime minister said his government was undeterred by Senate opposition to its 
proposed business tax cut – the centrepiece of its “jobs and growth” election 
pitch.

Malcolm Turnbull's summer reading list: Harry Potter and The Stupidity Paradox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/17/malcolm-turnbulls-summer-reading-list-harry-potter-and-the-stupidity-paradox>
Turnbull also flagged that the Coalition would press ahead early in 2017 in an 
effort to implement the government’s childcare package, which has been the 
subject of protracted Senate negotiations, and indicated that the government 
could have more to say on housing affordability.

The government has been negotiating with the Senate crossbench for months 
about savings measures required to fund the childcare package, and the 
education minister, Simon Birmingham,has indicated that the package might be 
trimmed “a little” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/19/labors-kate-ellis-urges-radical-overhaul-of-childcare-system>
 to get it implemented.

Turnbull said the childcare reforms were an important productivity measure 
that would improve women’s participation in the labour market.

While ministers have played down persistent reshuffle speculation, which has 
bubbled in the lead-up to the Christmas break, the prime minister is leaving 
his options open for the new year.

Asked about a potential refresh, Turnbull declined to rule one out, saying 
only he was “honoured to lead an outstanding ministerial team which is working 
hard and effectively in delivering the government’s commitments”.

Tax transparency: which companies paid the most and least tax in Australia?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/dec/09/tax-transparency-which-companies-paid-the-most-and-least-tax-in-australia>
In a end-of-year conversation with Guardian Australia that centred largely on 
the economy, tax and budget repair in anticipation of the mid-year economic 
forecast, scheduled for release on Monday, Turnbull said the government had 
achieved more legislatively during 2016 than it had been given credit for, but 
he acknowledged there was “a lot more work to do”.

He wouldn’t engage when asked whether there was any risk of recession in the 
new year,given gross domestic product figures confirming that the Australian 
economy went backwards in the September quarter, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/dec/08/the-day-the-australian-economy-ran-out-of-luck-if-only-temporarily>
 shrinking 0.5% in seasonally adjusted terms. It was the first time in five 
years the economy had recorded three months of negative growth. The technical 
definition of recession is two consecutive quarters of negative growth.

Turnbull said he hadn’t seen commentary contemplating the risk of recession, 
and he pointed to stronger employment figures, charting jobs growth, released 
this week.

He conceded that the GDP result was “a wake-up call” – but largely for the 
opposition.

“GDP was a real wake-up call, a reminder – it was a wake-up call for those, 
particularly in the opposition, who seem to think you can talk about economic 
growth and have literally no policies that would support it whatsoever,” 
Turnbull said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fjobs-and-growth-malcolm-turnbull-makes-it-clear-he-is-very-keen-on-jobs-and-growth-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jobs%20and%20growth%3A%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%20makes%20it%20clear%20he%20is%20very%20keen%20on%20jobs%20and%20growth%20%E2%80%93%20%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fjobs-and-growth-malcolm-turnbull-makes-it-clear-he-is-very-keen-on-jobs-and-growth-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jobs%20and%20growth%3A%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%20makes%20it%20clear%20he%20is%20very%20keen%20on%20jobs%20and%20growth%20%E2%80%93%20%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fjobs-and-growth-malcolm-turnbull-makes-it-clear-he-is-very-keen-on-jobs-and-growth-video&media=>
Jobs and growth: Malcolm Turnbull makes it clear he is very keen on jobs and 
growth – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/may/13/jobs-and-growth-malcolm-turnbull-makes-it-clear-he-is-very-keen-on-jobs-and-growth-video>
He said people were free to criticise the government’s economic policy agenda 
but it was geared to boosting investment and employment, and those remained 
government priorities.

The political year has been turbulent for Turnbull and the Coalition 
government, andopinion polling charts a significant tumble in the prime 
minister’s personal approval ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/13/malcolm-turnbulls-approval-rating-at-lowest-point-since-becoming-prime-minister>
 over the course of 2016. Turnbull’s standing as measured in Newspoll’s better 
prime minister rating dived 18 points.

The former prime minister, Tony Abbott, has campaigned post-election for a 
return to the cabinet, and is continuing to speak out on hot-button issues for 
the government’s conservative faction, which has been restive and outspoken 
since the July election.


The government worked in the final parliamentary sitting fortnight to emerge 
with some key legislative wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/02/year-ends-with-senate-roulette-and-deals-spun-as-grand-bargains-and-cunning-plans>
, including the two double-dissolution election triggers, the restoration of 
the Australian Building and Construction Commission, and the registered 
organisations bill,as well as resolving the long-running Senate standoff over 
the rate of the backpacker tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/01/greens-to-support-15-backpacker-tax-in-return-for-100m-for-landcare>
 by cutting a deal with the Greens to boost Landcare funding.

But having emerged with the victory it was again plunged into political 
controversy, with the energy and environment minister, Josh Frydenberg, 
floating an emissions intensity trading scheme for the electricity sectorbefore 
abruptly ruling it out after backbench insurgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/josh-frydenberg-backtracks-on-emissions-trading-comments>
 led by prominent conservatives.

The government will use the looming Christmas break to reset after a gruelling 
year. Asked to nominate his political priorities for the new parliamentary 
year, Turnbull said: “Continued delivery of our economic plan.

“We have our business tax cuts to deliver, obviously continuing to roll out 
our big programs, the NDIS most notably, the big infrastructure projects 
including the NBN.

We are on the way, but we have a lot more work to do with the Senate
Malcolm Turnbull 
“We clearly have a big energy challenge and we need to ensure all of our 
national policies support the three goals I’ve set out: security, affordability 
and emissions reduction.

“While we’ve achieved an enormous amount this year – I mean, I’m sure you will 
be writing about that – I mean, there were some prominent commentators who 
demanded I acknowledge we didn’t have the numbers in the Senate, and were cross 
with me when I didn’t or were perhaps puzzled with me when I didn’t acknowledge 
that. Anyway, nonetheless, we got a lot through.

“Business tax cuts are an important element and obviously the childcare 
package is one that is still before the parliament. That’s a big part of the 
economic agenda as well. It’s critical.

“We are on the way, but we have a lot more work to do with the Senate.”

Turnbull indicated that any move by Trump to follow through on his election 
promise during the US presidential election to cut corporate taxes would boost 
the government’s case with a Senate that has been, thus far, disinclined to 
support the proposed tax cut for larger businesses.

Trump’s election commitment was to slash the top business tax rate from 35% to 
15%, while closing loopholes.

The government’s plan is to cut the Australian company tax cut progressively 
from 30% to 25% over 10 years, at a cost of $48.2bn. Even if that succeeds the 
Australian rate would still be 10 percentage points higher than the US rate if 
Trump implemented his pre-election policy.

While the government may be able to shift one of the key Senate blocs in the 
new year by offering enticing trade-offs – Nick Xenophon, for example, is 
interested in persuading the government to come back to the table on emissions 
trading for the electricity sector – the politics of implementing an expensive 
tax cut for big business is fraught, with low wages growth continuing to 
squeeze households, and widespread community concern about profit shifting, 
avoidance and evasion by big firms.

Tax transparency data released by the Australian Taxation Office in early 
Decembershows more than 35% of the largest public companies and multinational 
entities paid no tax in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/more-than-a-third-of-big-companies-paid-no-tax-in-2014-15-ato-reports>
 in the latest financial year on record.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-interview-trump-can-boost-case-for-business-tax-cuts-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dd8111db3582397faab24d18d31f7241e7b9d0b%2F0_150_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malcolm%20Turnbull%20interview%3A%20Trump%20can%20boost%20case%20for%20business%20tax%20cuts%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-interview-trump-can-boost-case-for-business-tax-cuts-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malcolm%20Turnbull%20interview%3A%20Trump%20can%20boost%20case%20for%20business%20tax%20cuts%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-interview-trump-can-boost-case-for-business-tax-cuts-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dd8111db3582397faab24d18d31f7241e7b9d0b%2F0_150_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 The treasurer, Scott Morrison, and the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull: ‘We 
will seek the Senate’s support for the whole package.’ Photograph: Mike Bowers 
for the Guardian 
Turnbull indicated that the case for a business tax cut remained strong and 
Trump could help push the global competitiveness argument along. “If the US 
does reduce the company tax rate, as president-elect Trump has promised, that 
will certainly make our company tax rate even less competitive than it is now,” 
he said.

“So, it is part of our case. It was part of Paul Keating’s case and Peter 
Costello’s case and part of Chris Bowen’s case when he wrote about it in a 
book.” But now Labor was in “reality denial mode”. “We will seek the Senate’s 
support for the whole package.”

Turnbull stonewalled when asked whether pushing for the full company tax cut 
package would mean the government would have to seek a new round of budget 
savings, given that the return-to-surplus timetable has been again pushed back, 
and Australia’s triple-A credit rating is under threat.

“The savings we are seeking the support of the parliament for are the ones set 
out in the budget,” he said. “Our policy is set out in the budget. I’m not 
going to run through the contents of Myefo next week, let alone the 2017 
budget.”

Pressed on whether that meant the government was not minded to seek additional 
savings or pursue new revenue measures in the new year, Turnbull again declined 
to engage with the point.

[Housing] is a multifaceted problem and there is no single silver bullet.
Malcolm Turnbull 
“I’m not going to speculate. If you are asking me to speculate what might be 
in Myefo – let alone the budget – I’m not going to. We have set out a set of 
measures in the budget. The progress of that plan will be reviewed in Myefo but 
I’m not going to speculate about future budgets.”

Asked whether the government would have to be more proactive on housing 
affordability, which has emerged as a significant political issue given the 
cost of buying a home in Australia’s major cities, Turnbull flagged action in 
2017.


The Coalition rejected Labor’s election policies at the July poll on negative 
gearing and capital gains tax, which were badged as affordability measures,but 
the New South Wales government has sought to reopen that conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/mike-baird-breaks-with-federal-liberals-over-negative-gearing-changes>
, saying high prices in capital-city markets can’t be countered with supply 
measures alone.

Turnbull acknowledged that housing was a hot-button issue: “Housing 
affordability is a very central issue in our thinking. Most of the remedies lie 
in the hands of state governments but it is something we are very focused on.”

The non-Labor states had signed on to a program of streamlining planning 
measures, he said.

“If you want to improve housing affordability you need to build more houses. 
You need more dwellings. It is overwhelmingly a supply-side problem and our 
city deals are focused on that and we’ll continue to work on every aspect.

“It is a multifaceted problem and there is no single silver bullet.”

In addition to the government’s economic agenda, one of the breakthroughs of 
the 2016 political yearwas a deal reached between the Turnbull government and 
the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/australia-refugees-asylum-seekers-malcolm-turnbull-turns-towards-humanity-but-refugees-nightmare-of-fear-and-scapegoating-yet-to-end>
 to resettle refugees, now detained in offshore immigration detention, in the 
US.

There is a significant question mark over whether Donald Trump will honour 
that agreement given that he campaigned for the presidency on a strident 
anti-immigration platform.

The prime minister said he expected Trump would honour the deal. “The 
arrangements with the US are under way and we expect them to continue following 
the change in administration.”

“US authorities are conducting their own assessment of refugees referred by 
the UNHCR to determine which refugees and how many are resettled in the US,” he 
said.

In the event the deal fell over, Turnbull said the government was continuing 
to discuss resettlement options with other countries. “Refugees who are not 
resettled in the US will still have access to other resettlement options.

“Anyone who is not found to be a refugee should return to their country of 
origin.”
 