
It’s been a long few days. Many time zones. A dizzying number of issues and 
challenges. Very many inputs.

So it’s understandable that the Australian prime minister couldn’t quite take 
in what the US president said to him as journalists filed into the American 
purpose-built venue for bilateral meetings and other summit business on a balmy 
Tuesday evening at Apec in Manila.

“One of the things I’m going to announce is that I’m going to invite you to 
Washington,” Barack Obama whispered toMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> as the two men 
took their positions.


Turnbull said: “Sorry?”


“I’m going to say that I’m going to invite you to Washington and I hope you 
accept,” Obama told him.


Turnbull again: “You’re going to what?”


Slight pause while all the prime-ministerial synapses lined up. He got it in 
the end.


“Oh yeah, good, certainly,” he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmalcolm-in-the-middle-turnbull-woos-china-and-the-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c4eb433075eb74ec8c43205b60ec7601f7ffc12%2F481_69_2482_1489%2F2482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malcolm%20in%20the%20middle%3A%20Turnbull%20woos%20China%20and%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmalcolm-in-the-middle-turnbull-woos-china-and-the-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malcolm%20in%20the%20middle%3A%20Turnbull%20woos%20China%20and%20the%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F17%2Fmalcolm-in-the-middle-turnbull-woos-china-and-the-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c4eb433075eb74ec8c43205b60ec7601f7ffc12%2F481_69_2482_1489%2F2482.jpg>
 Turnbull and Xi Jinping in Antalya. Photograph: Xinhua/Landov/Barcroft Media 
Obama duly went on to extend his invitation during what is delightfully known 
in our business as the “spray” – where leaders make remarks at the end of a 
meeting for the benefit of the cameras and the scribblers with their notebooks 
– and Turnbull, naturally, accepted the putative hospitality of the president.


Mild cross-purposes notwithstanding, Obama looked supremely relaxed with his 
Aussie guest, even though the revolving door of Australian prime ministers must 
cause a certain amount of bemusement among our allies. You can only imagine the 
internal cogitations aboutAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> in other 
capitals: who is this one, will he last, is he worth my time, what on earth is 
going on down there?

The president drew Australia into the American Apec bosom deftly, with an 
economy of words. The US and Australia were fine friends who agreed on most 
everything, the president noted. We weren’t meant to linger on the lawyerly 
qualifier, we were meant to feel the unanimity.

Turnbull is not inclined in these meetings with peers on his first major 
overseas trip to default to an economy of words. He’s just a little too pumped 
right now to trust that less is more.

At the opening of his significantly longer contribution, Turnbull flicked back 
the front lapels of his suit jacket and smiled – which is the perfectly normal 
response in the circumstances.


Except the response looks out of scale if the person sitting next to you 
happens to make a study of stillness, which is Obama’s modus operandi – that 
almost ethereal sense of containment that defines the US president’s public 
outings.


Still, it all coalesced. For Team Turnbull, there was that happy sound of 
important boxes being ticked.


Consider these two checked boxes. The last thing Turnbull did before he 
departed the G20 summit in Turkey was meet the Chinese president, Xi Jinping. 
And here, now, at the opening of theApec summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit>, he is meeting Obama.


Malcolm Turnbull and Barack Obama hold first meeting and promise to 'ramp up' 
fight against Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-turnbull-and-barack-obama-hold-first-meeting-and-promise-to-ramp-up-fight-against-isis>
Within two days, in two hemispheres and two summits, Turnbull has traversed 
Australia’s two most important foreign policy relationships.


China’s activities in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> hang over this Apec summit 
in Manila, just as the shocking events in Paris cast a long shadow across the 
G20.


The US and Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> want Australia 
standing with them on the question of freedom of navigation in the South China 
Sea. The US has recently sailed a warship within 13 miles (22km) of the 
disputed Spratly archipelago in a direct challenge to China’s territorial 
claims.


China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> for its part wants to be able 
to assert its status as a growing superpower, which involves a certain amount 
of chest-bumping with America. Chest-bumping is good for nationalist business 
in Beijing, but like all nationalist business, a little bit of it tends to go a 
long way, and a lot of it can be downright dangerous.


Obama described his conversation with Turnbull on the South China Sea on 
Tuesday as “excellent”, which gives you something of a barometer of Australia’s 
alignment with US aspirations.


Turnbull said what the Americans wanted to hear in public: that Australia and 
the US were very much of the same mind when it came to preserving the rule of 
law in the South China Sea.


Japan wanted that “standing together” message reinforced in public, too. 
Shinzo Abe had been looking for reassurance from the new chap in Canberra that 
he would continue to express simpatico with Tokyo.Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> was an Abe man. 
Turnbull needed to demonstrate that he was an Abe man, too.


As well as working through the various milestones on this trip, Turnbull, an 
irrepressibly social character, is also on a quest to find relationships with 
his peers.


Meetings across the table, leader to leader, are always the end point of 
substantial, detailed work by officials whose chief vocation is translating 
objectives into precise talking points.


Malcolm Turnbull arrives in Turkey for G20 summit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/malcolm-turnbull-arrives-in-turkey-for-g20-summit>
In these sorts of transactions, leaders are less people than conduits for 
their national interests.


Bilaterals in summit seasons can be stiff exchanges, where digressions can 
carry risks: not enough said, too much said.


Turnbull’s instinct is to try and find points of common ground. He wants to be 
understood, not merely tolerated.


People close to the Xi discussion in Turkey say the prime minister offered an 
anecdote about walking around the lake at Hangzhou.


Hangzhou is to be the site of the next G20 meeting – the first G20 China will 
host.


The Australian prime minister told Xi how much he’d enjoyed his Hangzhou lake 
rambles on previous visits.


Xi apparently warmed at the prospect, sharing similar experiences of 
restorative time by the water. The conversation then eddied into other areas of 
shared interests, and to shades of nuance beyond the scripts worked up by 
officials.


Of course lake anecdotes do not, in and of themselves, defuse complex tensions 
between Australia’s most important foreign policy allies, or solve intractable 
problems, or provide any bulwark against the vagaries of events. Not even close.

But they are the start of something, which is very much where the prime 
minister is at. Malcolm Turnbull is starting something.

He’s starting his prime ministership – listening, absorbing, learning, hoping 
to charm, hoping to find a place at the table, and make it his own.

 