
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has locked in the dates for his first trip to the United States since becoming 
the Australian prime minister, with the talks likely to focus on terrorism and 
regional security.

Turnbull is due to visit Washington DC on 18 and 19 January for meetings with 
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> along with 
senior White House and defence officials, and congressional leaders.

The talks are expected to be dominated by security issues, including the fight 
againstIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Iraq and 
Syria, and strategic regional challenges, such as the handling of territorial 
disputes in the South China Sea.

Julie Bishop urges China to pressure North Korea over suspected nuclear test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/julie-bishop-urges-china-to-pressure-north-korea-over-suspected-nuclear-test>
The news comes amid claims by North Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/north-korea-hydrogen-bomb-test-claim-met-with-increasing-scepticism>
 that it has carried out a fourth nuclear test, for which the regime has 
attracted international condemnation. Meanwhile, theworsening diplomatic dispute
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/iran-saudi-arabia-split-stop-adding-fuel-to-the-fire>
 between Iran and Saudi Arabia, and other regional rivals, has raised concerns 
about efforts to resolve the Syrian conflict.

This will not be the first bilateral meeting between Turnbull and the US 
president, but it will be the first on US soil. The pairmet for more than an 
hour on the sidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/17/malcolm-turnbull-and-barack-obama-hold-first-meeting-and-promise-to-ramp-up-fight-against-isis>
 of the Apec summit in the Philippines in November, after which Obama invited 
Turnbull to Washington DC some time during the US winter.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20catches%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%20off-guard%20with%20invitation%20to%20Washington%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20catches%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%20off-guard%20with%20invitation%20to%20Washington%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video&media=>
 Malcolm Turnbull accepts Barack Obama’s surprise invitation in Manila in 
November. 
The timing of the meeting allows Turnbull to make the trip before the 
Australian parliament resumes in February, and pre-empts the Republican and 
Democratic primary contests for this year’s presidential election. It will, 
however, be a politically charged time in the US, coming just days after Obama 
delivers his final state of the union address to Congress on 12 January.

China admonishes Malcolm Turnbull on South China Sea comments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/china-admonishes-malcolm-turnbull-on-south-china-sea-comments>
During the two-day visit, Turnbull will also address the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies on national security themes. A speech to the US 
Chamber of Commerce is expected to canvass innovation and the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership, the 12-country regional trade pact thatcould face obstacles in 
Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/tpp-trade-deal-obama-us-congress-approval-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton>
.

Turnbull had described Australia’s relationship with the US as “very deep” and 
“vitally important” when heannounced the appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/08/joe-hockey-confirmed-australia-next-ambassador-united-states>
 of the former treasurer Joe Hockey as the new ambassador.

However, territorial disputes in the South China Sea present a balancing act 
for Australia, which relies onChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
as its biggest trading partner. At the previous meeting in Manila, Turnbull 
said he and Obama were “very much of the same mind” on regional issues, with an 
emphasis on upholding international norms and the rule of law.
 