
Barack Obama says the US and Australia will “ramp up” the fight against 
Islamic State in the wake of the Paris attacks and will work together to 
preserve international norms in the disputed zone of theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

At the end of a bilateral meeting in Manila that spanned more than an hour, 
the Australian prime minister,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, and the US 
president pledged cooperation on security issues. Turnbull declared Australia 
would stand “shoulder to shoulder” with the US in the fight against extremist 
violence.

It was the first time the two had met one-on-one in an official capacity.

Obama said they also discussed “reaching out” to Muslim communities at home to 
ensure people felt they were full participants in democracies in Australia and 
the US, and also to prevent radicalisation.

Terror attacks are likely, says Malcolm Turnbull in wake of Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/terror-attacks-paris-are-likely-malcolm-turnbull>
The two leaders discussed the tense situation in the South China Sea – an 
issue that forces Australia to delicately balance the interests of 
relationships with the US and Japan and the relationship withChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

The guided missile destroyer USS Lassen has sailed within 22km of the disputed 
Spratly archipelago in a direct challenge to China’s territorial claims.

Japan backs the US move, and the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, raised freedom of navigation 
exercises with Turnbull during a conversation at the G20 summit in Turkey at 
the weekend.

Japanese reporters were told after the meeting that Turnbull had “shared Abe’s 
concerns” over China’s assertive posture in the region.

Obama said the two leaders had had an “excellent” discussion about maintaining 
freedom of navigation in the South China Sea.

Turnbull said Australia and the US were very much of the “same mind” on 
regional issues, by which he meant the South China Sea disputes.

“We are committed to the rule of law, to ensuring the big changes in this 
region occur in a peaceful manner and in accordance with international law,” 
Turnbull said.

Obama also invited Turnbull to Washington some time during the US winter, an 
invitation the prime minister accepted.

One area of intense focus in the bilateral meeting was Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, and the imperative of a reaching a 
political solution for the country, as well as strategies to defeat Isis.

Russia and the US reached consensus at the G20 summit at the weekend on the 
need for“a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political transition” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/16/g20-barack-obama-and-vladimir-putin-agree-to-syrian-led-transition>
 in the war-torn country, including future UN mediation and a ceasefire.

The rapprochement follows a major lobbying effort by the US and European 
leaders in the run up to the G20 to persuadeVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> to step back from Syria’s 
President Bashar al-Assad and train the country’s military assets on Isis 
rather than on the Syrian opposition forces in defence of the regime.

Australia was excluded from a meeting of foreign ministers in Vienna  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/australia-excluded-from-syria-peace-talks-after-russian-objection>
ahead of the G20 to broker a deal on a political transition for Syria – 
apparently at the instigation of the Russians – but Turnbull met Putin briefly 
at the summit in Antalya.

Malcolm Turnbull's reality check finds him adrift in Europe's sea of 
uncertainty | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/malcolm-turnbull-g20-reality-check-adrift-europe-uncertainty>
Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, told reporters in Manila that 
Australia, as the second largest military contributor in Iraq, would work 
closely with the major powers during any transition in the country.

“Given that the US and Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> 
hopefully are forming a single coalition, we’ll continue to work closely with 
them to ensure that Australia continues to play its part in seeking to disrupt 
and destroy Daesh,” Bishop said.

She added that she expected military operations in the Middle East to 
intensify, but hosed down suggestions of boots on the ground.

In a column in the Australian newspaper 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/paris-attacks-we-must-boost-military-role-in-middle-east/story-e6frg6zo-1227611328781>
, the former prime minister Tony Abbott called for Australia to consider “less 
restrictive targeting rules for airstrikes and the deployment of special forces 
on the ground in support of local forces”.

Bishop rebuked Abbott, saying Australia would not enter any country 
unilaterally.

The meeting with Obama kicks off the Apec summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit> for Turnbull. The conversation 
on Tuesday follows one-on-one meetings for the new prime minister with the 
Indonesian president, Joko Widodo, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and 
the leaders of Japan, Singapore, the EU, India and China at the G20.

The Apec summit runs over Wednesday and Thursday in Manila.

The shocking violence in Paris has changed the dynamics and atmospherics of 
both theG20 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> summit in Turkey and 
proceedings in Manila. Security in the Philippine capital is tight.

But despite the acute focus on security issues, Apec is a grouping of Pacific 
rim countries that has trade as its primary focus.

 Obama is expected to meet on the sidelines of the Apec summit with 11 other 
world leaders to discuss the contentiousTrans-Pacific Partnership agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/trans-pacific-partnership-deal-reached-pacific-countries-international-trade>
. The TPP, if formalised, will create the world’s largest free trade area.

The US-led deal, as well as prompting trade liberalisation, is seen by many 
analysts as a strategic counterbalance to growing Chinese economic power and 
influence in the region.

Before the opening of the Manila summit Putin used an opinion piece published 
in the Straits Times 
<http://www.straitstimes.com/opinion/apec-towards-open-and-equal-cooperation> 
to criticise the TPP.

At the G20, the US and Russia came to terms on Syria but Putin is unhappy at 
the secrecy surrounding the negotiation of the TPP. “Overall, the creation of 
new free trade zones will help to create good conditions for liberalising trade 
and investment flows in the region,” Putin says in the piece.

 “At the same time, however, the confidential fashion in which the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations were conducted is probably not the best 
way to facilitate sustainable growth in the Asia-Pacific region.”
 