
Independents have hit back at Malcolm Turnbull’s attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/26/malcolm-turnbull-warns-marginal-seat-voters-against-supporting-independents>
 during his campaign speech, describing the prime minister as misleading, 
arrogant, disrespectful and part of the political elite.

Turnbull described a vote for independents as “a roll of the dice” and 
specifically urged people not to vote for senatorsJacqui Lambie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jacqui-lambie>, Nick Xenophon, 
Glenn Lazarus and the Queensland Senate candidate Pauline Hanson.

The prime minister and the treasurer urged a vote for stability, particularly 
after the UK decision to leave the European Union.

Labor costings: Chris Bowen promises higher surpluses after early increase in 
deficit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/26/labor-costings-chris-bowen-promises-higher-surpluses-after-early-increase-in-deficit>
But polling has showed 
<http://www.themercury.com.au/news/tasmania/major-parties-fear-lambie-popularity/news-story/64bec833106ddfbd4c55fef0ce3f0c83>
 Lambie could win two Senate spots in Tasmania at the expense of the Liberal 
tourism minister, Richard Colbeck. Lambie’s running mate is the Devonport 
mayor, Steve Martin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-warns-against-voting-for-anyone-but-coalition-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malcolm%20Turnbull%20warns%20against%20voting%20for%20anyone%20but%20Coalition%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-warns-against-voting-for-anyone-but-coalition-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malcolm%20Turnbull%20warns%20against%20voting%20for%20anyone%20but%20Coalition%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-warns-against-voting-for-anyone-but-coalition-video&media=>
Malcolm Turnbull warns against voting for anyone but Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jun/26/malcolm-turnbull-warns-against-voting-for-anyone-but-coalition-video>
Xenophon’s party, the Nick Xenophon Team, could pick up a swag of lower-house 
seats in South Australia, including Mayo, Grey, Boothby and Barker as well as a 
number of seats in the Senate in adouble-dissolution election  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/marathon-senate-debate-ends-with-bill-on-voting-changes-passing-36-votes-to-23>
designed to clear out the Senate crossbenchers.

 Xenophon said people were attracted to minor parties and independents because 
the “political elite” were failing to listen to their concerns.

He said while Turnbull was launching his campaign, Xenophon himself was frying 
fish to highlight his policy to extend country of origin labelling laws to 
cooked fish – a change a Senate committee estimated would lead to thousands 
more jobs in Australia.

“There is a disconnection between Australia political elites and people’s 
genuine concerns,” Xenophon said. “I too am worried about Brexit but I don’t 
think it would happen if elites listened to grassroots concern with loss of 
sovereignty.”

The Tasmanian Denison MP, Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie>, said Turnbull’s 
scare campaign against independents was blaming others when major parties 
should examine their own conduct to understand why voters were leaving them in 
droves.

“It is misleading to say power-sharing parliament will lead to anarchy, it is 
arrogant to say voters are wrong to vote any other way than for the major 
parties and it is disrespectful of [the] democratic system,” Wilkie said.

“What he is saying in essence is they have a right to unrestrained power and 
if anyone votes in any way other than Liberal or Labor they are acting 
improperly, which is remarkably arrogant.

“What is dangerous is when executive government has unrestrained power and we 
can see that from WorkChoices and Australia’s involvement in Iraq. I would be 
hopeful that most people in the community would see through it.”

Wilkie predicted Australia would move towards power-sharing governments.

“We are out of step with many developed countries, as we have had majority 
government fairly consistently,” Wilkie said. “They will become commonplace, so 
I think we are in a period of transition and over a number of parliaments we 
could see something more akin to Europe, Canada and New Zealand.

“I think that’s good. Now I would say that, but I believe it’s in the public 
interest whereas unrestrained power is not in public interest and is dangerous.”

A spokesman for Lambie said the fact Turnbull named independent senators 
showed theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> was 
worried.

“It shows his desperation when he mentions people by name,” the spokesman 
said. “The first rule of spin doctors is don’t mention people by name.


“Secondly, he mentioned voters had the choice of Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> governing like a 
union leader. Well we know what the other prime ministerial choice is, one who 
governs like a merchant banker.


“So with one guy who govern like a union leader and one guy who governs like a 
merchant banker, that’s why you need someone like Jacqui to keep the bastards 
honest.”

Climate change: John Hewson accuses Coalition of 'national disgrace'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/26/climate-change-john-hewson-accuses-coalition-of-national-disgrace>
He said the characterisation of a hung parliament as chaotic – a strategy used 
against the Brexit campaign – was both wrong and misleading.

“The hung parliament didn’t produce chaos, it produced consultation, something 
the Liberal government has not been able to do,” the spokesman said.

Lazarus said he did not trust the prime minister and if Turnbull was urging 
people not to vote for independents, Australians should do the “complete 
opposite”.

“Malcolm Turnbull and his government clearly want unfettered power in both 
houses of parliament to sell off of our land to foreign buyers, give away more 
of our jobs to overseas workers, increase GST to 15%, sell off Medicare, 
deregulate uni fees and cut the pension,” Lazarus said.

“I guarantee with a bigger crossbench in the Senate, we will stop the 
government from hurting everyday Australians and make sure the government is 
held to account – whoever is in government.”


“The Coalition is so on the nose in Queensland they don’t even use their logo 
on signs. Malcolm did over his own party’s prime minister. I, along with other 
crossbenchers, won’t let him do over everyday Australians.”
 