
This week, the world has finally focused on the tragedy that has befallen Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>. It took bombing raids from French 
aircraft to draw attention to the fact that Islamist extremists have captured 
two-thirds of this beautiful country, imposing a distorted and destructive 
interpretation of their faith on a people for whom it could not be more alien.

Unlike in most conflicts, musicians are on the frontline. For a start, music 
is now banned in the vast desert regions where once people – myself included – 
flocked to the famousFestival in the Desert 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/video/2008/jan/17/desert2008>, near Timbuktu. 
Yet music is more entwined with the life of the nation in Mali than perhaps any 
other place in the world: a political, cultural and social force. There was the 
griot tradition dating back centuries, then in post-independence days musicians 
were used to bond together a nation that lies on the faultline between the Arab 
and African worlds. More recently, a succession of sublime artists have blazed 
a trail around the world, their easily accessible, blues-based sounds making 
the word Mali even more synonymous with magical music.

Some commentators talk about the situation in the Sahel as the African wing of 
the war on terror. This is far too simplistic given the complexities of events 
there, their deep roots in old grievances inflamed by newer issues such as 
feuds over the profits of drug-running and kidnapping. But at root this is now 
a cultural war – between modernity and the past, between tolerance and 
brutality, between unity and division. And this is why the music of Mali 
remains such a vital force in the fight for all our futures.

It was excellent to hear the organisers of the Glastonbury festival announce 
yesterday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/jan/17/glastonbury-2013-lineup-first-acts>
 that they would use Britain's most important musical event to highlight Malian 
music.Rokia Traoré 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/apr/29/rokia-traore-review>, one of the 
most brilliant talents I have ever seen, will kick off the festivities; I 
advise you not to miss her. And to underline how artists from this nation have 
entranced so many of their fellow performers, we asked some artists from Africa 
and the west to tell us which tracks have most touched them.
Ian Birrell, co-founder Africa Express 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/africa-express>

Robert del Naja <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/massive-attack>
Massive Attack

I first came across Amadou Bagayoko – the Amadou in Amadou and Mariam 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/amadou-and-mariam> – when I arrived late in 
the Congo to join anAfrica Express 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/africa-express> trip. He was like an oasis of 
calm amid the chaos, this super-cool dude playing incredible riffs on a 
beautiful gold guitar. I was meant to remix their trackC'est Ne Pas Bon 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MAFK8hxlLGs>, but in typical Massive Attack 
style never got round to it. It is hard to think of another song more relevant 
to what is happening right now. It just seems so wrong that this couple come 
from a country where musicians are being persecuted when they are such 
ambassadors for all that is good and strong about Mali.

Baaba Maal <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/baaba-maal>
Senegalese musician

There is a wonderful record by Ali Farka Touré 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/mar/08/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries> 
andToumani Diabaté <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/toumani-diabate> called In 
the Heart of the Moon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/jun/24/worldmusic.shopping> – it's my 
favourite Malian record. It reminds me of the sort of music I grew up listening 
to in Senegal. The melodies are so beautiful, and there is a simplicity that 
makes it accessible to everyone. And it is two great musicians coming together 
in a very natural way – they are totally in sync with each other. I can listen 
to it all day.

Emily Eavis
Co-organiser of the Glastonbury festival

The Radio Tisdas Sessions <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0T_W-0Q2z7o> is 
Tinariwen <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tinariwen>'s first album, recorded 
at a radio station in Mali, and I got into it after seeing them play at 
Glastonbury in 2007. It was a muddy year at the festival, with a lot of rain 
all weekend, but two of the highlights for me were Tinariwen on the old Jazz 
World Stage (now the West Holts Stage) and Africa Express in The Park. We've 
always had a lot of great African artists coming to play over the years but 
these two sets really stood out and maybe captured a bit of the rock'n'roll 
spirit that was needed in those conditions.

Anyone who was there to see Rachid Taha 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2001/may/28/artsfeatures1> and the enormous 
Africa Express band blasting out Rock the Casbah up on that hill will never 
forget it. And you could feel the same sense of excitement for Tinariwen when 
they came on in their traditional desert robes and knocked out this amazing, 
hypnotic blues. It felt as if you had entered another world and we all just got 
completely lost in it. There's such a mystery around them as a band and you 
hear tales of them roaming the desert on horseback, riding into town to play 
their music, guitars in one hand and rifles in the other. For them, just being 
able to play and perform music is a matter of life and death and they are 
constantly on the move. The music that they make is completely spellbinding and 
very powerful, it really affects you.

John Paul Jones 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/dec/10/john-paul-jones-them-crooked-vultures>
Bassist with Led Zeppelin

There is a song by Rokia Traoré called Dounia 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DydY8bHTyg> (from the 2009 album Tchamantché 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/sep/05/worldmusic>) that I absolutely 
love. It's beautifuly delicate but also a very complex piece of music. Her 
voice just floats above it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3DydY8bHTyg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3DydY8bHTyg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3DydY8bHTyg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
My introduction to Malian music was through the blues of the late Ali Farka 
Touré 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/mar/08/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>, 
and I loved his whole approach. I'm not a student of it in any way, but it's a 
music I love to play – I've played with Afel Bocoum, who played with Ali, and 
with Rokia, as well as withFatoumata Diawara 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/mar/21/fatoumata-diawara-mali-damon-albarn>
. There's always a lot going on, so you really have to pay attention, but 
unlike Congolese music, for instance, it tends to be very gentle, too. The 
riffs are very melodic and it's very soulful, very subtle. I find the Rokia 
song particularly uplifting.Reading this on mobile?Click here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DydY8bHTyg>

Nick Gold <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2001/apr/10/artsfeatures1>
Producer of the Buena Vista Social Club, Ali Farka Touré and others

In 1990, the late, great Ali Farka Touré gave me a cassette and said: "Ca 
c'est la musique." I put it on. What is this? I thought. A scraper-driven 
push-pull rhythm, an insistent funk pulse, declamatory chorus vocals and, 
occasionally emerging from this minimal but mesmerising stew, the strange 
combination of violin, acoustic guitar and a weird instrument that sounded like 
an underwater banjo, but which I later discovered to be a kamelngoni, a recent 
adaptation of an ancient traditional hunter's harp and the base of this 
extraordinary music called modern Wassoulou. And above it all that 
oh-so-definite and beautiful soul voice unfurling endless serpentine lines. It 
was the 21-year-oldOumou Sangare 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/apr/20/worldmusic>'s debut release 
Moussolou (Women). Six songs, 30 minutes long. Perfect. I listened to it on 
repeat for weeks on end.

David Harrington <http://www.kronosquartet.org/>
Kronos Quartet

Toumani Diabaté's Mande Variations is currently my favourite album from the 
amazing riches of Malian music. Like Bach's Goldberg Variations from nearly 300 
years earlier, it's a record that manages to give the listener a vast 
sonic-compositional picture of musical possibilities, sets a new high-water 
mark for the kora as an instrumental force and at the same time is a generous 
tribute to the bountiful ancient tradition that Diabaté inherited. This is 
music at the highest, most exalted level, coming from the centre of the 
incredibly deep culture of Mali as refracted through the vision of one of the 
world's greatest instrumentalists.

Baloji <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/baloji>
Rapper

Mamani Keita is one of those unique voices originating from the homeland of 
blues music. Her songs are in the tradition of Bambara music, but at the same 
time they are completely in tune with our times. The 2006 albumYelema is not 
perfect, but she is not afraid to play with the rules of world music and to 
transgress them. She is like a quiet storm: she provokes and goes against the 
grain, without us completely noticing it.

"Pee Wee" Ellis <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_%22Pee_Wee%22_Ellis> 
Saxophonist and arranger for James Brown

Ali Farka Touré had a unique style of guitar playing which was quite 
reminiscent of the blues from the deep south of America. It was quite 
surprising to hear that; an African guy playing blues. His albumSavane has a 
sadness to it: very haunting, very, very beautiful. I really enjoyed working 
with him; he was such a pleasure to work with, a calm and sensitive artist. It 
came very naturally because it's such an honest form of music. I felt the 
spirit from him.

Femi Kuti <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/femi-kuti> 
Singer and bandleader

I've come to know of Rokia Traoré over the past couple of years. She's a very 
strong woman in persona, her beliefs, and in her writing – a true artist. I 
love the songAimer for the soft beauty in her voice – and I love jazz and the 
cyclical shuffle on the track, the harmonies, the great n'goni and with it 
being about love it's befitting to the current climate as Mali needs some 
serious love

Jon McClure <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/jonmcclure>
Singer with Reverend & The Makers

Although there are so many great Malian musicians, if I had to choose one I 
would pick Bassekou Kouyate. I had heard great things of him from people who 
had visited him at his home in Mali but nothing prepared me for seeing him 
live. The "Jimi Hendrix of the ngoni" tag is overused but rings so true. He is 
the master of the instrument and a total gent to boost. His recordSegu Blue is 
a masterpiece.

Angelique Kidjo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/apr/29/angelique-kidjo-oyo>
Beninoise singer-songwriter

Exiled in Paris from my native Benin in west Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, I started to study music in a jazz 
school in 1985. I could hear the passion the great jazzmen had for African 
music. John Coltrane had written a song called Dahomey Dance after the name of 
my country and it has been said that Miles Davis's modal approach in Kind of 
Blue was inspired by a performance of the Ballets de Guinée that he attended. 
But African music in the 80s was just about dance, partying, Congolese guitars 
and "la Sape", the Zairian form of dandyism. I was so frustrated. I could not 
imagine how to reconcile in my music the beauty of the traditional music of my 
youth with the modern sounds of jazz. Then, in 1987, came Salif Keita's album 
Soro. It was a grand revelation for me. In the opening of the songSina, his 
most amazing voice felt like an incantation. It was surrounded by mystical 
minor chords and backed by the funkiest Malian polyrhythms you could imagine! 
The emotion it carried gave me a sense that African culture had unlimited depth 
and power and could also touch your heart like nothing you had heard before.

Johnny Marr <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/johnnymarr>
Former Smiths guitarist

I first heard Amadou and Mariam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amadou-and-mariam> when I was in the band 
Modest Mouse and the drummer would play their first big record on the bus. It 
didn't surprise me that they crossed over to rock fans because there's a shared 
sensibility in the arrangements. I played with them at an Africa Express gig at 
Koko in London, and I suspect Amadou is a secret shredder – and nothing wrong 
with that. Put it this way: he's very into his riffs. He and I were sat in a 
hotel room on our own. Two electric guitars, not plugged in. Jamming. I know 
how to approach jamming with someone you've never met before: there's a feeling 
out of space, there's an appropriate way of making it happen ... and within 20 
seconds he was saying: "Solo! Solo! ... Blow! Blow! Blow!" I was completely 
unencumbered by any electricity: there was no amplifier. I wasn't plugged into 
anything. And he wanted me to "blow" like Jimi Hendrix or someone. And I 
recognise a guitar dude when I hear one – and he's one.

There's one tune of his which sounds very like one of mine: What Difference 
Does It Make? In fact, I remember thinking when we were on stage playing: "I 
guess you haven't actually nicked my riff ... in which case, we're cut from a 
similar cloth."

I'll leave it at that!

Michael Nyman <http://www.michaelnyman.com/>
Composer

My favourite Mali music album is Damon Albarn's Mali Music simply because I 
had the privilege of hanging out in Bamako during the rehearsals for the first 
live performance of Damon's collaborative gig at the Barbican in London in 
March 2002. My trip enabled me to mix with, talk to, listen to serious 
representatives of the Malian musical culture that is now in the process of 
being destroyed.

The past and present memories are strong; the future is unthinkable.

Spoek Mathambo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/mar/08/spoek-mathambo-father-creeper-review>
Rapper

I first heard A Chacun Son Problème by Amadou & Mariam on the African Express 
train that toured the UK last summer – with Amadou sitting and singing it by 
himself much as on the original recording. The world stopped for a moment. I 
instantly connected with the meditative, trancey qualities of the song, and 
although I don't understand French the sentiment cuts through my psyche and my 
make-believe translations make myprobleme that much less problematic. To this 
day, A Chacun Son Problème takes me a very warm and special place filled with 
love.

Romeo Stodart
The Magic Numbers <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/magic-numbers>

I've been extremely fortunate to collaborate with Amadou and Mariam on several 
occasions over the years and making music together has always been a real 
humbling and inspiring experience. Amadou's effortless guitar playing just 
oozes so much soul and the chemistry between them is really infectious. My 
favourite record to play of theirs is a collection of early recordings from 
1990–1995 calledLe Meilleur des Années Maliennes. It's really sparse, just 
their beautiful voices with mainly Amadou's guitar for accompaniment. It 
features some of the best liquid guitar playing you'll hear - I highly 
recommend it.

Ludovico Einaudi <http://www.einaudiwebsite.com/>
Pianist

My favorite Malian album is New Ancient Strings by Toumani Diabate and Ballake 
Sissoko, the best exponents of that beautiful Malian instrument, the kora. 
Apart from the unique atmosphere, the virtuosity of the musicians and the 
emotional depth what really makes special this album is also the sound being 
recorded in a natural acoustic. And I love it that the album is also a tribute 
to their respective fathers – also kora masters.

Cerys Matthews <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/cerys-matthews>
Singer, songwriter, broadcaster

I've been in love with music coming out of Mali since I was a teenager when 
Ali Farka Touré's haunting blues slinked out of a mixtape I'd been given. Mali 
could quite easily be branded, like Wales, as a "Land of Song" - music seems to 
be in the very soil. There are so many talented artists and albums to enjoy – 
from Ali's Savane and Amadou and Mariam's Dimanche à Bamako to more recent 
releases like Fatou Diawara's Fatou and Bassekou Kouyate's new one Jama Ko. I 
also love theTel Aviv Session, a collaborative release from Mali's Vieux Farka 
Touré and Isreali Idan Raichel.
 