
Six people have drowned in the UK in two days as strong winds and high seas 
battered much of the British coastline.

A man who got into trouble outside the safe swim area at Sandbanks beach in 
Poole, Dorset, on Saturday afternoon is the latest person to be confirmed to 
have died this weekend during rough coastal conditions.

The man, who was seen having difficulties in the rip current, was recovered 
from the water by lifeguards who performed CPR, Dorset police said. An air 
ambulance and paramedics attended, but he was pronounced dead at the scene.

Later on Saturday, a woman died after being recovered from treacherous seas 
off Jersey. Rescue boats fromJersey <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/jersey> 
fire service and the RNLI were launched at about 8.20pm after two swimmers were 
reported to be in difficulty near Green Island beach.

A male swimmer was rescued by a member of the public. The woman was later 
recovered from the water and transported to hospital, where she died, Jersey 
police said. It was revealed on Sunday that her name was Joy Godfray and she 
died the day before her 32nd birthday. Police said her family wanted to pass 
their “heartfelt thanks to the members of the public and all the emergency 
services who fought to save the life of their daughter”.

Also on Saturday, the bodies of a mother and her six-year-old son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/21/mother-and-son-killed-aberdeen-cornwall-winds>
 were recovered from the sea off Aberdeen, and a windsurfer in his 60s died 
after being caught in difficult conditions off West Mersea, Essex.

The pair in Aberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> were named as 
Julie Walker, 37, and her son Lucas. It is believed that Walker had gone into 
the sea to try to rescue him and another boy, 13, who had got into trouble 
while swimming. The second boy and two other people believed to have gone in to 
help, a 25-year-old woman and a 28-year-old man, were taken to hospital.

On Friday, a man died after he and his family were swept off rocks into the sea
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/20/man-swept-out-to-sea-by-10ft-wave-in-newquay-cornwall-dies>
 in Cornwall. He was named on social media as Rudy Bruynius, who was on holiday 
with his wife and three children.

The family had been walking at South Fistral beach in Newquay. The two boys 
were able to scramble back on to the rocks and Bruynius’s wife, Lisinda, was 
rescued on a RNLI sea scooter. The boys were treated for minor injuries.

A lifeboat was deployed to rescue Bruynius and the couple’s two-year-old 
daughter, McKayla. The pair were airlifted to Royal Cornwall hospital, where 
Bruynius died. McKayla remained in a critical condition on Sunday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fwoman-dies-rough-seas-jersey-weather%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56ac9231a75bad1a271dddfd319069e20401d5fb%2F0_84_2519_1512%2F2519.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Man%20drowns%20in%20rough%20seas%20off%20Dorset%20coast%2C%20taking%20weekend%20death%20toll%20to%20six&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fwoman-dies-rough-seas-jersey-weather%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Man%20drowns%20in%20rough%20seas%20off%20Dorset%20coast%2C%20taking%20weekend%20death%20toll%20to%20six&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fwoman-dies-rough-seas-jersey-weather%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56ac9231a75bad1a271dddfd319069e20401d5fb%2F0_84_2519_1512%2F2519.jpg>
 The scene in Newquay, Cornwall, where a man died and his wife and daughter 
were rescued off Fistral beach Photograph: Paul Blatchford/SWNS.com 
A crowdfunding page set up by a friend to support the family has already 
raised more than £16,000 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/terri-anne-remant?utm_id=106&utm_term=7wqyZY9p9>
.

An RNLI spokesperson said crews had had an extremely busy weekend with a high 
number of callouts, and warned people to take care in and around water.

“Essentially, the conditions we’ve got are approaching more what you’d expect 
in late autumn or winter in terms of the swells,” said Peter Dawes, the RNLI 
lifesaving services manager. “It has caught a lot of people by surprise at the 
end of the summer holidays. It’s bigger and worse conditions than they’re used 
to.

“We know that more than half the people who get in trouble had no intention of 
getting into the water – they’re swept off rocks, falling off paths or marinas 
into water. They have to be aware that water is a very unforgiving environment 
and you really can’t afford to make a mistake.”

Mark Wilson, a Met Office meteorologist, said the rough conditions on Saturday 
had been caused by a combination of strong winds and spring tides. “We saw an 
unseasonably deep area of low pressure yesterday that brought strong winds,” he 
said. “Because that was combined with spring tides, it led to some large waves 
across western areas in particular. We saw some gusts of 50-60mph. It was this 
combination that caused these coastal conditions.”

Conditions were improving on Sunday, with the low pressure system moving away.
 