
The Manchester Guardian, along with the Times, was one of the last of the 
morning papers to putnews on the front page. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-august-2011>


On Saturday 27 September 1952 the Manchester Guardian announced that it was 
the last time adverts would dominate its front pages. Monday 29 September saw 
the face of the new style paper. It was to coincide with the Labour Party 
Conference and therefore hoped to generate extra reader appeal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fmanchester-guardians-first-front-page-of-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d6942bb1da1cd4ed57eadd8cca39fe0f9df8617%2F0_0_4816_2889%2F4816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20first%20front%20page%20of%20news%201952%3A%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fmanchester-guardians-first-front-page-of-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%20first%20front%20page%20of%20news%201952%3A%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fmanchester-guardians-first-front-page-of-news%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d6942bb1da1cd4ed57eadd8cca39fe0f9df8617%2F0_0_4816_2889%2F4816.jpg>
 Guardian front page, 29 September 1952. Photograph: Katy Stoddard for the 
Guardian 
The newspaper had 16 articles on its front page. Ten articles were home news 
and six international. The story on the Labour Party Conference refers to 
concern over the conduct of the Korean war. It also covers some of the leading 
lights of the party such as Aneurin Bevan and Hugh Dalton assuring the world 
and one another that there was no disunity within its ranks.


Bedside Guardian and Alistair Cooke: teaching resource from the GNM Archive 
April 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/beside-guardian-and-alistair-cooke-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
In an article from New York Alistair Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alistaircooke> writes about the American 
presidential campaign and the changed tactics of Democratic hopeful Adlai 
Stevenson. Having begun as a respectful candidate he had altered his tone to 
attack Republican candidate Dwight D. Eisenhower.


Of the 16 articles on the front page Alistair Cooke is the only reporter with 
a named byline. Cooke had been the Manchester Guardian’s chief US correspondent 
since 1947.


The other articles carry no byline or journalists are referred to as ‘Our own 
Correspondent’, ‘Our own Reporter’, ‘Our Diplomatic Correspondent’, ‘Our 
Industrial Staff’ or ‘Our Labour Correspondent’.

In 2012 to commemorate 60 years since the Guardian first put news on its front 
page Katy Stoddard reported on the change and readers reactions inFrom the 
archive blog series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog>.

Sixty years of headline news: Hold the (Guardian) front page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2012/sep/28/guardian-front-page-news-1952>

The full news front page can be downloaded below.


Manchester Guardian page 1 Monday 29 September 1952 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/07/29/Manchester_Guardian_front_page_29_September_1952.jpeg>
 