
“I am commanded to convey to you the congratulations of the King upon 
tomorrow’s celebration both of the centenary of the Manchester Guardian and of 
the completion of your fifty years’ association with the paper, which, under 
your courageous guidance, has secured for itself a position of such eminence 
and esteem in the world of journalism.” This message from Buckingham Palace was 
delivered toCP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott>, the 
editor of theManchester Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/1>, on the eve of its 
centenary.


John Edward Taylor and Peterloo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/john-edward-taylor-peterloo-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 This message of congratulations was one of many sent to the Manchester 
Guardian and its long-standing editor marking its one hundredth anniversary on 
5 May 1921.

The Manchester Guardian was founded by John Edward Taylor 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/PRtaylor.htm>, a cotton merchant in 1821 with 
the intention of establishing a liberal reformist voice in the aftermath of the
Peterloo Massacre <http://spartacus-educational.com/PRpeterloo.htm>.

His nephew, CP Scott, was made editor in 1872 and he purchased the paper in 
1907, following the death of Taylor’s son. He promised that the principles of 
the Manchester Guardian would be upheld by maintaining its independence and 
running it for public benefit, not private gain. The paper became a limited 
company owned by theScott family 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/history/cp-scott/>.

 A special anniversary edition of the paper was published on 5 May 1921, which 
was widely publicised in the weeks leading up to the centenary.

Advance notice was given that the special issue would consist of the normal 
daily paper, an addition of 92 pages dealing with the whole history of the 
paper and a facsimile of its first edition. It also highlighted some of the 
features of this issue including The Manchester Stage bySir Frank Benson 
<http://theshakespeareblog.com/2012/09/stratfords-band-of-brothers-the-bensonian-company/>
, The Advertiser of 100 years ago, Mechanical progress in a century and the 
Growth of Municipal Manchester.

 Bill room staff with an advert for the Guardian’s centenary issue in 1921, 
from thecentenary photograph album 
<http://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/centenary-staff-album>. 
Photograph: Walter Doughty for the Guardian 
 The centenary edition of the newspaper also included a coloured cover which 
reconstructed the old Manchester Exchange and the Manchester Guardian buildings 
in 1821, a portrait inphotogravure <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photogravure> 
of CP Scott and a facsimile reproduction of a print of the Battle of Peterloo, 
the chiefpolitical event <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peterloo_Massacre> which 
gave birth to the Manchester Guardian. The paper cost 2d.

Download: Cover of the 1921 centenary edition of the Manchester Guardian 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1430300448066/Cover-of-the-1921-centenary.pdf>

 To celebrate the centenary and his 50th anniversary as editor CP Scott wrote 
his famous essay‘A Hundred Years’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2002/nov/29/1>, which continues to 
underpin the traditions of the Guardian today. The essay was printed in full in 
the special edition and includes the memorable phrase “Comment is free, but 
facts are sacred.” He insisted: “The voice of opponents no less than that of 
friends has a right to be heard.”

 The hundredth year edition also included many letters and congratulatory 
telegrams. The Prime Minister David Lloyd George praised the paper and its 
editor for a “period of unexampled progress in British journalism.”

 General Smuts, the Prime Minister of South Africa remarked:

“Mr Lloyd George once said to me that the Manchester Guardian exercised an 
influence entirely out of proportion to its circulation. This was of course no 
reflection on its circulation, but a tribute to its power.”

There were also messages of support from The Chicago Tribune, the French 
Journal des Debats, German newspaper Vorwärts and Switzerland’s Neue Zürcher 
Zeitung.


 Attention was frequently drawn to the wide-ranging influence of a provincial 
newspaper.

Sir W Ryland D Adkins MP for Middleton and Prestwich congratulated the paper 
on its praise from “the King downwards, tributes from all parties and classes, 
appreciations from everywhere abroad, local rejoicing, world-wide respect and 
congratulations.”


He continued with fulsome praise for CP Scott:

“His spirit lives in every part of the result like the mind of Wren in every 
stone of St Paul’s. Without him nothing is grasped: knowing him the whole range 
of moral and technical excellence in the Manchester Guardian becomes 
intelligible. What counts in this celebration is not the centenary, but the 
creative and transforming editorship now spanning just half that period.”

 The centenary edition looked back on the history of the paper and its 
reporting. There is a quotation from each year of the newspaper between 1821 
and 1921 including:

 15 August 1914: “Great Britain declared war on Germany at 11o’clock last 
night.”

 9 May 1915: “The Lusitania, one of the world’s most famous passenger liners 
was sunk by a German submarine off the Irish coast yesterday.”

 12 November 1918: “The Armistice with Germany was signed at 5 o’clock 
yesterday morning, and hostilities in the Great War ceased an hour before noon.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fmanchester-guardian-centenary-celebrations-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-may-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430298000094%2F4f80005d-c83b-4df2-b704-b0145d39f250-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20Guardian%20centenary%20celebrations%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20May%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fmanchester-guardian-centenary-celebrations-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-may-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20Guardian%20centenary%20celebrations%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20May%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fmanchester-guardian-centenary-celebrations-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-may-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430298000094%2F4f80005d-c83b-4df2-b704-b0145d39f250-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Menu and place settings for the Guardian’s centenary celebration dinner. 
Photograph: Robin Christian for the Guardian 
Alongside major preparations for the special edition of the paper publicity 
was also given to a centenary dinner to take place at the Midland Hotel in 
Manchester. Announcements were made that invitations had been sent out to 
prominent citizens of Manchester for the subscription dinner. It was announced 
in April that Lord Derby would preside and writer John Masefield would be among 
the speakers at the dinner on 3rd May 1921.


 There was coverage of the dinner in the paper on 4 May. It stated that over 
500 guests attended and all political parties were represented. On the main 
table alongside CP Scott were suffragistMillicent Fawcett 
<http://womenshistory.about.com/od/suffragists/p/fawcett.htm>, John Masefield 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/john-masefield>, future poet laureate and 
Conservative politician, theEarl of Derby 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Stanley,_17th_Earl_of_Derby>.

Acclaimed Russian tenor Vladimir Rosing sang at the dinner, accompanied by 
English pianist Ivor Newton.

There was also a staff celebration at Belle Vue in Manchester where CP Scott 
was awarded a silver salver with the inscription:


 Presented to Charles Prestwich Scott by his staff on the Centenary of the 
‘Manchester Guardian’ and in the 50th year of his Editorship May 5th 1921.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fmanchester-guardian-centenary-celebrations-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-may-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430298297007%2Fa99a718b-cfbd-4e5b-8c74-ffa27d7d9906-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20Guardian%20centenary%20celebrations%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20May%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fmanchester-guardian-centenary-celebrations-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-may-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20Guardian%20centenary%20celebrations%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource%20May%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fmanchester-guardian-centenary-celebrations-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-may-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F29%2F1430298297007%2Fa99a718b-cfbd-4e5b-8c74-ffa27d7d9906-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Silver salver presented to CP Scott to celebrate 50 years of his editorship. 
Photograph: Robin Christian for the Guardian 
Another more inclusive part of the celebration was the compilation of a book 
of photographs of the paper’s staff, including everyone from the directors to 
the cleaners and porters. The GNM Archive holdsa copy 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f6%2f9%2f1%2f11%2f1%2f1&>
 in its collections.


Centenary photograph album: teaching resource from the GNM Archive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/centenary-album-resource-gnm-archive>
A dinner was also held in London described on the pages of the newspaper on 
May 23 1921 with the headline ‘The London end of the Guardian’. Prominent 
figures who attended included writer John Galsworthy, Manchester Guardian 
journalists and women’s suffrage campaignersHelena Swanwick 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helena_Swanwick> and Evelyn Sharp 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/Wsharp.htm>, archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans 
<http://sirarthurevans.ashmus.ox.ac.uk/biography/> and Attorney General Gordon 
Hewart 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/264507/Gordon-Hewart-1st-Viscount-Hewart>
.


The Attorney general proposed the toast at the dinner and with reference to CP 
Scott:


“Long might he live to continue with the invincible steadfastness the labour 
he loved. For us he is a link with the future as well as with the past.”


Clearly overwhelmed by the praise bestowed on him the editor replied:


“Whatever credit is due to the paper … is due not really to me, it is due to 
the whole lot of us.” He continued that he was also grateful that it was a 
double anniversary so that he might “behind the greater mass and consequence of 
the paper” hide his diminished head.


More about events mentioned in this resource can be found on the following 
pages in192 moments that made the Guardian’s history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2011/may/16/moments-that-made-guardian-interactive>
:

1. Peterloo Massacre


2. Creating the Manchester Guardian

3. Prospectus “Liberty and reform” 

6. First issue 5 May 1821

28. CP Scott

61. The Guardian’s centenary ‘A Hundred Years’ essay by CP Scott

62. A year of celebration

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers page 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers>.
 