
One clear winner emerges from Andrew Adonis’s report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/put-hs3-at-the-heart-of-a-high-speed-north-adonis>
 into improving northern transport infrastructure – and once again it is 
Manchester.

The city of the Smiths and Old Trafford has already been given preferential 
treatment by George Osborne, to the chagrin of its northern rivals. The 
chancellor not only signed his first devolution deal with the wider Greater 
Manchester regionin November 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/manchester-directly-elected-mayor>
, but he has continued to shower the city with goodies, notably the £110m arts 
centre, the Factory, to be built on the former Granada Studios site.

Last year, Osborne managed to persuade the Chinese president, Xi Jingping, to 
visit just one city outside of London. Where did he go?Manchester, of course. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/chinese-president-xi-jinping-manchester-visit-northern-powerhouse-status>

Lord Adonis’s report is split into two sections: rail and road. He makes five 
key recommendations, all of which will directly benefitManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>. They are:

 * Kickstart HS3 to cut journey times between Leeds and Manchester by 40% to 
30 minutes. 
 * Harness HS2 to improve intercity connections in the north, including 
Manchester to Liverpool (which has been omitted from HS2 plans). 
 * Redevelop Manchester Piccadilly station. 
 * Increase the capacity on the M62 by up to 33% from Liverpool to Leeds 
(which passes through, you guessed it, Manchester). 
 * Enhance the M56 access from Liverpool to Manchester airport. 
As north of England editor, I live in Manchester, where the Guardian began in 
1821 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/05/guardian190-1821-found-dog>
. But several times a week I have to try to reach other areas of the north via 
the region’s congested roads and woefully inadequate railway.

I cycled into the office on Deansgate on Tuesday morning, glad I wasn’t trying 
to catch a train: by 7.15amthe reliably appalling Northern Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2014/sep/07/helen-pidd-i-hate-northern-rail>
 had managed to cancel nine services because of train faults and a shortage of 
carriages. I was happy, too, not to have had to drive to Leeds: roadworks on 
the M62 eastbound overran, closing two lanes near Huddersfield.

So I agree wholeheartedly that change cannot come soon enough. But in making 
Manchester the main beneficiary, Adonis seems to be siding with Osborne by 
concentrating efforts on only one city at the expense of the rest.

 I was in Teesside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/teesside-shops-await-budget-as-steelworks-closure-reverberates>
 last week talking to people about the budget and Osborne’s divisive plans to 
build a “northern powerhouse”. Many people felt wholly and understandably left 
out: forget trying to reach Manchester or even London; in Middlesbrough people 
would just like it not to take an hour and 20 minutes to take a train 40 miles 
north to Newcastle.

It takes longer to get from Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> to Hull by train than to travel 
twice the distance from London to Paris. On the roads, travelling east to west 
is often a nightmare. The report points out that there are fewer traffic lanes 
on the 14 A roads crossing the Pennines between Sheffield and Scotland than 
there are on A roads crossing the Thames between Tower Bridge and Chelsea.

The report justifies prioritising the Manchester to Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leeds> link because their city regions account 
for 46% of the population of what it called the “northern powerhouse”. As 
Adonis points out, the two cities are less than 40 miles apart, and yet on the 
congested M62 it often takes more than two hours by car to travel from one to 
the other.

As for pumping money into Manchester Piccadilly, that station is already 
earmarked for major investment as part of the so-called “northern hub”. It is 
not even the north of England’s busiest station. That’s Leeds, where passenger 
numbers increased by 31% between 2009-10 and 2014-15, with about 29m entries 
and exits in 2014-15, compared with close to 25m at Piccadillyover the same 
time.

Rail travellers in Sheffield would be justified in shooting Adonis a dirty 
look.Transport for the North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/08/northern-england-transport-planners-reject-noyster-cards>
, the soon-to-be statutory body set up to improve northern connectivity,
reported in November 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/northern-transport-strategy-autumn-report>
 that it was entirely feasible to build a new rail tunnel under the Peak 
District to speed up the slow Manchester to Sheffield service.

But Adonis makes no mention of this, mooting instead a road-only tunnel to 
bypass the often snow-covered Woodhead and Snake passes between the two cities. 
Surely any plan should be encouraging people to get out of their cars rather 
than into them?

Ultimately, though, Adonis can only make recommendations. It’s up to Osborne 
to fund them into reality.
 