
There aren’t many male dancers who, when performing Sleeping Beauty, would 
prefer to dance the gnarled, malign fairy Carabosse than the heroic Prince. Yet 
whenMarcelo Gomes <http://www.marcelogomes.co/> heard that American Ballet 
Theatre <http://www.abt.org/> were commissioning a new Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/mar/03/alexei-ratmansky-sleeping-beauty-american-ballet-theatre>
, he texted the choreographer Alexei Ratmansky with exactly that request.

In the end he danced both hero and witch (on different nights of the ballet’s 
run), and he now ranks this double casting as one of the highlights of his 
career. “Oh my God it was fantastic,” he says. “It was like turning a switch 
and experiencing the ballet from a completely different perspective. Some 
dancers are afraid to go in different directions, but I think it enriches you. 
Every time you push the limits, you learn something new”

At 35, Gomes is arguably at the peak of his ballet career. With his commanding 
technique, ebullient personality and handsomely crooked grin, he’s not just one 
of ABT’s top principals – he’s a company poster boy too. Yet dancing a bad 
fairy for the hell of it is far from being his only deviation from classical 
type. This summer he’s in the UK with two very different projects: making his 
debut in Matthew Bourne’sThe Car Man <http://new-adventures.net/the-car-man> – 
a dirty, sexy dance adaption of the Bizet opera – and presenting his own 
choreography, Tristesse, as part of theArdani Dance Gala 
<http://www.ardani.com/> at the London Coliseum. When I catch him, between 
rehearsals, he places a mockingly fluttering hand over his heart. “This is 
quite a moment for me in London. I don’t know if I can take it.”

Some dancers are afraid to go in different directions, but I think it enriches 
you
Marcelo Gomes 
Gomes has worked with Bourne once before, performing the lead role in his 
contemporary dance version of Swan Lake during a two-week season in Japan. As a 
classically trained dancer, Gomes found the raw physicality and violent 
emotional impulse of Bourne’s work to be an exhilarating challenge. “I went 
into that show really wanting to transform myself, to be pushed. In one 
performance I fell on stage. I hadn’t slipped in so long, but it felt so good. 
There was a sort of abandonment, a nervous adrenaline, that I hadn’t felt in a 
really long time.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5S7uhtktDcI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5S7uhtktDcI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5S7uhtktDcI&media=>
In The Car Man he performs Luca, the restless loner who turns a small American 
town into a cauldron of lust and violence when he comes looking for work. As 
dance, the role is demanding, but for Gomes the devil is in the detail of the 
acting. “With Matthew’s work, it’s like a play. You don’t go on stage thinking: 
how will I hit this jump technically? The concern is how your character will 
pick up a cup, how they will smoke a cigarette. When they kiss, it must be in 
the most real possible way.”

Now midway through rehearsals, Gomes says he’s awestruck by the versatility of 
the other members of the cast, which Bourne tends to draw from musical theatre 
as well as straight dance. “They’re fearless: the women are dancing in quite 
high heels but they’re not afraid to cover space, to jump into your arms – 
stuff that a ballerina would take quite a time to learn.” He’s also awed by how 
“generous and patient” these dancers have been with him, welcoming him into the 
ensemble rather than seeing him as a threat.

A sense of community is very important to Gomes. He looks for it even when 
he’s invited to dance individual guest performances with other companies: “I 
try to get a feel of how that company works, not to just do the show and leave 
without having made any connection with anyone. That seems to me to be an awful 
experience, a waste of time.” But he’s concerned that community has a 
diminishing value in the ballet world, as a restless younger generation seem to 
place more value on notching up entries for their CVs in as many companies as 
possible, rather than finding a home within one or two.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP2HDP892vdw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP2HDP892vdw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP2HDP892vdw&media=>
 Gomes’ second work with Matthew Bourne, a dirty, sexy Bizet’s Carmen 
 “Dancers are becoming a little afraid of commitment. Social media has changed 
the world and they think they have to move to its rhythms. They think the more 
places they go, the greater experience they will gain as artist. I don’t 
believe that’s true. I think I’ve gained more depth from being with ABT for my 
whole career – I wasn’t fast tracked to principal, I did a lot of roles, so I 
really know this company and I really appreciate where I am.”

Gomes is lucky in that he can leave his ABT home for short intervals and for 
different projects – not only performing guest seasons with Bourne but also with
Kings of the Dance <http://www.ardani.com/projects-kings.php>, the loosely knit 
group of male stars with whom he’s dancing at the Ardani gala this weekend. 
Despite its name and the international ranking of its members (who include
Friedemann Vogel <http://friedemannvogel.com/> from Stuttgart Ballet 
<https://www.stuttgart-ballet.de/> and Denis Matvienko 
<http://www.mariinsky.ru/en/company/ballet/guest_principal/denis_matvienko/>, 
guest principal with the Mariinsky), Gomes is proud of the spirit of 
camaraderie and artistic curiosity that’s been fostered in the group. With the 
support of their producerSergei Danilian 
<http://ardani.com/who-kings-danilian.php>, they’ve aimed to expand a repertory 
of new work, and when Gomes suggested he might himself contribute to it as 
choreographer, he was moved by the support he received. “The guys were all so 
open to it. As dancers we’ve always had this spirit of very friendly 
competition, watching and learning from each other. With Tristesse, it felt 
like a very creative atmosphere.

When you’re choreographing you have to fail, and the fear is always that I’m 
putting my reputation as a dancer at risk.
Marcelo Gomes  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fmarcelo-gomes-matthew-bourne-ballet-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436978686564%2F324d3b5d-555c-4619-afe6-b597ef58075d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marcelo%20Gomes'%20fearless%20dance%3A%20'Now%20I%E2%80%99ve%20started%2C%20I%20can%E2%80%99t%20hold%20myself%20back'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fmarcelo-gomes-matthew-bourne-ballet-dance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marcelo%20Gomes%27%20fearless%20dance%3A%20%27Now%20I%E2%80%99ve%20started%2C%20I%20can%E2%80%99t%20hold%20myself%20back%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F16%2Fmarcelo-gomes-matthew-bourne-ballet-dance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436978686564%2F324d3b5d-555c-4619-afe6-b597ef58075d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Away from the ABT, Marcelo also dances with Kings of the Dance this July at 
the Ardani gala. Photograph: Gene Schiavone 
The short ballet, set to music by Chopin, is inspired by a Paul Éluard 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Éluard> poem about the reunion of four 
friends who find themselves changed over time. It keys into the dancers’ own 
situation – their collaborations having to be carved out of busy individual 
schedules. But Tristesse is far from being a singlepiece d’occasion. Gomes 
first began choreographing about five years ago; improvising in the studio, 
making solos and small pas de deux. “It happened naturally. Either you have the 
itch or you don’t. I listen to music and I just get ideas and want to put steps 
together.”

It hasn’t been easy making headway with this secondary career, Gomes says. And 
although having established his name as a dancer has given him a head start, it 
comes with its own issues: “When you’re choreographing you have to be able to 
try things out, and to fail, and the fear is always that I’m putting my 
reputation as a dancer at risk. But now that I’ve started, I can’t hold myself 
back.”

ABT has been good at giving Gomes small opportunities, and this season he 
capitalises on them, with his first significant creation for the company: a 
setting of Tchaikovsky’sSouvenir de Florence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MElkwgridng> with a design by the French 
painter Françoise Gilot, the lover and muse of Picasso. “I’m incredibly 
inspired by these dancers I’ve known for 18 years,” he says, and its striking 
how frequently and how warmly he returns to the subject of his closeness with 
his company. ABT has become something of a second family to him, since joining 
the company as an apprentice.

He left his own home in Brazil when he was 13 to attend a ballet school in 
Florida. It was a traumatic experience at first, since Gomes spoke barely a 
word of English and, in those days before the internet and mobile phones, his 
only contact with his family was through letters and a badly working pay phone.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4fTbFsZ6mm4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4fTbFsZ6mm4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4fTbFsZ6mm4&media=>
Gomes was grateful for the support ABT gave him 12 years ago when he came out 
publicly, in acover story interview 
<http://www.advocate.com/politics/commentary/2003/01/21/tough-guys-do-dance> 
with the American gay and lesbian magazine The Advocate. “There was potentially 
a bit of rumble about it, some talk that my fans would never see me the same 
way again. ButKevin McKenzie 
<http://www.abt.org/education/archive/choreographers/mckenzie_k.html> [ABT’s 
artistic director] just said to me: ‘As long as you know what you’re doing, 
it’s your life and your career.’” Gomes took the decision to come out when many 
gay dancers were still opting for reticence. He’s such a funny, chatty, direct 
man, it’s hard to imagine him keeping anything secret. But the deciding factor 
was the curiosity that journalists showed in his love life. “It seemed to be 
the tie-it-up question of every interview: ‘Do you have a girlfriend? Are you 
seeing any special girl?’ I used to answer in the most generic possible way: 
‘I’m concentrating on my work; dance is the most important thing in my life 
right now.’ But I got so sick of pretending, so when I was offered this 
interview for Advocate, I accepted.”

Gomes laughs. “And you know, the funny thing is, now everyone knows I’m gay, 
no one asks me if I’m dating or not!”

Gomes and I chat about interviews for a little while: the questions that do 
and don’t get asked; the taboos that do and don’t get broached. I tell him that 
I’m a bit hesitant about asking women whether they want to have children. Even 
though it’s an issue that impacts in very specific ways on a dance career, it’s 
rarely a question I would think of asking a man. For Gomes, though, it’s like 
putting a match to touchpaper. His whole face lights up. “Oh, but you can ask 
me! You can be the first journalist to ask me, because I really want to have 
children one day. I have a niece who’s 11 and, God, I really love that girl. 
She’s taking ballet and I’m such a proud uncle.”

Gomes says he has yet to find the perfect partner with whom to become a dad, 
and that he needs to make time in his career. At the moment, his wish-list of 
projects seems to be piling up: making new works, dancing new roles and, at the 
top of the list, working with Bourne on an entirely new production: “The 
relationship I’m establishing with Matt is a wonderful one. Some time, I would 
love to be part of new creation with him. That would be taking me really far 
outside the box.”

 * Ardani 25 Dance Gala is at London Coliseum 
<http://www.eno.org/whats-on/other/ardani-25-dance-gala>, 17 and 18 July. Box 
office: 020-7845 9300. Matthew Bourne’s The Car Man is atSadler’s Wells 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/matthew-bournes-the-car-man/>, 
London, until 9 August (casting varies). Box office: 0844-412 4300  