
Bank of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> 
governor Mark Carney is to live broadcast a statement on Thursday to soothe any 
anxieties about the health of the financial markets in the wake of the vote for 
Brexit.

Slotted into the governor’s diary at the last moment, the speech is part of 
efforts by Threadneedle Street to reassure the public and investors following 
the historic vote on 23 June for the UK to leave the EU.

FTSE 100 now higher than before EU vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/ftse-100-now-higher-than-before-brexit-vote-eu-referendum>
It follows his address from the Bank on Friday, just as the markets were 
opening for the first time since the result of the referendum was announced, in 
which Carney said the Bank wouldtake any measures needed to secure economic and 
financial stability. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>

Five days ago, with the markets wrong-footed about Brexit vote, Carney had 
stressed banks were stronger than before the 2008 financial crisis. But he also 
spelt out that Threadneedle Street could inject an additional £250bn into the 
system to ensure that financial institutions did not run short of cash during 
the uncertain period ahead.

The Bank said that Carney would be making a speech on Thursday at 4pm on its 
website but provided no further details about what it would entail. Details of 
the address were revealed after he had met the heads of the UK’s biggest banks 
on Wednesday to discuss the impact of Brexit on their business and on the 
financial markets.

The meeting was part of the contingency plan drawn up by the Bank ahead of the 
vote which built upon the lessons of the 2008 crisis.

The governor was in attendance for part of the meeting, which is thought to 
have been attended by Ross McEwan, chief executive ofRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, and António 
Horta Osório, his counterpart at Lloyds Banking Group, among others.

Other senior Bank officials were present, including Andrew Bailey – who has 
one more day in his job as deputy governor at the Bank before taking up his new 
role as chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority. Sam Woods,who is 
succeeding Bailey as a deputy governor and head of the Prudential Regulation 
Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/08/sam-woods-appointed-bank-of-england-deputy-governor>
, was also present at the meeting.

It is likely that the bank bosses – who also included those from Barclays, 
HSBC andStandard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> – will be called to 
the Bank of England regularly as policymakers try to maintain close lines of 
communication in the months ahead when political uncertainty will also feed 
into the markets.

Among the topics thought to have been discussed is the need for banks to keep 
lending. No one present was prepared to comment on the meeting.

The shares in the major lenders have been under pressure since the referendum 
result five days ago and prompted the bosses of Lloyds and RBS to issue memos 
to staff to try to reassure them about the impact of the Brexit vote. As an 
example, Lloyds shares were trading at 70p before the referendum result and 
have fallen to 55p.


Carney had been expected to be in Portugal on Wednesday for an annual meeting 
hosted by the European Central Bank to discuss policy issuesbut changed his 
plans to remain in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/market-turmoil-fears-likely-to-force-mark-carney-to-abandon-ecb-meeting>
. He chaired a scheduled meeting of the financial policy committee, set up in 
the wake of the 2008 crisis to look for threats to financial stability, on 
Tuesday. The outcome of that meeting will be known next week.
 