
Debenham's policy of ripping out concession stalls to make more space for its 
own clothes ranges seems to be working. The high street retailer reported this 
morning that,despite the downturn, its profits for the current year will be 
higher than a year ago 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10190680>
.

Like-for-like sales are down 3.6% in the last year, and the pace of the 
decline increased slightly in recent months due to the disruption caused by the 
shake-up - which will give Debs over half a million extra square feet for its 
Designers atDebenhams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/debenhams> offering.

With gross profit margins up by 70 basis points, chief executive Rob Templeman 
is upbeat:

We believe that the increase in profits in a year which has seen some of the 
most difficult and volatile trading conditions in recent times is a creditable 
performance.

Looking to the new financial year, it will be difficult to predict consumer 
behaviour. Although it is early days, we are encouraged by the launch of our 
new brands which we expect to benefit gross margin during the course of the 
year. We will continue to focus on the drivers of cash profit during the year.

In other City news, BG has announced another oil discovery 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10190697>
. The Abare West well of the coast of Brazil is not on the same scale as larger 
rival BP's "giant" find last month 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/sep/02/bp-oil-find-gulf-of-mexico>, 
but BG CEO Frank Chapman is still pleased:

Abare West further extends an outstanding sequence for BG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bggroup> Group and partners operating in 
the Santos Basin, with eight discoveries in three years.

We also have a 19% drop in profits 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10190683>
 at investment managerAshmore, and a healthy performance from Dunelm 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10190690>
, which runs out-of-town stores selling homeware products.

There is also some news for ITV to digest this morning, with the Competition 
Commission saying that it isconsidering relaxing the rules that prevent the 
broadcaster abusing its dominant position in the UK TV ad market 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10190669>
. However the Commission has ruled out ditching the Contract Renewal Rights 
Undertakings altogether.
 