
Although bookselling framed his professional life, Martyn Goff, who has died 
aged 91, will be most remembered for his 34 years running what became under his 
stewardship Britain’s premier literary award – the Booker, now the Man Booker, 
prize. Goff took over as administrator of the prize in 1973, its fifth year.

As director of the National Book League (NBL), which had been near-moribund 
until his arrival in 1970, he caught people’s attention the following year by 
creating an innovative literary festival, the Bedford Square Book Bang, in 
London. Book events at the time were generally stuffy affairs, but despite 
appalling weather that helped turn the Bloomsbury square into a quagmire, the 
Book Bang attracted some 50,000 visitors. Little more than a year later, the
Publishers Association <http://www.publishers.org.uk>, which had launched the 
Booker, passed the administering of the prize to the reinvigorated League.

The Booker had been created in 1969 with a nod to the French Prix Goncourt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/prix-goncourt>. It was hoped that by 
awarding a prize for the best novel of the year, sales would increase. The 
sponsors, Booker McConnell, a commodities company, had invested in literary 
copyrights (mainly Ian Fleming and Agatha Christie), and were persuaded to put 
something back into literature by funding the prize. But despite widespread 
praise for its good intentions, its influence on sales remained modest.

Goff, with the help of the prize’s publicist, Marilyn Edwards, set to work to 
remedy this. The awarding of the prize, initially at a cocktail party, became 
by 1974 a dinner in the ballroom at Claridge’s, where for the first time TV 
cameras were on hand, withRobert Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/aug/13/robert-robinson-obituary> 
interviewing judges and authors as they entered the pre-dinner reception. To 
heighten anticipation still further, the final judging was moved to the 
afternoon of the prize.

All the time Goff was engineering press coverage, as one commentator put it, 
like “a happy wizard”, using “carefully placed leaks, official interviews, and, 
occasionally, strategic misinformation”. John Sutherland, the literary academic 
who chaired the Man Booker judges in 2005, later remarked that Goff “would have 
entered his club, the Athenaeum, naked, with only a shortlisted hardback 
covering his private parts if he thought it would get publicity for the prize”. 
Goff was in fact a snappy dresser who was especially known for his collection 
of vivid ties.

As well as selecting the judges each year and sitting in on their meetings, 
his other early role was to persuade Booker McConnell to keep the faith. Before 
Goff arrived, the prize was attracting often angry controversy. In 1971,Malcolm 
Muggeridge 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/11/15/obituaries/malcolm-muggeridge-writer-dies-at-87.html>
 resigned halfway through because he felt most of the entries were ill-written 
and pornographic. A year later the winner, John Berger (for his novel G), 
announced that he would give half his £5,000 prize money to the Black Panther 
movement in protest at what he saw as Booker McConnell’s colonialist policies 
in its Caribbean company.

Goff now arrived, and in his second year, 1974, one of the judges, the writer 
Elizabeth Jane Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/02/elizabeth-jane-howard-dies-90>, 
proposed that Ending Up, a novel by her then husband Kingsley Amis, should be 
on the shortlist. In a strong year, it did not win (the prize was divided 
betweenNadine Gordimer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/14/nadine-gordimer> and Stanley 
Middleton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/29/stanley-middleton-obituary>), 
but the public furore ensured greater coverage than ever before. However, 
Goff’s forecast that it might be the 1980s before the prize took off in sales 
terms was not far wrong.

On the prize’s 12th anniversary, in 1980, Goff was aided by the fact that the 
published shortlist – itself an innovation among prizes and since widely copied 
– contained two literary heavyweights, William Golding (for Rites of Passage) 
and Anthony Burgess (with Earthly Powers). The press caught on early. Burgess 
announced that he would attend the dinner only if he knew in advance that he 
had won. After the judges (chaired that year byDavid Daiches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.obituaries>) 
made their decision, Goff telephoned Burgess to tell him that Golding was the 
winner. While Burgess sulked in the Savoy hotel the prize dinner (now at the 
Stationers’ Hall) went ahead without him. Goff made sure every reporter knew 
what had happened.

Some fine choices followed: Salman Rushdie won with Midnight’s Children 
(1981), and the following year Thomas Keneally with Schindler’s Ark, a 
fictional account of a German industrialist, Oskar Schindler, who saved more 
than 1,000 Jews from the Holocaust. At the final meeting, when the judges 
wondered if perhaps it wasn’t a novel after all, Goff intervened to point out 
that by including it on their shortlist they had confirmed its fictional 
status. It went on to sell some 2m copies, thanks in part to Steven Spielberg’s 
Academy Award-winning film. TheBooker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>, in its 15th year, had truly 
arrived and Goff was to oversee its fortunes until 2006.

Son of Jacob Goff, a fur dealer and a Russian immigrant, and his wife, Janey, 
Martyn went to Clifton college, Bristol, and in 1940 was offered a place at 
Oxford, but second world war service intervened. In the RAF he served as a 
wireless operator in Lancaster bombers and, while stationed in the Middle East, 
showed his interest in the arts by editing a forces magazine that reviewed 
books and music. He also wrote a fan letter to Siegfried Sassoon, which, he 
later learned from the poet’s biographer, helped him through a period of 
writer’s block.

On being demobbed in 1946, and after trying unsuccessfully to get into the 
film industry, he was threatened by his father with a job in the family firm if 
he did not settle down. Goff quickly decided on bookselling. In 1948 he took a 
lease on a shop in St Leonard’s-on-Sea, East Sussex, where he horrified the 
local community by clearly labelling one section of books “Sex”. Moving to 
Surrey in 1950, he bought an established bookshop, the Ibis, in Banstead. He 
believed that imaginative window displays brought in customers, as did personal 
service. Goff’s fame spread beyond Surrey.

The NBL (later Book Trust <http://www.booktrust.org.uk>), of which he now 
became director, had been established in 1925 as an industry pressure group, 
but needed an injection of fresh ideas. Goff provided them, earning much-needed 
revenue by taking over the running of book prizes, to which he gave a 
professional edge. He also persuaded the Arts Council to fund a 
literary-fiction book club, the New Fiction Society, whose artistic directors 
included the young Sebastian Faulks. Goff proved a highly capable fundraiser; 
one of the high points at the NBL came when he persuaded Rowntree-Mackintosh to 
fund a children’s book prize, the Smarties.

On retiring from Book Trust in 1988 he was widely active in book-trade affairs 
and returned to bookselling as the chairman ofHenry Sotheran 
<http://www.sotherans.co.uk>, the antiquarian specialist in Sackville Street, 
Piccadilly. He continued to review widely and was proud to have been the first 
to notice favourably The Bone People, a novel byKeri Hulme 
<http://www.bookcouncil.org.nz/writers/hulmek.html>, a New Zealand Maori, which 
went on to win the Booker prize in 1985. He was also an avid collector of 
mainly modern British art and sculpture.

Goff wrote nine novels, including four with gay themes, which Angus Wilson 
said ensured there was public support for a reform in the law following the 
Wolfenden Report. One in particular, The Youngest Director (1961), led to 
change in his personal life. Its publication brought a letter from a young 
Finn. A correspondence followed and in 1970, the Finn, Rubio Lindroos, came to
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and moved in with Goff, becoming 
a bookseller. The relationship endured until Lindroos’s death in May 2014.

Goff was appointed OBE in 1977 and CBE in 2005.

• Martyn Goff, bookseller and literary prize administrator, born 7 June 1923; 
died 25 March 2015
 