
You didn't need a mystic to see this one coming: Angela Lansbury's return to 
the British stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/jan/26/angela-lansbury-blithe-spirit-stage-theatre>
 – for the first time since 1975, no less – in a West End production of Blithe 
Spirit has been greeted with near universal acclaim from critics.

"She is perfect," coos the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2583921/Dame-Angela-making-look-effortless-88-QUENTIN-LETTS-reviews-Blithe-Spirit.html>
. "In a different league,"fawns the Express  
<http://www.express.co.uk/entertainment/theatre/465594/Blithe-Spirit-starring-Angela-Lansbury-at-the-Gielgud-Theatre-review>
. "Very much alive,"coughs Time Out 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/theatre/blithe-spirit-2>. Mind you, on this 
occasion, the giddier critics seem to be utterly in line with public opinion. 
The 88-year-old Murder, She Wrote star has repeatedly drawn applause on her 
first entrance as the dotty medium Madame Arcati – a Broadway staple usually 
scoffed at by reserved British audiences. "She even gets a hand when she 
bumbles back off," according to Time Out's Andrzej Lukowski. "There are a lot 
of diehard Lansbury fans in the audience."

"The public has firmly (and understandably) decided to accord her the status 
of National Treasure,"writes the Independent's Paul Taylor 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/reviews/blithe-spirit-theatre-review-angela-lansbury-delicious-in-west-end-comeback-9200385.html>
.

Chances are that Blithe Spirit's producers have woken up smiling. Michael 
Blakemore's revival of Noel Coward's classic comedy at the Gielgud theatre – 
his production was first seen, with a different cast, on Broadway five years 
ago, winning Lansbury her fifth Tony award – has bagged full marks from the 
Mail, the Express and the Telegraph,where Charles Spencer heralds 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-reviews/10705226/Blithe-Spirit-Gielgud-Theatre-London-review.html>
 "a tour de force that will glow warmly in the memory of all who see it". High 
praise from a man who admits to "rather dreading" the prospect beforehand.

If past Arcatis have come unstuck, Taylor points out, it is by falling into 
the trap of overegging her absurdity. Lansbury takes her seriously, on her own 
terms. "There's something weird, beautiful and disturbing about this Arcati, a 
lovable gorgon who's gone way beyond mere eccentricity,"writes Whatsonstage's 
Michael Coveney 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/london-theatre/reviews/03-2014/blithe-spirit-gielgud-theatre_33886.html>
.

If any detail of her performance emerges, it's what Coveney calls "a hieratic, 
jerky sand-dance" she uses to summon the dead. "She seems to physical vibrate," 
adds Spencer, while the Spectator's Kate Maltby declares Lansbury"alive and 
kicking – nigh twerking" 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/culturehousedaily/2014/03/nijinsky-disguised-as-nigel-farage-angela-lansbury-stars-in-blithe-spirit-review/>
.

The Guardian's Michael Billington sounds a rallying call for Coward's play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/18/blithe-spirit-review-fine-noel-coward-revival>
, offering a reminder that it "is not called Madame Arcarti, nor is it about 
spiritualism. It is really about a subject that haunts all Coward's best 
comedies, which is the perils of long-term commitment." If Billington praises 
an actor, it is Charles Edwards as Charles Condomine. "One of the best comic 
actors on the British stage," he writes. "He charts perfectly the hero's 
zig-zag emotions."

Sarah Hemming of the Financial Times dubs his comic performance  
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/68ac329c-af55-11e3-bea5-00144feab7de.html#axzz2wON9Hsd9)>
"dry as one of his own martinis". Elsewhere, Henry Hitchings of the Evening 
Standard, in a four-star review 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/goingout/theatre/blithe-spirit-gielgud-theatre-angela-lansbury-is-vivacious-in-defiance-of-her-age--theatre-review-9201298.html>
, rounds-up the other supporting players: Jemima Roper's Elvira is deemed 
"impeccably irritating" and Janie Dee's Ruth "a perfect blend of refinement and 
shrewish nagging."
 