
The finance minister, Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, has refused to 
rule out the Coalition forming minority government with independents, as poll 
analysis shows the government could lose up to 16 seats in just three states.

Cormann was responding to comments by the foreign affairs minister, Julie 
Bishop <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, about the 
Coalition’s tactics in the event of a hung parliament.

Malcolm Turnbull has added to the issue by saying a hung parliament was a 
“theoretical possibility” and if a minority government were formed it would be 
between Labor and the Greens.

On ABC radio, Bishop said: “We don’t intend to lose the election – I intend to 
be part of a government that can implement the economic plan we’ve laid out so 
carefully for the Australian people.”

Australian election 2016: poll analysis suggests swing against Coalition – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/30/australian-election-2016-newspoll-analysis-suggests-swing-against-coalition-live>
Asked about a possible hung parliament, Bishop said: “Well ... this is all 
hypothetical. It would depend very much on the circumstances, it would depend 
on the legislation we were putting forward.

“This is a double-dissolution election. As you know, when the Australian 
people make their decision ... we would then, on the assumption we were able to 
win the election, we would then go to a joint sitting of both houses of 
parliament to pass two very important economic and productivity enhancing 
measures.”

The legislation she was referring to was the restoration of the Australian 
Building and Construction Commission and increasing accountability of union 
officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/21/behind-the-industrial-relations-bills-that-could-trigger-a-double-dissolution-election>
.

Asked about Bishop’s comments, Cormann told reporters the government was 
“working every single day to win the trust of the majority of people in the 
majority of seats”.

He did not rule out forming a minority government with independents and did 
not reject a characterisation that Bishop’s comments meant theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> would consider doing so.

“We are campaigning to win this election so that we can continue to implement 
our plan for jobs and growth,” Cormann said.

Asked about an analysis of Newspolls that showed the government might lose 16 
seats 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/newspoll-enough-to-lose-keystates-swing-against-coalition/news-story/8c67d20b18465daad6b817be6fdbc7e8>
 in Queensland, New South Wales and Western Australia, Cormann said: “We’ve 
always said this election will be close and what that means is that every 
single vote matters.

“Every single Australian at this election has a very clear choice: a choice 
between our plan for jobs and growth ... or the alternative Labor approach, 
which would bring with it political instability, higher taxes, fewer jobs and 
weaker borders.”

Today's campaign: poll warning for Coalition after lacklustre debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/30/todays-campaign-poll-warning-for-coalition-after-lacklustre-debate>
Cormann said Labor was “on a unity ticket with the Greens, on an 
anti-business, anti-success, anti-investment, anti-jobs and growth, weaker 
borders agenda”.

He said there was “no prospect of the Coalition forming government with the 
Greens” but repeatedly refused to rule out forming minority government with 
independents.

The Greens have said forming government with the Coalition is “inconceivable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/di-natale-greens-coalition-government-national-press-club>
, citing its policies on climate change and refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/15/greens-would-demand-change-to-asylum-seeker-policy-under-power-sharing-deal-with-labor>
.

Asked about minority government at a doorstop on Monday, Turnbull said “this 
is a theoretical possibility; the independents, you’re basically talking about 
the Greens here, the Greens are a left wing political party, somewhat to the 
left of the Labor party”.

“If there is any government put together on that basis, we know from 
experience, we don’t have to theorise, it will be done between Labor and the 
Greens,” he said.

There are three independent crossbench MPs seeking re-election: Cathy McGowan, 
Bob Katter and Andrew Wilkie. A number of other hopefuls have varying chances 
of success, including Tony Windsor, who is taking on the deputy prime minister, 
Barnaby Joyce, in New England and theformer Australian Idol presenter James 
Mathison, who has announced he will run against Tony Abbott in Warringah 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/05/27/tv-presenter-james-mathison-is-running-against-tony-abbott-at-th/>
.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, appeared on 2GB 
radio with Ray Hadley on Monday and was also asked to rule out a deal with 
independents for a Coalition minority government.

Morrison replied: “I just don’t think that’s a proposition that comes to us 
... We have a majority in the House of Representatives at the moment, we intend 
to hold that majority.

“The only real question about a hung parliament here is one that goes to Labor 
and the Greens, and we know what their form is on that and the form of 
independents previously ... That is the chaos we all remember. And the best way 
to avoid that chaos is to support the government.”

It's time to expose the myths of the neo-liberal economic model | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/its-time-to-expose-the-myths-of-the-neo-liberal-economic-model>
Bishop was also asked about the possibility of a divided Senate. 

“We know a Labor government would have to govern in coalition with the Greens; 
that’s what we saw last time, that’s what will happen next time,” she said. “I 
would look at every piece of legislation put forward by Labor and consider it 
on its merits.”

At a doorstop on Monday, Labor’s campaign spokesman, Tony Burke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-burke>, said he was “under no 
illusions” about the difficulty of winning the election.

“When you get more than a 20-seat head-start in an election campaign, that 
makes you automatically the frontrunner – that’s where Malcolm Turnbull is,” he 
said.

“I know we are the underdogs in it but I also know that the fight here is 
close.”
 