
When I was 13, my mum took me to see Angela Lansbury in Gypsy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xApZ8rKlmIg>. It was 1973, and all I could 
think about was that I was going to see the woman fromBedknobs and Broomsticks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8xHM7TNxg3s>. I took along my souvenir 
brochure from the film for her to sign and hung around the stage door before 
the show. I remember Angela signing it and saying: “Oh, this show is very 
different to that film. I hope you enjoy it.” It was an indication of her 
versatility, even then.

Her performance changed my life. She was incredible as Mama Rose: strong, 
almost frightening. She made her entrance from the back of the stalls. I have 
this vivid memory of sitting there, watching her, just a few feet away. It was 
a lesson in the fact that musicals needn’t just be fun, fun, fun. Sometimes 
there can be something deeper. This, I realised, was the world I wanted to work 
in.

The word “reinvention” is used a lot today, about the Madonnas, Chers and Lady 
Gagas of this world, but usually it just means dressing differently. Angela, 
however, is a woman who has properly reinvented herself several times. She 
began in the movies: at 18, she starred in 1944’sGaslight 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0036855/> and was nominated for an Oscar. She 
plays a maid whose mistress, Ingrid Bergman, is convinced her husband is trying 
to drive her crazy. Angela manages to imply that her character is colluding in 
this, even though she isn’t – it’s all in Bergman’s head, and suggested by 
Angela’s performance. Straight away, you can see that this is someone with 
enormous talent, not just a pretty girl who got the part because she looks 
great.

In The Picture of Dorian Gray <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TlaGNgi4ybc> a 
year later, she looks absolutely beautiful and gets another Oscar nomination. 
After that, they don’t know what to do with her: she does MGM musicals, bits 
and pieces, costume drama. Eventually, she tries the stage and becomes this 
enormous star. She finds she can sing and dance – and becomes probably the most 
revered performer in musicals.

Today, Angela’s best known for her TV career, for Murder, She Wrote 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x33rwm_murder-she-wrote-intro_shortfilms>, 
but that kind of passed me by. It’s not her pinnacle. I love the fact that, at 
89, she’s still so energetic and forward-looking. She’s just finished Blithe 
Spirit in London’s West End and didn’t miss a single performance. Now she’s 
planning an American tour and thinking about her next show. Working on the 
stage is tough, and she’s the real thing. That’s the joy of it: the total 
commitment of someone who refuses to grow old.

I’ve met her a couple of times. The first time was at the Olivier awards a few 
years ago. She’d read an interview in which I’d mentioned her and put it in a 
frame at home. Apparently, the first thing she said when she got off the plane 
on her way to the awards was: “WillMatthew Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/matthewbourne> be there?” I was and we met, 
which was a thrill, and then she came to the New York opening of my version of 
Sleeping Beauty.

Has she influenced my work? Her spirit has. She gives a lot on stage: I can’t 
imagine she would ever phone in a performance, or give a weak matinee turn, and 
I’ve seen many big stars do that. You get very disappointed when they don’t 
live up to their reputations. But Angela never seems to disappoint.

• Matthew Bourne’s Edward Scissorhands 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2014/edward-scissorhands/> is at Sadler’s 
Wells, London EC1, from 2 December to 11 January 2015. Box office: 0844 412 
4300.
 Angela Lansbury and David Tomlinson in the 1971 Disney classic Bedknobs and 
Broomsticks. Photograph: Snap Stills/Rex 
Angela Lansbury in brief

Born: London, 1925.

Way in: Gaslight for a creepy, assured performance that holds its own 
alongside Ingrid Bergman;Bedknobs and Broomsticks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PpmshIjeSv8> for her chirpy Disney era; Murder 
She Wrote on TV; and she’ll betouring the US 
<http://deadline.com/2014/09/angela-lansbury-hits-the-road-with-blithe-spirit-tour-834943/>
 in December as Madame Arcati inBlithe Spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/23/blithe-spirit-review-angela-lansbury-happy-medium>
.

Key work: All of the above – plus her Australian stint in Driving Miss Daisy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/19/how-we-made-driving-miss-daisy-james-earl-jones-angela-lansbury>
, alongside James Earl Jones.

In three words: “Vigour, versatility, class.”

Angela Lansbury and James Earl Jones: how we made Driving Miss Daisy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/19/how-we-made-driving-miss-daisy-james-earl-jones-angela-lansbury>

Quiz: Noël Coward or Murder, She Wrote? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/quiz/2014/mar/13/noel-coward-or-murder-she-wrote-angela-lansbury-quiz>



 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/quiz/2014/mar/13/noel-coward-or-murder-she-wrote-angela-lansbury-quiz>
 