
Alfred McAlpine <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alfredmcalpine>, the 
construction group, will suffer a £13m hit to profits after the discovery of 
serious accounting irregularities and possible fraud at its Slate business, 
based at the Penrhyn quarry in north Wales.

The group yesterday revealed a "systematic misrepresentation" of production 
volumes and sales by senior managers at Slate, the world's leading producer of 
natural slate. McAlpine said those involved "sought to conceal the financial 
implications of their actions through the pre-selling of slate at substantially 
discounted prices. The board believes that the behaviour and collusion of the 
managers responsible has been entirely deliberate and involves the possibility 
of fraud." A spokesman for McAlpine said the problems were uncovered by an 
internal audit and the investigation remains internal although police 
involvement "cannot be ruled out".

Two senior managers were suspended at the weekend, although the spokesman said 
there is no evidence of any personal gain. McAlpine said the accounting 
irregularities will involve a restatement of the 2005 net assets by 
approximately £11m, and a reduction in the expected pre-tax profit of the Slate 
business in the year to December 31 2006 by about £13m. This is before any 
restructuring and impairment provisions that may be required.

The group also warned that the "historic actions" of those involved "will 
continue to have a material impact on the profitability and cash generation of 
the Slate business in 2007". McAlpine said it is bringing in independent 
accountants to start "a detailed forensic analysis" of the Slate business since 
2003.

Production of slate from the Penrhyn quarry dates back to the 13th century and 
it supplied the roof for the British Library in London and the Welsh Assembly 
building.
 