
MediaGuardian.co.uk has been shortlisted again for a prize at the annual 
Association of Online Publishers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aop> Awards.

The award recognises the integration of the web with traditional print 
products and offline events.

MediaGuardian.co.uk grew from the Guardian's Media Guardian section, published 
on Mondays, and the brand is also extended to various industry events 
throughout the year, including the annual MediaGuardian Edinburgh International 
Television Festival in August.

The regular Media Business page was launched in the newspaper earlier this 
year to drive the brand name and harness the editorial firepower of the 
website, which operates with a team of 10 editorial and production staff.

The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> Unlimited 
editor-in-chief, Emily Bell, has also been nominated in the best consumer 
editor category, alongside the online editors of the Independent, the Wall 
Street Journal, the Sun and ThisisLondon, the website of the London Evening 
Standard.

Bell, a former business editor of the Observer, took charge of Guardian 
Unlimited three years ago and has seen traffic more than double in two years.

The AOP Online Publishing Awards are now in their second year, having replaced 
the Periodical Publishers Association's internet awards as the industry 
showcase for the online efforts of traditional publishers.

Emap's Aloud.com online ticketing service and FHM.com, the magazine's online 
offshoot that broke into profit this year, have been nominated for the best 
consumer digital product or service award.

FHM.com has also been nominated in the best integration of consumer media 
category alongside rival lads' mag Maxim and Delia Smith's recipe site 
DeliaOnline.com.

The Financial Times' website, FT.com, is among the sites nominated for the 
best consumer site award, as is Associated New Media's personal finance site, 
ThisisMoney.co.uk, and Asian lifestyle portal RedHotCurry.com.

Also nominated is the BBC's website, which is the most popular online 
destination in Europe but has been criticised by commercial rivals who claim it 
has dented their revenues.

The corporation is also nominated for its radio player in the innovation 
category, which lets users catch up with programmes they might have missed.

Nominations in the best business digital product or service category include 
AccountancyAge.com, Brand Republic, Caterer.com, eFinancialNews.com, PCPro.com 
and Startups.co.uk.

Other websites nominated alongside MediaGuardian.co.uk, whose editor Lisa 
O'Carroll won the business editor award last year, include VNU's 
AccountancyAge.com, PersonnelToday.com from Reed Business Information and 
Emap's TotalTele.com and AJPlus.com.

Emap, which recently overhauled its online operations, has been nominated for 
eight awards.

The company, in common with many of its rivals, spent millions and employed 
hundreds of online staff at the height of the dotcom boom but was later forced 
to make most of them redundant and slash spending.

Emap's many award nominations will be seen as a vindication of this 
cost-cutting and streamlining strategy.

Â· To contact the MediaGuardian newsdesk email editor@mediatheguardian.com 
<mailto:editor@mediatheguardian.com> or phone 020 7239 9857
 