
Who knew the New York Yankees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> cared so much about $6m?

They don’t, of course – not really. It’s not the money but the principle of 
the matter that has led baseball’s richest and most storied franchise to 
publicly decline to pay sluggerAlex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> the $6m bonus written into 
his contract for matching Willie Mays’ 660 career home runs. They’re not even 
being particularly coy as to why: sources within the New York front office 
leaked that they’d be refusing to pay Rodriguez for the milestone as soon as he 
was reinstated by the team, and the fight loomed on the horizon throughout 
Rodriguez’s generally strong spring training and into Opening Day.

Then the regular season started, and Rodriguez forced the issue. He had hit 
.243/.371/.541 in 89 PA going into Sunday’s action, with 6 home runs in just 22 
games played. The sixth of those home runs, the blast that tied Mays’s career 
record, came at Fenway Park on Friday night against the rival Red Sox. And 
despite the somewhat manufactured nature of that rivalry, which has been far 
more hype than heat since, oh, the later part of last decade, Sox fans gave it 
to Rodriguez lustily in his first appearance at the plate, just before the 
Yankees icon took reliever Junichi Tazawa deep over the Green Monster.

That kicked off a night of odd, muted, carefully-worded celebrations. The 
Yankees, after all, had already decided they weren’t going to pay the bonus. 
They did so way in advance of when they would actually be required to make that 
decision. The language in Rodriguez’s contract reads as follows,per USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/yankees/2015/05/02/alex-rodriguez-bonus-brian-cashman-660th-home-run-willie-mays/26774077/>
: “It’s the sole discretion of the New York Yankees to determine whether each 
of these milestones is commercially marketable as the home-run chase,’’ 
according to the contract. “The Yankees have the right, but not the obligation, 
to determine whether it’s a commercially marketable milestone.’’

The Yankees appear to have worked backwards: they first asserted they weren’t 
going to pay the bonus, then set about making the milestone unmarketable. 
They’ve not been so uncouth as to try and completely ignore the historical 
significance of the event –at least not on the team’s Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/Yankees/status/594316809920237568> – but you won’t find 
them selling T-shirts or hats like they did for any of Derek Jeter’s 
milestones, or the ridiculous amount of purchasable nonsense you can still find 
surrounding theYear of Mariano 
<http://shop.mlb.com/search/index.jsp?kwCatId=&kw=mariano%20rivera&origkw=mariano+rivera&sr=1>
 in the MLB.com Store. It is, in essence, a self-fulfilling prophecy: what does 
it take for something to be unmarketable? Well, mainly it takes an adamant 
refusal to market it. There can be good reasons not to try to sell something to 
fans and there can be bad reasons, but those reasons aren’t ever just out there 
in a state of nature, immutable dictates that alternately tie or free the hands 
of the actors involved. They reflect choices, and the Yankees have made theirs.

To their credit, in an odd way, the Yankees are quite up-front about that. 
Yankees GM Brian Cashman has been very candid as to the language of the 
contract, and that the decision not to pay Rodriguez represents an executive 
choice that’s the exclusive right of his organization to exercise for whatever 
reason they see fit.Via ESPN 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/12807079/brian-cashman-says-new-york-yankees-pay-alex-rodriguez-6-million-bonus-660th-home-run>
: “We have the right but not the obligation to do something, and that’s it,” 
said Yankees general manager Brian Cashman before Saturday’s Yankees-Red Sox 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/team/_/name/bos/boston-red-sox> game at Fenway Park. 
“We’re going to follow the contract as we follow all contracts, so there is no 
dispute, from our perspective.”

If the reported language of the contract is correct, the Yankees appear to be 
on sure ground here, even if their actions come off as a bit petulant. After 
all, you’d think that a Yankees team that desperately needs to make the 
playoffs to avoid a third straight embarrassing season wouldn’t actively 
antagonize their best hitter, who also happens to be the man whose 2009 
postseason brought them their only World Series victory in the last decade and 
a half. But the current Yankees regime, especially at the levels above Brian 
Cashman, has proven itself nothing if nottone-deaf and petty 
<http://www.nj.com/yankees/index.ssf/2013/12/yankees_president_randy_levine_to_alex_rodriguez_robinson_cano_needs_some_steroids.html>
.

There is one bright side, however, to what would otherwise be little more than 
another chance for Yankees haters to snack on the team’s bumbling. TheMLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> Players Association has indicated that 
it will support Rodriguez in any attempt he makes to recover the $6m, and in 
any future attempts to recover similar awards for tying the records of the 
three men remaining ahead of him on the all-time home run leaderboard: Babe 
Ruth, Hank Aaron, and Barry Bonds.

This is important because the relationship between Rodriguez and his union has 
been frosty at best recently. The MLBPA essentially threw Rodriguez to the 
wolves in his attempts to resist being banned from the sport following the 
Biogenesis scandal. That forced Rodriguez to construct his own defense, part of 
which involvedsuing the MLBPA 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24408397/arod-suing-mlb-mlbpa-in-effort-to-overturn-suspension>
 along with MLB itself. Rodriguez has never been popular among his fellow 
players – at least those who weren’t also team-mates – and it seemed for a time 
that disdain was informing the union’s treatment of one of the game’s stars. 
That’s not how unions are supposed to work, of course. Not liking a union 
member is insufficient grounds to deny him the full force and protection of 
membership. To act otherwise is to fundamentally undermine the purpose of 
having a union in the first place.

A healthy relationship between the MLBPA and Rodriguez is necessary not just 
because it’s what Rodriguez is owed by paying dues – it’s important because one 
of the primary tactics that management has used throughout history to break 
unions has been to turn union members on each other. During the last lockout, 
the NFL broke the NFLPA under the disastrously incompetent leadership of 
DeMaurice Smith by playing on the tensions between veteran players and rookies. 
MLB tried to do much of the same thing in their last round of negotiations with 
the MLBPA, to less success – but the general goal is always to get the players 
with less to see the players with more as their enemies, instead of the 
management that’s compromised on a system that merely pays most players less 
than what they’re worth, instead of all of them.

Will Rodriguez get his $6m? In the end, I doubt it. But I also think that’s 
less important, in the grand scheme of things, than him fighting for it – and 
doing so with the full backing of his union. In the ridiculously lucrative 
world of professional baseball, the money isn’t really important to any of the 
parties involved; what’s important is the fight.
 