
Jennifer Ramírez knows it would be suicide to remain in El Salvador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/el-salvador>.

A former member of the Barrio 18 street gang, she spent two years as a 
protected witness, testifying against her former associates. When the trials 
came to an end, she was released from protective custody to the mercy of the 
streets.

Even the judge told her to run.

The migrants who fled violence for the US only to be sent back to their deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/deportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador>
Ramírez, now 24, was adopted into the gang as an eight-year-old orphan, but 
said that she decided to testify against her former associates when she became 
pregnant.

“Now I just want to find a safe place where I can work and send money home for 
my daughter so she can have a different life than me,” she said.

Last year, Ramírez made it to the United States twice, only to be caught and 
deported each time. When she set out again this year, she discovered that it 
has now become as hard to enterMexico <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>
 as it is to cross the heavily policed US border.

On her previous attempts, she said, it took three days to reach the migrant 
shelter in Ixtepec, about 150 miles into Mexico. This time she had spent nearly 
a month, walking most of the way, sleeping rough most nights – and one occasion 
only just escaping Mexican immigration officials who shot her with a Taser.

“It has got really difficult to move even a few kilometers,” Ramirez said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f3aa7946d5fcdeff453a35e50a917a3f5e5cd8%2F0_227_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexico's%20migration%20crackdown%20escalates%20dangers%20for%20Central%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexico%27s%20migration%20crackdown%20escalates%20dangers%20for%20Central%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6f3aa7946d5fcdeff453a35e50a917a3f5e5cd8%2F0_227_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Women and children eat lunch at a shelter providing temporary refuge for 
Central American migrants traveling north, in Arriaga, Chiapas State, Mexico, 
last year. Photograph: Rebecca Blackwell/AP 
Across southern Mexico, Central American migrants fleeing violence, poverty 
and institutional collapse have over recent months found that well-trodden – if 
risky – routes north have been blocked by a government crackdown.

This has forced travelers to divert their journey through more remote and more 
perilous regions, where they face a heightened risk of robbery, rape, abduction 
and death.

Migrants interviewed in three separate church-run shelters on Mexico’s 
sweltering Pacific coastal plain, described taking lengthy detours – by land or 
even by sea – to avoid checkpoints and police raids.

They spoke of violent encounters with armed robbers and corrupt police – and 
the constant threat of sexual violence against female migrants. Female migrants 
described how they were forced to sleep with people smugglers orcoyotes in 
exchange for their “protection”.

At a shelter in the town of Chahuites, several migrants told the story of a 
Honduran migrant called Beverly who had disappeared a few days earlier: a 
people smuggler had kidnapped and raped her younger sister, Fatima, whom he was 
holding prisoner in a nearby town. Beverly had set out to find her sister, but 
neither woman had been heard from since.

The roots of the current crackdown lie in the political furore unleashed last 
year by the arrival in the US of a wave ofunaccompanied Central American 
children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/09/central-america-child-migrants-us-border-crisis>
 and undocumented families.

The Mexican crackdown has clearly been devised in tandem with the US 
government. Thomas Shannon, counselor to US secretary of state John Kerry, told 
the Senate appropriations committee in July what the US government planned to 
do to prevent a repeat of the surge.One of the main planks of the strategy 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/2448514-shannon-testimony-7-10-14.html#document/p3/a249403>
 was “improving the ability of Mexico to interdict migrants before they cross 
into Mexico”.

Migrants can still cross Mexico’s southern border itself relatively easily, 
but inside the country, they find that traditional routes are all but shut down.


Many more checkpoints have been set up along roads in the southern states of 
Tabasco, Veracruz, Chiapas and Oaxaca, making travel by bus much harder, too.

‘Flee or die’: violence drives Central America’s child migrants to US border
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/09/central-america-child-migrants-us-border-crisis>
Police raids mean few now dare ride the infamous freight train, known as La 
Bestia, that had long been themain mode of transport for the poorest migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/23/migrants-mexico-train-the-beast-fleeing-poverty>
.


The train now trundles through silent stations, its wagons free of the crowds 
of men, women and children who once clung to roofs and ladders.

President Enrique Peña Nieto announced the crackdown in July 2014, within a 
broader policy package called the Southern Frontier Programme. Hundreds of 
migration agents were redeployed to the country’s southern states.

Mexican officials said the programme was designed to protect migrants and 
promised to go after people-smugglers and the criminal gangs that regularly 
preyed on travellers. They also promised justice for any migrants abused by 
officials.

“The government believes that all these actions have had important, though 
insufficient, results,” the office of the president said in a written statement 
to the Guardian.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f6b90c5f00b8482aef3a0940258029294561f9e%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexico's%20migration%20crackdown%20escalates%20dangers%20for%20Central%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexico%27s%20migration%20crackdown%20escalates%20dangers%20for%20Central%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f6b90c5f00b8482aef3a0940258029294561f9e%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Immigration officials remove Central American migrants from a northbound 
freight train during an after-midnight raid by federal police in San Ramon, 
Mexico, last year. Photograph: Rebecca Blackwell/AP 
“The government will continue to evaluate the strategies and redouble its 
efforts in these areas, with the objective of guaranteeing the human rights and 
security of migrants moving through our country.”

But the most obvious impact of the programme has been a vast increase in 
deportations from Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/04/mexico-deports-record-numbers-women-children-central-america>
, significantly reducing the pressure on the US border.

Mexico deported 92,889 Central Americans between October 2014 and April 2015, 
almost double the 49,893 in the same period the year before.


The US authorities, meanwhile, detained 70,226 people “other than Mexicans” – 
mostly fromGuatemala <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guatemala>, Honduras 
and El Salvador – between October 2014 and April 2015. The year before, it 
apprehended 159,103.

Such efforts may have driven down the number of migrants reaching the US border
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/mexico-immigration-crackdown-fewer-child-migrants-central-america>
, but, human rights activists charge, it has done nothing to address the 
desperate poverty and rampant violence in countries like Honduras and El 
Salvador, and risks creating a new humanitarian crisis in Mexico as well.


“The Obama administration has found a way to hide the so-called crisis of 
Central American migrants at the border,” said Maureen Meyer, of the Washington 
Office on Latin America. “But at what cost?”

In the Guatemalan border post of El Carmen, just over the Suchiate river, 
migration officials said that up to 15 buses filled with deportees pass through 
every night on their way toHonduras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/honduras>
 and El Salvador.


Once migrants get back to those countries, however, few are likely to remain 
there for long. Most cities in the two countries are currentlycontrolled by 
gangs ormaras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/12/deportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador>
, such as the Barrio 18 and the Mara Salvatrucha, and many migrants leave to 
escape imminent physical danger.

Hitching a lift northward from the border, one Salvadoran teenager described 
his journey as a sequence of near-death encounters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7e6f9a7fb921cd5c32cda627aa279d274f8b27%2F0_0_4387_2634%2F4387.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexico's%20migration%20crackdown%20escalates%20dangers%20for%20Central%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexico%27s%20migration%20crackdown%20escalates%20dangers%20for%20Central%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fmexico-central-american-migrants-journey-crackdown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7e6f9a7fb921cd5c32cda627aa279d274f8b27%2F0_0_4387_2634%2F4387.jpg>
 Men who operate makeshift rafts to cross the Suchiate river, a natural border 
between Mexico and Guatemala, wait for customers at the place known as ‘Paso 
del Coyote’ in Ciudad Hidalgo, Mexico, last year. Photograph: Yuri 
Cortez/AFP/Getty Images 
Stefhans, 19, fled his home after his father refused to pay a protection fee 
to a local gang. In retaliation, the gang ordered his death.

He was caught in Mexico and sent back home, where his mother and siblings met 
him as he got off the bus. The reunion was sweet, he said, but short: after 
lunch, the family put him on another bus heading north.

Back in Mexico, Stefhans managed to avoid the battery of checkpoints by 
trudging along train tracks.


But while he eluded migration officials, he walked straight into an ambush by 
armed robbers. “They had guns and machetes and there was nowhere to run to 
because they had us surrounded,” he said. “They took everything we had.”

Robbers come in all guises on the road north, and some wear uniforms. 

A 34-year-old Salvadoran taxi driver called Walter Acosta described how 
federal police had demanded 500 pesos (about $30 or £20). He gave them 
considerably less, which was all he had, and they let him go.


Encouraged by activists at the shelters, Stefhans and Acosta decided to file 
legal suits, and hoped to obtain a special visa, given to migrants in Mexico 
who have been victims of crimes, that would allow them to remain in the country 
until their cases are resolved.

But many migrants distrust the authorities too much, or are under too much 
pressure to start earning money, to follow this path. Instead, they seek to 
slip ever deeper into the shadows.

At one stage in his journey, Walter took a boat through mangroves to avoid a 
checkpoint. Activists have reported that migrants are increasingly using new 
sea routes between northern Guatemala and Mexico’s Pacific coast.

Several migrants in the shelters said that when planning the journey, they had 
already factored in the $4,000 fee for a smuggler to get them across the US 
frontier.

Now, however, they were facing the realisation that they would have to pay 
about the same amount again to get them through Mexico.

“It looks like it is the only way,” said 17-year-old Margarita, in the town of 
Chahuites. Just a day before, she had been robbed and sexually molested as she 
headed north, but was saved from rape by her older brother, who had appealed to 
the assailants’ consciences.

Soon after, he was detained and deported by Mexican officials. Margarita was 
left alone with her younger brother. “I don’t know what we are going to do,” 
she said. “I never thought it was going to be this bad.”

Additional reporting by Ed Pilkington in New York

On Wednesday: South of the US border, migrants travel through cartel 
battlefield
 