
Kidnap, murder, extortion – despite recent reports of improvements, Mexico 
remains gripped by a crisis which, at its peak, saw the army deployed in some 
areas in an attempt to wrest back control of the streets from violent drug 
cartels. Between 2007 and 2012 intentional homicides per capita increased by 
over 65% in Mexico, while kidnappings increased 250% and extortions 94%. Other 
countries in the region are also facing social and political challenges for 
everyday security – the situation in Venezuela, for example, is not much better 
than Mexico, with a leading criminologist tallying155,788 murders in the 
country since 1999. 
<http://www.eluniversal.com/nacional-y-politica/120603/155788-asesinatos-en-venezuela-desde-1999>

It comes as no surprise then that the attraction of the UK as a safe country 
to live in has gone from being the 17th most important factor for Mexican 
students in 2007 to the fifth in 2012,according to British Council research 
<http://ihe.britishcouncil.org/educationintelligence/student-insight-mexico>.

But if international higher education is increasingly seen as an escape route 
for some of Latin America's young people, it is only because of some far more 
positive social changes in the region. In the past decade, more than 50 million 
people have worked their way up the social ladder and into the middle classes – 
an increase of more than 50% that means now almosta third of Latin Americans 
are classifiable as middle class 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2012/11/13/mexico-middle-class-grows-over-past-decade>
. This generation has high aspirations for their children and wants to see them 
secure the best education possible.

At the same time, most governments in the region have started addressing low 
rates of higher education participation – more scholarships, increased 
sponsorship and greater social mobility has resulted in half a million more 
people enrolling in higher education in 2010-11 than in 2006-07 inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> alone. This has also helped increase 
the appetite for international study.

Underpinning all this is Latin Americans' famously strong sense of family. 
Historically, it has been the main reason that those who could study abroad 
have preferred to stay home instead, but aspirations for the next generation, 
coupled with safety concerns, mean this instinct has opened people's minds to 
the idea of international study.

It is against this backdrop that the region is becoming increasingly important 
to European universities. As with students from most regions around the world, 
the UK has to settle for second place behind the US in the eyes of Latin 
Americans, but the high quality of education available, the international 
recognition of UK qualifications, and the subsequent career prospects are cited 
as defining factors when Latin American students were asked to reflect on the 
UK as a higher education destination.

The UK shares many of these qualities with the US, but there are discernible 
differences in the way each is viewed from Latin America. The UK is more often 
chosen because it is seen as a desirable country to study in, while the US is 
chosen on the strength of individual institutions. This means that Latin 
America is a recruitment ground that's open to all UK universities and not just 
a few big names.

There are still many obstacles that UK universities can only overcome with 
representatives on the ground, which is where good education agents and 
specialist providers with local knowledge and contacts play a part. What Latin 
Americans really want to know is that their children will be employable once 
they complete their studies. And, while tuition fees between domestic and UK 
universities are comparable in general, the UK's high living costs are a 
concern, so parents need to be further convinced of UK higher education's value 
as an investment.

Domestic competition is also increasing all the time as private Latin American 
universities respond to foreigners' recruitment drives by undercutting 
international offers, creating more scholarship and discount schemes; these 
universities have locality on their side. On an international level, the UK 
needs to brace itself for increasing competition from emerging higher education 
destinations – Germany and Canada are already not far behind in their 
recruitment of Latin American students.

However, as long as its carefully crafted reputation remains intact, and the 
quality of degree level study is maintained, I confidently predict that UK 
higher education can face down all of these challenges as an appealing 
destination for increasingly mobile Latin American students, whatever their 
motivation for leaving home and however the political or social situation 
develops.

Laura Aguirre is Latin American recruitment manager for Study Group 
<http://www.studygroup.com/> – follow it on Twitter @Study_Group 
<https://twitter.com/Study_Group>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 