
MI5 is investigating the extent to which two of the alleged spies accused of 
involvement in theRussian espionage ring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/01/russian-spy-ring-russia> had 
contacts in the UK and whether they attempted to recruit British officials as 
informants.

The agency is scrutinising the activities of Anna Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/02/anna-chapman-husband-fbi-spy-suspect>
, who has British citizenship and a British passport, and Tracey Lee Ann Foley, 
who allegedly used a forged British passport prepared for her by Russia's SVR 
intelligence service.

Chapman, 28, moved to London in 2002 and had a series of jobs including six 
months working for the small business banking division of Barclays and stints 
with a hedge fund called Navigator Asset Management and a private aviation 
company, NetJetsEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

MI5 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi5> is attempting to verify the details 
of Chapman's time in London including her contacts in the business community, 
whether she handled the accounts of wealthy individuals and her appearances at 
glitzy nightclubs.

Anna Kushchenko – as she was then known – met a British man, Alex Chapman, in 
a London nightclub and the couple married five months later in Moscow in 2002. 
They divorced four years later but remained in touch. Marriage to a British 
citizen and three years' residence in the UK would have enabled Chapman to 
obtain a British passport.

William Hague <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/williamhague>, the foreign 
secretary, has confirmed that the UK is examining the forged passport 
allegation. "Of course we are concerned about that, we're discussing that with 
the United States," he said. He declined to say whether intelligence agencies 
believe Chapman may have spied on Britain as well as the US.

Alex Chapman, a 30-year-old trainee psychologist from Bournemouth, was 
interviewed by MI5 on Wednesday. He said he was not surprised that his ex-wife 
had been arrested on suspicion of spying. "Towards the end of our marriage she 
became very secretive, going for meetings on her own with 'Russian friends', 
and I guess it might have been because she was in contact with the Russian 
government," he toldthe Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/russia/7866823/MI5-investigates-KGB-father-of-Russian-spy.html>
. He also said that his ex-wife's father, Vasily Kushchenko, was a 
"high-ranking" officer in the Russian security forces who "controlled 
everything in her life". As part of its investigation, MI5 is thought to be 
looking at whether Chapman was recruited to work for Russia's security agencies 
by her father.

Chapman moved back to Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> in 
2006 when her marriage ended and relocated to the US in 2007 to set up an 
online property venture. The company struggled until 2009, when her ex-husband 
said someone "pumped a lot of money into it" and it took off. Alex Chapman also 
said his ex-wife had disliked Americans until she met a rich US citizen who 
took her to the States and she came back loving the country.

It is unclear whether Foley had connections with the UK beyond her alleged use 
of a forged British passport for trips to Moscow. She posed as a naturalised US 
citizen born in Canada, and had lived in the US since 1999. Believed to be 
married to another alleged spy, Donald Heathfield, with two teenage sons, at 
the time of her arrest she lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
 