
In the autumn of 1980, a meeting took place between François Mitterrand 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-francois-mitterrand-1323110.html>
 and his socialist rival, Michel Rocard, both of whom were jockeying to be the 
Socialist presidential candidate at the forthcoming elections. Mitterrand 
subsequently recounted the rendezvous to his aideJacques Attali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/feb/25/comment.comment>: “As I was 
bored listening to him, I began to play with a piece of paper which I rolled 
into a ball. It fell on the floor between the two of us, and can you imagine: 
he got on all fours to pick it up and give it to me.”

Whether or not this story is true, it encapsulates perfectly the relationship 
between the two men: Rocard, who has died aged 85, the eager challenger without 
the killer instinct; Mitterrand the cool and Olympian political operator with 
an uncanny sense of the weaknesses of his opponents. Rocard was the most 
brilliant and attractive socialist politician of the post-second world war 
period; Mitterrand his implacable nemesis.

Born in Courbevoie, a western suburb of Paris, Michel was the son of Yves and 
Renée (nee Favre), a teacher.Yves 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/03/17/obituaries/yves-rocard-astrophysicist-89.html>
 was a distinguished nuclear physicist, an austere intellectual whose 
remoteness was accentuated by deafness (he was allegedly one of the models of 
Hergé’s eccentric Professor Calculus in the Tintin books). Michel craved his 
approval, but found it difficult to win – Yves disliked Michel’s decision to 
study social sciences rather than the hard sciences. The family was Protestant 
and Michel was driven by the strong ethical imperative characteristic of French 
protestantism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmichel-rocard-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F099d00dfca0762eabf54ba886989baeae80ba637%2F0_74_2805_1682%2F2805.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michel%20Rocard%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmichel-rocard-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michel%20Rocard%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmichel-rocard-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F099d00dfca0762eabf54ba886989baeae80ba637%2F0_74_2805_1682%2F2805.jpg>
 Michel Rocard with Margaret Thacher in 1988. Photograph: Charles 
Platiau/Reuters 
While studying at the Ecole des Sciences Politiques and then the elite Ecole 
Nationale d’Administration, Rocard threw himself into socialist student 
politics. From 1958 he was a financial civil servant, at the same time 
continuing his activism, becoming a bitter opponent of the government of the 
socialist Guy Mollet (with Mitterrand as interior minister) for its pursuit of 
colonial war inAlgeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>. In 1960 
Rocard joined the small dissident Unified Socialist party (Parti Socialiste 
Unifié, known as the PSU), and rose to become its leader (1967-73). In 1969 
Rocard stood as the PSU’s candidate at the elections, scoring 3.6% of the vote.

By now he was a figure with a national profile, but found himself out of tune 
with the recomposition of the left under Mitterrand, who had taken over the 
moribund Socialist party. Mitterrand’s strategy involved an alliance with the 
powerful Communist party. The price of this alliance was the adoption of a 
Marxist-inspired programme of nationalisation and public spending, which Rocard 
believed was economically naive. But the political wind was behind this 
strategy and Rocard joined Mitterrand’s party in 1974.

He was an important recruit, but equally Mitterrand harboured an 
understandable suspicion of him. When the left was defeated at the 
parliamentary elections of 1978, Rocard hoped his time had come. Attacking what 
he called the “archaism” of the Socialist leaders, he developed his vision of 
what he called the “second left” – a left committed to decentralisation and 
ready to draw on civil society rather than relying on state control and 
top-down reforms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmichel-rocard-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b65a5d09b071d56566438e39c1e4667f98c6676%2F0_70_2951_1771%2F2951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michel%20Rocard%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmichel-rocard-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michel%20Rocard%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fmichel-rocard-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b65a5d09b071d56566438e39c1e4667f98c6676%2F0_70_2951_1771%2F2951.jpg>
 Michel Rocard with Nelson Mandela in 1990. Photograph: Joel Robine/AFP/Getty 
Images 
One of his obsessions was to educate the left into economic realities. Where 
Mitterrand’s culture was historical and literary, Rocard’s was economic and 
sociological; where Mitterrand’s ambition was to win power, Rocard’s was to 
reflect on what to do with that power.

At the Socialist congress in Metz in 1978, Rocard was outmanoeuvred by 
Mitterrand’s supporters. When Rocard tried to suggest that the current policies 
of the left would lead to austerity and exchange controls, he was put down by 
Mitterrand’s sidekick Laurent Fabius with the demagogic phrase: “Yes, Michel, 
there is something between the market and rationing – it is socialism.”

This succeeded in making Rocard seem to be a rightwing figure, which was only 
true according to a particular definition of the left. Rocard was essentially 
trying to educate the party to move from incantatory Marxism to social 
democracy. Polls at this time showed Rocard to be the most popular Socialist 
politician inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, but Mitterrand 
controlled the party and it was he who was selected as the party's presidential 
candidate. After Mitterrand won the presidential election of 1981, he sidelined 
Rocard into a ministry, planning and regional development, where he had little 
real power.

Over the first two years of Mitterrand’s presidency, almost all that Rocard 
had predicted came to pass: three devaluations, a huge increase in the balance 
of payments deficit, the imposition of exchange controls and a wage freeze. 
Mitterrand was forced to backtrack. Rocard’s political stock rose, and in 1983 
he was given the post of agriculture minister.

He later said that this was one of the periods he had most enjoyed, restoring 
relationships with the farming groups who had been alienated by his 
predecessor, the abrasiveEdith Cresson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/mar/26/eu.france>. Then, suddenly, 
Rocard resigned in April 1985, scandalised by Mitterrand’s cynical decision to 
introduce proportional representation in the following year’s parliamentary 
elections. Mitterrand’s aim in doing this was to divide the right by allowing 
the extremist Front National to win seats.

Rocard threw his hat in the ring to be the Socialist candidate for the 
presidency if the ageing Mitterrand decided not to stand again. When Mitterrand 
made it clear he had every intention of doing so, Rocard had to withdraw his 
candidature. After Mitterrand’s re-election in 1988, he appointed Rocard as 
prime minister. The parliamentary elections that followed the presidential 
election did not give the Socialists an overall majority, and Rocard seemed the 
person likeliest to rally the support of centrists to the government.

As premier, Rocard did have some notable successes: he managed to reconcile 
the highly antagonistic communities in the French territory of New Caledonia; 
he organised a reform of the financing of the indebted social security budget; 
and he introduced a minimum living wage income (Revenu Minimum d’Insertion) for 
those on very low incomes. These were valuable incremental reforms, but Rocard 
did not entirely succeed in giving an overall sense of direction as premier.

This was partly because Mitterrand, as president, did all he could to 
undermine him. When Rocard had taken over, the outgoing premier,Jacques Chirac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/may/22/france.eu>, told him: “Beware 
of Mitterrand, it is when he smiles at you that the dagger is close to your 
back.” This was indeed the case, though for Rocard there were in fact few 
smiles.

Mitterrand sacked Rocard in May 1991. It was probably no bad thing to be 
disassociated from the increasingly discredited Mitterrand, and Rocard began to 
position himself for the future. With disaster looming for the Socialists at 
the forthcoming elections, Rocard called for a “big bang” on the left to create 
a new force incorporating the centre, the Greens and the Socialists. The 
predicted electoral disaster occurred and Rocard got himself elected to the 
leadership of the Socialist party. But this was to be a short-lived success.

Although under his leadership the party did start to rise in the polls, he 
made the mistake of heading the party’s list at the European elections of 1994. 
The Socialists did very badly, partly because Mitterrand had covertly supported 
a rival centre-left list in order to undermine Rocard. After this debacle, 
Rocard was ousted from the leadership of the party and decided to distance 
himself from French politics, resigning even the post of mayor of 
Conflans-Sainte-Honorine, a north-western suburb ofParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, which he had held since 1977. From 
this moment, he devoted himself to his activities as a member of the European 
parliament, where he remained until 2009.

Rocard was a genuine political visionary and the French Socialist party would 
be in a better state today had he been listened to earlier. He was an economic 
realist with a moral vision, but it was France’s bad luck that he did not have 
the political adeptness to put his vision into practice. Segolène Royal’s 
election campaign in 2007 was a half-baked attempt to embody some of the 
intuitions Rocard had had 20 years earlier, but without the intellectual 
substance that Rocard had tried to give them. It was somehow typical, however, 
that Rocard’s intervention in the first round of the campaign, calling on Royal 
to form an alliance with the centrist candidateFrançois Bayrou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/french-election-blog-2012/2012/apr/03/francois-bayrou-stuck-middle-boring>
, was ill-timed and did her cause no good. Rocard was unfortunately never the 
most effective tactical advocate of the ideas he defended.

With his first wife, Geneviève Pujol 
<http://publications-chs.eklablog.com/itineraires-et-travaux-de-genevieve-poujol-animation-education-populai-a60720487>
, he had two children, Sylvie and Francis. In 1972 he married Michèle Legendre, 
and they had two sons, Olivier and Loïc. His first two marriages ended in 
divorce. He is survived by his third wife, Sylvie Pélissier, and his children.
Julian Jackson


David Owen writes: Michel Rocard was my friend of the heart and the brain for 
50 years. We agreed on a social democracy for the 21st century. We believed in 
Europe as an enriching entity in all its many manifestations. For him Europe 
would be a supranational political design, for me a grouping of states. On that 
difference there were many arguments along the lines of his June 2014 Guardian 
article,A French message to Britain: get out of Europe before you wreck it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/06/french-message-britain-get-out-european-union>
.

In Paris this spring we spoke in unison on a European Movement political 
platform at the start of the British referendum campaign. The time had come for 
the EU and the eurozone to be a United States ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and for Britain to leave the 
EU, but with the friendship between our two countries enhanced by that process. 
I am glad that he lived to see that British decision. I mourn the loss of a 
great Frenchman and fine internationalist.

• Michel Louis Léon Rocard, politician, born 23 August 1930; died 2 July 2016
 