
Microsoft is bringing “the thunder”. That was the message sent to its 
competitors today, when Microsoft unveiled itsWindows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> devices, including the new 
Surface Pro 4 and Surface Book, challenging Apple’s dominance at the top end of 
the laptop market.

“We have competitors, you might have noticed. They are chasing us,” Panos 
Panay, head of engineering of allMicrosoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> devices, said during the 
hour-and-a-half-long presentation. “What do you do? Do you double down and 
bring the thunder or do you reinvent the category again?”

It seems that the company chose to do both and did not shy from making 
comparisons with rivalApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, a 
company whose glitzy presentations have in the past left Microsoft looking 
stale.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVfOe5mFbAE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVfOe5mFbAE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXVfOe5mFbAE&media=>
 Microsoft introduces it’s latest technology. 
Surface Book

According to Panay, compared to MacBook Pro, Surface Book is twice as fast. In 
his demo of the device, he transferred 3GB of data in just four seconds by 
using a Surface connection – eliciting a number of “whoas” from the audience. 
The demo came with its own dig at Apple – a number of which were sprinkled 
throughout the presentation – an image of a toaster-fridge hybrid.
Terry Myerson (@tmyerson) 
@maryjofoley <https://twitter.com/maryjofoley>, @alex 
<https://twitter.com/alex>, @thurrott <https://twitter.com/thurrott>, @tomwarren
 <https://twitter.com/tomwarren> hope you enjoy the show today…pay attention – 
some new things might pop uppic.twitter.com/yHbgfLNyfN <http://t.co/yHbgfLNyfN>
 <https://twitter.com/tmyerson/status/651384235090157568> October 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/tmyerson/status/651384235090157568> 
The image was a clear reference to Apple CEO Tim Cook’s comments about 
tablet-laptops like Surface. “You can converge a toaster and a refrigerator, 
but those things are probably not gonna be pleasing to the user,” Cook said in 
2012.

Surface Book is the first Microsoft laptop. It comes with a 6th gen Intel Core 
i5 or i7 processor and up to 1TB of storage.

It is “the most powerful laptop on the planet”, according to Panay. However, 
it’s not just a laptop. The 13.5in touchscreen is detachable and works with the 
Surface Pro 4 dock. The device was designed for everyone – from gamers to 
architects to scientists to coders, he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2F8gNntIGxFb%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2F8gNntIGxFb%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Finstagram.com%2Fp%2F8gNntIGxFb%2F&media=>
 Surface Book. 
“I have been using it and it just blows me away. The typing experience on this 
product is perfect,” said Panay. The laptop comes with a precision glass 
trackpad that comes with five points of touch, which Panay said “feels so 
lovely”. “We know what comfort is. We brought it all to the table.”

If there is one thing that will impress potential customers, it will be the 
battery life, which does not drain when the device is closed.

Surface Book, which will officially launch on 26 October and costs $1,499, 
will be available for pre-orders on 7 October.

HoloLens

At the very beginning of the presentation, Microsoft demonstrated the latest 
skills of HoloLens, its mixed reality gaming system. HoloLens creates holograms 
that you can hold and that move as you move your hand– making them into 
basically wearable holograms.

HoloLens is expected to launch sometime during the first quarter of 2016, with 
a price tag of $3,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmicrosoft-unveils-windows-10-devices-laptops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06a0eb3b7e026cff91804be796f12c950737038d%2F137_11_707_424%2F707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20launches%20Surface%20Book%20as%20it%20steps%20up%20competition%20with%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmicrosoft-unveils-windows-10-devices-laptops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20launches%20Surface%20Book%20as%20it%20steps%20up%20competition%20with%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmicrosoft-unveils-windows-10-devices-laptops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06a0eb3b7e026cff91804be796f12c950737038d%2F137_11_707_424%2F707.jpg>
 Microsoft Band 2. Photograph: Microsoft 
Band

Not exactly a rival to the AppleWatch, the Microsoft Band 2 is geared more 
toward the health-conscious consumers.

The band is designed to be a “big part of your health story”, said Lindsey 
Matese, senior communications manager for Microsoft Band and Health. It was 
designed for golfers, cyclists, runners and “gym rats”. Users will be able to 
track exercise, calorie intake and sleep. The band also tracks elevation.

Band, which costs $249, is available for pre-orders and will officially launch 
on 30 October.

Lumia

The Surface Pro 4 and Surface Book may have stolen the spotlight on Tuesday, 
but it’s the Lumia phones that could really help Microsoft break into a new 
market given that Microsoft has just 3% of the global mobile phone market.

As expected, the company announced the Lumia 950 with 5.2in display and Lumia 
950XL with 5.7in display. Each comes with a 20 megapixel camera and a flash 
technology that, according to Panay, will get rid of red-eye and make you look 
like a human and not a ghost.

The phones come with USB-C connector chargers, which provide fast charging: 
50% charge in less than 30 minutes. Both phones can run universal Windows 10 
apps, including Office, Edge, OneDrive and Cortana.

Microsoft hopes that the new phones will appeal to business users. 

“This is supposed to be the most productive phone you’ve ever picked up,” said 
Panay.

The main demo for the phones consisted of turning them into mini-computers by 
plugging one into a display deck, which basically transformed it into a desktop.

Both phones will be available in November, Lumia 950 for $549 and Lumia 950 XL 
for $649.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmicrosoft-unveils-windows-10-devices-laptops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b92e6bfca4e9126f1519eb30336e75f31b3bc26%2F176_45_2612_1568%2F2612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microsoft%20launches%20Surface%20Book%20as%20it%20steps%20up%20competition%20with%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmicrosoft-unveils-windows-10-devices-laptops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microsoft%20launches%20Surface%20Book%20as%20it%20steps%20up%20competition%20with%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmicrosoft-unveils-windows-10-devices-laptops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b92e6bfca4e9126f1519eb30336e75f31b3bc26%2F176_45_2612_1568%2F2612.jpg>
 Microsoft’s Surface Book. Photograph: Microsoft 
Surface Pro 4

“This is the thinnest and most powerful core PC ever to ship,” said Panay. The 
display is 12.3 inches and is capable of displaying more than five million 
pixels.

Surface Pro 4 comes with a fingerprint sensor, new pen, a quieter key board 
and bigger glass trackpad. It’s 8.4mm thick and the only reason it’s not 
thinner, according to Panay, is because of the USB ports.

Surface Pro 4 is 30% faster than the Pro 3 and 50% faster than a Macbook Air, 
according to Microsoft.

As with other products, preorders start on 7 October, with the official launch 
on 26 October. Surface Pro 4 starts at $899.

Pen

After Apple introduced a pencil <http://www.apple.com/apple-pencil/> for its 
iPod Pro, Microsoft rolled out a new surface pen. It comes in multiple colors 
and with interchangeable tips for different pen types – drawing, sketching, 
writing, etc. The pen, which comes with Surface Pro 4, slides into the surface 
for easy storage and has a year-long battery life and an eraser.

“We put an eraser on the pen,” said Pansay. “It’s kind of funny, there’s a 
pencil out there without an eraser.”
 