
Patricia Highsmith's 1957 novel Deep Water is to get the big-screen treatment 
from Oscar-winning film-maker Mike Nichols, according to Variety. 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118007326.html?categoryid=13&cs=1> Nichols 
will work from a screenplay by Joe Penhall, who has also adapted forthcoming 
post-apocalyptic tale The Road from the novel byCormac McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/cormac-mccarthy>.

Deep Water is a psychological suspense novel about a couple in small-town 
America, whose seemingly perfect marriage comes under scrutiny when the wife's 
extra-marital affairs, are thought to have resulted in the murder of several 
men.

Highsmith's morally ambiguous thrillers have proved fertile ground for both US 
and European film-makers over the years. Her novel Strangers on a Train was 
shot by Hitchcock in 1951, while 1955'sThe Talented Mr Ripley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77406/talented.mr.ripley> has been 
filmed twice - once by René Clément as Plein Soleil (Purple Noon) in 1960, and 
once byAnthony Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> 
under its original name in 1999, a version which starred Matt Damon as the 
sociopathic title character, and Jude Law and Philip Seymour Hoffman as two of 
his unfortunate victims.

1974's Ripley's Game was made into a film starring John Malkovich in 2002. 
1970 sequel Ripley Under Ground was filmed by Roger Spottiswoode in 2005, and 
1961's This Sweet Sickness (not a Ripley novel) was filmed as Dites-lui que je 
l'aime in 1977, with Gérard Depardieu in the lead role.

Nichols, 77, most recently directed the 2007 comedy Charlie Wilson's War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122446/charlie.wilson.s.war>, starring 
Tom Hanks and Julia Roberts. No cast or other details have yet emerged for his 
version of Deep Water.
 