
It's been six years since they released their debut album as The Last Shadow 
Puppets, but Miles Kanesays that he and Alex Turner are focussing on writing an 
X-Men inspired film together, rather than making new music.
"It's something we always talk about y'know? But I think we're gonna write 
this film first anyway before we hit back into that," Kane toldDigital Spy 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/music/news/a581525/arctic-monkeys-alex-turner-writing-x-men-style-film-with-miles-kane.html#~oIPXLW6HYJ9j6c>
. The pair released the No 1 albumThe Age of the Understatement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/18/popandrock.shopping> in 2008. 

Set in the 1960s, Kane also described the film as having an "X-Men kind of 
vibe", and said that he and the Arctic Monkeys' frontman would not have major 
acting roles: "We're not planning to be [in the film] but we may have a little 
cameo," he said.

Although this would be their first foray into the world of scriptwriting, both 
artists have worked in the film industry previously: Turner penned the 
critically lauded score for Richard Ayoade's 2010 film Submarine, while Kane's 
former band The Rascals also had a small role in 2009 BritflickAwaydays 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KgTMVya1ihw>.

Despite their debut collaboration receiving a Mercury nomination and chart 
success, Kane and Turner have yet to confirm a new Last Shadow Puppets' album, 
although they have regularly hinted at collaborative material. "There will be 
[another record] when the time is right," Kane toldNoise11.com 
<http://www.noise11.com/news/miles-kane-says-there-will-be-another-last-shadow-puppets-album-20120103>
 in 2012. "We'll both know together when it's right. We're both enjoying our 
own things, but we're still working together and when the time is right we'll 
go and do that again."

In May 2014, Miles Kane joined Arctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> on stage during their 
Finsbury Park show, performing Last Shadow Puppets' Standing Next to Me.

 