
Ed Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> has said a 
future Labour government would introduce a “Turing’s law”, offering posthumous 
pardons for gay men convicted under historical indecency laws.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> said the legislation 
would allow the men’s family and friends to apply to the Home Office to quash 
convictions under the “gross indecency” law for consensual same-sex 
relationships.

The law will be named after Alan Turing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing> – the Enigma code-breaker who 
was convicted of gross indecency in 1952 with a 19-year-old man and who 
received a posthumous royal pardon.

“What was right for Alan Turing’s family should be right for other families as 
well,” said the opposition leader. “The next Labour government will extend the 
right individuals already have to overturn convictions that society now see as 
grossly unfair to the relatives of those convicted who have passed away.”


Turing, whose work cracking German military codes was vital to the British 
second world war effort against Nazi Germany, was chemically castrated and two 
years later died from cyanide poisoning in an apparent suicide.

He was given a posthumous royal pardon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
 in 2013 and campaigners have been pressing the coalition government to pardon 
all men convicted under the outdated law. Last month, Turing’s great-nephew, 
Nevil Hunt, his great-niece, Rachel Barnes, and her son, Thomas, handed over a 
petition, which attracted almost 500,000 signatures 
<https://www.change.org/p/demand-justice-for-the-49-000-men-who-were-wrongfully-criminalized-for-being-gay>
, to 10 Downing Streetcalling for such a pardon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/feb/22/family-alan-turing-government-petition-pardons-gross-indecency-homosexuality>
.


The Protection of Freedom Act (2012) provides for individuals still alive to 
apply to the Home Office to have their convictions for homosexual acts 
disregarded. But no such redress is available for the family and friends of 
people who died before the law changed.

Benedict Cumberbatch, who played Turing in the 2014 film The Imitation Game, 
is backing the campaign started by Turing’s family to pardon the 49,000 men who 
were prosecuted for being gay.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fmiliband-promises-turing-law-posthumous-pardons-gay-conviction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425384016062%2F5386b081-1bda-462c-b012-1c5d68383154-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Miliband%20promises%20posthumous%20pardons%20for%20convicted%20gay%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fmiliband-promises-turing-law-posthumous-pardons-gay-conviction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Miliband%20promises%20posthumous%20pardons%20for%20convicted%20gay%20men&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fmiliband-promises-turing-law-posthumous-pardons-gay-conviction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425384016062%2F5386b081-1bda-462c-b012-1c5d68383154-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch as Alan Turing in The Imitation Game. The actor is 
backing the Turing family’s campaign. Photograph: Black Bear Pictures/Allstar 
It emerged last week that the campaign is being delayed amid concerns in 
Whitehall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/27/homosexual-pardon-delayed-whitehall-fears-paedophiles-simon-hughes-alan-turing>
 that a small number of paedophiles could be included.


Campaigners who had hoped that the royal pardon for Turing would be extended 
across have been dismayed by a warning from Whitehall officials that a blanket 
pardon could benefit gay men who had sex with a minor. Officials have said that 
there may be no record of whether a minor was involved in a pre-1967 
prosecution because homosexuality was illegal regardless of age. Homosexuality 
was initially decriminalised in 1967 for consenting adults aged 21 and over. 
The age of consent was eventually equalised in Britain in 2001.

Campaigners believe that the objections about benefiting paedophiles could be 
overcome by introducing two amendments to the relevant legislation to make 
clear that the men would have acted wholly lawfully under today’s law. The 
amendments would say that the sex took place between men aged over 16 and that 
they were both consenting adults.

Labour said the next Labour government would review how the Protection of 
Freedom Act could be extended to cover the deceased as well as those still 
alive – allowing applications on a case-by-case basis. This would allow the 
family and friends of people convicted of historical offences that would no 
longer be considered criminal to have their conviction removed.

Gordon Brown made a public apology in 2009 for the treatment of Alan Turing 
while he was prime minister.

 