
4.01pm BST 

Afternoon summary

• A Conservative minister, Matthew Hancock, has invited the UK Statistics 
Authority to reprimand Labour for using what he claims are misleading 
statistics about the number of new jobs going to London.(See 2.34pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog#block-53b2b688e4b06ddda2b81819>

• Andrew Lansley, the leader of the Commons, has said that proposals to 
toughen standards rules for MPs have been shelved for 19 months because the 
Commons would vote them down. As the Press Association reports, Lansley gave 
details of an impasse with the cross-party standards committee as he was pushed 
on why changes it proposed in December 2012 have not been put to a vote. The 
measures would allow the parliamentary standards commissioner to look into 
instances where MPs' "private and personal" behaviour brings the House into 
disrepute. Some believe they could have been used in the case of former Liberal 
Democrat Mike Hancock, who has faced no formal censure despite recently 
apologising for an "inappropriate and unprofessional" relationship with a 
vulnerable constituent. However, Mr Lansley confirmed that he is refusing to 
bring the changes before MPs - because they already rejected similar plans as 
too intrusive in March 2012.

• Downing Street has revealed that Whitehall departments have been given a 
target of enrolling 1% of their employees in the army reserves.

• Channel 4 has rejected claims that its output is too "bland". At a culture 
committee, hearing, John Whittingdale, the committee chairman, said that there 
was a "concern" that the broadcaster was showing "more and more" commercial 
programmes to pull in audiences. Looking at today's schedule, he asked which 
programmes met its public service criteria, and added: "It may be that today is 
a very bad day. Outside of the news I can't see anything that looks like public 
service broadcasting." But the broadcaster's chief executive David Abraham 
rejected the accusation, saying: "We wouldn't agree at all that the schedule is 
bland."

That's all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.

Updated at 4.02pm BST

3.41pm BST 

Here a short Adonis Review reading list.

• Atul Hatwal at LabourList says Labour has not presented the Adonis Review 
very well. 
<http://labour-uncut.co.uk/2014/07/01/brownian-big-numbers-dont-work-so-why-does-labour-keep-announcing-them/#more-18465>

To accompany the launch of the Adonis Growth Review, the topline of Labour’s 
story was that it would devolve up to £30bn of central government funding to 
new regional partnerships of local authorities ...

As a policy, there is much to recommend today’s announcement. Which is why the 
way it has been packaged for the media is so depressing.

Gordon Brown was notorious for bludgeoning audiences with lists of gargantuan 
numbers to demonstrate his commitment to Schools-n-Hospitals. Notorious 
because, while these types of big numbers have a certain resonance within the 
Westminster bubble, they are positively off-putting for most voters.

I’m currently conducting a series of focus groups for the day job, looking at 
how people understand political messages. The topic we’re looking at 
specifically is immigration, but the findings are applicable to most political 
issues.

When confronted with a statistic, particularly a Brownian big number, there is 
typically a two stage response: “I don’t understand your number,” swiftly 
followed by, “I don’t trust your number.”

• René Lavanchy at Infrastructure Punk says there are some concerns about the 
plans to allow councils to keep all their business rates revenue to fund 
infrastracture. 
<http://infrastructurepunk.wordpress.com/2014/07/01/the-adonis-review-showing-us-the-money/>

In order not to get left out of pocket, councils will need to be sure that 
they can really ramp up their rates income through the enhancing power of 
infrastructure and urban renewal. And that’s a bigger risk than other, more 
traditional ways of financing infrastructure as it’s more imponderable and tied 
to the volatile property market (business rates are based on the rental value 
of business property). Asthis FT article from last year 
<http://on.ft.com/Y9Onn4> notes, there’s some scepticism that that could be a 
successful model outside London.

• Michael Deacon at the Telegraph says Miliband's speech at the launch was 
terrible. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/ed-miliband/10938260/Sketch-Ed-Miliband-thrills-for-Britain.html>

If Mr Miliband really wants to “speak to” people, maybe he should ask himself 
what the point of giving a political speech is. He seems to think the point is 
to talk about politics. It isn’t. There is only one point to giving a political 
speech, and that is to make your audience like you. To make them come away 
saying, “Here, that bloke was actually all right, wasn’t he?” One way to 
achieve this is to talk to them, in everyday English, about subjects that 
interest them.

 One politician who grasps this is Nigel Farage 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/ukip/10788721/Nigel-versus-the-North-a-week-on-tour-with-Ukip.html>
, which is why his speeches invariably consist of a) jokes, and b) opinions 
that he knows his audience will agree with. I’ve never heard the Ukip leader 
attempt to enthuse factory workers in Leeds about catapult centres or One 
Nation solutions or decent skills agendas.

3.23pm BST 

Lord Baker, the former Conservative education secretary, has praised the 
Adonis Review, by colleague Patrick Wintour reports.
Patrick Wintour (@patrickwintour) 
Lord Baker former Conservative chairman "Andrew Adonis has written a 
thoughtful analysis of Britain’s skills needs."
 <https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/statuses/483955083080908800> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/statuses/483955083080908800> 
3.14pm BST 

Lord Glasman says Labour lacks a sense of direction

It seems like open season on Ed Miliband at the moment. In the Times today 
(paywall) <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article4134658.ece> 
Rachel Sylvester has written a particularly withering column about his 
shortcomings. And nowLord Glasman, the Labour peer and sometime adviser to 
Miliband, has writtena piece for the Financial Times (subscription) 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ca886f70-fe25-11e3-acf8-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk#axzz36CgciKqC>
 saying Labour needs "a sense of direction".

There has been much talk, in particular about Ed Miliband’s leadership 
<http://blogs.ft.com/westminster/2014/06/the-12-moments-that-define-ed-miliband/>
 of the Labour party and his inability to connect with voters. Most of it is 
uninteresting. The government is not dominant; Labour can win under Mr 
Miliband. What is missing is a sense of direction ...

The problem for Labour is not that it lacks policy but that it lacks a 
narrative of national renewal.The Condition of Britain report 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/the-condition-of-britain-strategies-for-social-renewal>
 launched last month by the IPPR, a left-leaning think-tank, shows the way 
forward. The study marks an almost Galilean change of perspective for a party 
that has long insisted that everything revolves around the state. It shows a 
regard for institutions that can develop resilience and moral character.

There is a sense of place that has been lost to Labour for 60 years. A sense 
that people cannot solve all their problems alone and need each other to lead a 
better life. It suggests, for example, that contributory welfare be introduced 
in the national insurance system so that what people can take out depends on 
what they have put in.

But Labour has not told a story about how the centralisation of power, in the 
market and the state, is the primary problem, and giving incentives to virtue 
rather than vice is the fundamental solution. And so the most original leftwing 
thought for some years on social welfare reform vanished almost without trace, 
reduced to a nasty Labour press release on how the party plans to force young 
people into training.

Glasman's advice to Miliband is that he should take some novels to read with 
him on holiday, rather than thinktank reports, because he needs to tell a learn 
how to tell a story.

In her column, Sylvester says Miliband's key problem is not the lack of a 
narrative, but lack of decisiveness.

There is a lack of grip and consistency at the top. The Labour leader calls 
for a new kind of politics then gets involved in cheap political stunts. His 
office is by all accounts a shambles, with rival courtiers offering conflicting 
advice and competing for the leader’s ear. “He’s not surrounded by a team but a 
cacophony,” one insider says.

Mr Miliband boasts that he has more intellectual self-confidence than David 
Cameron, but seems strangely lacking in political certainty, hedging and 
trimming rather than following through.

 One former cabinet minister says: “He is a curious mixture of dogma and 
indecision. Whenever you listen to him, he seems wooden and stilted as if he’s 
reading out somebody else’s script. Everything is so hidebound. It’s either 
that he doesn’t really know what he thinks or doesn’t want to share it with 
people — I don’t know which is worse. It’s like somebody who can’t give birth 
and you’re not even sure there’s a baby inside.”

Many MPs see the shadow of Gordon Brown — who was always nervous of revealing 
his true instincts because he feared the voters would not like them — hovering 
over his protégé. “This is nothing to do with policies at all. We have got them 
coming out of our ears,” says one MP. “Ed just can’t communicate. He’s lost the 
ability to show passion, it’s all tactics and no strategy. It’s just like 
Gordon.”
 Lord Glasman Photograph: Murdo MacLeod 
Updated at 3.15pm BST

2.34pm BST 

Tories ask UK Statistics Authority to reprimand Labour over jobs claim

Matthew Hancock, the Conservative business minister, has written to the UK 
Statistics Authority asking it to adjudicate on whether Labour is right to talk 
about 80% of new private sector jobs going to London. (See previous posts, 
passim.) He's inviting Sir Andrew Dilnot, the authority's chair, to reprimandEd 
Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>.

Here's an extract from his letter.

In a press release today, 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/90391647579/mending-our-fractured-economy-ed-miliband-lord>
 the Leader of the Labour Party Ed Miliband states that ‘four fifths of all the 
new private sector jobs created since 2010 are in London’.

Shadow Business Minister Chuka Umunna made a similar claim on the BBC News 
channel, that ‘eight out of ten new private sector jobs since the election have 
actually been created in London’ (BBC News 24, 1 July 2014).

However, the most recent, unadjusted ONS statistics for the last four years 
(Q1 2010 to Q1 2014) suggest that London has accounted for less than 1 in 4 net 
additional private sector jobs created (21.7%). Using the most recent available 
data which is adjusted for reclassifications but not seasonally adjusted 
(between Q1 2010 and Q2 2013), London again accounted for around 1 in 4 net 
additional private sector jobs (24.3%). Using data adjusted for 
reclassifications, and which is comparable on an annual basis (between Q1 2010 
and Q1 2013), London still accounted for around 1 in 4 net additional jobs (27%)

The statistic that Mr Miliband and Mr Umunna cite is several years out of 
date, and therefore misleading.

I would therefore be very grateful if you could clarify whether or not the 
statements made by Mr Miliband and Mr Umunna were accurate, so that they can 
issue the appropriate corrections at the earliest opportunity.

2.15pm BST 

Ken Livingstone on Ed Miliband

Ken Livingstone, the Labour former mayor of London, has joined the debate 
about Ed Miliband, and whether he has the personality to become prime minister. 
In an interview for Total Politics, he says Miliband is far less weird than 
Livingstone himself, and that being weird doesn't matter that much anyway in 
politics.

Ed is much more normal than I am. He’s actually interested in detail and 
facts. Ed does not give a damn about what he’s wearing, his hairstyle - I’m 
sure he’s surrounded by people telling him he needs to do this and that but he 
really doesn’t care any more than I did, and therefore he will change Britain.

Ed is like me, he doesn’t want to be there, he wants to do something. He will 
hate all the trivial crap. People have always thought I’m weird - I collected 
reptiles for god’s sake, I make Ed look normalEverybody thought I was weird - 
and with my voice, and my lack of any fashion sense, you know If you think 
back, if Winston Churchill became leader of the Tory Party today, the media 
would say he’s an alcoholic, he’s overweight, he smokes - he sounds weird. If 
you look at the people who changed Britain, it’s not because of their looks.

Livingstone also suggests that normal people would be unlikely to go into 
politics anyway.

Why would you come into politics … I mean the lifestyle is shite, you have to 
meet people you can’t stand – endless tedium – the only reason for being there 
is todo something. There are so many people who come into politics because they 
want to be there – they need psychiatric help if that’s their idea of a nice 
lifestyle.

Livingstone also says that he is convinced Miliband will change Britain.

 In my lifetime, only two governments have changed things: Attlee’s and 
Thatcher’s. Ed’s will be the third. By the end of Ed’s administration, the 
Tories will have to adjust in the way that Blair adjusted to Thatcher. He will 
set that new agenda – I have no doubt about it. I’m always saying to Ed - 
ignore all those old Blairites who are still hanging around saying tone it down 
tone, it down.

The whole interview will be published on the Total Politics website 
<http://www.totalpolitics.com/> tonight. In it, Livingstone also signals that 
he would want to take a post in a Miliband government. 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/ken-livingstone-id-accept-a-job-in-an-ed-miliband-cabinet-9576023.html>
 Ken Livingstone Photograph: Beretta/Sims/Rex Features 
1.34pm BST 

Lunchtime summary
 Ed Miliband and Lord Adonis Photograph: /BBC News 
• Ed Miliband has committed Labour to a significant transfer of spending power 
from Whitehall to local authorities as part for economic regeneration. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/01/lord-adonis-review-backs-devolution-cities-counties-economic-growth>
Unveiling the final report from a review conducted by Lord Adonis, Mending the 
Fractured Economy, Miliband said councils acting together as combined 
authorities would make better spending decisions.

Let's transfer £30 billion worth of spending out of Whitehall over a 
Parliament and let's transfer it to local areas to make those local decisions 
about transport, about skills, about support for businesses, about how to get 
people back to work - not just because we think it is good for local people to 
make these decisions, but because they will make better decisions, because they 
have much more of a sense of what the local needs are," said Mr Miliband. If we 
can involve local businesses in these decisions, we are much more likely to be 
able to succeed.

He also dismissed the coalition's record on devolution, claiming that it had 
failed to implement similar proposals from Lord Heseltine and arguing that it 
was irrational for George Osborne to make further devolution dependent on 
councils adopting elected mayors, as he did in a major speech on this subject 
last week. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jun/23/osbornes-speech-calling-for-manchester-to-leeds-high-speed-rail-politics-live-blog#block-53a7ebdde4b0e76217e03cb2>
 ButNicky Morgan, a Conservative Treasury minister, claimed that Miliband was 
just "playing catch-up".

The chancellor spoke recently about the importance of northern cities. Labour 
are playing catch-up. And they are too late because, through the hard work of 
Greg Clark, minister for cities, and the deputy prime minister, devolution to 
our cities, city deals, has already happened ...

They are playing catch up because we, the coalition government have already 
been doing this in terms of devolving power and money on things like skills, as 
well as transport and housing, to local areas ...

Even Labour leaders in northern cities say that this government has done more 
to give their cities more of a say in how they spend the money than the last 
government did in 13 years in power.
 Nicky Morgan Photograph: /BBC News 
In an interview with the Times (paywall),  
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/business/industries/industrials/article4134678.ece>
Lord Heseltine played down complaints that his devolution proposals had not 
been fully implemented.

Last weekend, the Labour leader Ed Miliband pledged to spend £30 billion on 
infrastructure and skills outside London through LEPs, lending credence to Lord 
Heseltine’s argument that the bodies have cross-party support. However, the 
government’s current commitment to LEPs through the Local Growth Fund is £10 
billion, some way short of the £49 billion Lord Heseltine called for. “I could 
sit and sulk and say it’s not enough, but it’s more than anyone else has ever 
got — and it’s a stepping stone. [Localism] can no longer be dismissed as wild 
theory or reckless funding.”

• David Cameron has accused Miliband of getting his facts wrong about job 
creation. This undermined Labour's credibility, Cameron claimed in a tweet. (See
9.49am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog#block-53b2755de4b04fe840941200>
He was referring to a claim that 80% of new private sector jobs created since 
2010 have been in London. Miliband used the figure in a news release released 
overnight, although he did not use it in his speech at today's launch. However, 
when asked to defend it, he said it was the best statistic he had seen. The 
Miliband figure, from the Centre for Cities, covers 2010 to 2012. More recent 
ONS figures, compiled in a different way, suggest only around 20% of net jobs 
in the last year have been created in London. But the Centre of Cities has 
defended its figure, saying the ONS figures do not take into account people who 
work in London but live elsewhere. (See11.18am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog#block-53b28a3ae4b07f992dfe87c2>

• Lord Ashcroft has published a poll of voters on Labour/Lib Dem marginals, 
suggesting that there is a 15% swing to Labour in those seats and that this 
could allow Labour to take 17 seats from the Lib Dems. 
<http://lordashcroftpolls.com/2014/07/liberal-democrat-labour-battleground/>


My research in Bradford East, Brent Central, Manchester Withington and Norwich 
South found the Lib Dem share down from 38% to 19%, with Labour up 11 points to 
47%. This amounts to a swing of 15%, enough in theory for Labour to gain 17 
current Lib Dem seats if repeated across the board at an election – though as 
we saw in my polling of Conservative-Lib Dem marginals, swings are very far 
from uniform where the Lib Dems are concerned ...

The swing to Labour would have been even greater had it not been for the Green 
Party, which has attracted around one in seven Lib Dem defectors in these seats 
since 2010. I found the Greens in second place on 20% in Norwich South, and 
third on 10% in Manchester Withington. Indeed for every two Lib Dem defectors 
switching to Labour, one has gone to the Greens.

• The number of people in relative poverty has fallen by 100,000 over the past 
year to 9.7 million, according to new official figures. As the Press 
Association reports, the government said the annual poverty statistics also 
showed that in-work poverty fell by 200,000. The percentage of people in 
relative poverty is at the lowest level since the 1980s, said ministers. Median 
incomes remained broadly unchanged between 2011/12 and 2012/13, up £2 to £440 a 
week for a couple with no children. Here is an extract froman Institute for 
Fiscal Studies briefing on the figures. 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7259>

Using a relative measure of poverty, which instead uses a poverty line of 60% 
of median income, the figures show significant falls between 2007–08 and 
2012–13. This reflects the fact that the incomes of low-income households were 
hit less hard (proportionately, as well as in cash terms) over that period than 
the incomes of middle-income households, and again this is explained by rapidly 
falling earnings and relatively stable benefits. Measuring incomes before 
deducting housing costs, relative poverty fell by 1.3 million (3ppts) between 
2007–08 and 2012–13, to 9.7 million (15%). Measuring incomes after deducting 
housing costs, relative poverty fell by 400,000 (1ppt) to 13.2 million (21%).

Rachel Reeves, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said the figures showed 
the government's child poverty strategy was failing.

These figures show the Government’s child poverty strategy is failing 
abysmally with no progress for the millions of children still living in 
poverty. They also include extremely worrying signs that rising housing costs 
are set to push more children into poverty and that severe poverty is on the 
rise.

• Michael Moore, the Lib Dem former Scottish secretary, has announced that he 
will introduce a private members' bill to legislate to put the 0.7% aid target 
(0.7% of national wealth should go on aid) into law. Moore came second in the 
private members' ballot, which means his bill will be debated and could become 
law. The coalition parties are both committed to the 0.7% target, but, despite 
promising to do so in the coalition agreement, they have not passed a law to 
make this mandatory. The Lib Dems blame this on the Tories, who know the 0.7% 
target is unpopular with their activists.

• Lord McConnell, the former Labour Scottish first minister, has given a 
speech saying he supports Better Together because he wants Scotland to carry on 
enjoying home rule in the UK.

Now, I have watched over the past two years the debate around the referendum 
on independence become increasingly polarised between Unionism and Nationalism.

I have never described myself as a Unionist, although I respect most who do.

I am not a Nationalist, although I respect most Scots who do.

I am a patriot, a democrat and believer in a better Scotland in a better world.

I appeal to those who believe in Scotland, who care about Scotland, who are 
democrats and patriots but not nationalists.

To think twice.

Not to save the Union.

But to save devolution, to save Home Rule inside the UK.

• Bob Jones, the West Midlands police and crime commissioner, has died 
suddenly. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/01/death-west-midlands-pcc-bob-jones-trigger-byelection-35-days>
 An election will be held to replace him.

• Fiona Cunningham, who resigned last month as a special adviser to Theresa 
May after briefing against Michael Gove, has been given a job as associate 
director at the Centre for Social Justice, a Conservative thinktank.

12.34pm BST 

EEF, the manufacturers organisation, has put out a lengthy statement broadly 
welcoming the Adonis Review. 
<http://www.eef.org.uk/releases/uk/2014/EEF-comment-on-Ed-Miliband-and-Lord-Adonis-business-policy-announcement.htm>
 However, Terry Scuoler, its chief executive, says devolving money too quickly 
could be a mistake.

Devolving an additional level of funding before local structures for growth 
have been properly tested runs the risk of greater strain being placed on local 
enterprise partnerships and other local bodies. This pressure could inevitably 
see local plans being driven by central government targets.

12.26pm BST 

The Institute for Government has also welcomed the Adonis Review plans. This 
is from Tom Gash, director of research at the IfG.

There appears to be an emerging consensus that decentralising power to major 
city-regions like Greater Manchester could support UK growth. Past attempts to 
decentralise show that implementing such reforms is not easy, but both the 
Osborne and Adonis proposals will minimise opposition by building on existing 
institutions and supporting local leaders who are already pushing for change.

The next steps are to ensure and demonstrate that cabinet and shadow cabinet 
back the plans and offer clear, sufficiently concrete manifesto commitments 
that the public can buy into and don’t get overshadowed by politicians’ 
personal agendas. These would give the parties the mandate to see reforms 
through in 2015, if elected. But given the possibility of coalition or minority 
government after the next election, it’s also important that we understand the 
Liberal Democrat position on this agenda.




12.13pm BST 

For the record, here are today's YouGov GB polling figures. 
<http://yougov.co.uk/news/2014/07/01/update-labour-lead-2/>

Labour: 37% (No change from YouGov in the Sunday Times)

Conservatives: 35% (up 2)

Ukip: 12% (down 2)

Lib Dems: 8% (no change)

Labour lead: 2 points (down 2)

Government approval: -21 (up 4)

12.00pm BST 

Reaction to the Adonis Review

The Adonis Review has gone down well with business and local government. 
Here's a round-up of the reaction I've seen.


From Katja Hall, the CBI's director general


Lord Adonis’ report identifies the right priorities for growth and job 
creation, and recognises that the benefits of the recovery must be shared 
across all regions of the UK.

His report addresses many of the major challenges facing our economy, from 
skills shortages to strains on infrastructure.

Size matters for local government, and more combined authorities would help 
create regional economic powerhouses to invest in research and development, 
support exporters and expand apprenticeships.


From Adam Marshall, director for policy at the British Chambers of Commerce

Businesses will be pleased that Andrew Adonis’s growth review focuses squarely 
on the real-world issues they face – from local growth to access to finance, 
training, procurement, and exporting. Not all of Lord Adonis’s recommendations 
will find favour with pragmatic local businesspeople, but many will.

There is no such thing as national prosperity without boosting the growth 
prospects of our cities and counties. Businesses in England, particularly, will 
welcome Lord Adonis’s recommendation that more power and money should be 
devolved away from Whitehall, and that more business rates revenues should be 
kept locally rather than shipped off to the Treasury to be recycled back as 
grants.

Decisions on local growth are best taken when businesses and councils decide 
what arrangements work best for their areas, and deliver these accordingly. In 
a world where more funding and tax revenues are devolved, however, businesses 
need the strongest possible say over both local economic plans and how money is 
spent. Any future devolution plans must have maximum accountability to local 
business, and go even further in this respect than the Adonis report.

From Sir Merrick Cockell, the outgoing Conservative chair of the Local 
Government Association

Local government has long been calling for greater fiscal devolution, a more 
localised approach to business rates and adult skills and an end to overly 
complex and fragmented funding. It is encouraging to see that these have been 
recognised in this report.

Councils have been frustrated by the lack of progress in devolving growth 
funding to local areas. We have long said that the current £2bn Local Growth 
Fund fails to match the ambition councils have for playing a central role in 
economic growth.

Local government is up for the challenge and anything which advances this 
debate is a positive step in the right direction. We hope the Labour party 
takes proposals in these areas seriously. While the devil is in the detail, we 
will be keen to discuss these proposals with shadow ministers to ensure money 
is devolved without added bureaucracy and burdensome conditions.

From the Centre for Cities

The Centre for Cities welcomes the Adonis Review’s strong emphasis on 
devolving more power and funding to cities, as an integral part of its 
recommendations for driving greater and more balanced prosperity across the UK 
through investment in skills, innovation, business support and infrastructure.

We have long argued that greater certainty of funds for cities, combined with 
institutions that work at the level of the ‘real’ economy, would support 
cities, and the UK as a whole, to realise their economic potential.

As always, success will be determined by the detail – the means by which funds 
are awarded, over what time period, the extent to which devolution is packaged 
with strings attached, and the ability of Whitehall to delay change through 
lengthy negotiation.

 Nonetheless, the Centre is delighted to see the Review continue the ‘race to 
the top’ around cities policy. Now all the major parties need to match their 
ambitions and rhetoric with sustained action and investment that really deliver 
on the promise of change.

11.47am BST 

5 key charts from the Adonis Review

You can read the Adonis Review in full here. 
<http://www.policy-network.net/publications/4695/Mending-the-Fractured-Economy>

Here are five charts from the report that summarise some of its key findings.

1. GDP per hours worked in G7 countries
 GDP per hours worked in the G7 Photograph: /Adonis Review 
2. Proportion of private sector jobs created in London and elsewhere from 2010 
to 2012
 Proportion of jobs created in London Photograph: /Adonis Review 
3. Infrastructure stock as a proportion of GDP in 2013
 Infrastructure stock as proportion of GDP Photograph: /Adonis Review 
4. Local and regional government's share of total government spending and tax 
in 2011
 Local government share of total government tax and spending Photograph: 
/Adonis Review 
5. Shortage of new maths and physics entrants to teacher training compared to 
government targets in 2011-12 (bottom), 2012-13 and 2013-14 (top)
 Shortage of maths and physics teachers Photograph: /Adonis Review 
Updated at 11.50am BST

11.32am BST 

Here's more from Devolve Deliver (see 9.23am) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog#block-53b26f42e4b00e4ee5d8cb75>
, explaining why polls show the public apparently supports economic devolution.
devolvedeliver (@devolvedeliver) 
New @survation <https://twitter.com/Survation> infographic from our recent 
poll illustrates the public desire for devolved economic powers
pic.twitter.com/8mNGDKxvsK <http://t.co/8mNGDKxvsK>
 <https://twitter.com/devolvedeliver/statuses/479177328132907009> June 18, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/devolvedeliver/statuses/479177328132907009> 
11.18am BST 

The Centre for Cities has defended the "80% of new jobs going to London" 
figure which Labour has been quoting and which the Tories are claiming is out 
of date. (See 9.49am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog#block-53b2755de4b04fe840941200>
 It has issued this statement.

The Centre for Cities’ annual Cities Outlook report for 2014 showed that 80 
per cent of all private sector jobs created between 2010 and 2012 were created 
in London. This figure is based on data from the Business Register and 
Employment Survey (BRES) from the Office for National Statistics (ONS), which 
looks at employment by workplace. By contrast, the figures being quoted by the 
government – which argues that 80 per cent of private sector jobs over the last 
year were created outside of London – are based on the Annual Population Survey 
(APS) data, which is regional and measures employment of residents. This 
dramatically undercounts the number of people who work in London but live 
elsewhere.

While no dataset is perfect, BRES data gives a more accurate picture of where 
jobs are located, rather than where employed people live. Using the APS data 
the government relies on, a working person who lives in St Albans would be 
classed as employed in their home town of St Albans, even if their job was 
actually in London. The BRES data is unfortunately only updated infrequently, 
and the data for 2013 has still not been collected, while the APS dataset is 
more regularly updated. However, in order to measure where people work rather 
than live, it remains the most consistent and accurate source of UK employment 
data currently available.

11.14am BST 

Here is some Twitter comment from journalists about the Adonis Review, and the 
launch.
Rob Merrick (@Rob_Merrick) 
Two differences from draft Adonis report 1) Areas will get devolved cash 
without forming 'combined authorities' 2) No competitive bidding
 <https://twitter.com/Rob_Merrick/statuses/483903212026867712> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Rob_Merrick/statuses/483903212026867712> Rob Merrick 
(@Rob_Merrick) 
Labour plumps for full devolution of business rates....last week, Hezza told 
me it would widen the rich-poor divide
 <https://twitter.com/Rob_Merrick/statuses/483910395028332544> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Rob_Merrick/statuses/483910395028332544> Duncan Weldon 
(@DuncanWeldon) 
There's a lot of overlap between Labour's regional growth plans & the 
Chancellor's speech last week.
 <https://twitter.com/DuncanWeldon/statuses/483869746581209088> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/DuncanWeldon/statuses/483869746581209088> Chris Gibson 
(@ChrisGibsonNews) 
The Adonis report into growth very similar in scope to Lord Heseltine's review 
a few years back. Labour say his plans were mostly ignored.
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisGibsonNews/statuses/483905958297759744> July 1, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisGibsonNews/statuses/483905958297759744> Patrick 
Wintour (@patrickwintour) 
Factory floor in Leeds. Blue overall workers seated in semi-circle plus bosses 
waiting for Miliband to speak on cities. Very Cameron Direct.
 <https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/statuses/483896677120892928> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/patrickwintour/statuses/483896677120892928>  Ed Miliband 
launching the Adonis Review Photograph: /BBC 
10.55am BST 

The final question comes from Keith Wakefield, the leader of Leeds council.

Q: What can you do to address the problem of low wages?

Miliband says he understands the problem with this.

Labour would legislate to curb the use of zero hours contracts, he says.

It is vital to address this. If the government does not, people will not feel 
that politics can address the problems they care about, he says.

And that's it. The Q&A is now over.

10.52am BST 

Miliband says a lot of money is spent on training. But many businesses feel it 
is not well spent. They should have more incentive to ensure it is well spent.

10.51am BST 

My colleague Patrick Wintour goes next.

Q: When George Osborne gave a speech making similar proposals, he called for 
more directly elected mayors. Do you support that?

Miliband says he does not accept that Osborne was proposing what Labour is 
proposing.

The Tories are not accepting that there is a problem with where jobs are being 
created. If you don't accept there's a problem, you won't accept the need for a 
solution.

And Lord Heseltine produced a report on this. But it was largely ignored by 
the government, he says.

He says the coalition also does not accept the need for changes to the market, 
as well as changes to the state.

On mayors, he says it does not make sense to deny people devolution if they do 
not have an elected mayor. In some areas people may be happy with the local 
government they have.

But Labour is asking councils to come to together to form combined authorities.

Q: Can you say how much money an authority like Leeds might get from your plan 
to allow keep business rate revenues.

Miliband says he can get those figures. But he is talking about substantial 
sums - tens of millions, or more.

10.46am BST 

Q: How would Labour be held accountable for its plans?

Miliband says he understands why people are sceptical. Today he is setting out 
a clear plan for government. It is not just a general plan with no detail.

Labour will be held accountable by local authorities, local businesses and 
local enterprise partnerships.

And Labour will publish progress reports, he says.

10.44am BST 

Rachel Reeves, the shadow work and pensions secretary, is at the launch. She 
says she went to university, and the government carried on investing in her. 
But the government did not carry on investing in the many of her contemporaries 
who did not go to university.

That is why Labour is said that young people under 21 without skills will need 
to train to get benefit.

10.42am BST 
Yorks&Humber Labour (@yorkshirelabour) 
At Airedale International in Leeds @Ed_Miliband 
<https://twitter.com/Ed_Miliband> & @Andrew_Adonis 
<https://twitter.com/Andrew_Adonis> launching radical Labour regional growth 
report.pic.twitter.com/gPNY0VpDjJ <http://t.co/gPNY0VpDjJ>
 <https://twitter.com/yorkshirelabour/statuses/483905693746200577> July 1, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/yorkshirelabour/statuses/483905693746200577> 
10.41am BST 

Miliband now takes a question from a journalist. It's Nick Robinson.

Q: Why have you dropped the claim about 80% of private jobs being created in 
London?

Miliband says that figure came from the Centre for Cities report. It is the 
best figure he's seen. If someone has a better figure, that's up to them.

Q: How would you explain to people here why they should vote Labour?

Miliband says Labour knows how to support businesses that create wealth. He 
has a vision for a high-wealth future for Britain. He knows how to achieve 
that, through giving power to local people, raising skills, helping the 50% of 
those who do not go to university, and reforming banking, even if that is going 
to be unpopular with some.

10.37am BST 

Q: What would you do to help small businesses?

Miliband says finance is a big issue. Banking reform is unfinished business, 
he says.

Government is not a wealth creator. But it can make a difference with the 
decision it makes, for example in procurement. In the past, the will to do this 
has not been there.

Labour would prioritise cutting business rates over cutting corporation tax.

10.32am BST 

Q: Colleges have an incentive to increase numbers, not improve skills. How 
would you make them address this?

This comes from a member of the Airedale workforce. Miliband asks him about 
his experience of this issue.

Miliband invites Lord Adonis to comment on this.

Adonis says the closer the links between colleges and employers, the better.

You need systematic engagement on training.

The key relationship involves apprenticeships, he says. One of his key 
recommendations is for a big increase in apprenticeships.

Miliband says he wants to give local entreprise partnerships more say over how 
training money is spent.

And the public sector has been "absolutely useless" in terms of 
apprenticeships. If you compare what happens in the UK with a country like 
Germany, it is "scandalous". Government cannot get firms to take on apprentices 
if it does not do the same itself.

10.27am BST 

Miliband says in the end leadership, and collective commitment, will decide 
whether this plan succeeds or fails.

Lord Adonis has worked very closely with Ed Balls and the Labour Treasury 
team, he says.

Miliband says the coalition "talked a good game on this". They welcomed Lord 
Heseltine's plan. But then they basically ignored it, he says.

10.25am BST 

BBC News have given up their coverage, but you can find a live feed on the 
BBC's website. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-28098586>

10.24am BST 

Miliband's Q&A

Miliband is now taking questions.

Journalists are at the event, but it is not a press conference and Miliband is 
inviting questions from the local people in the audience.

Q: If regions get £3obn over the lifetime of a parliament, that's a lot of 
money. How will you ensure that local people do not create a new tier of 
bureaucracy?

Miliband says he is not proposing a new tier of government. Labour looked at 
regional assemblies when it was in government, he says. This plan is different.

10.21am BST 

Miliband is wrapping up now.

This is a long-term plan to show that there can be jobs in every part of 
country.

But this is also about showing that politics can answer the big questions the 
country faces.

Politics is good at answering the small questions facing the country. But 
Miliband says he thinks it can address big questions too.

10.20am BST 

Miliband says the final key theme is innovation.

Countries like Germany are far better at supporting science and innovation. 
There should be long-term budgets for these, he says.

10.19am BST 

Miliband says finance needs reform too. Labour wants to reform the banks. And 
there should be regional banks.

It is a pro-business thing to say the banks should be reformed, he says.

10.18am BST 

Miliband says the government needs to offer better opportunities for people 
who are not going to university.

That will require real change.

If he was a 14-year-old, he would have trouble knowing what the "gold 
standard" is for vocational educational. It is clear for academic 
qualifications. But it is not clear for vocational qualifications.

10.17am BST 

Miliband says the Scots got devolution in the 1990s.

England needs to catch up, he says. Power should be devolved locally.

So the first principle in the report is devolution.

10.14am BST 

Miliband says the future of Britain depends on having a high-skill, high-wage 
economy.

People are worrying where the good jobs of the future are going to come from.

And people are wondering if politics can address this. Many people will think 
politicians cannot answer these questions.

His mission is to show people that there are answers, he says.

And that's where the Adonis Review comes in.

The problems of today did not start with the recession.

Some people think the problems are basically fixed. But Miliband says he does 
not accept that.

10.12am BST 

Ed Miliband launches the growth review

Ed Miliband is speaking at the launch of the growth review in Leeds now.

He is at Airedale International.

Leeds can be at the centre of Labour's plans for how the economy grows in the 
future, he says.

10.11am BST 

Jonathan Portes, director of the National Institute of Economic and Social 
Research, has weighed on in the "new jobs" row. (See 9.28am  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog?commentpage=1#block-53b27068e4b07f992dfe8791>
and9.49am.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog?commentpage=1#block-53b2755de4b04fe840941200>
He says the Tories are broadly right, but that they should not describe the 
figure for the net increase in the number of jobs as the figure for new jobs.
Jonathan Portes (@jdportes) 
@eduardmead <https://twitter.com/eduardmead> @bbcnickrobinson 
<https://twitter.com/bbcnickrobinson> Using these net figures as "new jobs" 
simply wrong.http://t.co/CIHJM061MA <http://t.co/CIHJM061MA> ONS don't publish 
"new job" stats
 <https://twitter.com/jdportes/statuses/483890630951985152> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/jdportes/statuses/483890630951985152> Jonathan Portes 
(@jdportes) 
@eduardmead <https://twitter.com/eduardmead> @bbcnickrobinson 
<https://twitter.com/bbcnickrobinson> That said, Labour stat certainly wrong. 
Conservatives much closer, but not on basis of published ONS figures.
 <https://twitter.com/jdportes/statuses/483890884493475840> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/jdportes/statuses/483890884493475840> 
9.49am BST 

Cameron says Labour's facts on job creation are wrong

David Cameron has joined the attack on Adonis (see 9.28am) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog?commentpage=1#block-53b27068e4b07f992dfe8791>
 for wrongly claiming that 80% of new jobs are going to London.
David Cameron (@David_Cameron) 
Labour get their facts wrong on jobs - again. How can they ever be trusted 
with the economy?http://t.co/zTZJVadFhQ <http://t.co/zTZJVadFhQ> #AdonisReview 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AdonisReview?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/statuses/483892324192489472> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/statuses/483892324192489472> 
9.41am BST 

Adonis Review published

The Adonis Review is now out.

You can read it in full here (pdf). 
<http://www.policy-network.net/publications_download.aspx?ID=8980> It's 
83-pages long.

And here's a statement about its aims from Lord Adonis. 
<http://www.policy-network.net/publications/4695/Mending-the-Fractured-Economy>

My review has a simple goal: creating better jobs in your area.

Britain’s industrial revolution changed the world. Innovation in technology, 
production and manufacturing transformed the lives of millions, first in 
Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, and other towns and cities, and then beyond our 
borders. Having once led the world, Britain is struggling to keep up.


On education, infrastructure, regional growth, productivity and living 
standards, the UK lags much of Europe and North America. Having once been the 
world’s dynamo of new products, ideas and processes, British firms struggle to 
grow, find the skilled workers they require, and export.


Growth is unbalanced. The link between growth and living standards has been 
broken, exports are weak, young people widely lack the opportunities they 
deserve and inequality is vast, both between people and between regions.


Whitehall needs to hand down budgets and powers for this purpose – not just 
talk about handing them down, as the Coalition has done since the Heseltine 
Report. England’s business leaders and local governments need empowering to 
invest in infrastructure, skills and economic development.


While big numbers dominate discussions about economic growth, the real story 
exists in the company, or the cluster, or the school, or the city.


My overriding aim is to promote a smarter, not a more expensive, state. We 
need to build on the best of Britain and be optimistic that the best is yet to 
come.


9.28am BST 

On the Today programme Lord Adonis said that four-fifths of new jobs created 
since 2010 have been created in London. (See 9.18am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2014/jul/01/miliband-and-adonis-publish-regional-growth-review-politics-live-blog#block-53b26b30e4b00e4ee5d8cb72>
 Chuka Umunna, the shadow business secretary, has just repeated the claim on 
the BBC News, with the clarification that that figure applies to private sector 
jobs.

But the Tories are saying it is wrong.
Tory Treasury (@ToryTreasury) 
Labour's figures are out of date. Four fifths of the new private sector jobs 
in England over past year have been created outside London
 <https://twitter.com/ToryTreasury/statuses/483855984180600832> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ToryTreasury/statuses/483855984180600832> Tory Treasury 
(@ToryTreasury) 
.@iankatz1000 <https://twitter.com/iankatz1000> @Andrew_Adonis 
<https://twitter.com/Andrew_Adonis> except it's not true. Since 2010, just 1 in 
4 private sector jobs created are in London (Source: ONS).
 <https://twitter.com/ToryTreasury/statuses/483879520240668672> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ToryTreasury/statuses/483879520240668672> 
The Sunday Times's David Smith says the Tories are right.
David Smith (@dsmitheconomics) 
Odd claim that four-fifths of net new jobs created in past 4 years are in 
London. I make it 22%, or 36% including the south-east.
 <https://twitter.com/dsmitheconomics/statuses/483878284460302336> July 1, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/dsmitheconomics/statuses/483878284460302336> 
9.23am BST 

Devolve Deliver, a group campaigning to get Labour to devolve more economic 
powers, has been in touch with a graph illustrating how much economic power is 
concentrated in London.
devolvedeliver (@devolvedeliver) 
@AndrewSparrow <https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow> This is how overcentralised 
the UK economy is at the moment compared to other countries h/t@NEF 
<https://twitter.com/NEF> pic.twitter.com/NalAgqtjc9 <http://t.co/NalAgqtjc9>
 <https://twitter.com/devolvedeliver/statuses/483884315294855169> July 1, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/devolvedeliver/statuses/483884315294855169> 
9.18am BST 

Lord Adonis's Today interview

Lord Adonis was talking about his review on the Today programme this morning. 
Here are some of the key points he made.

• Adonis said the recovery was flawed because most new jobs were being created 
in London.

The economy is growing, but it’s not creating the productive, high-skilled, 
well-paid jobs that we need because of severe fractures in the economy. We have 
mass youth unemployment; a really serious problem of innovation – lack of 
innovation; four-fifths of net new jobs since 2010 have been in London; and we 
don’t have the rates of research and development and productivity that we need. 
And all of these need really serious attention.

• He said power needed to be devolved to the city region level.

We’ve had too little authority at the travel-to-work area in the past, the 
city region and the county region where you can make a big difference in terms 
of infrastructure, as London has shown in the last 15 years with a mayor and 
the Greater London Authority. Now, we have these local enterprise partnerships; 
we need to rationalise and strengthen those and I think there’s a very good 
case for creating more city and county regional authorities, like Manchester, 
and encouraging more of those to be set up.

• He confirmed that his ideas were similar to those proposed by Lord 
Heseltine, the Conservative former prime minister, in his No Stone Unturned 
report last year. 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/no-stone-unturned-in-pursuit-of-growth>

I have spoken to Michael Heseltine and, when it comes to creating really 
strong and powerful cities and city regions, we broadly agree. The issue is 
actually getting action because, of course, the one thing Whitehall never wants 
to do is give up power and resources. He said there would be a huge struggle; 
there has been a huge struggle and there’s been some devolution, but not much. 
And what the cities want is to see significantly more devolution and 
responsibility, living up to the proposals that Lord Heseltine set out. And 
that’s what I’ve proposed today – a really big package of devolution in return 
for the cities and county regions taking serious responsibility for planning 
and delivering infrastructure.

Adonis revers Heseltine. In a New Statesman article three years ago, 
<http://andrewadonis.com/2011/10/06/the-lefts-favourite-tories-michael-heseltine/>
 he said: "In the brilliance of his institutional creativity, Heseltine is 
matched only by Aneurin Bevan and Ernest Bevin among postwar ministers."
 Lord Adonis Guardian 
8.55am BST 

Here is the press notice that Labour released overnight giving some details of 
what's in the Adonis review. 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/90391647579/mending-our-fractured-economy-ed-miliband-lord>

8.53am BST 

You never hear anyone complaining about Labour not having any policy nowadays, 
do you? Over the last few months policy has been gushing out of Labour HQ even 
faster than anti-Unite press releases from Grant Shapps, and today we are 
getting another instalment. It's a regional growth review compiled by Lord 
Adonis, the former transport secretary. Ed Miliband and Adonis are launching it 
in Leeds.

My colleague Patrick Wintour has previewed the announcement in the Guardian 
today. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/30/labour-outlines-plan-boost-regional-growth-skills>
Here's how his story starts.

New city or county regions will be given the power to keep all growth in their 
business rates income and use it to build new housing and infrastructure, and 
reskill their local workforce, under plans to be announced on Tuesday byEd 
Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> and former Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> cabinet minister Lord Adonis.

In what is being billed as a decisive shift away from decades of Whitehall 
centralisation, Adonis also proposes that at least £6bn a year of transport, 
housing, welfare and infrastructure budgets are devolved from central 
government to large city councils or combined authorities.

The government has so far agreed half of the growth in business rate revenue 
could be retained, a measure derided as too modest to provide an incentive for 
councils to focus on growth.

The Miliband-Adonis plans are seen as vital to reassuring business that 
Labour's responsible capitalism agenda will encourage balanced growth and not 
lead to punitive tax rates or excessive regulation. The ideas were welcomed by 
both the CBI and the EEF manufacturers' organisation, suggesting a much-needed 
thaw in Labour's relations with the business community could be under way.

Patrick has also written a good analysis explaining how industrial policy has 
come back in fashion. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/30/labour-industrial-intervention-growth-devolution>
 I will be covering the launch, and the report, in detial, as well as the 
reaction it provokes.

Otherwise, it's reasonable quiet. Here's the agenda for the day.

9.30am: The cabinet meets.

9.45am: Ed Miliband and Lord Adonis launch the Labour regional growth review.

10.30am: Lord Burns, the Channel 4 chairman, and David Abraham, its chief 
executive, give evidence to the Commons culture committee.

11am: Lord McConnell, the former Scottish first minister, gives a speech for 
the Better Together campaign.

12.40pm: Andrew Lansley, leader of the Commons, and Angela Eagle, the shadow 
Commons leader, give evidence to the Commons standards committee on the 
standards system.

As usual, I will also be flagging up any breaking political news, posting 
summaries with a round-up of all the day’s developments, and highlighting the 
most interesting political articles on the web.

If you want to follow me on Twitter, I’m on @AndrewSparrow. 
<https://twitter.com/AndrewSparrow>
 