
The award-winning writer behind The Thick of It and Veep has accused ministers 
of effectively trying to kill off theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>
 and urged people to defend it against politicians and Rupert Murdoch.

Armando Iannucci <https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci> said it 
would be “bad capitalism” to diminish the national broadcaster, and said the 
debate about its future had been poisoned by the newspaper industry.

“If the BBC were a weapons system, half the cabinet would be on a plane to 
Saudi Arabia to tell them how brilliant it was,” Iannucci told an audience of 
leading TV executives at the Guardian Edinburgh international television 
festival.

Unless you want TV by diktat, defend the BBC | Armando Iannucci
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/mactaggart-lecture-tv-diktat-defend-bbc-ministers-talk-us-down>
“And yet, it’s quite the reverse. They talk of cutting down to size, of 
reining in imperialist ambitions, of hiving off, of limiting the scope, with 
all the manic glee of a doctor urging his patient to consider the benefits of 
assisted suicide.”


The rallying cry, in the 40th annual James MacTaggart Memorial Lecture in 
Edinburgh, comes at a critical moment for the BBC.

In July, the government struck a funding deal that saw the BBC management 
agree to shoulder the estimated £750m burden of paying for free licence fees 
for the over-75s and followed up that action with a green paper set to debate 
the scope and scale of the corporation.


In a speech entitled We’re All in This Together – deliberately echoing the 
language used by the chancellor, George Osborne – Iannucci said the “extremely 
subjective opinions” of senior ministers were putting the UK on a “dangerous 
path, a creeping imperial ambition that’s doing international harm to our 
stock”.

Iannucci compared the behaviour of the current government with Tony Blair’s 
defence of his decision to invade Iraq in 2004, when the former prime minister 
said of his justification to act: “I only know what I believe”.

Suggesting that the Conservative government did not reflect all of public 
opinion, Iannucci said: “The problem of ‘I only know what I believe’ is now 
putting pressure on public service broadcasting to conform to the political 
norms of the party in power, no matter how slim its majority, or how low its 
share of the vote.”

Hours before Iannucci’s high-profile intervention, ministers were already 
seeking to allay concerns about the future of the corporation.John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale>, the culture 
secretary, said it was unfortunate there had been a need to strike a speedy 
financial settlement after the election to cover a financial deficit, before 
the discussions about the renewal of the BBC’s charter had even begun.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fjohn-whittingdale-bbc-funding-editorial-freedom-paramount-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440668963154%2FKP_404940_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Whittingdale%20on%20BBC%20funding%3A%20editorial%20freedom%20is%20paramount%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fjohn-whittingdale-bbc-funding-editorial-freedom-paramount-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Whittingdale%20on%20BBC%20funding%3A%20editorial%20freedom%20is%20paramount%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Fjohn-whittingdale-bbc-funding-editorial-freedom-paramount-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F27%2F1440668963154%2FKP_404940_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Culture secretary John Whittingdale says editorial freedom for the BBC is 
paramount.Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2015/aug/27/john-whittingdale-bbc-funding-editorial-freedom-paramount-video>
Asked by veteran ITN newsreader Alastair Stewart whether the desire to 
diminish the BBC was unfinished business from his days as an adviser to 
Margaret Thatcher, Whittingdale said it was absolute nonsense. “Nobody is 
talking about dismantling the BBC,” he added.


The culture secretary did, however, suggest that the BBC could cut costs 
without resorting to cutting channels such as BBC4. “Lots of people think there 
is still scope for cuts to BBC management,“ he said.


Iannucci, who has won fame and fortune on both sides of the Atlantic, said the 
British television industry felt under attack and that his US counterparts 
could not understand why the government would want to reduce the power of the 
BBC rather than encourage it further.

“To them it looks like we’re going mad,” he said. “This is toxifying something 
that could otherwise make more money internationally. Simply put, it’s bad 
capitalism.”

He also contrasted the criticism of the BBC with the expansion of global media 
giants, saying: “Capitalism is pursued where it helps the BBC’s competitors, 
and a most peculiar form of Maoist state control is advocated when it doesn’t.”

“It’s Facebook and Google who came along and ate up all newspapers’ classified 
ads. Yet it’s the BBC, who run no ads, that gets the blame, while it’s Google 
and Facebook that get the helpful tax arrangements from HMRC.”


Iannucci, who has worked for Sky, HBO and Channel 4 as well as the BBC, quoted 
from both James Murdoch’s 2009 lecture and one given by James’s father, Rupert, 
in 1989 to suggest that both believed that media groups could no longer focus 
on one area, unless that media group happened to be the BBC.

“Dismantling it [the BBC] is madness. The question shouldn’t be how do we cut 
it down to size, but why should we?” he said.

“It makes no economic or cultural sense to tell this country’s best online 
media presence, one that serves the public freely, that projects our cultural 
impact globally, to make itself a little bit worse.”


With a swipe at TV executives rather than the content producers and viewers, 
Iannucci also criticised the “one-sided nature” of the appointments to 
Whittingdale’s advisory panel into the future of the broadcaster.

“It’s like a car company was looking into what car it should make next, but 
only spoke to the managers and not to any of the engineers. Or drivers. You 
cannot have a meaningful root and branch review of television, if you’re only 
going to deal with one branch.”


In a passionate but humourous speech he described as playful but deadly 
serious, Iannucci made it clear that when it came to bias the press had more to 
answer than the BBC.

“Where does it come from, this spooky force bending the ear of chancellors and 
ministers and civil servants and asking them to cull the BBC?” he asked. “Let’s 
for the sake of argument call this force M, for Mysterious.”


“The BBC is funded by and speaks to the country. The country is not the 
government. More people pay for the BBC and watch it than vote for any one 
political party. And politicians convinced that, because they are in 
government, their views and values are the majority opinion of the day, are 
slaves to an illusion.”
 