
Twiggy Forrest is responsible for the best event to occur on the back of a 
flat bed truck sinceAC/DC took a run 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/xvu9g_ac-dc-it-s-a-long-way-to-the-top_music> 
along Melbourne’s Swanston street and informed us it that it was a long way to 
the top.


#AustraliansForCoal is the latest sign of an industry in values freefall | 
David Ritter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/15/australiansforcoal-is-the-latest-sign-of-an-industry-in-values-freefall>
On 9 June 2010 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/axe-the-tax--mining-magnates-see-red-20100609-xvqj.html>
, Twiggy was a double-act withpoet-billionaire 
<http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2012/02/15/3431797.htm> Gina Rinehart in 
Perth. Dressed in hi-viz work wear so new and shiny you could see it from 
space, he fronted a rally against the Labor government’s proposed Resources 
Super Profits Tax (RSPT).

He railed against the evils of big-government Canberra intervention in the 
free market for resources. Intervention that would, of course, destroy jobs and 
investment. The RSPT meant no less than Australia “turning communist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FEhmNMulWZQ>”.

The global players, like BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto, were happy enough for 
Twiggy to be the public face of the campaign against the RSPT.


Dressing like a miner doesn’t make you one, of course. Twiggy is in fact a 
billionaire mining company boss and scion of one of WA’s oldest mining and 
pastoral families who gave the state, among other things, its first premier.


But he functioned as a sort of Richard Branson figure, the publicity savvy 
home-grown billionaire ranting about Canberra commies.

Meanwhile, the big boys more quietly exercised the coercive powers available 
to them. After all, being among the country’s largest taxpayers and the world’s 
largest corporations (at times BHP Billiton has been worth more than Toyota) 
brings with it the ability to exert unconscionable pressure on opponents, even 
national governments.


An astonishing ad buy worth tens of millions of dollars pounded the Labor 
government – “axe the tax” – and the now-repealed minerals resource rent tax 
(MRRT) that replaced the RSPT was a very poor substitute. For perspective, the 
mining companies spent more on anti-RSPT ads in a few months than unions spent 
on the Your Rights at Work campaign over nearly four years.

Gillard and Swan’s deal on the MRRT was more the government signing the 
articles of surrender than the implementation of a proper system of resource 
rent charging that would see the nation benefit from the windfall gains of any 
commodity boom.


The history of Australia since white settlement is one of recurring commodity 
booms and inevitable busts (or at least sharp reductions in prices back to more 
normal levels) since the long wool boom and the gold rushes of the 19th 
century. It’s pretty much a law of commodity exports into a global market. 
Great fortunes are made, and some lost.


Those that find themselves on the wrong side of a sharp fall in prices often 
do their dough as surely as those lucky (or smart) enough to be producing when 
prices are high make enormous windfall profits. Public finances have always 
ridden the same painful rollercoaster. Today we see multiple write-downs of tax 
revenue; in the 19th century a grand dome in the design of the Victorian 
Parliament was cancelled when the gold rushes petered out.


There is not a great deal of point complaining. Buy the ticket and take the 
ride, as they say.


In mining, the price of the commodity matters, but so do the location, depth, 
and quality of the deposit being mined, the capital efficiency, technology, and 
the broader cost structure of the corporation. Marginal mines that turn a 
profit in boom times are regularly shuttered when prices fall. In brutal terms, 
if your cost of production exceeds the price you can get, you are doomed.

What’s changed in the five years since Twiggy left the flat-bed truck? Well, a 
sustained and precipitous fall in the price of iron ore. No wonder Twiggy is 
increasingly hysterical in his calls for government investigation and 
intervention in the iron ore market. Losing your paper fortune can do funny 
things to a bloke. One analyst suggests that equity in Twiggy’s company 
Fortescue is effectivelyworthless 
<http://thenewdaily.com.au/money/2015/05/18/fortescue-shares-worth-zero-nikko/> 
at current iron ore prices.

In 2010 Twiggy was pretty clear that the national interest meant letting it 
rip, breakneck development and no to big government. Now it means, to the 
extent his ask is clear at all, someGosplan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gosplan>-style system of production quotas where 
he gets to run assets at full tilt, while his giant competitors have to dial it 
down a few notches to increase the price above his cost of production.

The national interest conveniently coincides with Twiggy’s personal interest – 
that much hasn’t changed since 2010. Fortescue is now funding a “grassroots” 
group calledOur Iron Ore <http://www.ourironore.com>, which makes out that the 
commercial interests of Fortescue are the same as the public interest. The 
stock photo of “the face of the Australian community 
<https://twitter.com/picketer/status/600162001344561154>” on the website is 
also used by a Florida rehab clinic.

Twiggy’s concern for people and communities didn’t stop his company, just 
three weeks ago, fromsacking a chunk of its workers 
<http://www.watoday.com.au/wa-news/fmg-sacks-workers-at-christmas-creek-cloudbreak-mine-sites-20150429-1mvvaw.html>
 on the spot and having their belongings returned from the mine camp in garbage 
bags.


This sort of digital astroturfing to provide cover for a campaign of narrow 
self interest, with the primary target being an narrow political audience, is a 
disease in Australian public life. It’s widespread, and ideology-agnostic.

But “Our Iron Ore” is particularly galling. It is an attempt to trick the 
Australian public into forgetting Twiggy’s role in defeating the introduction 
of sensible intervention in the resource sector, via taxation.

Ironically, a tax like the RSPT is also one of the few sensible things a 
national government could sensibly do to encourage investment in marginal 
projects, dampen the worst excesses of a boom andactually extend it 
<http://www.tai.org.au/node/1835>.


There are plenty of things we should have a national debate about in relation 
to the resource industries, about what the boom did, and about what governments 
should do: the pernicious effect on 100% fly-in fly-out workers, families and 
communities, or about what the boom did to hollow out industries like 
manufacturing, and about the rights of Indigenous Australians.

Twiggy Forrest is right: we shouldn't sell our natural resources at bargain 
basement prices | Richard Denniss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/01/andrew-forrest-is-right-we-shouldnt-sell-our-natural-resources-at-bargain-basement-prices>
And especially about what sort of resource taxes we need to have in place to 
to capture for the nation the benefits of the inevitable next boom in demand 
for “our iron ore”, whenever it comes.


But saving Twiggy from the inherent logic of global capitalism isn’t a 
national priority. It is a long way to the top of a boom. And it’s an equally 
long way down.
 