

The Confederacy is rising again, this time using perhaps the final weapon in 
its arsenal: calendars.

Stone Mountain monument at center of racial tension over Confederate tributes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/28/stone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension>
Mississippi governor Phil Bryant recently proclaimed April to be Confederate 
Heritage Month 
<http://www.clarionledger.com/story/news/politics/2016/02/25/mississippi-declares-april-confederate-heritage-month/80938722/>
, adding an official flourish to a longstanding tradition in his state and 
several others. April, he wrote in the proclamation, is “the month in which the 
Confederate States began and ended a four-year struggle”.

Bryant’s proclamation does not mention 
<http://m.jacksonfreepress.com/news/2016/feb/24/mississippi-governor-declares-april-confederate-hi/?templates=mobile>
 the central cause of the struggle – slavery – but instead announces the month 
as a chance to “gain insight from our mistakes and successes” and to “earnestly 
strive to understand and appreciate our heritage and our opportunities which 
lie before us”. It also sets aside 25 April as “Confederate Memorial Day”.

The proclamation set off an outcry around the state. Bryant may have expected 
less-than-universal acceptance of his declaration: he did not issue it on the 
official Mississippi state website, alongside other proclamations. Instead it 
appeared without notice on the site of theSons of Confederate Veterans 
<http://www.scv.org/>. 

The SCV is a group dedicated to preserving the vestiges of southern rebellion 
– including the Mississippi state flag, which is the last in the nationto 
feature a version of the Confederate battle flag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/17/mississippi-state-flag-confederate-symbol>
.

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) leaders in 
Mississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi> reacted by 
proposing a civil war remembrance of their own: Union Army Heritage Month.

“These white and black Mississippi patriots fought for the continuation of the 
United States of America as one nation, under God, indivisible with liberty and 
justice for all,” Derrick Johnson, president of Mississippi’s NAACP, wrote to 
the Clarion-Ledger.

“Should not these soldiers be honored, too?”

Scores rallied on the steps of the capitol, in Jackson. They were diverse. 
Kathleen Chambers personified a shift in the state’s mentality: she is young 
and white, and instead of a southern drawl she spoke with the universal up-talk 
of young people.

“Any white people I know? They’re not OK with this,” she said to the local 
television station WAPT.

Of Bryant, she said: “He’s trying to turn a Confederate heritage into a good 
thing, when it’s not. It shouldn’t be celebrated. Especially we shouldn’t 
celebrate owning people in the past.”

Other states around the south – Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas 
and, until a few years ago, Virginia – celebrate similar months, with 
variations. Unlike Mississippi, Alabama’s proclamation keeps the cause of the 
war in view: “Our recognition of Confederate history also recognizes that 
slavery was one of the causes of the war, an issue in the war, was ended by the 
war and slavery is hereby condemned.”

Virginia may be a bellwether for the fate of the Confederate calendar. The 
last time Virginia declared such a month, in 2010, the backlash was immediate. 
On 8 April that year Governor Bob McConnell issued a lengthy apology to the 
citizens of his state and amended his proclamation.

“The proclamation issued by this office designating April as Confederate 
History Month contained a major omission,” he wrote. “The failure to include 
any reference to slavery was a mistake, and for that I apologize to any fellow 
Virginian who has been offended or disappointed.

“The abomination of slavery divided our nation, deprived people of their 
God-given inalienable rights, and led to the civil war.Slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/slavery> was an evil, vicious and inhumane 
practice which degraded human beings to property, and it has left a stain on 
the soul of this state and nation.”

Progressive rebels in the American south fight a flag – and the Klansman next 
door
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/04/progressive-american-south-flag-klansman-next-door>
McDonnell injected this section into the middle of his proclamation: “WHEREAS, 
it is important for all Virginians to understand that the institution of 
slavery led to this war and was an evil and inhumane practice that deprived 
people of their God-given inalienable rights and all Virginians are thankful 
for its permanent eradication from our borders, and the study of this time 
period should reflect upon and learn from this painful part of our history.”

In Mississippi, Bryant has showed no inclination to include such an 
acknowledgment. But Clay Chandler, the governor’s director of communications, 
told the Times-Picayune in Mississippi: “Like his predecessors – both 
Republican and Democrat – who issued similar proclamations, Governor Bryant 
believes Mississippi’s history deserves study and reflection, no matter how 
unpleasant or complicated parts of it may be.”

And, he said: “Like the proclamation says, gaining insight from our mistakes 
and successes will help us move forward.”
 