
A ballerina who lived in a single motel room with her mother and five siblings 
during her teenage years will become theAmerican Ballet Theatre 
<http://www.abt.org/>'s first black soloist in 20 years.

Misty Copeland, who has been recovering from a career-threatening injury this 
year, is one of six soloists in Wednesday's matinee performance of Le Corsaire 
at the Metropolitan Opera inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>. She will perform again on 
Saturday evening.

In an interview with the New York Post 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/news/local/unlikely_star_raises_the_barre_EROgBoD7eCG8CmRl0toSGN>
, the 30-year-old explained the moment's significance: "People say, 'It's 2013, 
you live in New York City, you're [being] dramatic – but they don't understand 
the way the ballet world works. We're completely behind the way the world has 
evolved. Ballet is just kind of staid."

The lack of diversity among ballet dancers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/04/black-ballet-dancers?newsfeed=true>
 is a growing concern, with many pointing toaccess and grassroots as the 
problem's source 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/07/racist-attitudes-ballet-access>.

Copeland has overcome a number of odds to reach such an extraordinary career 
first. She grew up in poverty in California and spent a portion of her teenage 
years living in a single motel room with her mother and five siblings. Copeland 
was 13 when she was spotted by ballet instructor Cynthia Bradley and took only 
four years to complete training that can last up to 17 years. Furthermore, she 
has an unusual physique compared with her peers: more muscular and curvaceous.

In autumn, Copeland suffered a black-line fracture to her left shin during 
rehearsals and faced surgery followed by several weeks of physiotherapy.

Though she says she's dancing at around 80%, she is determined to perform at 
the Met this week. She told the New York Post: "For young African Americans to 
feel that they have a chance to see a brown face on the stage – that ballet 
isn't this white world that's untouchable to them – I think having that visual 
does so much. I think it's so important for them to see me and to hear me."
 