
Leading shares are heading higher again, helped by a rise in banking shares, 
although there is a mixed performance from Ireland's financial institutions 
following yesterday's results of the stress tests.

Ireland's banks need an extra €24bn in a financial restructuring which will 
see the government take majority control of all remaining lenders.Bank of 
Ireland, which will be one of two "pillar" banks created under the new plans, 
has jumped 35% to €0.298 and the other,Allied Irish Banks, is up 3% after an 
early drop as its share suspension was lifted.Irish Life & Permanent, which up 
until now had survived without direct funding, fell 67% as it was revealed it 
needs a €4bn injection. Analysts at RBS said:
 The results of the irish stress test were largely in-line with expectation 
except for Irish Life & Permanent where the outcome was worse. Most positive 
was the decision not to involving senior bond holders in burden sharing. We 
continue to be believe that the sector remains uninvestible.

Among the UK banks Barclays is 9.85p better at 287.4p, Royal Bank of Scotland 
has risen 1.25p to 42.04p andLloyds Banking Group is up 1.43p to 59.52p.

The banks are leading the FTSE 100 higher after yesterday's late dip, with the 
index now up 48.39 points at 5957.15. Manoj Ladwa, senior trader at ETX 
Capital, said:
 A sharp rally this morning for the FTSE as relief sets in after yesterday's 
announcement of Ireland's stress test results. But with scrappy corporate news 
flow and employment numbers due from the US later in the session, any gains 
could quickly be eroded, especially if the US figures disappoint. 
The non-farm payroll numbers, expected to show a rise of up to 200,000 jobs, 
are due at 1.30 UK time, but before that comes the purchasing managers index 
showing the UK's manufacturing performance for March.

BP has added 10.2p to 464.2p following a deal to expand its interests in 
coalbed methane production and an upgrade from JP Morgan. In a note on the oil 
sector the bank said:
 One name stands out as being seriously under-priced – once again it is BP 
which trades on a 2011 PE of just 6.4 times and a downstream adjusted 
enterprise value reserve multiple of $7.3 per barrel of oil equivalent. To 
match Shell's multiple of $10.9 per boe, we must zero the value of BP's stake 
in TNK-BP and also raise the total
Macondo related liabilities from $20bn to $58bn. 
 