
The electropop provocateur Peaches <https://www.theguardian.com/music/peaches> 
takes on Jesus Christ Superstar for next year’s Mona Foma, the summer festival 
of Tasmania’s Museum of Old and New Art.

More than 200 artists from a dozen countries as far-flung as Azerbaijan will 
feature in thefive-day festival in Hobart 
<http://mofo.net.au/?_ga=1.149032816.776991989.1476164482>. (Mona Foma is an 
acronym for Museum of Old and New Art: Festival of Music and Art, and is often 
further shortened to Mofo.)

Peaches, the Canadian electronic musician and performance artist, will perform 
Andrew Lloyd Webber <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-lloyd-webber> 
and Tim Rice’s 1970 rock opera as a one-woman show at the Theatre Royal. 
Peaches Christ Superstar has been performed sporadically since 2010 but the 
Mofo performance will be its Australian premiere.

Peaches Christ Superstar review – all killer, no filler in rock-opera homage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/20/peaches-christ-superstar-review-brighton>
 Left-of-centre collaborations and premieres jump out from the lineup, with 
some Australian musicians reaching outside their comfort zones for the 
avant-garde festival. Brian Ritchie, the bass guitarists for the Violent Femmes 
and the festival’s curator, said the artists on the 2017 bill had been 
encouraged to cross media and extend their practice.

Many will be appearing at the festival in “artist-in-residence” mode, 
responding in real-time to the inspiration of the site.

The Australian rock band Regurgitator will reinterpret the Velvet 
Underground’s debut album, with the addition of synth and Chinese zither. Jim 
Moginie, the guitarist from Midnight Oil, will perform with the German theremin 
virtuosi Carolina Eyck and a piano accompaniment.

As previously announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/mike-patton-faith-no-more-side-project-tetema-to-perform-at-mona-foma-festival-in-world-first>
, Mike Patton, the frontman of the California rock band Faith No More, will 
bring the live world premiere of tētēma: the fruits of his collaboration with 
the experimental composer Anthony Pateras, in their only Australian show; and 
Maynard James Keenan, best known for his work as vocalist in the bands Tool and 
A Perfect Circle, will perform with his elaborate side project Puscifer on 
Mofo’s outdoor stage – in costume and with a wrestling ring.

The opera collective Foundation IHOS Amsterdam will premiere a new work during 
Mofo, titled Before the Flame Goes Out – subtitled a “memorial to the Jewish 
martyrs of Ioannina, Greece”.

The DJ Z-Trip, a pioneer of the mashup movement, is also on the bill, as is 
Germany’s Pantha Du Prince, who fuses house, techno and indie.

Mona is my generation's Sydney Opera House, a gamble that paid off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/21/mona-is-my-generations-sydney-opera-house-a-gamble-that-paid-off>
Artists and punters alike will be able to interact with art, science and music 
installations and exhibitions in and aroundHobart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hobart> for the festival’s 
duration. Highlights include a “wet analogue” synthesiser created by the 
Australian artist Guy Ben-Ary from his own body cells, and an “interactive 
endurance walk on amplified salt inside a shipping container”, brought to Mofo 
by Mick Douglas.

The program is rounded out by markets, parties and dining experiences inspired 
by “Salvador Dalí’s cookbook”.

Will Hodgman, the Tasmanian premier and its minister for tourism, said Mofo 
2017 would transform the city of Hobart and its surrounds “into a somewhat 
surreal stage”.

The festival will take place between 18 and 22 January, with tickets on sale 
from 17 October. Tasmanian residents are eligible for a “locals’ discount”.

 