
Monica Lewinsky was barred from sharing a box with former US vice-president Al 
Gore at an advertising festival in Cannes, days after delivering animpassioned 
speech about the bullying 
<https://www.canneslions.com/cannes_lions/programme/festival_programme/#festival-1/day-7/day-9/event-23/detail-1-160/>
 and harassment she received following her liaison with Bill Clinton.

Lewinsky attended the Cannes Lions advertising festival and gave a 
widely-praised seminar describing her experience as the “patient zero” of 
cyberbullying and online shaming following her intimate relationship with 
Clinton in the late 1990s when he was US president.

On Saturday, Lewinsky was invited to sit in the mayoral box for VIPs at the 
Palais de Festivals on the last night of the Cannes Lions advertising festival.

Gore, who served as vice-president to Clinton, was at the festival to receive 
the LionHeart 
<http://www.canneslions.com/cannes_lions/press/press_releases/1026/vice_president_gore_honoured_with_cannes_lionheart_award/>
, an honorary award presented to an individual who “through innovative use of 
commercial brand power has made a significant and positive difference to people 
or the planet”.

Lewinsky did not take up her seat in the box. Instead she joined the main 
audience, although it is not clear if the ticket was rescinded by the 
organisers of Cannes Lions or at the request of Gore’s team.

In a statement issued by her publicist, Lewinsky said: “I have tremendous 
respect for the critical work on climate change former Vice-President Gore is 
doing and for which he was honoured at Cannes Lions. I did not know he was to 
be seated in the mayor’s box. It was 100% appropriate for me to sit elsewhere.”

Neither Gore’s PR advisers or Cannes Lions had responded to a request for 
comment at the time of publication.

Earlier last week, Lewinsky gave an impassioned and highly-praised speech 
about her life from White House intern to pariah forced to disappear from the 
public eye for nearly two decades.

“At the age of 22, I fell in love with my boss,” she said to a packed Cannes 
auditorium on Thursday. “And at the age of 24, I learned the devastating 
consequences. So as far as our culture of humiliation goes, what we need is a 
cultural revolution. We need to return to a long-held value of compassion, 
compassion and empathy.”

The breaking news of her affair was the “click that reverberated around the 
world” and with the more recent rise of sites including Facebook, Twitter and 
Instagram there is now a “compassion deficit, an empathy crisis” online.

“Today we call it cyberbullying and online harassment,” she said. “Online, 
technologically enhanced shaming is amplified, uncontained and permanently 
accessible. Public shaming as a blood sport must stop. It’s time for an 
intervention on the internet and in the culture.”

 