
Good morning folks, and welcome to the Morning Mail – sign up here to get it 
straight to your inbox every weekday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guardian-australia-morning-mail/2014/jun/24/-sp-guardian-australias-morning-mail-subscribe-by-email>
.

Ferguson

There were continued protests around the US yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/26/protesters-cities-across-us-michael-brown>
 over the killing of Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson in the 
Missouri suburb of Ferguson, withactivists directing their rage into boycotting 
Black Friday tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/26/ferguson-protesters-police-brutality-black-friday-boycott>
, traditionally the biggest shopping day of the American year.

The violence and rioting in Ferguson has let Moscow score points against 
Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/26/ferguson-protests-moscow-reacts-obama-washington>
, with Russian releasing a statement which comes close to parodying US missives 
on Russia’s internal problems, andother authoritarian regimes around the world 
have reacted with thinly disguised glee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/25/world-reacts-ferguson-michael-brown-shooting>
.

Michael Brown’s mother, in an emotional TV appearance this morning, said 
Wilson “wanted to kill” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/26/mother-michael-brown-darren-wilson-wanted-to-kill>
, a day after Wilson’s first TV interview in which he said his “conscience was 
clear” after the shooting.

We have live coverage as protests continue today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2014/nov/26/michael-brown-shooting-solidarity-protests-live>
.

Australian news and politics 
 Some asylum seekers could get a chance at a permanent visa if Morrison makes 
a deal with Labor and crossbench senators. Photograph: customs.gov.au 
• Scott Morrison may be forced to give 31,000 asylum seekers a chance of 
resettlement in Australia or else abandon sweeping new asylum laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/27/scott-morrison-may-be-forced-to-give-31000-asylum-seekers-chance-of-settlement>
.

• The federal government has reportedly abandoned the $7 co-payment for GP 
visits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/27/gp-co-payment-plan-to-be-ditched-in-effort-to-clear-policy-barnacles-reports>
, in an attempt to remove policy “barnacles”.

• Queensland police may get instant access to mental health records under a 
plan to address a recent spike in police shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/27/queensland-police-may-get-instant-access-to-mental-health-records>
.

• Bill Shorten has described Tony Abbott as a backward-looking failure adrift 
on the world stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/26/tony-abbott-backward-looking-failure-adrift-bill-shorten>
.

• Phil Hughes is still in a critical condition after being hit by a cricket 
ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/26/phil-hughes-still-critical-and-in-a-coma-as-michael-clarke-maintains-vigil>
.

• More than 1,100 alleged abusers and enablers of abuse are still serving in 
the Australian defence force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/26/more-than-1100-alleged-abusers-and-enablers-still-serving-in-defence>
, and a “significant cluster of very serious allegations” have not been 
thoroughly investigated.

• More than 1,100 people are jailed each year in Western Australia over unpaid 
fines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/26/more-than-1100-people-year-jailed-unpaid-fines-wa>
; the number of Indigenous women in jail has soared as a result of the fine 
default policy.

• Sia and Chet Faker were among the big winners at last night’s Aria awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/26/aria-awards-2014-go-boy-band-crazy-but-absent-sia-takes-home-main-prize>
.

Around the world
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmorning-mail-ferguson-gp-co-payment-asylum-laws-aria-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417031728057%2F9d6702c8-adb0-47eb-a84e-cbd7a8fa01c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Morning%20Mail%3A%20Ferguson%2C%20GP%20co-payment%2C%20asylum%20laws%2C%20Aria%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmorning-mail-ferguson-gp-co-payment-asylum-laws-aria-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Morning%20Mail%3A%20Ferguson%2C%20GP%20co-payment%2C%20asylum%20laws%2C%20Aria%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2Fmorning-mail-ferguson-gp-co-payment-asylum-laws-aria-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F26%2F1417031728057%2F9d6702c8-adb0-47eb-a84e-cbd7a8fa01c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Japan’s Commissioner to the International Whaling Commission, Joji Morishita. 
Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters 
• Japan has likened Australia’s anti-whaling campaign to an attempt to 
restrict the rights of Japanese women to wear the kimono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/27/australia-whaling-campaign-likened-to-ban-japan-kimono>
.


• Two Hong Kong student leaders are among scores of pro-democracy protesters 
who have been arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/26/hong-kong-student-leaders-arrested-mong-kok-protests>
 as police officers cleared a major protest zone in Mong Kok.

• A Spanish judge has ruled that the euthanasia of Excalibur, the dog who 
belonged to a nursing assistant who contracted Ebola last month, was lawful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/26/spanish-judge-rules-ebola-nurse-dog-was-euthanised-lawfully>
.

More from around the web 
 Denis Napthine during the Ballarat Cup Day. Photograph: Vince Caligiuri/Getty 
Images 
• Among the most read on the Guardian this morning: Gay Alcorn writes that a 
loss in the Victorian election would be humiliating for Denis Napthine, and a 
slap in the face for Tony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/26/a-victorian-election-loss-would-be-humiliating-for-napthine-and-a-slap-in-the-face-for-abbott>
.

• The biological family of a teenage girl who killed herself while in foster 
care is demanding answers from authorities after learning about her death on 
Facebook 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-11-26/mother-learns-of-daughters-foster-care-suicide-on-facebook/5920118>
, the ABC reports.

• The confidential plan to rescue the $8.5bn project to construct Air Warfare 
Destroyers has been sabotaged by infighting 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/defence/air-warfare-destroyers-cursed-by-infighting-says-rescue-report/story-e6frg8yo-1227136267267>
, the Australian reports.

• Tasmania is expecting major disruption due to one of the biggest public 
service strikes in 20 years 
<http://www.themercury.com.au/news/tasmania/tassie-braces-for-public-service-strike-chaos/story-fnj4f7k1-1227136308697>
, the Mercury reports.

One last thing
 The new Guardian website is designed to work across all devices. Photograph: 
Guardian 
Guardian Australia has a new website this morning on desktop – here’s 
everything you need to know about the changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2014/nov/26/-sp-new-website-guardian-australia>
.

Have an excellent day – and if you spot something I’ve missed, let me know in 
the comments here or on Twitter@newsmary <http://www.twitter.com/newsmary>.

Sign up

Get the Morning Mail direct to your inbox first thing every weekday by signing 
up here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guardian-australia-morning-mail/2014/jun/24/-sp-guardian-australias-morning-mail-subscribe-by-email>
.
 