
Here’s the kind of story that lifts the heart because it illustrates the 
courage of a journalist who has fought official disapproval in order to go on 
working.

It begins by stating that Moroccan journalist Ali Lmrabet 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ali_Lmrabet> is back at his desk writing an 
article about his country’s history for a local magazine.

Why is that surprising? Because, as Sam Kimball reveals in a Columbia 
Journalism <http://www.cjr.org/watchdog/ali_lmrabet.php> Review article 
<http://www.cjr.org/watchdog/ali_lmrabet.php>, Lmrabet is “doing journalism in 
Morocco” for the first time since 2005, when a court found him guilty of 
defamation, fined him and barred him from practising as a journalist for 10 
years.

In an interview in 2005 with the editors of a weekly newspaper, Al Moustakil, 
Lmrabet had declared that Western Saharans living in camps inAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria> since Moroccan forces invaded their 
country in 1975 were refugees.

It prompted Ahmed Khar, the spokesman for a pro-Moroccan NGO, to file a civil 
lawsuit against Lmrabet, saying his words had caused him great pain.

Lmrabet has been under continual government pressure ever since. Officials 
recently refused to renew his identity card and proof of residence, without 
which he can’t legally publish inMorocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/morocco>. It prevented him from reopening 
his paper, Demain, and its website.

Lmrabet responded by going on hunger strike from the end of June until early 
August while camping out in front of the United Nations headquarters in Geneva.

The Moroccan government eventually agreed to give him a passport and a 
residency permit “within three months.”

It amounts to a significant victory for the man who chose to be a journalist 
after years as one his country’s envoys.

His writing has resulted in him being jailed twice. On the second occasion, in 
2003, he was sentenced to four years for insulting the king, Mohammed VI. He 
was released the following year after an official royal pardon.

Then came the 2005 court action over his views on the displaced people of the 
Western Sahara <https://www.theguardian.com/world/western-sahara>. His claim 
about the refugees contradicted the official line in Morocco because it implied 
that the people were forced to flee by the occupying Moroccan military, which 
was not the case.

Source: CJR <http://www.cjr.org/watchdog/ali_lmrabet.php>

 