
Morrisons has unveiled its new Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> TV advertising campaign 
for what could be a “make or break” festive season for the Bradford-based 
grocer. The ad will air for the first time during the prime-time Coronation 
Street slot on Friday evening and chief executive Dalton Philips said he was 
confident that the chain would beat its rivals on price for festive food and 
drink.

The UK’s fourth-largest supermarket chain announced in April it was cutting 
prices on 1,200 lines at a cost of £1bn over three years, but needs a dramatic 
turnaround in it fortunes to avoid another disastrous Christmas like last 
year’s, when it lost out to the discount retailers Aldi and Lidl.

Again featuring TV personalities Ant and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec> – this time sporting £12 
Christmas sweaters – the main 60-second advertisement is set to the festive 
tune It’s Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas’and focuses on the retailer’s 
in-store teams of butchers, bakers, fishmongers and greengrocers helping 
customers to “make Christmas special”.

To simplify its Christmas range, Morrisons has slashed lines by more than 10%, 
cutting back its range of Christmas puddings from 15 to 10 products, for 
example, and reduced other ranges where there is duplication. It has also 
tweaked its annual Christmas collector scheme, this year giving shoppers the 
chance to get £25 off their Christmas shopping in just six weeks by collecting 
coupons after a minimum £40 shop.Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> has run a Christmas Bonus 
scheme for seven years, and last year over 1.3m UK customers took part in it.

Dalton Philips said this year’s festive season would be the first bolstered by 
Morrisons’ convenience shops, its recently launchedMatch & More loyalty card  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/02/morrisons-promises-match-aldi-lidl-prices>
 and online shopping – still limited across the UK but extending in two weeks 
time into the north-west. Around 2m customers have signed up for the Match & 
More card since its launch in October.

Philips said: “We are keeping our prices very low and we are also making 
things easier and simpler for our shoppers, with an emphasis on the quality of 
our fresh food.” To help achieve this, the grocer is appointing 1,800 new 
“availability” champions – or a “gap squad” - in 300 stores to ensure items are 
quickly replenished on shelves, along with 1,000 “fresh food inspectors” to 
ensure that items such as sprouts are “squeakily fresh”. However, the roles 
will be filled by existing staff.
 