
Almost everyone goes to university nowadays, everyone knows that.

Except that not everyone does and we rarely see accurate statistics about how 
many or what proportion of people actually do. It's quite an important 
question, bound up with thorny issues of workforce skills, educational 
aspiration and, of course, how (and how much) the UK taxpayer funds our 
domestic higher education sector.

Against this backdrop came a widely-reported piece of analysis 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/192188/13-p140-HEIPR_PUBLICATION_2011-12.pdf>
 from the department of business, innovation and skills (BIS) on the Higher 
Education Initial Participation Rate (HEIPR), which examines participation 
rates for 17-30-year-old English domiciled first-time participants in higher 
education in the UK, including outside England.

Higher education in this context means every kind of accredited higher 
education course, from two-year foundation degrees delivered at a local further 
education college, to PhDs from Cambridge. This time round, the HEIPR stood at 
49%, up from 46% last year. The media duly reported thatalmost half of all 
young people went to university in 2011/12 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/2013/apr/24/students-higher-education-almost-50-per-cent>
.

They didn't. The HEIPR is an odd beast and it doesn't measure what you think 
it might measure. The methodology involves finding the proportion of people at 
each age from 17 to 30 who are involved in university for the first time – and 
then summing all of those participation rates.

The resulting rate is designed to equate roughly to the probability that a 
17-year-old will participate in higher education by the age of 30. It doesn't 
measure the proportion of young people going into higher education. Nor does it 
tell us what proportion of people has a degree – and it shouldn't be presented 
as if it does.

What if we do want to know this information? Where do we go? Well, there are a 
couple of places. The first is government datasets. TheAnnual Population Survey 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/about-ons/who-we-are/services/unpublished-data/social-survey-data/aps/index.html>
 involves a sample of 155,000 households and 360,000 people, and is rigorously 
audited. It is good data and you can interrogate it using Nomis, a service from 
the Office for National Statistics (ONS).

Using Nomis, we can see that in 2012, 34.4% of the working age population of 
Great Britain, aged 16 to 64, achieved NVQ4+ (a degree-level or equivalent 
qualification or above). You can check my working if you like –here is the 
report I ran 
<http://www.nomisweb.co.uk/reports/lmp/gor/2092957698/report.aspx#defs>. 
Related data reveals that 40.2% of those in work have a degree or equivalent – 
unsurprisingly, degree holders are more likely to be in work than those without.

We can also get data from the census. This has some advantages – a much, much 
larger sample – and some disadvantages – it's only taken every 10 years. 
Fortunately, we had one in 2011, so the data is still quite relevant.

It's now possible to examine census data yourself using Nomis, but the ONS 
also produceda report of some of the key facts 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/publications/re-reference-tables.html?edition=tcm%3A77-286262>
 in December 2012, which found that 27.2% of the population aged 16 to 74 had a 
degree or equivalent or higher – about 12 million people all told. This 
proportion is lower than the proportion for 16 to 64-year-olds because of the 
much smaller participation rates for the 64-74 age group covered by the census.

What none of this addresses is the proportion of people that the UK needs 
educated to degree level. That's even trickier, as the nature of work changes 
with time. A modern economy with rapidly-developing technology like ours tends 
to demand more skills and qualifications as time goes on. The recentSkills and 
Employment Survey <http://www.cardiff.ac.uk/socsi/ses2012/> found that 26% of 
jobs in the economy explicitly require a degree – or, put another way, if you 
don't go to university, more than a quarter of jobs are inaccessible to you.

If we then return to the APS data for the whole country and look at jobs in 
the managerial, professional and associate professional categories – those that 
are deemed 'graduate level' – we find they make up 43.6% of the jobs in the 
economy. This doesn't mean that some graduates aren't currently working in 
sub-graduate level jobs – they are – but it does suggest that we have room for 
a few more graduates yet.

In short, it's not actually very easy to work out what proportion of the UK 
population has degrees (nor how many more or less graduates the economy needs). 
Depending on which dataset you study, it's 27.2% or 34.4% or 40.2% of the 
population. It certainly isn't 49%. Most people don't go to university and 
current data suggests that most people in the UK never will.

Charlie Ball is deputy director of research at the Higher Education Careers 
Services Unit <http://www.hecsu.ac.uk/> – follow it on Twitter @hecsu 
<http://twitter.com/hecsu>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member of theHigher Education Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/higher-education/>.
 