
Things We Have in Common 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/sep/07/things-we-have-in-common-by-tasha-kavanagh>
 is the title of Tasha Kavanagh’s Costa-nominated YA novel about a troubled 
teenager with a crush on a schoolmate, and who turns out to share more with a 
third character than she does with pretty Alice. Looking at the prize’s 
category shortlists announced this week, it’s almost as if the judges have 
taken it as their motto: to an unusual degree, each of the five lists is made 
up of books and authors with things in common. Yet in each, too, there is an 
equivalent of Kavanagh’s teen misfit.

The Costa category shortlists 2015 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/nov/17/the-costa-category-shortlists-2015-in-pictures>
The novel category sees another contest (after Ali Smith v Colm Tóibín last 
year) between eminent authors who missed out on the Man Booker, with 2007 
Booker winner and Ireland’s fiction laureateAnne Enright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anne-enright> opposed by Kate Atkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kate-atkinson>, a double Whitbread/Costa 
winner (she took the novel award for Life After Life just two years ago) now on 
a hat-trick. Even more prolific though less garlanded is Patrick Gale, the 
category’s token male; the outsider is the relative newcomerMelissa Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/melissa-harrison>, whose second novel, At 
Hawthorn Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/01/at-hawthorn-time-melissa-harrison-review-fiction-nature-writing>
 – a mixture of celebration of nature and social satire – sticks to one English 
rural place, in contrast to the international vistas opened up by her more 
experienced counterparts, who depict Canada’s prairies (Gale), Ireland’s west 
coast, Mali and New York (Enright), and bombing missions over Nazi Germany 
(Atkinson).

The quartet of first novelists look harder to separate, as Sara Baume, Kate 
Hamer, Andrew Michael Hurley and Kavanagh all have creative writing degrees, 
make reviewers reach for comparisons with classic authors, and are published – 
or were initially – by indies. However, Baume’sSpill Simmer Falter Wither 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/13/spill-simmer-falter-wither-sara-baume-fiction-review>
, a tale of a loner and his dog that was longlisted for the Guardian first book 
award, stands out for lacking the other books’ leaning towards commercial genre 
fiction, as Hamer and Kavanagh’s novels have thriller elements (both involve 
abduction, real or feared) and Hurley’s appears influenced by ghost stories and 
horror.

A year ago, the biography shortlist contained three memoirs, including the 
eventual overall award winner, Helen Macdonald’s H is for Hawk. This time, 
lives of others have made a comeback, with Robert Douglas-Fairhurst onLewis 
Carroll <https://www.theguardian.com/books/lewiscarroll>, Ruth Scurr on John 
Aubrey andAndrea Wulf on Alexander von Humboldt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/13/the-invention-of-nature-the-adventures-of-alexander-von-humboldt-andrea-wulf-review>
. Easy enough, then, to spot the exception, as Thomas Harding’sThe House by the 
Lake is neither solo biography nor autobiography and this study of one German 
house’s occupants was treated by reviewers as left-field historiography (its 
strand of memoir presumably explains why it was deemed eligible).

In contrast to the women-on-top fiction categories, masculinity dominates the 
poetry list, in the form of Andrew McMillan’s gay and heterosexual “men … 
weeping in gyms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/05/physical-andrew-mcmillan-review-poetry>
”, Neil Rollinson’s defiantly unreconstructed laddism and Don Paterson’s more 
mature perspective as at once lover, father and grumpy citizen. Kate Miller’s 
painterlyThe Observances is the oddball entry, but in age terms (though a 
debutant) she lines up with Paterson and Rollinson – all are over 50, whereas 
McMillan, shortlisted for theGuardian first book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/aug/14/guardian-first-book-award-2015-longlist-in-pictures>
 andForward <https://www.theguardian.com/books/forwardprizeforpoetry> first 
collection awards, is in his late 20s.

Age is also what differentiates the misfit in the children’s category, as the 
gap in years between the veteran writerAndrew Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/30/jessicas-ghost-by-andrew-norris-review>
 (a Whitbread winner in 1997) and the youngest contender, Sally Nicholls, 
matches the 30‑odd years that separate Miller and McMillan. Death – or 
devastating dislocation – is the thematic link of a notably dark group, also 
including novels byFrances Hardinge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/17/costa-childrens-book-award-shortlist-2015>
 and Hayley Long; but mortality is less traumatic (even bond-forming) in 
Norriss’sJessica’s Ghost, a tale of friendship between a boy and a girl who 
died a year ago.

When the overall winner is announced at the end of January, from the genre 
winners revealed early in the new year, form suggests it will come (like eight 
of the nine previous Costa winners) from the novel, first novel or poetry 
shortlists, and may well involve mental illness, potentially terminal disease 
or bereavement. However, the form book was upset by last year’s choice of Helen 
Macdonald’sH is for Hawk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/23/h-is-for-hawk-helen-macdonald-review>
, the first factual winner since 2005, and the absence of any titles already 
bearing prizes (as Macdonald’s book and Ali Smith’sHow To Be Both did last 
year) adds to the uncertainty in the 2015 contest. Most likely, perhaps, given 
the relevant shortlists’ strength, is another fiction v non-fiction clash, with 
the novel and biography winners once again the last books left standing.
 