Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_-Tgfx5jFkI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_-Tgfx5jFkI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_-Tgfx5jFkI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This is Gelsey Kirkland <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gelsey_Kirkland> dancing 
the Act 1 variation, or solo, inGiselle <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giselle>. 
The recording was made in 1975, when Kirkland was 23, and had just leftNew York 
City Ballet <http://www.nycballet.com/nycb/home/> to become Mikhail Baryshnikov 
<http://www.bacnyc.org/images/uploads/mb-headshot.jpg>'s partner at American 
Ballet Theatre <http://www.abt.org/>.

The clip shows how, through a mastery of the science of ballet, a great dancer 
makes it her own. From the first moment to the last, Kirkland is absolutely in 
control, technically speaking, and so free to shape hermusical phrasing 
<http://www.theballetbag.com/2011/06/09/musicality> as she chooses. Very few 
Giselles would choose to take the variation this slowly, but Kirkland fills up 
every bar with detail. Watch the luxuriance of that firstposé (step-out) into 
arabesque <http://www.theballetbag.com/browse-the-bag/bag-of-steps/> on pointe 
at 0:06 (repeated at 0:18), and the way the working leg rises as the supporting 
foot rolls smoothly down through the heel. A momentaryfondu 
<http://www.theballetbag.com/2009/12/23/bag-of-steps-adagio/>, a "melting" bend 
of the supporting knee (as opposed to fondue, a melting of Gruyère cheese) and 
she's into the next step.

Giselle, created in 1841, is a Romantic-era ballet, and these are usually 
danced "after the beat", as if in answer to the music. Here, Kirkland combines 
this responsiveness with a subtlerubato (or "bending") of the score – watch the 
way, for example, she borrows a beat at 0:12 and expends it on that lovely airy 
balance at 0:13 – so that what emerges is a kind of conversation between her 
and the piano. Watch how she sustains those pirouettes in attitude at 0:31 and 
0:38, and note the part played by her arms. If you look at her left arm in 
particular, you can see how she uses it to propel herself through the turn, 
while never interrupting its lyrical flow.

And then, after the arabesque at 0:41, she seems to step outside the dance for 
a moment, to check herself. This is a very Gelsey detail; it's as if, in all 
the sunny joy of the dance, she had an instant of foreboding, a premonition. A 
split second later and it's gone, whirled away in the next pirouette. The 
diagonal of hops from 1:00 to 1:20, as the working leg describes a series of
ronds de jambe, is a perfect illustration of "after the beat" Romantic dancing, 
and then she's into that helter-skelter series ofpiqué turns, skirt flying. 
But, as the final pirouette to the knee demonstrates, still in exquisite 
control.

The years that followed the filming of this clip would not be happy ones for 
Kirkland, and her career would implode in a nightmare of drugs and self-harm,
unsparingly detailed here 
<http://pabook.libraries.psu.edu/palitmap/bios/Kirkland__Gelsey.html>. She 
remains, however, a much-loved legend of American ballet, and this clip shows 
exactly why.
 