
Nauru’s secrecy over the Australian-run immigration detention centre on its 
island continues to deepen, with the independent parliamentarianAndrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> denied a visa to the 
country.

“The Nauru government’s official refusal of my request for a visa to visit the 
Nauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> detention centre confirms that 
the Australian government has much to hide,” the member for Denison said.

“The only conclusion that can be drawn from not allowing a sitting member of 
the federal parliament to visit is that the Australian government doesn’t want 
the truth coming out.”

Time to shut Nauru and Manus camps, says government's refugee policy guru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/03/time-to-shut-nauru-and-manus-camps-says-governments-refugee-policy-guru>
He joins the Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/nauru-bans-greens-senator-sarah-hansonyoung-from-visiting-refugees-20160824-gr05oh.html>
 andthree Danish politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/danish-delegation-visit-to-nauru-australian-detention-centre-refused-visas>
 in being refused a visa to visit the tiny Pacific nation this year, because of 
sensitivities over alleged systemic abuses within the detention camp.

Nauru has long shied from independent scrutiny of the offshore processing 
centre. Foreign journalists – save for specially selected acquiescent reports – 
are refused permission to even apply for a visa.

The United Nations refugees agency, the UNHCR, is permitted to visit the 
country but human rights groups such as Amnesty and Human Rights Watch are 
routinely denied.

Hanson-Young was previously granted a visa in 2013 but was spied on by Wilson 
guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/19/nauru-guard-who-ordered-spying-on-sarah-hanson-young-to-face-inquiry>
, a secret surveillance operation initially denied by the company but later 
admitted.

Wilkie rejected the Australian government’s argument that such visas were a 
matter for Nauru – a sovereign nation. He said the Australian people had a 
right to know what was being done with their money and in their name.

“Last week prime minister Malcolm Turnbull advised me that visiting Nauru is 
entirely a matter for the Nauru government,” he said. “But let’s be clear – 
this is entirely down to the Australian government because we all know that 
Nauru does exactly what Australia tells it to. Prime minister Malcolm Turnbull 
could facilitate an official visit tomorrow if he wanted to. To claim otherwise 
is misleading and fanciful.

“The recent leaking of thousands of accounts of incidents has re-energised 
public concern with offshore processing and the government is desperately 
scrambling to avoid any further scrutiny.”

Calls to the Nauruan government by the Guardian have not been returned.

However, the government said last month on social media: “Government won’t 
comment on individual visa applications 
<https://twitter.com/Republic_Nauru/status/768670925910859776> but like 
Australia reserves right to disallow entry to those who incite violence or 
hatred in or against Nauru orotherwise considered unwelcome 
<https://twitter.com/Republic_Nauru/status/768671128944570368> and/or deemed 
contrary to the national interest”.

Last month, the Guardian published the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files>, more than 2,000 leaked 
incident reports from the island that reported systemic abuse of children, 
sexual violence against women and children, and massive rates of self-harm and 
suicide attempts among refugees.


Some blunt truths and a ray of hope for the refugee justice movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/03/some-blunt-truths-and-a-ray-of-hope-for-the-refugee-justice-movement>
In the wake of the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files>, Australia’s offshore 
detention regime has come under unprecedented pressure.Labor, the Greens and 
crossbench senators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/senate-inquiry-into-nauru-child-abuse-allegations-likely-after-crossbenchers-indicate-support>
 have promised to support a new Senate inquiry into conditions in the offshore 
camps and the PNG supreme court has ordered the Manus Island centre to close, 
ruling it “unconstitutional and illegal 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/26/PNG_SC_judgement.pdf>”.

The pre-eminent adviser to successive Australian governments – both Labor and 
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> – on asylum 
policy for more than two decades, Paris Aristotle, has said the current 
offshore arrangements have failed and that people held on Nauru and Manus 
Island needed a “decent solution” quickly.

Aristotle, along with Michael L’Estrange and Sir Angus Houston, sat on the 2012
expert panel on asylum seekers 
<http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/thebordercrossingobservatory/files/2015/03/expert_panel_on_asylum_seekers_full_report.pdf>
 that recommended to the Gillard Labor government the re-opening of offshore 
detention camps on Nauru and Manus as part of a “comprehensive regional 
network”.


He said offshore processing was never meant to become an arbitrary or 
indefinite detention and that asylum seekers and refugees were never meant to 
be used as “human shields” to prevent other people making boat journeys.


“We need to find a decent outcome for these people,” Aristotle told the 
Guardian from Malaysia.

“The people on Manus Island and Nauru now need to be given a pathway to a 
resettlement that is decent, in a country where the services exist to support 
them, where they will be able to work and to go to school and to restart their 
lives. For these people, it’s been too long.”

Aristotle said that if the government would not countenance – as it appears 
resolute to – resettling refugees from Manus and Nauru in Australia it should 
negotiate with suitable countries around the world.

“The situation is critical and these people are desperate. If these people are 
not given hope soon, if they can’t see that this is leading to an outcome that 
is decent, we will see more and more people attempting to harm themselves, and 
attempting to kill themselves.”


Nauru fiasco serves to confirm Danish group's suspicions of Australian tactics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/03/nauru-fiasco-serves-to-confirm-danish-groups-suspicions-of-australian-tactics>
Aristotle said recommendations of the 2012 expert panel report had not been 
fully or properly adopted – including those to increase Australia’s 
humanitarian intake to 27,000 (currently 13,750) and pursue stronger 
co-operative agreements with countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia.

The panel report 
<http://artsonline.monash.edu.au/thebordercrossingobservatory/files/2015/03/expert_panel_on_asylum_seekers_full_report.pdf>
 said processing on Manus and Nauru should be re-established but only for 
short-term purposes and expressly stated there should be “no arbitrary 
detention”.

He said neither PNG nor Manus Island could be made a suitable place for 
refugees to be settled 
<http://www.foundationhouse.org.au/news/papua-new-guinea-nauru/>.

Aristotle said the offshore regional processing arrangements could be retained 
but only if the arrangements could guarantee fair and humane treatment, and 
were used as short-term contingencies for future irregular migration flows.
 