
Mike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley> is not Father 
Christmas, nor an accountant, nor an employment specialist. On these points the 
founder and majority shareholder of Sports Direct was adamant during the 
advertised “grilling” by MPs that turned out to be a light toasting.

In other regards, Ashley was vagueness itself. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/mike-ashleys-evidence-surprise-answers-to-unsurprising-questions>
 The way he tells it, he’s just a put-upon retailer struggling to cope with 
this new-fangled invention called the internet that irritatingly allows punters 
to order a single pair of socks. Multipack dispatches to shops were in his mind 
when the Shirebrook centre was designed, thus he couldn’t possibly be expected 
to know everything that happens in the warehouse.

He’s as appalled as anyone to discover that workers have been docked pay for 
clocking on a minute late, andhave been underpaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/sports-direct-agrees-back-pay-deal-with-hmrc-minimum-wage>
. He’d hate his children to suffer the same “unacceptable” experience, as he 
put it. He’ll do what he can to the fix the problems but, hey, “my best might 
not be good enough” and the business “probably” outgrew his talent for control 
“a long time ago”.

As a way to disarm MPs, pleading ignorance and fallibility was a successful 
tactic. By the end, they seemed to think they’d won important concessions and 
were falling over themselves to thank their witness for being generous with his 
time. If they replay the tape, the MPs should be embarrassed: they will 
discover Ashley committed himself to virtually nothing.

Mike Ashley admits Sports Direct staff were not paid minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/mike-ashley-admits-sports-direct-staff-were-not-paid-minimum-wage>
The company, now under investigation by HMRC, is in talks to pay compensation 
to some workerswho received less than the minimum wage when they were held back 
to be searched by security staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
. But such payments will cover no more than a couple of hundred directly 
employed staff. Will Sports Direct cough up to the thousands of agency workers? 
None of the MPs asked.

Nor did Ashley budge from his apparent addiction to temporary contracts, 
despite his long-winded musing about how it would be nice if more staff could 
be made permanent. This was despite the impressive testimony from the Unite 
union that the over-use of temporary contracts, administered by outside 
agencies, lies at the heart of a growing culture of employment insecurity in 
the UK. Ashley seemed to think the union is engaged in a wild plot to embarrass 
him in a “media circus”. In practice, Unite demonstrated that it knows more 
about what goes on inside Sports Direct than Ashley.

In most FTSE 350 companies, a boss could expect to be fired for displaying a 
similar lack of knowledge about the company he runs, or confessing that it’s 
“too big” to monitor properly. That’s plainly not going to happen at Sports 
Direct. Ashley owns 55% of the shares and has shown no interest in reforming 
boardroom governance.

Until the latter happens, one suspects real reform of working practices at 
Sports Direct – as opposed to the simple taks of clearing bottlenecks at 
security points – will dissolve in Ashley’s self-serving plea that perfection 
is impossible. After the dramatic buildup to the session, the MPs flunked their 
big moment.

No business like slow business

RIT Capital Partners’ dalliance with the idea of merging with Alliance Trust, 
and thereby creating a giant £5bn investment trust in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/30/alliance-rit-proposal-jacob-rothschild>
, is over almost before it began. Brief talks have been abandoned, with Lord 
Rothschild’s crew saying merely that “it would not be in the best interests of 
its shareholders to make an offer for Alliance Trust”.

That’s less than illuminating but it’s not hard to guess the relevant details. 
The two trusts have very different approaches on investment and fees. A 
watertight financial structure would be tricky to compose sinceAlliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> investors would surely not 
wish to accept a discount to asset value. Any potential cost savings might leak 
away in the inevitable organisational reshuffle. Thus Alliance Trust’s 
long-term investors shouldn’t waste too much energy fretting about a lost 
opportunity.

Elliott Advisors, the American activist investor with a 16% shareholding, 
might be more concerned, however. The easy part, given Alliance Trust’s 
unspectacular performance over many years, was shaking up the boardroom last 
year. It will be rather harder to find an escape route, which is widely assumed 
to be Elliott’s aim. That’s the thing about investment trusts: the action tends 
to happen very slowly. Elliott may have to settle in for the long-haul.

Selling up, are you esure?

Here’s another potential deal when the logic looks less than robust: insurer 
esure is contemplating demerging Gocompare.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/07/go-compare-could-be-sold-by-esure>
, its price comparison website.

It is only a year since esure took its ownership from 50% to 100%. That hardly 
seems sufficient time to learn whether the attempted reinvigoration of the 
business – by giving the opera singer in the ads another run-out – will work. 
An outright sale, assuming the price was high, would allow esure to show a nice 
turn on last year’s £95m buy-in of the stake. But a demerger would merely add 
head office overheads. Why bother?
 