
Mr. Rudyard Kipling <https://www.theguardian.com/books/rudyard-kipling> 
contributes to this week’s number of “The Car” the foregoing diagrams 
illustrating an idea of his for a suit of pneumatic armour for the protection 
of flying men from injury by at any rate slighter falls. “A little protection 
about the head and shoulders,” he writes, “might make all the difference 
between life and death at the moment of the smash.”

 Manchester Guardian, 29 July 1910. Illustration: Rudyard Kipling 
The sketches are Mr. Kipling’s own “rude diagrams.” The smaller shows by the 
shading what would be the protected areas in a full suit. The larger shows the 
details of head and shoulder pieces.


Mr. Kipling describes the arrangement thus: “I suggest a helmet of rubber 
inflated on the crown of the head and round the back and over the collar bones; 
the whole need not be much heavier than awickerwork singlestick mask 
<http://www.fencingmuseum.com/Large/November/M1900-cane-singlestick-mask-400.htm>
. What you want is the protection of the neck against a backward or forward 
wrench. The height of the padding on the shoulders ought to cushion off the 
worst of a sideways wrench, and the rubber, being moderately thick, acts as 
slight protection against bits of broken stays and things. But the main thing 
would be to give the spinal cord a chance not to be snapped and to protect the 
dome of the head from fracture. You would have to make the rolls under the chin 
pretty thick, so that the head could be driven down on to them without too much 
harm.


“Back and pelvis protectors are different propositions, and I doubt if men 
would care to wear them. But it looks to me as if the head, neck, and shoulder 
bones, being vital, could be given some sort of protection, if only for that 
fraction of a second which turns an irretrievable smash into nothing worse than 
a horrid jar.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Frudyard-kipling-illustrations-armour-pilots-1910-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae39021bbf6fdc525776110964edc77e3afe538%2F0_0_1400_913%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mr%20Kipling%E2%80%99s%20rubber%20armour%20for%20airmen%3A%20archive%2C%2029%20July%201910&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Frudyard-kipling-illustrations-armour-pilots-1910-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mr%20Kipling%E2%80%99s%20rubber%20armour%20for%20airmen%3A%20archive%2C%2029%20July%201910&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Frudyard-kipling-illustrations-armour-pilots-1910-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feae39021bbf6fdc525776110964edc77e3afe538%2F0_0_1400_913%2F1400.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 29 July 1910. Illustration: Rudyard Kipling  