
Well being progressive is so fun? I said to Mummy you MUST try it, she’s like, 
darling are you SURE, what is involved, I’m like, honestly it is super easy now 
and again you just go *progressive voice* God they SO ought to do something 
about poor people? & everyone goes God IKR, then you go back to normal, then 
you go *shocked tone* God & how majorly bad is like, racism, yadda yadda yadda, 
then *concerned face* would not your dream prison have like, divine scented 
candles in every cell #GreaterBritain & everyone goes God I think I love you.

What if prisoners did the Bake Off washing up as a punishment #winwin, Govey's 
like awesome

Mummy’s like, and you can eat & drink normally the whole time? I’m like, 
totally, everyone says Dave looks fabulous since he turned progressive 
#betterthanbotox she’s like, & you do not have to talk to awful men in vests, 
I’m like are you joking,just hire Andy Adonis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/05/andrew-adonis-george-osborne-national-infrastructure>
 as your personal trainer, literally he has worked with everyone, basically 
being progressive is like stretching, it takes just a few seconds, you can do 
it anywhere, but the results are srsly transformational? Eg Dave has these 
super progressive thoughts when we are chillaxing in front of Bake Off, like, 
what if prisoners did the Bake Off washing up as a punishment #winwin, Govey’s 
like, awesome, noted :) Nancy’s like but Dad, doesn’t BonkersWhittingdale hate 
Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/27/bake-off-star-sue-perkins-gives-culture-secretary-a-roasting-over-bbc-cuts>
? Dave’s like not that I heard darling, she’s like plus Dad, do they watch it 
in China you knowwhat Hunty said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/hunt-tax-credit-cuts-make-britons-work-like-chinese-or-americans>
, he’s like, I have literally no idea, she’s like, & what about tax credits?

I’m like Nancy did you not HEAR where Daddy said in Greater Britain nothing is 
written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/07/david-cameron-greater-britain-conservative-conference-speech>
? As in literally? So nothing that Oik & Bonkers & Theresa & Hunty say stops 
Daddy being totes progressive? Nancy’s like, u wot m8, aren’t we Conservative? 
I’m like, well Oik & Theresa are very sweetly & kindly doing that so Daddy 
doesn’t have to, I just wish someone wouldtell Mrs Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/angela-merkel-to-demand-details-of-eu-negotiations-from-david-cameron>
 :( Because we told her it was Dave’s birthday as in *hint* banging on about 
Syria is NOT his idea of a treat #downer? She was like, Und? Dave’s like, 
Angela, my dream is a Greater Britain where nobody will EVER have to do boring 
stuff on his actual birthday, she’s like, she’s like, Ja, right, in your dreams 
:(((
 