
Britain’s largest arts prize is to get even bigger after the Art Fund 
announced a significant rise in total prize money for itsmuseum of the year 
award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/gallery/2016/jun/29/art-fund-museum-of-the-year-2016-rankin-pictures>
.

The Art Fund director, Stephen Deuchar, said on Monday that in addition to the 
first prize of £100,000, each of the four runners-up from the shortlist would 
receive £10,000. That marks a 40% rise from £100,000 to £140,000.

Launching the 2017 prize, Deuchar said: “In these uncertain times museums are 
a trusted public realm, whose collections and programmes can help people make 
sense of the world we live in, and where we may be going.

“Whatever the challenges of the moment, museums and galleries across the UK 
are forces of innovation, driven by some of the best cultural leaders anywhere.”

The prize is the largest arts award in the UK and the biggest of its kind in 
the world. It will be judged next year by a panel consisting of the director of 
the British Museum, Hartwig Fischer, the BBC Radio 2 DJ Jo Whiley, the artist 
Richard Deacon and the former deputy mayor of London Munira Mirza, who was in 
charge of arts policy during Boris Johnson’s administration.

Past winners have included major institutions – the British Museum in 2011 and 
the V&A this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/06/unforgettable-va-wins-museum-of-the-year-award>
 – and comparative minnows –the William Morris Gallery in Walthamstow, London, 
in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/04/william-morris-gallery-arts-fund-prize>
 and the Lightbox in Woking, Surrey, in 2008.

The size of the prize makes a significant difference to the museums. The V&A 
said it was putting the cash towards making its collections more widely 
available outside London.

Tim Reeve, the museum’s acting director, said: “This is a real opportunity to 
work even more closely with colleagues across the cultural sector, to share 
knowledge and expertise, and to connect our objects with more communities in 
more dynamic ways.”

The 2017 award, previously called the Gulbenkian prize, will once more be 
partnered in with the BBC, which will commission programmes about the 
shortlisted museums. The list will be announced in April and the winner 
revealed at a ceremony at the British Museum on 5 July.
 