
At dinner last month after a concert by the Congolese rapper Baloji 
<http://www.baloji.com/>, I found myself sitting next to his drummer, Saidou 
Ilboudo. As we chatted over the chicken, he told me the remarkable story of how 
as a teenager growing up in Burkina Faso he had been recruited one day byThomas 
Sankara <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Sankara>, the country's president, 
to play in a state band.

Sankara is an almost-forgotten figure these days in the west, but in the 
mid-80s he was one of the most charismatic leaders of his age, a revolutionary 
known as "Africa's Che Guevara" who pushed public health, promoted feminism and 
faced down the global financial institutions causing such damage to the 
continent.

This was an amazing break for a boy just out of school. For a few years, he 
enjoyed the privileges and security that went with being part of the 
president's circle, while playing in a band that had a dual purpose: to 
entertain young people while proselytising political messages. Then, in 1987, 
Sankara was murdered in a French-backed coup and life became trickier.

The idea of publicly funded pop groups might sound strange, but many leading 
figures of African music served time in such institutions. Given the 
continent's oral tradition, there is a proud history of praise singers, and 
musicians were for centuries vital voices, used and abused by politicians and 
tribal leaders who understood their power. Think only ofFranco 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/8300170.stm>, whose liquid 
guitar-playing made Congolese rumba the heartbeat of Africa while promoting the 
messages ofMobutu Sese Seko <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobutu_Sese_Seko>, 
his thieving president.

After the end of colonialism, musicians were used to fuse countries carved out 
of often disparate communities. Nowhere was this truer thanMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>, a nation on the faultline between the 
African and Arab worlds in which music is more threaded into the fabric of 
cultural, social and political life than perhaps any other place on Earth.

Salif Keita <http://www.salifkeita.net/>, the honey-voiced albino singer, 
first achieved fame in a band set up by the minister of information to play a 
residency in a station hotel. He was then poached by the chief of police to 
join their rivals, whose guitarist was Amadou Bagayoko, now aglobal superstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/26/amadou-and-mariam-bamako-interview>
 with his gold guitar alongside his wife, Mariam. It is hard to envisage 
coalition ministers, let alone Met police chief Bernard Hogan-Howe, performing 
a similar role.

Mali stakes a claim as birthplace of the blues – the foundation stone of 
modern music – and many of its best-known artists have taken their songs around 
the world. They remain respected political voices at home. Oumou Sangaré, the 
country's biggest female star, made her name in her early 20s with a
breathtaking album <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xq9shQQJXdQ> tackling issues 
such as female circumcision and women's roles in society. Now one of her former 
backing singers, Fatoumata Diawara, has pulled together 40 stars from all over 
the country to sing together in a symbol of unity.

The current tragedy of Mali is intensified by its tradition of tolerance. Its 
strand of gentle Sufism could not be further removed from the hate-fuelled 
Islamists of al-Qaida. So when an outspoken reggae singer called Tiken Jah 
Fakoly upset the rulers of his native Ivory Coast and was then declared 
"persona non grata" by Senegal's president, he made his home in Bamako, where 
he can fill football stadiums.

But not these days. For music is banned in two-thirds of Mali following its 
collapse last year with first acoup 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012_Malian_coup_d'%C3%A9tat>, then the capture 
of the vast northern desert regions by Islamist militias, whose members come 
from as far afield as Pakistan. Even in the south of the country, despite the 
Franco-African intervention, there is such instability that these artists whose 
music provides pleasure around the world cannot perform in their home towns.

The banning of music is hideous anywhere, but in Mali of all places it seems 
somehow sacrilegious. This is a poor country; as one of its most famous artists 
says, music is its mineral wealth. And the mujahideen have not just banned it: 
they declared war on musicians, destroying their equipment and threatening to 
slice off their fingers. It underlines how at heart this is a cultural 
conflict, between those embracing the turbulent values of liberal democracy and 
those seeking the certainties of theocracy.

I first went there almost a decade ago for the fabulous Festival in the Desert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2008/jan/17/desert2008>, held on white 
sands a couple of hours from the fabled city of Timbuktu. Today, this area is 
at the heart of the fundamentalist badlands, but westerners could not have been 
made more welcome. At daytime, I sat in a tent chatting over tea and biscuits 
to celebrated guitaristAli Farka Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/08/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
; at night, there was stunning music from an array of amazing artists such as 
Amadou and Mariam. Afterwards, I lay under the Saharan stars listening as 
members of Tuareg rockersTinariwen <http://www.tinariwen.com/> strummed away 
beside a campfire until dawn.

It was an intoxicating experience. Mali and its music seeped into my soul. 
There in the desert I met Damon Albarn. Afterwards, we set up Africa Express, 
bringing together musicians fromAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the west to embrace that unified 
spirit of music, joy and generosity found in the desert. Many of 
these Malian artists have been linchpins of the project.

Music is a powerful force, as true in the west as anywhere else. But somehow 
in Africa it has even more potency. Perhaps this is down to weak political 
institutions, often lamentable political leadership or the lack of strong 
literary tradition in some places. Or maybe it is just that the music is so 
damn good. But from Fela Kuti fighting a corrupt military dictatorship in 
Nigeria to Miriam Makeba challenging the evil of apartheid in South Africa, 
this genuine protest music has been a ray of hope through troubled times.

As the continent shakes off the shackles of the past and races into the 
future, musicians remain important voices. Look at Senegal, next door to Mali. 
Baaba Maal preached awareness about HIV/Aids, takings his songs from village to 
village and playing a key role in ensuring infection rates remained 
comparatively low. Last year, when a president in his 80s tried to cling on to 
power, it was a youth movement led by rappers that prevented him. Now Youssou 
N'Dour is a cabinet minister.

Perhaps the Islamists are right to fear music's strength. But they can never 
contain its power in a place like Mali. As Fatoumata Diawara said last week, it 
remains a source of hope amid the nightmare that has engulfed her nation.
 