
Audition your ideas – Rose Tremain
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8c9a2b740105bc25d7f942544c501ba32931087%2F502_1372_2124_2655%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8c9a2b740105bc25d7f942544c501ba32931087%2F502_1372_2124_2655%2F2124.jpg>
 Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Most writers experience what I call the “September paradox”: just when the 
weather is warning of the dying season to come, the creative mind (probably 
refreshed by a hot foreign holiday, or a breezy one on the north Norfolk shore) 
discovers that an internal springtime has arrived and new ideas are popping up 
all over the place.

It’s important to snatch this moment. Give these green stems of thought your 
passionate attention, otherwise they may be dead by Christmas. Water well and 
weed diligently. But here’s my advice on how to proceed: treat these seedlings 
like job applicants. You don’t know who they are yet. They may seem feisty, 
clever or captivatingly beautiful, but are they going to offer anything 
original? Most important, are they likely to be inspirational companions, who 
will lead you to create the best work that you’re capable of? WB Yeats’s advice 
to writers, “Do not hurry, do not rest”, is relevant here.

As the autumn advances, keep a vigil on the applicants. Then, you’ll gradually 
begin to know what they’re leading you towards. Are you embarking on the long 
road to something truthful, or just moving towards a heaving skip of recycled 
bullshit? The landmass of the western world is slowly being submerged by bad 
books. You don’t want to add to this tonnage, so go slowly into your analysis 
of what it is you’ve got to say. Does it have real emotional and intellectual 
grip? If so, then start gathering all the knowledge you’ll need to set forth on 
your great writing adventure.

Only remember that the September applicants may not fulfil their promising 
CVs. The “big novel” that shrinks into a Christmas card list is, in the 
writer’s world, a familiar disaster of the festive season.

• Rose Tremain taught creative writing at the University of East Anglia and is 
its former chancellor

Pay attention – Philip Hensher
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90664124edde6a43788027aaea9ae8f9c33aaf8d%2F754_0_2995_3744%2F2995.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90664124edde6a43788027aaea9ae8f9c33aaf8d%2F754_0_2995_3744%2F2995.jpg>
 Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
Think about how people reveal themselves through behaviour, and focus on the 
externals of gesture, expression, dialogue and settings. It’s tempting, given 
the limitless power of the omniscient novelist, to plunge into a character’s 
head and write, baldly, “Laura felt painfully envious”. But what has more 
energy is the analysis of how a character in the grip of painful envy carries 
herself, speaks, looks, and even dresses. We always know, if we are observant, 
how a person who is desperately, secretly in love with another behaves. The 
trick of fiction is to extract the ways in which other emotions affect the 
outer crust, too, and by observing the characteristic walk of a human being 
overcome with happiness, say, making the reader feel observant, and not just 
laboriously informed.

How this carriage affects the characters around her, too: because fiction does 
not amount to much if it is just one character standing in a stairwell, 
pondering gravely about past events. If the first lesson of fiction is about 
the leakage of the abstract into the world of the physical, the second ought to 
be that fiction is about the way one character’s desires will crash into 
another’s, and a third, and a fourth, when all that seems to be happening is 
four friends meeting in a pub, or working together in an office, or finding 
themselves thrown together by chance. The episode that consists of one person 
alone leads to nothing much: the episode of four different characters with 
their own ways of life moves in multiple directions.

To do this, the beginning writer is going to have to undertake some systematic 
observation, notebook in hand. No novelist worth reading ever sat at home, 
entranced with the words spooling out. They paid attention to the life of the 
streets, to the mannerisms of their friends, to the way a small child speaks 
when he is hoping not to get found out. Fiction looks outwards.

• Philip Hensher is professor of creative writing at Bath Spa University

Plan your ending – William Boyd
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff2807cf3281d5d52dfe29a78ae12d3c40be193d%2F591_181_852_1065%2F852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff2807cf3281d5d52dfe29a78ae12d3c40be193d%2F591_181_852_1065%2F852.jpg>
 David M Benett/Getty Images 


About once a month or so, when someone says to me, “I’ve got this great idea 
for a novel/film/play/TV series” and then outlines the (usually pretty good) 
opening, I say: “So – how does it end?”. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the 
answer is: “I haven’t quite figured that out yet.”

Therefore my default response to all “great” ideas in the writing business is 
to do with the ending. A good ending can redeem a mediocre idea. A bad ending 
can sink a really good idea. As soon as you know how your narrative ends – 
in whatever medium – then a huge percentage of the problematic issues that 
arise in the writing will be solved.

If you have a clear sense of how your story will end then you can, as it were, 
rewind to the beginning and plot any number of various routes that will allow 
you to arrive at that desired ending – with its attendant catharsis, of course. 
If you start writing (however striking your original idea) with no sense of how 
your story will end, then life becomes progressively harder. Flailing around. 
Writer’s block. Draft after draft. This is how novels get abandoned; film 
scripts bottom-drawered. The thing to do is to stop and envisage your final 
pages, your final scene. Take your time. What note do you want to strike? What 
surprise do you want to spring? What denouement will justify this journey?

It may sound mechanical, but story-telling is a very complicated business, 
full of moving parts and many cogs engaging. You can’t rely on the Muse to 
descend and sort it all out for you. A bit of serious forethought about the 
conclusion will mean you don’t need the Muse’s help at all.

William Boyd is a novelist and screenwriter

Know your characters – Claire Messud
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24935f9036a36593bce4354c048a441cdc7329f2%2F1970_225_2472_3090%2F2472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24935f9036a36593bce4354c048a441cdc7329f2%2F1970_225_2472_3090%2F2472.jpg>
 Sarah Lee 
In fiction, character is (almost) everything. We discuss “the elements of 
craft” – characterisation, plot, point of view, dialogue, detail, setting, 
style, and so forth – as if they were separable, as if you could disentangle 
them one from another. You can’t, of course; but when you filter almost all 
things through the specificities of character, many questions resolve 
themselves, almost miraculously.

Each of us is, in any given moment, the sum total of our temperament and 
experiences up to that point. Our baggage and idiosyncrasies may be suggested 
in our appearance; but much is invisible to the world. We all know that if 
there are three people in a room, each will tell a different story about what 
happened there – so character determines the story itself. But it also 
determines what will unfold – the plot.

Ten rules for writing fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/20/ten-rules-for-writing-fiction-part-one>
As a writer, when you create a character, you don’t simply create his exterior 
(the wispy goatee, the receding hairline, the Liberty print shirt and expensive 
loafers); you must also come to know who he is (bullied in school, uneasy in 
friendships, veering between eager to please and cruel; vain but pretending not 
to be), and what has formed him (a Catholic school in the Sydney suburbs? A 
comprehensive in Exeter? Born with a silver spoon; or things started off 
comfortably, but his father’s business failed when he was 11? Raised in the 
shadow of three older siblings? Or alone with a single mum?). You must know his 
passions (loves pugs? Bicycle racing? First world war history? Talmudic study?) 
and his fears.

Once you know this person as well as you know yourself (or better), and once 
you put him, or her, in a particular place in a particular time, your character 
can only really act (or react) in a limited number of ways. He will notice only 
certain things, and those things only from a particular perspective; he will 
interact with others as only he can. If you’re using the first person, or the 
third person privileging this character, your diction and syntax – your very 
writing style – will be shaped by this person.

So much about a character is invisible, in fiction as in real life; but what 
lies beneath the surface will affect every aspect of your story. If you really 
take the time to figure out who you’re dealing with, much will become clear.

• Claire Messud is a senior lecturer in creative writing at Harvard

Distance yourself – Tessa Hadley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fb1c1e5825ab71737e56e73d70373bae19272c%2F2187_316_2077_2596%2F2077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fb1c1e5825ab71737e56e73d70373bae19272c%2F2187_316_2077_2596%2F2077.jpg>
 Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
This is something I talk about with my students until they’re sick of it: 
teaching yourself to read your own writing as a reader. It’s very difficult; it 
makes your mind ache – not only when you first start trying, but always. Three 
minutes ago you were tussling down inside the sentences, trying to drag out of 
the air the perfectly right words to express a mood, or catch a person’s 
physical presence or a place’s, or trying to find the perfectly right thing for 
your character to say. Then you blink your eyes, pull back from the screen or 
the notebook, try to imagine you’ve never seen this writing before.

This is the exact equivalent of a painter pulling back from her canvas, 
squinting at her work, before she dives forward and changes it again. It’s a 
revelation, really – how surprisingly visual reading is. Go back a few pages, 
start reading as if you’ve never seen these words before. How does it seem? 
Suddenly you’ll see what you couldn’t see when you were down among the 
undergrowth. It’s going on too long, it’s sentimental, the tone’s too heavy, 
there are too many sentences with same rhythm, there’s an inadvertent 
repetition. Or, something’s missing. You could print out your work, to try to 
see it freshly – or type it up, if you’re writing longhand. Or you could look 
at it full screen on the computer, with a different background, more like the 
pages of a book. The trouble is you have to make this effort not once, but over 
and over. Your mind will be sore from the effort of reading the same old thing 
so many times as if it were new. But unless you do it you won’t know what 
you’ve written, or whether you’ve got it alive and whole, faithfully, on to the 
page.

• Tessa Hadley is professor of creative writing at Bath Spa University

Don’t be afraid to start again – Jeanette Winterson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb16d30419aa8e9070e4a6afdfafd682f5152cb56%2F2027_657_2409_3011%2F2409.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb16d30419aa8e9070e4a6afdfafd682f5152cb56%2F2027_657_2409_3011%2F2409.jpg>
 Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 


Creativity is inexhaustible. Experiment, play, throw away. Above all be 
confident enough about creativity to throw stuff out. If it isn’t working, 
don’t cut and paste – scrap it and begin again.

• Jeanette Winterson is professor of new writing at the Centre for New 
Writing, University of Manchester

Be surprising – Blake Morrison
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8247f09bdd8528683c5341909410c96dcaef46e1%2F1058_250_2584_3230%2F2584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8247f09bdd8528683c5341909410c96dcaef46e1%2F1058_250_2584_3230%2F2584.jpg>
 Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
When the sweetly idealistic Nina asks Trigorin, in Chekhov’s The Seagull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/nov/19/the-seagull-chekhov-translation-language>
, to describe what it’s like to be a famous writer, he tells her it’s torment. 
Day and night, the compulsion to write never leaves him, he says. He can’t 
rest; can’t forget the unfinished novel he’s meant to be working on; can’t see 
a cloud in the sky without thinking of a comparison (with a grand piano, say) 
he might use somewhere; can’t trust the praise of encouragement of friends; 
feels nervous, miserable, overwrought, half-mad, and when any new work of his 
appears in print realises that it’s all wrong. Nina doesn’t listen, to her 
cost. But aspiring writers would do well to heed the warning. To be forever 
“consuming your own life”, as Trigorin puts it, is no picnic.

But as he also admits, the act itself, when you’re fully immersed, is 
enjoyable. And to write “in a sort of haze”, unsure what you’re up to but 
simply compelled, may be no bad thing. Say you sit down to write a poem, or an 
episode, set on an autumn morning. You have the idea but feel stuck, hamstrung, 
overwhelmed by your literary forebears: mist and mellow fruitfulness have been 
done to death. So has woodsmoke but suddenly you’ve the smell in your nostrils 
and are reminded of (or imagine) a particular fire, logs crackling in a grate, 
two wine-glasses, a bitter argument, a crimson stain on a sheepskin rug – 
perhaps the scene is a winter night rather an autumn morning and the logs are 
imitation logs in a modern gas fire, but that’s fine, where you’re being taken 
is more interesting than what you’d planned. Just go with it – you can always 
change it later.

In other words, if you only write what you’re expecting to write, you’ll be 
bored. Take a risk. Work against the grain. Don’t be afraid to make a deathbed 
scene comic, or to show a murderer being kind to animals. Truth is surprising, 
and surprise is the key – surprising the reader but also, in the first place, 
surprising yourself.

• Blake Morrison is professor of creative and life writing at Goldsmiths

Use a pseudonym – Toby Litt
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9538c40a0b7103646bce57ced11e66f931549d9%2F439_127_1141_1426%2F1141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9538c40a0b7103646bce57ced11e66f931549d9%2F439_127_1141_1426%2F1141.jpg>
 Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Trying to write your very best can stop you writing your very best. There’s a 
couple of ways to get around this. Most obviously, you can let yourself off 
writing as well as you’re possibly able. You can say: “This is draft zero, not 
even a first draft, so there’s no need for it to be anything but an exciting 
mess.” Lots of writing advice is about taking the pressure off by lowering the 
expectations you have of each draft. That’s the very best part of your very 
best.

A different approach, one I often suggest to writers who are struggling, is to 
dodge the issue entirely.

Instead of writing your novel or story as you, and anticipating all that 
pressure of owning your work (having friends read it as yours, reading it out 
in public after being introduced as you), give yourself a pseudonym to work 
with. Make up the name of a writer you just might have been, if you hadn’t been 
yourself. Type it in at the top of the manuscript. Print it out. Sign it. (I’m 
serious.) This draft is no longer by you (at your very best). This draft is by 
them, whoever they turn out to be.

Now, whenever you need to figure something out about your story, from the 
overall form to the punctuation of a sentence, you can shift responsibility. 
The question isn’t “How do I, at my very best, write this?” but “How does 
so-and-so write this?”

By writing under a secret pseudonym, you will gain a collaborator who has no 
hang-ups, no responsibilities, no history. They will, I promise, help you write 
better – perhaps even better than your very best.

• Toby Litt is a senior lecturer in creative writing at Birkbeck, University 
of London 

Do your research – Kathryn Hughes
 Graham Turner for the Guardian 
There’s this odd idea that, when it comes to writing non-fiction and 
biography, all you have to do is get the facts straight in your head and then 
spool them out in a listless monotone. The experience is rather like sitting 
next to a pub bore, who starts every sentence with “The interesting thing is …” 
without noticing that you’ve already turned away and started to talk to someone 
else.

So it’s all about finding a way to tell your story about the past as if it is 
actually very present. And, no, that doesn’t mean employing the historic 
present tense, which is used far too often, and mostly badly. Instead, you need 
to marinate yourself in your material, consuming everything that you can get 
your hands on about your subject (we’ll assume you’re writing a biography) and 
the period in which they lived. Read the books that they read, not just the 
ones that they actually wrote. Track down their great-great-granddaughter and 
ask if there any relics (snuffboxes, spectacles diaries, not actual bones) that 
you could sniff or finger. Saturate yourself in your subject’s correspondence 
until you know the name of their neighbour’s dog or the date on which their 
child’s first tooth fell out.

Only once you’ve metabolised this material, taken it into your own body, let 
it settle and mulch inside you for weeks, months or years, will you have a hope 
of making it live again. The first time you sit down to write, after a period 
of research immersion, try it freestyle. Don’t hug your notes, or pore over 
timelines. Write the narrative from memory, letting details float to the front 
of your imagination, while others recede into the background. With any luck, 
your narrative will feel fresh and juicy because that is how it lives in your 
imagination. Only at this point should you go back to your data and make sure 
that you haven’t invented anything. Because that really isn’t OK.

• Kathryn Hughes is professor of life writing at the University of East Anglia

Commit to finishing – Nikita Lalwani
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25f3120fcc2bffbbec53be817a38b38da383b082%2F719_899_2101_2626%2F2101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25f3120fcc2bffbbec53be817a38b38da383b082%2F719_899_2101_2626%2F2101.jpg>
 Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
Making the decision to finish a piece of work is crucial. It is this 
seriousness of intent that gives you half a chance of writing something that 
will have a life beyond your desk. It might be easier to deny this aspect and 
pretend that you will never get there – how dare you presume that this folly of 
a story you are bashing out can be something real, a book for an actual 
audience, and more to the point, isn’t it very likely you will write a bad 
ending? You made the whole thing up, after all, and this contraption that we 
call plot could easily come apart. So goes the insecure writerly mind in the 
dark hours. But once you believe that you will reach the end of your book, 
whatever shape that takes, then it can make it easier to write with the kind of 
conviction and purpose that makes a reader want to turn the page.

In Six Walks in the Fictional Woods, the playful and profound series of essays 
on writing by Umberto Eco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/nov/12/umberto-eco-real-literature-is-about-losers>
, he likens the act of reading to playing a game: “a game by which we give 
sense to the immensity of things that have happened, are happening or will 
happen in the world”. By saying to yourself that you will complete the story, 
you are acknowledging the nature of this transaction between yourself and a 
potential reader – you are in the game.

Of course, your story may never have a reader, but I believe there are very 
few benefits to thinking in that way. Time and time again I have seen talented 
students ditch their manuscripts at the half-way point, and less talented 
students reach the end, rewrite the whole book enthusiastically, and get 
published. Something about ending your novel can elevate it beyond what you 
might feel is a shameful and insubstantial piece of drivel that you have 
written in your pyjamas and make it a contender in your own mind. Respect your 
process and make a pact to close the deal.

Nikita Lalwani is a lecturer in creative writing at Royal Holloway, University 
of London

Forget brilliance – DBC Pierre
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b4705e48f48fafb30bc2f1dec8a8b27ba0acc6a%2F1870_223_2784_3480%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b4705e48f48fafb30bc2f1dec8a8b27ba0acc6a%2F1870_223_2784_3480%2F2784.jpg>
 Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
One intimidating thing about starting to write is the array of polished advice 
about it. Pearls seemingly formed between tennis and cocktails, brilliantly 
deployed by the greats between six and nine every morning but Sunday. Suddenly 
our biggest hurdle isn’t character, pace or plot, but that we can’t even play 
tennis.

I’m talking about the otherness of our peers. If our toolkit belongs to 
Fitzgerald and Faulkner, our first issue will be getting over writing relative 
crap at the outset. But whoever said “writing is rewriting” knew the science of 
crap, the practical lesson being: it’s easier to improve it than to originate 
brilliance. To improve it we need to have it, which means writing it, and that 
requires a different ethos than the one we probably sat down with, glowing with 
hope and expectation.

My suggestion is this: we stop ourselves from writing what we have to write by 
pausing to fret over details and risks, and by filtering ourselves through 
subconscious juries. Sparkles of gold can appear if we just get enough words 
written, which means write like the wind, don’t look down. Make a pact never to 
show anyone, build a mound of dirt, skim it later for anything that excites 
you. Skimming is a different job, sober and honest, of an archaeologist 
crumbling dirt in her hands. Separate any glimmers into a new document and 
build on them, connect them, repeat the process. Those glimmers are also 
evidence that things can work out, making them power pills for the will; use 
them to press on. We might start by sifting crap but a couple of passes can 
lure out real pipe-puffing linen-wearing tennis-playing vigour.

The key then is to not try playing tennis.

• DBC Pierre is author of writing guide Release the Bats

Ignore tips – Amit Chaudhuri
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03713fb033b57a444610a7eca447cf8dd72312f5%2F2374_297_1676_2095%2F1676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03713fb033b57a444610a7eca447cf8dd72312f5%2F2374_297_1676_2095%2F1676.jpg>
 Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
The one tip I give to students of writing is to disregard tips. These might 
have to do with arresting opening sentences, or they may simply concern the 
tools of the trade – character, setting, description, plot. The four words, 
chosen randomly, are vague descriptive categories once used in 
literary departments, where, with “tone”, they’ve been abandoned, only to be 
repeatedly invoked in creative writing classes along with “craft”, “sentence”, 
and that nervous-making shibboleth, “point of view”. I’m not sure what 
“character” means. Is it an aggregate of physical features – nose, eyes, hair – 
which add up to a bodily presence into which, as if it were a vessel, you pour 
psychological life: thoughts, memories, political views? Can you “fictionalise” 
a real person by adding a moustache to his face, or a stammer to his speech?

Why is it that, when we invent characters, the process of invention involves 
an excavation from the subconscious, as if we were trying to remember someone 
we knew decades ago; while when we write of people we know, we see them in our 
imagination as independent entities who are essentially strangers to us? To 
create a character is to unlearn what we know: tips will be unhelpful. 
Unhelpful, too, is the hierarchy in which these categories arrive, with 
character at the centre, and setting important inasmuch as it is where plot or 
story – or what happens to the protagonist – unfolds.

For me, the protagonist is only one element in a story: evening, room, wall, 
smoke, car, are other possible ones. It’s a prejudice inherited from the 
European Renaissance that the human must occupy centre stage, everything else 
being secondary. A work of the imagination gives us not a protagonist, but the 
intimation of a world. No one thing in a world – object or person – has 
centrality.

If I have one more tip, it’s this: give nothing centrality, because writing is 
about continually shifting weight from one thing and moment to the other.

• Amit Chaudhuri <https://www.theguardian.com/books/amit-chaudhuri> is 
professor of contemporary literature at the University of East Anglia

Just do it – Naomi Alderman

You learn the most from sitting down and doing the work, regularly, patiently, 
sometimes in hope, sometimes despairingly. When you have something that seems 
complete, show your work to people you trust to be honest but not malicious. 
Put it aside for six months and reread it. Expect to be disgusted by your own 
early work. If writing is your vocation, if you hope that it might be your 
salvation, push on through the disgust until you find one true sentence, a few 
words that say more than you expected, something you didn’t know until you set 
it down.

There are no “tips” for this process really; it’s painstaking and intense and 
doesn’t often feel pleasant.

However, I think there are tips for how to sit your bum on the chair and do 
the work.

Stop reading so many articles on the internet about how to write. You’re 
allowed one a week. Instead, spend that time actually writing.

Use a writing prompt to get you started. I recommend Judy Reeves’ book A 
Writer’s Book of Days.

Write for 15 minutes every day. Set a time in advance, set a timer. Try to 
write at the same time every day. Your subconscious will get used to the idea 
and will start to work like a reliable water spout.

Remind yourself, every day, that you’re doing this to try to find something 
out about yourself, about the world, about words and how they fit together. 
Writing is investigation. Just keep seeking.

• Naomi Alderman is professor of creative writing at Bath Spa University
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40d00c083aeeb1712d76ed0d7e0d8079739fff60%2F0_245_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20best%20writing%20tip%20by%20William%20Boyd%2C%20Jeanette%20Winterson%2C%20Amit%20Chaudhuri%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fmy-best-writing-tip-william-boyd-jeanette-winterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40d00c083aeeb1712d76ed0d7e0d8079739fff60%2F0_245_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
 Once you’ve written your masterpiece, it’s time to get it published ... 
Photograph: Daisy Corlett/Alamy 
How to get an agent

Jonny Geller, joint chief executive of Curtis Brown

Research: Who does an agent represent? What is their area of expertise? How 
many new writers do they nurture? If you sent your romantic saga to an agent 
who specialises in military history, you will have wasted your stamp.

Be brief: If you can’t write a short letter, you probably can’t write 
a long novel.

Don’t do the agent’s work for them: A mis-pitch is an unnecessary 
hurdle to jump, so no “Sherlock Holmes meets Jack Reacher” combinations, please.

Don’t send your first three chapters until they are so good you couldn’t bear 
changing a word: If you don’t love it, we won’t. You only get one chance to 
read something for the first time so don’t think you can fix that problem 
later. There won’t be a later.

Wait: Leave at least four to six weeks before hassling the agent for 
a response.

Be positive: We are looking for terrific books by great new authors so be 
confident and expect success. If you write to us anticipating rejection, we 
will smell it and probably agree with you. It is a wonderful thing to create, 
produce and believe in yourself.

• Jonny Geller’s recent Tedx talk was “What Makes a Bestseller 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mD-uP2BsVy4&feature=youtu.be>?”

How to get published 

Susanna Wadeson, publishing director at Transworld

There are six elements I think about when considering a project.

Story: This comes first, in both fiction and non-fiction. What’s the story? Do 
I care? And am I the right editor to help tell it? Does it grab me? This starts 
with the all-important pitch – a two-line summary – but I have to be sure the 
whole book will deliver on that promise and has a fluent and compelling 
narrative thread.

Platform: Who is the author and do they have a public profile to help us 
promote the book? Do they have an existing following/readership on 
TV/radio/social media? Essentially, is there a chatter-factor?

Voice: Is the writing distinctive and a pleasure to spend time with? Is it 
elegantly constructed? Witty? Surprising? Am I moved to laugh? Cry?

Authenticity: Am I comfortable with the match of author and subject? Does it 
feel opportunistic or manufactured, or does the author have a genuine passion 
to convey?

Originality: Is it really new? Will the book shift our views about who we are, 
the world we live in?

Audience: Yes it is interesting/fun/moving/different and I love the author, 
but is there a market for it? Will anyone feel they need it to the extent that 
they will pay £15 for it?
 