 Wendy Tan White, founder of Moonfruit 
Wendy Tan White’s first major leap of faith wasn’t, as you might expect, 
startingMoonfruit <https://www.moonfruit.com> with Joe White and Eirik 
Pettersen during the first dotcom boom. It was carrying on when the dotcom 
bubble burst in 2001, she reveals.

“Funding ran out, so we had to cut the team from 60, to 10, then two, which 
was very tough,” she says. “But we totally believed in our mission to enable 
small firms to build their own websites.” By 2012, when the business was sold 
to the Yell Group for £23m, seven million websites had been built using the 
pioneering Moonfruit platform.

Tan White admits that leaps of faith still “bring the same vertigo and 
butterflies”, even after years in business. Her latest, 18 months ago, saw Tan 
White and husband Joe joinEntrepreneur First 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/article/entrepreneur-first-startups-london> (EF), the 
London tech accelerator started by Matt Clifford and Alice Bentinck in 2011. 
“We joined because we want to help the best talent to build world-class 
startups from scratch. We were also looking for something that was worth 
betting our time and money on,” she says. “Matt and Alice are exceptional 
people.”

In May, Entrepreneur First had its first major exit, when Twitter acquired AI 
start-up Magic Pony for $150m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/20/twitter-ai-magic-pony-150m-video>
. “We’ve raised £40m to extend EF’s company-building programme from six months 
to two years, and invest further in companies. We’ve personally invested in 12 
businesses in our portfolio of 20 – and mentor many more. Becoming investors 
has been a totally different leap of faith.”

Software solutions
 Chris Barling, co-founder of Actinic 
Tech entrepreneur Chris Barling was 40 when he took a life-changing chance to 
set up his own business. “I left a well-paid job with Cable & Wireless to set 
up [ecommerce software provider]Actinic <http://www.actinic.co.uk> in 1996,” he 
says. “My co-founder and I funded the launch and my family of five had to live 
on £8,000 in that first year.”

Software development involves considerable investment before any revenue comes 
in, he adds, often leaving owners short of cash. “It was a major leap of faith. 
I was continually being told people wouldn’t buy online, but the business grew 
to be worth £250m.”

Barling estimates £10bn of sales went through Actinic-powered websites before 
he moved on in 2014. He now sits on the board of a FTSE 100 company and two 
high-growth tech startups. And he has startedPowered Now 
<http://www.powerednow.com>, a provider of invoice, estimating and scheduling 
mobile software for small trade businesses, such as plumbers, electricians and 
builders.

“Again, I’m told trades people will never be keen on technology to run their 
business. [But] they will, because now it’s mobile, like them, and simpler. 
It’s taken personal investment, but now we have more than 1,100 paying 
customers and 60,000 trade businesses have downloaded our app. Entrepreneurs 
must sometimes take leaps of faith. It’s hard, but can bring the biggest 
rewards. It should never be an [unconsidered one] though.”

Space man
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsmall-business-risk-growth-leap-of-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0f3c6906b059ebfe80380b41c5c348970271bd%2F101_0_801_1001%2F801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20biggest%20leap%20of%20faith%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsmall-business-risk-growth-leap-of-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20biggest%20leap%20of%20faith%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsmall-business-risk-growth-leap-of-faith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c0f3c6906b059ebfe80380b41c5c348970271bd%2F101_0_801_1001%2F801.jpg>
 Ross Bailey, CEO of Appear Here. 
“In 2012, after Airbnb <https://www.airbnb.com> started to take off, it just 
came to me and stayed in my head,” says 24-year-old Ross Bailey of starting his 
businessAppear Here <https://www.appearhere.co.uk/>. “Maybe something similar 
could help fill the huge number of empty UK retail premises.”

To test this theory, Bailey and a friend took a short-term let on premises 
near Carnaby Street and sold T-shirts to coincide with the Queen’s Diamond 
Jubilee.

Others showed interest and the viability of the pop-up shop concept became 
clear. The company launched in February 2013 and is now a leading online 
marketplace that connects landlords with brands and businesses seeking 
short-term retail space in the UK.

“My leap of faith was simply telling others about my idea,” Bailey reveals. 
“Some said it was rubbish, but one person said I shouldn’t over-think it. Try 
it out and if it fails, it fails.

“There’s something powerful about telling people about your idea. Many people 
want you to succeed. Ultimately, you win or you lose, but the initial momentum 
begins.” Appear Here now has offices in London and Paris and more than 40 
employees, having raised some £5m in funding.

Growth platform
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsmall-business-risk-growth-leap-of-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ba1b06ba12e0f1a1905ef98ef7df7afaebfc628%2F1210_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20biggest%20leap%20of%20faith%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsmall-business-risk-growth-leap-of-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20biggest%20leap%20of%20faith%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fhiscox-partner-zone%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsmall-business-risk-growth-leap-of-faith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ba1b06ba12e0f1a1905ef98ef7df7afaebfc628%2F1210_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
 Saurav Chopra founded Perkbox in 2014. 
Saurav Chopra took a chance in 2014 when he cofounded Perkbox 
<https://www.perkbox.co.uk>, a platform employers pay to use to provide 
employees with “access to more than 200 perks, an online reward and recognition 
system and a wellness hub”.

Chopra explains: “Parent company Huddlebuy was a highly profitable 
lead-generation business, turning over £1m-plus, but we wanted to build 
something we could scale worldwide. [Starting a new business] that wasn’t 
generating any revenue required a huge leap of faith.”

Justifying the idea to his board, investors and employees was incredibly hard, 
admits Chopra, and Perkbox was one year in the making before launching in 2015. 
“Just two years after deciding to pivot, revenue has grown by 13 times, and 
we’ve gone from 15 employees to 100, without any external funding.”

Chopra believes that entrepreneurs must regularly take leaps of faith – these 
are mostly small, but occasionally very significant. “They key is to minimise 
risk,” he says. “Evaluate as much data as possible; get input from key team 
members; and feedback from potential customers. Once the decision’s been made, 
you must communicate your rationale and plan to the rest of the team.”

Mersey paradise
 Steve McGauley, owner of Liquid, and his son 
Steve McGauley’s leap of faith involved relocating his marketing agency from 
London to Liverpool. “I startedLiquid <http://www.liquidagency.co.uk> in 2000. 
Three years later, after growing steadily, moving to the north west seemed the 
next natural step.

“I’m Yorkshire born, but my dad’s a Scouser and my family live in the north – 
it’s where I feel most comfortable. I considered Manchester and Leeds, but I’m 
a passionate Liverpool FC fan and the thought of a short drive to Anfield was 
too much to resist,” he laughs.

While it was a big move, McGauley says agencies don’t need a London postcode 
to compete. “We have a high success rate of winning work against agencies 
regionally and in London,” he adds. “We have the same work ethic and 
creativity, but charge less usually.” Liquid now has 17 employees and an 
impressive client list that includes Levis, Warburtons and Liverpool John 
Lennon Airport.

The main reason for relocating was better quality of life, he says, 
particularly at a time when he and his wife wanted to start a family. “London 
consumes you; working very long hours is expected. Personally, I never had any 
doubts. I believed in my business and in Liverpool.

“I’m thankful for my time in London,” he adds, “but moving to Liverpool has 
been one of my best decisions ever. The talent and drive here reminds me of 
London, but the people in Liverpool tend to do it with a smile on their face.”

While leaps of faith can be terrifying, when they’re taken with careful 
consideration of the risks and benefits on the line, they can be the push that 
a business needs to grow and thrive. What will your next leap of faith be?

Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed with Hiscox 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/>, sponsor of the Adventures in Business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/adventures-in-business>
 hub on the Guardian Small Business Network.
 