
Who was Harvey Pekar <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j1yVxREyrmo>? He was a 
grouch, a slouch, a miserablist. He griped and bitched about everything. But he 
did it in style. And he did it publicly, throughAmerican Splendor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96545/american.splendor> – a series of 
autobiographical comic books and the subsequent movie adaptation,which Amy 
Fleming chose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/07/my-favourite-film-american-splendor>
 to open the third week of ourMy favourite film series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/my-favourite-film>.

"Harvey didn't do happy," wrote Amy. "But he did funny and truth, and so does 
this movie – beautifully." Robert Pulcini and Shari Springer Berman's film was 
a cinematic holiday from Hollywood's gloss and fantasy, she said. Trudging 
around, observing Cleveland life with movie Harvey (Paul Giamatti) and real 
Harvey both took her deep into Pekar's hilarious, sad world, with the blend of 
drama and documentary reminding her that "the story is about genuine, 
flesh-and-blood people with human frailties". This "adds tenderness; it makes 
the film feel as pathologically honest as Pekar himself".

This clarity made and broke the movie, according to many of you. "I found the 
characters both irritating and compelling at the same time," saidLasereyedcorgis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/Lasereyedcorgis>. "Which is what 
people are like I suppose." The film was a "perfect vehicle for Giamatti's 
world-weary schtick", saidIfThen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/IfThen>, while zoskia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/zoskia> welcomed the film-makers' 
intention to show us "an America that we do not always see", even it was full 
of "poor people, low-paid jobs, car-boot sales, sadness and frustration".Nobby73
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/Nobby73> found Harvey's message 
therapeutic: "Another predictable disappointment," they said, quoting a Pekar 
staple. "Whenever I get a shock looking in the mirror, I think of the line and 
it cheers me up ..."

Harvey died of cancer last year, his outlook gloomy to the end. "Life's a war 
of attrition," he said. "You have to stay active on all fronts. It's one thing 
after another."

On to the next thing then, which was Charlotte Higgins's passionate appraisal 
of The Red Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/08/my-favourite-film-red-shoes>
. A Powell and Pressburger (melo)drama that sees young ballet dancer Victoria 
Page (Moira Shearer) driven to insanity by her need for perfection in her art. 
The film, set in "a half-destroyed yet intellectually alive postwar London", 
attempted to "capture the 'out-of-body', fugitive experience of an artist in 
performance", said Charlotte. "When the conscious mind is suppressed and the 
body and pure instinct take over."

"The sheer living one's art and being consumed by it are expressed 
brilliantly," agreedimsotired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/imsotired>. The sincerity of 
Page's ambition is the key, saidChike6 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/Chike6>: "It's absolutely assumed 
that this art business is important. To see people composing, dancing and 
creating as if their lives depended on it. I hadn't seen that expressed quite 
so powerfully before, and I haven't since."

The grace and composure of the ballet was underwritten with something much 
darker and primal, said Charlotte. She picked up on Powell's use of sexual 
imagery, particularly in his depiction of the titular footwear, which were 
"absolutely dripping with dark imagery about female sexuality (menstruation, 
loss of virginity) and creativity". "It's as much a film about repressed 
sexuality and sexual manipulation as it is about dance," saidinsomniac506 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/insomniac506>, while BrerRabbit2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/BrerRabbit2> held Powell's 
frenetic film up as a progenitor of (theatrical) things to come: "Some might 
say the whole film is camp before camp was camp."

As ever we hadn't made enough of the film's behind-the-scenes corps de ballet, 
so director of photography Jack Cardiff, art director Hein Heckroth, matte 
artist Peter Ellenshaw and cameraman Chris Challis all got their own round of 
applause. Elsewhere a discussion on whereThe Red Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76632/red-shoes> placed in the P&P 
catalogue (it was better than Black Narcissus; no, it was better than Blimp but 
not a patch on … etc etc etc) pirouetted itself to exhaustion, while the prima 
ballerina of comments (fromMsDWrites <http:>) took centre stage:

"I first saw this film when I was a ballet-mad five-year-old," they said. "As 
the final credits rolled, I turned, wide-eyed, to my father and said, 'But, 
she's all right, isn't she?' He blithely replied, 'Oh yes, but she broke both 
her legs.' For years I was convinced that afterwards Vicky went on to found a 
great school for disabled dancers. It was probably 15 years before I saw it 
again, my father had died in the interim, and I still remember staring at the 
screen and saying out loud, 'Hang on … !'"

From the mildly misguided to the full-on bonkers, as Jonathan Haynes came out 
fighting (left-handed) for The Princess Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/09/favourite-film-princess-bride>
. Rob Reiner's adventure story has Cary Elwes's humble farmhand/swashbuckling 
swordsman battle through shrieking eels and fire swamps to save his "twoo wuv" 
Buttercup from a fate worse than rodents of unusual size: marriage to the wrong 
man. William Goldman's screenplay sends up fairytale tropes quicker than Jack 
climbed the beanstalk. It delighted Jonathan ("It tells a very sweet story 
without ever straying into mawkishness or sickliness") but was a little too 
knowing for some of you. "A film for wise-cracking, smartarse kids," saidjamie12
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/jamie12>. "Along with The Goonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/86435/goonies>, it seems to be one of 
the films people in my age group rave about as a childhood favourite, but it 
really leaves me cold," agreedPeachFizz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/PeachFizz>.

The rest of you were into it (A quick sampler: "A Sunday teatime classic" – 
magick <http:>; "A masterpiece of just-tell-us-what-we-need-to-know minimalism" 
–jeromeknewton <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/jeromeknewton>) and 
one of you was IN it. Long hair and a beard were all that were required of
SouthCoastOwl <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/SouthCoastOwl> and 
his mates to get a bit of screen time alongside Fezzik,Inigo Montoya 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3W5GDkgf2w> and the six-fingered man. Stranger 
still was SouthCoastOwl and co's appearance at the first screening in his part 
of Sheffield for what was, superficially, a children's film: "The cinema staff 
were a bit surprised to see that the expected half-term audience of kids and 
their parents appeared to have morphed into a crowd of hippies and metalheads," 
he says. Rest well and dream of large women, SouthCoastOwl. They might need you 
on the convention circuit yet …

If, as magick says, The Princess Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77070/princess-bride> was for Sunday 
teatime,Rio Bravo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78735/rio-bravo> was 
for Sunday teatime, dinner and much of the evening, according to Tony Paley, who
rode into town with Howard Hawks's epic western in tow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/10/my-favourite-film-rio-bravo>
. Hawks's two-and-a-half-hour movie "demands a particular frame of mind" and 
sees "the tumbleweed lazily roll across the main street from one character to 
another", wrote Tony. The ensemble cast, which included John Wayne, Dean Martin 
and Angie Dickinson, were strong enough to carry a film with precious little 
plot. And their tight-knit gang (gloriously given monikers such as Chance, Dude 
and Feathers) have so much affection for each other that you lot couldn't help 
rooting for them in their fight against the lawless Burdette clan.

"This film is so good that it finally made me abandon my political objections 
and begin to love John Wayne," saidLlivracNhoJ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/LlivracNhoJ>, a view that many of 
you could posse up with. "Wayne's work with John Ford is more interesting, 
deeper, and darker," saidollienorthern <http:>. "But Hawks could definitely do 
the lighthearted stuff brilliantly and I don't think there's any western that's 
as much fun as Rio Bravo."monders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/monders> remembers the film fondly 
for less innocent reasons: "This film was the first time I saw a lady in 
stockings. And lo, at age 8, a pervert was born."

On a totally unrelated note ... Christian Bennett was on the spot next. He 
took a shot at explaining whySteve James's documentary Hoop Dreams is his 
all-star movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/11/favourite-film-hoop-dreams>
. The film focuses on two promising young athletes, Arthur Agee and William 
Gates, who are battling it out in the highly competitive world of high-school 
basketball. "Through the microcosm of Arthur and William's lives, Steve James 
tears into American society, looking at its systematic failure to value the two 
main protagonists as anything other than a commodity," said Christian. "The 
boys' future education and ticket out of the ghetto [are] played out in front 
of their whole community, reliant on the bounce of a basketball."

Years in the making and edited down from 250 hours of footage, James's 
masterpiece "splays open the American dream and reveals a country riven with 
social and cultural stratas", saiddondi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/dondi> – but was "criminally 
overlooked at Oscar time", addedcanukbound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/canukbound>. At the time many of 
America's influential critics agreed – Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert even took 
the unusual step of campaigning for the film to be included in the documentary 
nominations. Hoop Dreams remained off the list, eventually sinking an editing 
nom but no gong. Poor play the academy.

Marquest1 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/Marquest1> took a late 
run with a heartwarming comment and a very nice compliment. "Saw it again a 
couple of years ago with my fiance (who was in tears throughout parts of it) 
and it was every bit as moving and powerful as I remember," they said. "I'm 
really enjoying this series – particularly since Guardian writers for the most 
part haven't felt the need to pretend to like unwatchable, pretentious arthouse 
rubbish."

We have a fair few weeks before the bell, Marquest1. Give us enough open nets 
...
 