
My all-time top celebrity spot? Gabriel Byrne, no question. On a Saturday in 
July 2003, the morning after two of my best friends marry, I'm in the bar of 
the Charlotte Street Hotel saying a final farewell before they fly off on 
honeymoon (also, the newly minted husband needs to borrow cash for the cab to 
Heathrow). As we swap war stories from the night before, I become aware of a 
familiar yet unplaceable Irish voice drifting over the conversation from behind 
me. After a few seconds, it comes to me – "What's the rumpus?" – so I sneak a 
crafty glance over my shoulder and there he is:Gabriel Byrne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gabriel-byrne> is sitting alone at a corner 
table, talking on his mobile phone.

I had a crashing hangover – was almost certainly still drunk – and this seemed 
fitting for the encounter. By this time Byrne was better known forThe Usual 
Suspects <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/63102/usual-suspects>, but for 
me he'll always be Tom Reagan, the magnificently rumpled, battered but 
undefeated antihero of the Coen brothers' 1990 gangster filmMiller's Crossing 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100150/>. The movie is soaked in booze, from the 
opening closeup of Tom's whisky glass 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sXQ940YSD2A> and the clink-clink sound of ice 
cubes tumbling in.

In an era when action heroes such as Arnie and Bruce strolled through movies 
casually offing baddies by the dozen but rarely seeming in any genuine danger, 
Tom was my kind of protagonist – bumbling from one hazardous encounter to the 
next, the antithesis of omnipotent. (Likewise, I was drawn toBlade Runner 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76627/blade-runner>'s Rick Deckard and 
Angel Heart <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/79502/angel-heart>'s Harry 
Angel.) Perpetually hungover and seemingly clad in the previous night's soiled 
threads, reeling from one savage beating or close brush with death to the next, 
he is all the time ready with a wisecrack ("How'd you get the fat lip?" ... 
"Old war wound. Acts up around morons"), working out the angles, spotting the 
grifts, prepared to gamble with his life on the next big play.
 Miller's Crossing 
When I first saw Miller's Crossing at the cinema I had one of those "What the 
hell just happened?" moments. And not just because of theat-first-impenetrable, 
hard-boiled, rat-a-tat dialogue <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0100150/quotes> 
and dizzying plot twists. For most of the movie I was convinced that Tom's 
scheming (to recap: he shags the girl his mob boss and best mate loves, fesses 
up, gets beaten up – repeatedly – switches allegiance to a rival boss, 
engineers his murder, kills the girl's brother, switches back, but still loses 
the girl and his mate) was motivated by his love for Marcia Gay Harden's Verna. 
Right up to the climactic scene where Verna's brother, John Turturro's Bernie 
Bernbaum, is on his knees before Tom begging for his life:"Look in your heart … 
Look in your heart!" <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qoS635XbKhE>. "What 
heart?". Tom shoots him between the eyes.

OK, so he's an asshole. But he's an asshole who abides by his own set of 
rules, no matter what – killing the brother of the woman he loves (yes, I still 
think love's in the mix) to "straighten things out" with Albert Finney's Leo. I 
guess I should have seen it coming, given that the film is shot through with 
such a deep, dark cynicism from the opening scene, in whichJon Polito's 
psychopathic rival mob boss Johnny Caspar 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dy37wGK-6mY> lectures Leo about friendship, 
character and ethics – "It's getting so a businessman can't expect no return 
from a fixed fight. Now if you can't trust a fix, what can you trust?"
 Miller's Crossing 
I can pay the film's script no higher praise than to note it has been 
referenced by my Guardian colleagues Andy Bull and Rob Smyth(scroll down to the 
lunchtime session of this cricket report) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2011/jul/29/england-india-second-test-live>, 
who know a thing or two about fine writing. The dialogue fizzes and crackles 
along for 115 minutes, nowhere more so than in the sparring between Tom and 
Verna, which reaches a climax of sortsin a drunken brawl in a powder room 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m6rS1K5aN4Q&feature=related>: "Intimidating 
helpless women is part of what I do" …"Then find one and intimidate her." 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hCDWjpBOgbM&NR=1&feature=endscreen>

During one of their post-coital exchanges it emerges that the film's MacGuffin,
the hat blowing away through leaves in a forest, which appears at the end of 
the opening titles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OaF5w8B5MSY>, refers to a 
dream of Tom's – and then the Coens casually dismiss it, with another slice of 
black humour. Verna analyses the dream and asks if when he caught up with the 
hat it had changed into "something wonderful". "Nah, it stayed a hat. And no I 
didn't chase it," replies an exasperated Tom."Nothing more foolish than a man 
chasing his hat." <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6YD_Q8anMzU&feature=related>
 Miller's Crossing 
Ah, those opening titles. Carter Burwell's elegiac theme music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UM3f-WHxZVo> can still bring an involuntary 
tear to my eye. This Pavlovian response became a tad inconvenient a few years 
later,when the theme turned up in a Caffrey's beer commercial 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4AFeBUJHcbs>.

Another thing that stays with me is the final closeup of Tom's face 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bHor-ixem6A>, after he's split for good with 
Leo ("Dammit Tom, I forgive ya" … "I didn't ask for that and I don't want it. 
Goodbye, Leo."). He leans against a tree as Leo walks off, adjusts his hat, 
then looks up, gazing ahead, with the camera holding on his impassive 
expression for several seconds. What is he thinking? What does it mean? I've no 
idea, so I'll leave the final word to Tom: "Nobody knows anybody. Not that 
well."
 