
 I knew I would feel like just a number in a big hotel like the Dorchester or 
the Hilton, but when I walked into Berry's and a couple of chefs joked 'Oh, you 
don't want to work here mate - it's a bloody dodgy place', I took the job.

 My first boss, Malcolm Cowan, allowed me to express myself in the kitchen. He 
was very fair in the way he treated me, although I sometimes took advantage of 
our friendship. I was a 'bit of a lad' and on the phone to my mates too much 
because I thought it was a reasonable perk. But he was very encouraging and 
promoted me quite quickly.

 I quit to go driving around America in a Mustang with my mate Richard. We 
made a thousand croissants a day in Sausalito, just knocking them out in the 
mornings. But Malcolm called me back to the UK because he wanted me to be his 
chef tourant. He needed someone lively who would create an atmosphere in the 
kitchen and he knew I was a fun person.

From Malcolm I learned how to delegate, write menus and plan well. He was 
quite astute - he anticipated things quickly and was a good judge of people. 
Later on I became his sous chef and he taught me the ropes.

When you're at the top you have to know how to delegate without putting the 
fear of God into people. In the end I was like a counsellor, which is what you 
become when working with people long hours.

 I had a big row with my general manager towards the end of my time there and 
I fell out with Malcolm after that. After I moved on I heard he gave up the 
restaurant and bought a pub in the country.

 It's important to be dedicated and enthusiastic when you're starting a 
career. It might take a long time to get established and the money won't flow 
in straight away. You've got be a good communicator in almost any job nowadays 
- but if you're enthusiastic and committed in your job, good things will come 
your way.

Â· Ainsley Harriott <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ainsleyharriott> 
is the new face of Fairy Liquid.

anstead.writing@ntl-world.com
 