
The underground comic writer Harvey Pekar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/13/harvey-pekar-dies-american-splendor>
 didn't really do happy, but he did truth and humour in spades, which is why
American Splendor <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0305206/>, a 2002 film about 
Pekar (in which he also appears), got under my skin in a big way. "If you're 
the kind of person looking for romance or escapism or some fantasy figure to 
save the day," warns his rasping narration at the start, "guess what? You got 
the wrong movie." Sometimes, a little cinematic holiday from the gloss and 
fantasy of Hollywood is just what the doctor ordered.

Pekar, a downtrodden hospital file clerk, chronicled the intricacies of his 
glum life in depressed Cleveland, Ohio, in his ironically namedAmerican 
Splendor comic books 
<http://www.darkhorse.com/Search/Browse/american+splendor/PpwNwkt8>. He wrote 
the words, and artists such asRobert Crumb <http://www.crumbproducts.com/> did 
the pictures. Pekar is often referred to as the Mark Twain of comic books, and 
an anthology of his work won the American Book award in 1987. Despite this – 
and the fact he moonlighted as a jazz and book critic, and regularly appeared 
as acomically grouchy guest on the Letterman show 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D0akXKxbflM&feature=related> (for the "dough") 
after his cult, hipster, anti-hero status got him noticed by producers at NBC – 
Pekar never felt in a position to quit his day job.

American Splendor, the movie, begins with Pekar (played by Paul Giamatti 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0316079/>) losing his voice to a stress-related 
vocal chord nodule, on account of his second wife ditching him and his "plebian 
lifestyle". Not long after, Pekar and Crumb meet at a yard sale while examining 
old jazz records. (Pekar, who is unashamedly tight, is wondering whether he 
could talk down the price of a record from a quarter because it has a crack in 
the laminate.) Then we witness Pekar's rise to (relative) fame and his getting 
together with wife number three,Joyce Brabner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joyce_Brabner>, his neurotic match. Eventually, 
he is diagnosed with cancer (sounds fun, huh?) and the only thing that can get 
the couple through it is to co-write a (celebrated) graphic novel,Our Cancer 
Year <http://www.amazon.com/Our-Cancer-Year-Harvey-Pekar/dp/1568580118>, about 
the experience. But there's plenty of joy to be found in the film: the 
completely unromanticised human relationships, the humour, the continuous 
bummer that is Pekar's existence.

But what really lifts the film to the heights of poignancy is its odd mixture 
of documentary and drama. Most of the film is in fact dramatic (Giamatti acts 
out scenes from Pekar's life) but this is interspersed with asides showing the 
real-life protagonists chatting (somewhat awkwardly, in fact, unless they just 
appear stilted compared with the actors' performances) in an empty white 
studio. This reminder that the story is about genuine, flesh-and-blood people 
with human frailties adds tenderness; it makes the film feel as pathologically 
honest as Pekar himself. (The first thing he says to Brabner on their first 
date: "You might as well know, I had a vasectomy.") At one point, Giamatti and
Judah Friedlander <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0295103/> (AKA Frank from 30 Rock 
<http://www.nbc.com/30-rock/>), who plays Toby Radloff, Pekar's self-confessed 
nerd colleague at the hospital <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cXxRnZ3Ih44>, 
walk off the set and sit, dwarfed in the background, while the real Pekar and 
Radloff – the true stars – talk in the foreground.

Giamatti channels Pekar beautifully. In his voiceover, the real Pekar says the 
guy playing him "don't look nothing like me" – the actor is, admittedly, 
cuddlier-looking – but Giamatti portrays his many beefs and neuroses with 
sensitivity and humour, without straying into hamminess. Throughout, he 
maintains a graphic grimace, helping to recreate a comic-book feel. (Pekar once 
said of his work: "It's an autobiography written as it's happening.") And the 
way Giamatti captures those subtly glorious moments when Pekar cocks his head 
and smirks at the hilarity of his humdrum life, filing it in his writer's mind 
for later, is pure gold.

American Splendor is one of three films, all coming out within a year or so of 
each other, that made my hair stand on end. Lars von Trier'sDogville 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KXcS5qo-nKg&feature=related>, Spike Jonze's 
Adaptation <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HtZ2M4e_AM> and Splendor (which was 
directed by documentary-makers Robert Pulcini and Shari Springer Berman) all 
have a postmodern, Brechtian thing going on, where the illusions behind 
film-making are undermined and dispelled. Some people think this is little more 
than directors sticking their heads up their behinds. But, with these three 
films at least, I find the extra layers make the film more affecting; they make 
me think more.

Harvey Pekar died last year at the age of 70 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/13/harvey-pekar-dies-american-splendor>
. He was still married to his third wife, and on his third bout of cancer and 
anti-depressants. Like I said, he didn't do happy. But he did funny and truth, 
and so does this movie – beautifully.
 