
It’s not too surprising to discover that Dude, Where’s My Car? has a poor, 
poor rating of18% on Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/dude_wheres_my_car/>. Many people detest this 
film. Critics point to its daft title and ludicrous plot; some scenes make no 
sense andseem to belong in an entirely different movie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DqUXnKrfPMU>; the two leads are party-obsessed 
man-children who make theAmerican Pie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/oct/12/culture.peterbradshaw> boys look 
like over-achieving intellectuals; much of the humour relies on repetition and 
an attitude towards gender, sexuality and non-American accents that is, to put 
it generously, schoolboyish. It’s hard to disagree with any of this, and yet: I
adore Dude, Where’s My Car? 

Its two central characters, Jesse and Chester, are a pair of easygoing stoners 
who wake up one morning after a night on the tiles with no memory of what they 
got up to the previous evening. They discover Jesse’s car has been mislaid, and 
with it the anniversary presents they’d bought for their girlfriends – and so 
begins the duo’s mission to retrace their steps and get to the bottom of 
several mysteries. How did they get themselves in such a terrible state? Why is 
their kitchen cupboard filled with a year’s supply of pudding? Why are they 
being pursued by a pair of Scandanavian dudes in disco vests, a group of babes 
in black jumpsuits, and a nerdily intense UFO cult? And, above all other 
pressing matters, where is Jesse’s car?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmy-guilty-pleasure-dude-wheres-my-car%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F18%2F1395159837847%2Fb64d558d-784c-4848-a1c9-315251733351-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20guilty%20pleasure%3A%20Dude%2C%20Where's%20My%20Car%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmy-guilty-pleasure-dude-wheres-my-car%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20guilty%20pleasure%3A%20Dude%2C%20Where%27s%20My%20Car%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F20%2Fmy-guilty-pleasure-dude-wheres-my-car%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F18%2F1395159837847%2Fb64d558d-784c-4848-a1c9-315251733351-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext Collection/Sportsphoto 
A large part of DWMC’s appeal lies with its two lead performances; Ashton 
Kutcher and Seann William Scott are both fine comic actors deserving far more 
credit than they usually get. When the film was released in 2000, Kutcher was 
best known for his role in That 70s Show, Scott for his portrayal of the 
obnoxious Stifler in American Pie. While their roles in Dude were by no means a 
stretch for either actor, it’s hard to imagine anyone else playing these 
loveable idiots with quite so much energy, conviction and warmth. As a heroic 
duo, Jesse and Chester share DNA withBill and Ted 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0096928/>, Harry and Lloyd 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0109686/>, Cheech & Chong 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2pXxHW1DHs> – and perhaps a faint trace of 
Withnail and Marwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/14/favourite-film-withnail-and-i>
, another pair of chemically rattled ne’er-do-wells who could have benefited 
from adopting some of Jesse and Chester’s vim, brio and indefatigable optimism.

Like Withnail and I, DWMC is hugely quotable; it’s packed with so many 
throw-away gags and Dadaist one liners it’s impossible to absorb them all in a 
single sitting. Thankfully, the film rewards repeat viewings in spades; it’s 
essentially a series of set-pieces, and admittedly not every scene quite hits 
the mark, but there are many that get funnier with every watch. Highlights 
include Jesse and Chester’s efforts to explain to each otherwhat their new back 
tattoos say <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EFFqwFv6j-Y>; their ham-fisted 
infiltration of the UFO cult <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RenOUsGvS90>; 
Brent Spiner’s appearance as amalevolent ostrich farmer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gvZvmvxBCag>; and, pick of the bunch, a thwarted
attempt to order Chinese food 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=Kp5nUQkgWIc> from an 
un-cooperative drive-through. Seann William Scott’s face in this last scene, 
fluctuating between joy, confusion, and anguish, is worth the price of 
admission on its own.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKp5nUQkgWIc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKp5nUQkgWIc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKp5nUQkgWIc&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kp5nUQkgWIc>

DWMC Director Danny Leiner went on to make Harold and Kumar Go to White Castle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwP5E15VzRM>, a far more critically respected 
entry in the two-stoners-have-to-do-something canon – but for my money it never 
quite reaches Dude’s gloriously idiotic highs. Some time ago, I was lucky 
enough to live with a group of friends who shared my enthusiasm, and several 
late nights and early mornings featured ritual viewings and in-jokey debates 
about its subtexts, disjointed timeline and the location of Jesse’s car. I 
suppose that’s where most of the guilt part of this guilty pleasure comes in; I 
could have been spending that time far more wisely – but then I wouldn’t have 
had nearly as much stupid, stupid fun.

• More from My guilty pleasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/guilty-pleasure>
 