
As a child growing up in the 70s there wasn’t a whole lot of choice about what 
to watch on TV. There were some after-school programmes, the odd Saturday show 
and there was a lot of test card time. I was good at entertaining myself: I 
liked being outside, I liked making things, drawing things and reading, but 
there were also times when I really wanted to justwatch something. I was often 
sodesperate to watch something that I would sit with my eyes glued to the test 
card, waiting for the weird static picture of the girl and the clown-headed 
creature to vanish and for a film to begin.
 Lauren Child: growing up in the 70s there wasn’t a whole lot of choice about 
what to watch on TV. Photograph: Polly Borland/PR 
The films I watched were all in black and white, because we only had a black 
and white television; sometimes cowboy films, sometimes musicals, often 
thrillers. I got to know Bette Davis, Cary Grant, Shirley Temple, and countless 
other actors, but the onlydirector whose name I ever remember becoming familiar 
with was, Alfred Hitchcock.


He used costume and interiors to create a rich visual experience, sets 
beautifully designed to lead the eye around the screen seeding silent clues. He 
understood that thrillers are more thrilling when interrupted by the domestic, 
that suspense is heightened when drama is broken by chit chat and comedy. We 
are taken back to normality and reminded of what is at stake.


Hitchcock is responsible in large part for my desire to write a thriller for 
children. When I began to sketch out the first Ruby Redfort book I returned to 
his films, in particularNorth By Northwest 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/North_by_Northwest>, Rear Window 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rear_Window>, Dial M for Murder 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dial_M_for_Murder> and To Catch a Thief 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048728/> – glamorous movies with sharp dialogue. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fmy-inspiration-lauren-child-alfred-hitchcock-ruby-redfort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423572731792%2F5780f358-87c5-4b23-85cb-1c6f8137974a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20%20inspiration%3A%20Lauren%20Child%20on%20Alfred%20Hitchcock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fmy-inspiration-lauren-child-alfred-hitchcock-ruby-redfort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20%20inspiration%3A%20Lauren%20Child%20on%20Alfred%20Hitchcock&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fmy-inspiration-lauren-child-alfred-hitchcock-ruby-redfort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423572731792%2F5780f358-87c5-4b23-85cb-1c6f8137974a-1020x612.jpeg>
 Lauren Child returned to her childhood obsession with Alfred Hitchcock’s films 
when she came to write Ruby Redfort, here witness the sheer glamour of Grace 
Kelly in Hitchcock’s thriller Rear Window. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/PARAMOUNT 
Hitchcock likes to throw his characters in at the deep end; North by Northwest 
pushes innocent by-stander, Roger Thornhill, into the path of ruthless 
murderers. The victim of mistaken identity, Thornhill doesn’t know what is 
going on,we don’t know what is going on and so we are on the run together, 
neither of us knowing who to trust.


I wanted to drop Ruby into this Hitchcock world, where glamour meets murder 
and car chases are followed by dinner. The wit is there, but so is the threat, 
and characters can make intelligent decisions yet still come unstuck.


The inspiration for the personality of 13-year-old Ruby also came from film. 
As a child I had seen Tatum O’Neal inPaper Moon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paper_Moon_%28film%29> and The Bad News Bears 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bad_News_Bears>, and Jodie Foster in numerous 
movies, most importantlyAlice Doesn’t Live Here Anymore 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alice_Doesn%27t_Live_Here_Anymore>, Freaky Friday 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freaky_Friday> and Bugsy Malone 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bugsy_Malone>. Both these child actors made a 
huge impression on me: they represented something that the child me wanted to 
be (actually still wants to be). They weren’t defined by their girlness, they 
were convincing characters, smart, savvy and fearless who happened to be girls.


These were the qualities I wanted Ruby Redfort to embody, that I wanted the 
reader to admire and envy in her because they, like I, wanted them for 
themselves.

 Feel the fear 
Lauren Child’s latest Ruby Redfort book is Feel the Fear 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/feel-the-fear.html>, find out about all the 
books in the series on Lauren’sRuby Redfort website <http://rubyredfort.com/>. 
Also read this interview with Lauren by BookCookie and ScribbleKeeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/dec/10/lauren-child-interview-ruby-redfort>
.

You can hear Lauren Child talk about Ruby Redfort (and other matters) at the 
Imagine children’s festival at London’s Southbank Centretoday at 3pm 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/lauren-child-2015-88852>. Lauren is 
also part of theEverybody into books 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/everybody-into-books-1000748> free 
all day event on Monday 16 Feb, where she’ll be reading her new book The New 
Small Person, brought to you byInclusive Minds <http://www.inclusiveminds.com/>.
Charlie and Lola’s Best Bestest Play runs until 22 February 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/charlie-and-lolas-best-bestes-88576>.


 * Discover everything we are doing in our Imagine children’s festival 
takeover week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/feb/15/imagine-childrens-festival-site-takeover-whats-happening>
.
 