
Football365 <http://www.football365.co.uk> 
 I love this site. It updates me on all the latest football information. I 
know the people behind it; I've known Danny Kelly for 15 years. When they 
floated it, they cited an article I'd written about how the internet was going 
to revolutionise the music business. They used that article to help articulate 
the Football 365 philosophy. The site represents what I love about the web - 
the medium's speciality is information-flow, and this site has really current 
news about what's happening in football.

Clickmusic <http://www.clickmusic.co.uk> 
 I own a percentage of this site. Every five minutes, music news is updated on 
it from around the world. They trawl through all the music sites, like nme.com 
or Rolling Stone and at least 15 different music places, and post up the news 
instantly. It's a brilliant way for me to find out what all my protegés are up 
to.

april skies <http://www.zipworld.com.au/~niina/jamc/> - an unofficial Jesus 
and Mary Chain site
The Jesus and Mary Chain are the first band I managed, and I love to keep up 
with its ex-members and to see what people are saying - there's a chat forum 
that keeps me entertained. It's run by Jesus and Mary Chain fanatics, and there 
are a group of about 50 who're always there. I've got a link to this site from 
my own"McGee's List" <http://www.creation.co.uk/mcgee/> on the Creation site, 
which I'm proud of, too, because I set it up against the prevailing 
anti-technology tide at the company a couple of years ago. It was recently 
voted Britain's second-best music site.

www.malcolm4mayor.com <http://www.malcolm4mayor.com>
 We're designing it this weekend. Malcolm McLaren is the only true independent 
candidate in the London mayoral election. We don't believe that the mayor 
should have any political allegiance. The site will be useful for anyone who 
wants to follow our campaign - there'll be newspaper articles up there, and 
bulletins about what Malcolm's up to and where he is at any given time.

 Alan McGee <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alan-mcgee> leaves his job as 
head of Creation records in June.
 