
It was impossible not to be moved by the death, last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-star-trek-actor-dies-car-crash>
, of Anton Yelchin: a winning 27-year-old who clearly had so much more to give. 
Later this month sees the release in the US ofStar Trek Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/may/21/star-trek-beyond-13-reasons-to-get-excited-about-the-new-trailer>
 – Yelchin’s most high-profile movie to be released posthumously. Next week, 
meanwhile, comes the DVD release ofGreen Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/green-room-review-horror-cannes-film-festival-2015-patrick-stewart>
, one of the most critically acclaimed of the actor’s recent efforts, and a 
movie whose success he, happily, lived to see.

Green Room: inside the punk Patrick Stewart thriller that's making people sick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/10/patrick-stewart-jeremy-saulnier-green-room-thriller-punks-v-fascists>
I met him in May last year, one sunny morning at the Cannes film festival, 
when he was friendly and funny, and perhaps a little fragile from the previous 
night’s party. When he first greeted me, his voice had the raw rasp of someone 
who had recently been singing at the top of their lungs. Perhaps he had. After 
all, the cast had good reason to celebrate. Jeremy Saulnier’s drama – a punkish 
follow-up to the director’s acclaimed debutBlue Ruin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/01/blue-ruin-review> – had premiered 
in the Director’s Fortnight to a riotous reception. In the film, Yelchin plays 
Pat, the bass player of punk band the Ain’t Rights, who find themselves trapped 
backstage at a neo-Nazi club as a gang of murderous skinheads, led by Patrick 
Stewart, lay siege.

Yelchin reported that the experience of working with the Trek elder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2012/apr/19/star-trek-captain-who-best>
 was “very inspiring”. “Not necessarily seeking advice from him, but just 
soaking in his being,” he said. “How he carries himself, what his values are at 
this point in life. He’s very gracious and very funny too ... We talked about 
Russian novels.”

Born in Leningrad, where his parents were acclaimed ice skaters, Yelchin was 
raised in the US, where they moved when he was six months old. At nine, he’d 
landed his first movie role, despite his parents “pushing me into sports … 
Acting was something I genuinely always loved,” he said. “It’s funny: when I 
have to be athletic for a film, I can do it. But if I go to play sports, I 
suck. My parents made me try and I was terrible. They tell me they saw me and 
said, ‘Oh no.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fanton-yelchin-interview-green-room-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78e7392d3fee56bae3ceb7549459886a947129c6%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20morning%20with%20Anton%20Yelchin%3A%20'I%20have%20an%20overabundance%20of%20emotion'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fanton-yelchin-interview-green-room-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20morning%20with%20Anton%20Yelchin%3A%20%27I%20have%20an%20overabundance%20of%20emotion%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fanton-yelchin-interview-green-room-cannes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78e7392d3fee56bae3ceb7549459886a947129c6%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Anton Yelchin, left in Green Room. Photograph: Altitude 
Anton Yelchin: actor of cherubic charm who inspired huge affection | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/19/anton-yelchin-cherubic-charm-star-trek-like-crazy-green-room>
Yelchin, a fluent Russian speaker, was eager to speak about Russian 
literature, to which he said he felt connected, to its “mood, the emotional 
nature … The things I read in Crime and Punishment,” he continued, “I don’t 
know if it’s because it’s Russian, or because it’sDostoevsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fyodordostoevsky> and everyone reads him and 
says ‘Holy fucking shit!’, but in terms of being proud of a cultural heritage,
that’s what I’m proud of. There are certain things about the Russian culture 
and the Russian ethos that I can relate to. It’s an overabundance of emotion.”

At their core, Tarkovsky's films are incredibly passionate about our being and 
our presence on this earth

The same, he said, goes for cinema, too. “You can see that in Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/16/andrei-tarkovsky-its-time-to-immerse-yourself-in-the-work-of-a-true-auteur>
. No matter how cerebral the films are, at their core they are incredibly 
emotional. The emotion is shrouded in the magic and mystery of his film-making, 
but when I watch them I am so moved by them because, at their core, they are 
incredibly passionate about our being and our presence on this earth.”

He sipped a sorely-needed coffee and puzzled at the thought. “It’s a very 
Russian thing to be incredibly cerebral, and simultaneously have this 
overabundance of feeling. I relate to that. My favourite composers are people 
likeRachmaninov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/nov/19/symphony-guide-rachmaninov-third>
. I listen to that and it’s like: Fuck! That’s too much feeling!”

Extremes of emotion can also be found in the music of Green Room … though not 
exactly Rachmaninov. Like his director, Yelchin was, he said, a passionate and 
knowledgeable fan of punk, playing guitar for a time in a punk band calledthe 
Hammerheads <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yAXahUtSBuo> with Tom Petty’s son. 
“I love that music,” he nodded with a happy grin. “I love thrash, grindcore, 
Cowcatcher and hardcore. My band does a lot of 30-second songs, 90s, late-80s 
hardcore. It has more shifts. I love learning all that stuff on bass. And I 
love Dead Kennedys.Nazi Punks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-MkRuV0aCcI> is 
one of my favourite songs.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyAXahUtSBuo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyAXahUtSBuo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyAXahUtSBuo&media=>
Anton Yelchin performs with the Hammerheads 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yAXahUtSBuo> 
The song features in one of the best scenes of the movie as does a repeated 
question about desert island groups. Yelchin reported his as being the Misfits 
andBad Brains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/14/ian-makaye-bad-brains-hardcore> 
– as far as punk went, at least. He also professed love forBB King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/15/bb-king-obituary-mississippi-farmhand-blues-legend>
 “and Ray Charles I listen to all day”.

For someone defined on screen by the sensitivity of their presence, and who 
took his work – and that of others – very seriously, it was encouraging how 
lighthearted Yelchin seemed in the flesh. For instance, he joked about being a 
skinhead in disguise, then nervously clarified that he was kidding, perhaps 
remembering the fate of the likes ofLars von Trier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/19/cannes-film-festival-2011-lars-von-trier-banned>
, declared persona non grata from the festival after a badly received gag about 
sympathising with Hitler. “I’ll get banned from Cannes! Yeah, seriously, I was 
kidding just then. I’m Jewish for Christ’s sake!”

It's important to consider the ideological roots of Nazism so we can 
understand it, fight it and enlighten people

In fact, proximity to the Nazi paraphernalia on the set troubled him deeply. 
“Seeing all the images Jeremy [Saulnier] collected … I don’t like that. I think 
it’s important to consider the historical and ideological roots of that belief 
so we can understand it, so we can fight it and enlighten people as to why it’s 
so fucking ridiculous, but I don’t go to seek it out. Some people fetishise 
that kind of thing and I don’t. I find it really repulsive. Being around the 
props and the stuff makes you feel bad, seeing the swastikas every day – it’s 
gross.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKdVYUXyBzU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKdVYUXyBzU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyKdVYUXyBzU&media=>
Watch a trailer for Green Room <https://youtu.be/yKdVYUXyBzU> 
Green Room <https://www.theguardian.com/film/green-room> is the kind of edgy, 
credible material in which Yelchin shone, light years from the blockbuster fame 
Star Trek delivered in 2009, as he entered his 20s. He spoke with affection of 
doing a tiny film, Porto, in Portugal earlier that year. “One hundredth ... no, 
sorry,one thousandth of the budget of a Star Trek. But there are certain kinds 
of film you can’t make for a quarter of a million dollars. Star Trek would be a 
different movie if it cost a quarter of a million dollars. It’d just be us on a 
cardboard set.”

Yelchin became most enthused about the franchise not when I brought up getting 
his own action figure, but when he spoke of the technical training he had 
absorbed just being on set. “It’s a good group of people. I’d feel differently 
if it wasn’t. If it wasn’t JJ [Abrams], I’d probably be less inclined to feel 
that way but I still think everything is something you learn from, even if it 
sucks. Especially if it sucks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fanton-yelchin-interview-green-room-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2378d587a5014cc58c2e4b197b1d86d48463bf%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20morning%20with%20Anton%20Yelchin%3A%20'I%20have%20an%20overabundance%20of%20emotion'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fanton-yelchin-interview-green-room-cannes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20morning%20with%20Anton%20Yelchin%3A%20%27I%20have%20an%20overabundance%20of%20emotion%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fanton-yelchin-interview-green-room-cannes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b2378d587a5014cc58c2e4b197b1d86d48463bf%2F0_0_3504_2336%2F3504.jpg>
 Anton Yelchin with Imogen Poots in Green Room. Photograph: Altitude 
Anton Yelchin cannot be replaced – there is no one as normal left in Hollywood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/anton-yelchin-cannot-be-replaced-there-is-no-one-as-normal-left-in-hollywood>
Sadly, we shall never see the fruits of this careful observation: Yelchin was 
due to shoot his directorial debut, Travis, later this month. Instead, we have 
his wonderful performances to savour, including in five as-yet-unseen films. 
And I’m lucky enough to have the memory of 20 optimistic minutes in the company 
of this charming and confident young man. Slightly wary, too.

“And seriously,” he said, shaking my hand goodbye, “I was just kidding about 
the skinhead thing…”

 * Green Room is released on DVD on 12 July; Star Trek Beyond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-trek-beyond> is in cinemas from 21 July 
in Australia, and 22 July in the UK and US
 