
Some years ago, while working as a district nurse at a GP practice, one of the 
receptionists came to tell me she had just taken a phone call from the son of a 
patient to say he had returned from the Dignitas clinic in Switzerland. His 
mother, who had recently been diagnosed with a neurological condition that 
would kill her slowly, and with loss of dignity and independence, had taken her 
life there.

The reception staff were shocked. I was shocked. My team was shocked. I was 
dismayed that this lady, who I had known for a number of years, had to go to 
another country to receive the care she wanted and to die earlier than she 
should have.

Let's talk about death: what does it mean to you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/11/lets-talk-about-death-what-does-it-mean-to-you>
The following day her GP asked me what Lily* had been up to over the past few 
days. You can tell from this perhaps that Lily was a lady who made demands on 
the surgery team. The GP was upset when I told her what had happened, and 
contacted Lily’s son.

I had known this lady for a number of years and looked after her husband when 
he returned from hospital after surgery. Lily would turn up at the surgery 
immaculately dressed and would not leave until she obtained what she thought 
would help him. I would sometimes receive a phone call from the surgery asking 
me to come back from my house calls to see her. I was not the only person at 
the surgery with whom she could be quite insistent. Yet even as she frustrated 
us all, I found it noble the way she fought for what she thought was best for 
her husband.

After he died I saw her only occasionally. A few years later her health 
deterioriated and I became involved in her care. Occasionally I found it 
frustrating when, in the middle of a clinic or housecall, I would be contacted 
to say Lily wanted to see or speak to me. Many a day on my way home I would 
have to call into her house to reassure her or deal with a problem.

After her diagnosis she was matter of fact as we discussed plans for her care 
and how to deal with her condition. She was living on her own and had no 
intention of “burdening” her children. Despite the fact that she could be 
difficult, I found her likeable with a very dry sense of humour and fun.

Assisted dying: what can the UK learn from places where it is legal?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/12/assisted-dying-uk-learn-places-legal-oregon-netherlands>
I found out later that before she died she had bought a new outfit to travel 
in, and been to a favourite view she and her husband used to visit and to a 
favourite restaurant.

The point of telling this story is that I gained great insight into the 
courage and tenacity it takes to go to Dignitas and that there should be a way 
of assisting someone who is of firm mind to take their own life in these 
circumstances. Perhaps if she had felt she would have had control of the 
situation in this country Lily would not have found it necessary to take her 
own life at all; certainly she would have had a longer life. I feel privileged 
to have known a very brave woman, even if she could drive me to distraction.


 * Name has been changed 
If you would like to contribute to our Blood, sweat and tears series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/series/blood-sweat-and-tears> 
which is about memorable moments in a healthcare career, please read our
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailingsarah.johnson@theguardian.com 
<mailto:sarah.johnson@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
 