
The boss of EpiPen manufacturer Mylan Pharmaceuticals will attempt to shift 
blame for the company’s decision to implement huge price hikes on its 
lifesaving devices to health insurers and others at a congressional hearing 
Wednesday.


Heather Bresch, chief executive of Mylan, is set to appear before Congress to 
explainMylan’s pricing of EpiPen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/epipen-price-hike-mylan-new-york-investigation>
 and the profits the company has made off of the device.


Mylan CEO sold $5m worth of stock while EpiPen price drew scrutiny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/27/mylan-ceo-sold-stock-epipen-price-hike-heather-bresch>
Mylan came under scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/epipen-mylan-price-increase-senators-letter-warren-sanders>
 after it was reported that the company had increased the price of its devices, 
used to treat life-threatening allergic reaction, from $56.64 in 2007 to 
$317.82. Since EpiPens are usually sold as a two-pack, the total cost can be 
more than $600.

In her testimony to the House committee on oversight and government reform, 
Bresch is set to defend the price increases, noting that Mylan only makes about 
$50 in profit per pen while making the life-saving device available and raising 
awareness about anaphylaxis. Anaphylaxis is an allergic reaction that causes 
one’s airways to swell and close. Epinephrine, a drug which is used to treat 
anaphylaxis, is cheap but must be delivered in the proper dose. Mylan’s EpiPen 
quickly delivers a proper dose of epinephrine in emergency situations.

“For millions of families, the presence of an EpiPen Auto-Injector in a purse, 
briefcase, backpack or medicine cabinet is a source of enormous comfort and an 
invaluable insurance policy against a potential tragic event. It troubles me 
greatly that the EpiPen product has become a source of controversy,” Bresch 
wrote in prepared testimony released ahead of the meeting. “At the same time, 
the issue of EpiPens has two equally critical dimensions – price and access. 
With the current focus on pricing, I’m very concerned that the access part of 
the equation is being minimized.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fepipen-price-hike-mylan-ceo-congress-heather-bresch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba98b339f285467a1017e0f6916fe888c6ca74b%2F0_0_3000_2022%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mylan%20CEO%20expected%20to%20defend%20EpiPen%20price%20hikes%20before%20Congress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fepipen-price-hike-mylan-ceo-congress-heather-bresch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mylan%20CEO%20expected%20to%20defend%20EpiPen%20price%20hikes%20before%20Congress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fepipen-price-hike-mylan-ceo-congress-heather-bresch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ba98b339f285467a1017e0f6916fe888c6ca74b%2F0_0_3000_2022%2F3000.jpg>
 Heather Bresch, chief operating officer of Mylan Pharmacueticals, sits in her 
office in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania. Photograph: Dale Sparks/AP 
According to Bresch, Mylan has reached more than 80% more patients. She added 
that “approximately 85% of EpiPen patients pay less than $100 for a two-unit 
package and a majority pay less than $50”.

EpiPen is not the only product whose price Mylan has hiked. According to an 
investors’ note by a Wells Fargo senior analyst, David Maris, this year Mylan 
hiked prices of two dozen products by 20%. Since the drugs are used to treat 
afflictions such as irritable bowel syndrome, overactive bladder and 
gallstones, there was little coverage or outcry.

Mylan has insisted that its business model is not premised on price hikes and 
that the price hikes are due to the increase in costs of doing business in the 
US healthcare system.

In August, Bresch compared healthcare to the mortgage crisis. She explained 
that since EpiPens passed through various “hands”, such as retailers and 
pharmacy benefits managers, the cost became inflated by the time they reached 
the counters.

“What Mylan takes from that, our net sales is $274, so $137 per pen,” she said 
at the time.

On Wednesday, she attempted to once again explain the profit that Mylan makes 
off of EpiPens.

“I think many people incorrectly assume we make $600 off each EpiPen. This is 
simply not true. In the complicated world of pharmaceutical pricing, there is 
something known as the Wholesale Acquisition Cost, or WAC. The WAC for a 
two-unit pack of EpiPen Auto-Injectors is $608,” she said. “After rebates and 
various fees, Mylan actually receives $274. Then you must subtract our cost of 
goods, which is $69. This leaves a balance of $205. After subtracting all 
EpiPen Auto-Injector related costs, our profit is $100, or approximately $50 
per pen.”

That’s slightly less than the $56.64 that EpiPen cost when Mylan acquired its 
maker, Merck KGaA, in 2007.
 