
Mylan, the company that produces the EpiPen, will reduce the cost of its 
product for some patients through increased financial assistance, the company
announced 
<http://newsroom.mylan.com/2016-08-25-Mylan-Taking-Immediate-Action-to-Further-Enhance-Access-to-EpiPen-Epinephrine-Injection-USP-Auto-Injector>
 on Thursday.

However, the company did not promise to reduce its prices nor did it address 
the price hikes onits other products 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/business/consumer/epipen-maker-also-hiked-prices-slew-other-medications-n636981>
, which have seen increases ranging from 20% to 542%.

The announcement comes day after a number of lawmakers, including Bernie 
Sanders and Hillary Clinton, called on Mylan to reduce its prices.

EpiPens are used to administer medication to someone experiencing a 
life-threatening allergic reaction, or anaphylaxis.

EpiPen CEO hiked prices on two dozen products and got a 671% pay raise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/24/epipen-ceo-hiked-prices-heather-bresch-mylan>
To reduce the cost of its EpiPen auto-injector, Mylan will issue savings cards 
that will cover up to $300 of the cost. EpiPens are typically sold as a pair at 
a cost of $600.

Mylan is taking immediate action to ensure that those who need the EpiPen can 
get one, said Heather Bresch, Mylan’s chief executive officer. But the company 
did not say that it would reduce the price of its main product nor will it roll 
back any of the price increases implemented in the past nine years. In the last 
12 months alone, Mylan increased EpiPen’s price twice – each time by 15%. 
Instead, the company offered to increase financial assistance to those most in 
need.

In her statement, Bresch blamed insurance companies for shifting costs on 
patients and called on “all involved” to help address the US healthcare crisis.

“We recognize the significant burden on patients from continued, rising 
insurance premiums and being forced increasingly to pay the full list price for 
medicines at the pharmacy counter,”she said 
<http://newsroom.mylan.com/2016-08-25-Mylan-Taking-Immediate-Action-to-Further-Enhance-Access-to-EpiPen-Epinephrine-Injection-USP-Auto-Injector>
. 

In addition to issuing $300-savings cards, Mylan changed the policy on who 
will now be eligible for free EpiPens. Previously, families of four earning 
below $48,600 qualified for free EpiPens. That threshold will now be $97,200. 
Consumers will also soon be able to order their EpiPens directly from Mylan, 
which the company says will help reduce their costs. Mylan will continue to 
offer free EpiPens to schools.

The news comes just a day after Democratic presidential nominee Hillary 
Clinton issued a statement calling on Mylan to reduce the price of the EpiPen, 
saying: “It’s wrong when drug companies put profits ahead of patients.”

For my daughter, the EpiPen is a lifeline, not a luxury | Liz Richardson Voyles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/25/epipen-price-increase-mylan>
Even as Mylan takes steps to make its EpiPen more affordable, lawmakers have 
called on Bersch to appear beforeUS Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-congress> and explain why the price of 
EpiPen went up by 461% since Mylan acquired it in 2007.

“We are concerned that these drastic price increases could have a serious 
effect on the health and well-being of every day Americans,” senators Susan 
Collins and Claire McCaskill told Breschin a letter 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Health/senate-calls-epipen-maker-testify-price-hike/story?id=41624672>
. “As leaders of the Senate Special Committee on Aging, we are particularly 
concerned that seniors have access to EpiPen because, according to Mylan’s 
website, older Americans ‘may be at an increased risk of having a more severe 
anaphylactic reaction if they are exposed to biting and stinging insects’.”

They requested that Bresch testify within the next two weeks. 

Even as Mylan was announcing the steps that it is taking to make its EpiPen 
more affordable,Sarah Jessica Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sarah-jessica-parker> issued a statement 
announcing that she had terminated her relationship with the company. Earlier 
this year, the Sex and the City actress served as a spokesperson for Mylan, 
helping raise awareness about anaphylaxis and life-threatening allergies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fepipen-price-hike-savings-card-mylan-heather-bresch-congress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1576779a5589b48c6d31fefb53be3a2ab1179e6%2F0_72_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mylan%20to%20provide%20EpiPen%20cost%20assistance%20as%20CEO%20is%20asked%20to%20testify%20on%20price%20hike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fepipen-price-hike-savings-card-mylan-heather-bresch-congress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mylan%20to%20provide%20EpiPen%20cost%20assistance%20as%20CEO%20is%20asked%20to%20testify%20on%20price%20hike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fepipen-price-hike-savings-card-mylan-heather-bresch-congress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1576779a5589b48c6d31fefb53be3a2ab1179e6%2F0_72_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 On Thursday, Sarah Jessica Parker ended her relationship with Mylan. 
Photograph: Bebert Bruno/SIPA/REX 
“I was recently involved in an initiative to raise awareness for anaphylaxis. 
It’s a cause deeply important to my because of my son’s life-threatening peanut 
allergy. The epinephrine auto-injector is a vital part of our healthcare, as it 
is for the many who are at risk. I recently learned that the price of the 
EpiPen has been systematically raised by Mylan to a point that renders the 
medication cost-prohibitive for countless people,” Parker said in a statement, 
which sheposted on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BJh35t2D3d8/?taken-by=sarahjessicaparker&hl=en> on 
Thursday morning.

“I’m left disappointed, saddened and deeply concerned by Mylan’s actions. I do 
not condone this decision and I have ended my relationship with Mylan as a 
direct result of it. I hope they will seriously consider the outpouring of 
voices of those millions of people who are dependent on the device, and take 
swift action to lower the cost to be more affordable for whom it is a 
life-saving necessity.”
 