
Anonymous fans of Paul Schrader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-schrader> briefly launched a social 
media campaign railing against a studio’s alleged decision to re-edit the 
celebrated film-maker’s latest movie without his permission.

The “Save Paul Schrader’s Dying of the Light” Facebook page referenced an 
espionage thriller starring Nicolas Cage andAnton Yelchin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anton-yelchin> which had received early 
interest from a number of prestigious festivals. Shot in Romania, Australia, 
Kenya and the US, it’s the intriguing story of a middle-aged CIA agent battling 
dementia as he tracks an elusive, Bin Laden-like terrorist leader.


Variety first reported 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/mysterious-facebook-petition-asks-fans-to-save-paul-schrader-movie-1201297879/>
 the existence of the page and posted a screen shot. But the page now seems to 
have beenremoved from Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Save-Paul-Schraders-Dying-of-the-Light/891914370875366>
.


It reportedly stated: “The truth about Dying of the Light … The movie was 
taken away from Paul Schrader! The movie is now recut and the control of the 
film was taken away from Mr Schrader two months ago. Since this was a project 
Mr Schrader conceived, wrote and directed, we petition online the producers, 
Grindstone Pictures, Lionsgate Films and Red Granite Film to make sure Schrader 
and Cage’s version of the film is seen to the public as the director intended! 
The fate of the film now rests in the hands of Grindstone/Lionsgate and Red 
Granite. The name of everyone who likes this page will be added to the 
petition.”

Dying of the Light was originally written by Schrader in 2010 and had Danish 
film-makerNicolas Winding Refn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolas-winding-refn> on board as an 
executive producer. Schrader, the screenwriter of Taxi Driver and Raging Bull, 
and who directed American Gigolo, has a history of misfortune with studios: in 
2004 he lost control ofDominion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jul/13/edinburghfilmfestival2005.festivals>
, a prequel to horror classic The Exorcist, which was later completely reshot 
by a different director, Renny Harlin, and released in cinemas.
 Film director and writer Paul Schrader. Photograph: Linda Nylind/Guardian 
New York film festival director Kent Jones told Variety that Dying of the 
Light featured one of Cage’s best performances in years, and had been a genuine 
candidate for inclusion in September’s 52nd edition of the festival. “I think 
he’s amazing,” Jones said of Cage’s turn. “He’s extremely disciplined and 
focused. When he’s working with a director who’s really working closely with 
him, he becomes very powerful. You remember what a powerful actor he is.” 
However, Jones claimed the studio Lionsgate,which picked up US rights 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/red-granite-boards-paul-schraders-dying-of-the-light-1201127458/>
 via its direct-to-video subsidiary Grindstone, was denying all knowledge of 
the movie.

Dying of the Light was also set for a premiere at the Rome film festival next 
month, with Schrader due to receive a lifetime achievement award, but 
organisers withdrew the invitation when they discovered the film-maker’s 
project was to be re-edited.

Schrader, Cage and Refn have so far failed to make any public comment on the 
matter, nor have Lionsgate or Red Granite made any statement.


 * 
• Lindsay Lohan criticised by Canyons director Paul Schrader for ‘turning her 
back’ on movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/26/lindsay-lohan-canyons-paul-schrader>

 * • Xan Brooks interviews Paul Schrader in 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/mar/23/1>  