
Oscar-winner Natalie Portman is to become the latest young female Hollywood 
actor tomove into directing 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/24/entertainment-us-natalieportman-idUSBRE96N12920130724>
 with a film adaptation of Israeli novelist Amos Oz's memoirA Tale of Love and 
Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/11/featuresreviews.guardianreview>.

The book, which has been translated into 28 languages and has sold more than a 
million copies worldwide, details Oz's childhood in Jerusalem in the chaotic 
period at the end of theBritish Mandate for Palestine 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/British_Mandate_for_Palestine_%28legal_instrument%29>
, as well as the writer's experiences during the early years of the state of 
Israel and teenage years on a kibbutz. Portman, who was born in Jerusalem to an 
Israeli father and an American mother, will also take a supporting role as Oz's 
mother.

Oz told Reuters he had been helping with the film's screenplay and expected 
Portman to arrive inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> in 
September for pre-production. He said the true-life tale was expected to shoot 
in January 2014.

"She read A Tale of Love and Darkness and asked me for the rights to make a 
film adaptation around five or six years ago," he said. "I agreed because of my 
high esteem for her work. She's an excellent actor."

Portman has not yet made any public comment on the project. The 32-year-old 
won the best actress Oscar in 2011 for her turn as a troubled ballet dancer in 
Darren Aronofsky's splintered psychological dramaBlack Swan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137726/black-swan>. She joins a growing 
list of female Hollywood stars who are venturing behind the camera.Ellen Page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/03/ellen-page-interview-the-east> is 
to make her directorial debut next year with Miss Stevens, starring Anna Faris 
as a teacher chaperoning a mob of high school students to a state drama 
competition, while Bridesmaids'sMelissa McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melissa-mccarthy> will co-direct and star in 
the raunchy comedy Tammy, also next year.
 