
The Israeli writer Amos Oz, in his prize-winning memoir A Tale of Love and 
Darkness, tells how a young girl, Fania, burns with such moral fervour that she 
cries out against the allure of a pretty painting of a shepherdess that hangs 
in her home. She sees it as a lie, Oz writes, because she knows that real 
shepherdesses are dressed in rags and scarred by cold and hunger and because 
she feels “that to ignore suffering is almost as bad as inflicting it”. The 
fiery Fania was Oz’s mother and now her part is to be played on screen by
Natalie Portman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman>, one 
Hollywood star who may just match the intensity of such a fearless spirit.

At the Cannes film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival>, both Portman’s spirit 
and her creative talent will be celebrated when her screen adaptation of the Oz 
memoir receives its world premiereon 18 May. The event will also mark a bold 
turn in Portman’s career; the actress, who won an Oscar in 2011 for her leading 
role inBlack Swan, has not only written and directed the new film, but has also 
insisted on making it in Hebrew. Her producer Ram Bergman explained: “She said, 
‘It’s got to be a love letter in Hebrew.’” When he pointed out how much harder 
it would make things, she told him she did not care. So far, the film has no 
distribution deal in the US.

Portman, 33, bought the rights to the Oz memoir eight years ago. Since then, 
she has spent much of her free time developing her $4m version. The story, 
which centres on Oz’s troubled relationship with his mother and with his 
coverage of the Israeli-Palestine conflict, clearly has a firm grip on her 
imagination, yet it may not be a slavish translation to the cinema screen. The 
author, Portman says, has given her permission to create a fresh 
interpretation: “He said: ‘The book exists. Don’t make a film of the book, go 
make your own piece.’”

As a teenager in 1999, Portman found fame in the role of the courageous Queen 
Padme in the Star Wars film,The Phantom Menace, and she seems to have been 
happy to fight battles ever since. In 2009 she adopted a vegan lifestyle and 
she now refuses to wear feathers, leather and fur. Last week she told the 
American entertainment press that she opposed Binyamin Netanyahu’s regime in
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>. “I’m very much against 
Netanyahu. Against. I am very, very upset and disappointed that he was 
re-elected. I find his racist comments horrific,” she said. However, in the US 
there was probably more fuss about her revelation that she is not now sure 
where her Oscar is. “I think it’s in the safe or something. I don’t know. I 
haven’t seen it in a while,” she told theHollywood Reporter. She went on to 
suggest that, like the golden statues in the story of Abraham, Oscars are 
worshipped as “false idols”.

Israeli-born Portman grew up on Long Island in sheltered comfort, knowing 
nothing, she has said, about poverty. In 1994 she acted in Luc Besson’s thriller
Léon: The Professional, a hard-nut story about a hitman who becomes tutor to a 
vengeful 12-year-old orphan. Praised for its style by some critics, and popular 
with audiences, it was criticised elsewhere for its exploitative use of a 
vulnerable child character. Roles inHeat, Beautiful Girls and Woody Allen’s 
musical comedyEveryone Says I Love You followed swiftly.

After Star Wars, Portman took a break from acting in 1999 to study psychology 
at Harvard. She appears to have returned to these academic instincts when she 
faced the job of producing a screenplay: “My process from school is to sort of 
handwrite my structure … and revise it and everything, and then once I have 
that, then to start actually writing it at the computer.”

Kenneth Branagh, Portman’s director in the 2011 spectacular Thor, also 
remembers a “formidable and occasionally forbidding kind of concentration”, 
although he tries not to suggest she is humourless, adding: “She certainly has 
a ticklish sense of humour.”

Other films include the 2004 film of Patrick Marber’s Closer and the 2008 
Tudor drama,The Other Boleyn Girl.

Portman’s careful path through the vainglory of Hollywood invites comparisons 
with an earlier child star, Jodie Foster: after appearing as children in 
popular hits as well as in violent adult films (while Portman madeLéon, Foster 
hadTaxi Driver), both went back to education, before identifying themselves 
with serious causes and becoming directors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fnatalie-portman-star-wars-star-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431123014313%2F5c04f64f-e909-44c5-b613-0d8b8717de07-1670x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Natalie%20Portman%3A%20from%20Star%20Wars%20to%20star%20of%20the%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fnatalie-portman-star-wars-star-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Natalie%20Portman%3A%20from%20Star%20Wars%20to%20star%20of%20the%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmay%2F10%2Fnatalie-portman-star-wars-star-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431123014313%2F5c04f64f-e909-44c5-b613-0d8b8717de07-1670x2040.jpeg>
 Natalie Portman in Léon. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
This route is not unusual these days. Top-flight film actors all have a 
political platform at their disposal and, where once only a few stars each 
generation made the transition to Republican politics – from Shirley Temple 
through Ronald Reagan to Clint Eastwood and Arnold Schwarzenegger – now a fleet 
of A-listers is out there espousing liberal or humanitarian views, from Emma 
Watson and George Clooney to Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt.

The public arguments may not always be watertight, but the stances are often 
deeply felt and potentially risky. When Scarlett Johansson agreed to promote 
Sodastream, an Israeli company with a controversial factory on the West Bank,
she was criticised for also holding a position as an Oxfam ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/16/scarlett-johansson-stands-by-sodastream-deal>
. Similarly, as a face of the fashion and beauty house Dior, Portman faced 
difficulties when designerJohn Galliano was caught making antisemitic rants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/08/john-galliano-guilty-racism-antisemitism>
 in 2011. Forgiveness, Portman argues, is the best approach when someone admits 
they made a terrible mistake. Besides, Dior was funding education projects for 
young girls in Kenya that were important to her.

In November, Portman turned her back on Los Angeles to set up home in Paris 
with her three-year-old son Aleph and his father, her husband Benjamin 
Millepied, the 37-year-old French ballet dancer and choreographer. The couple 
met on the set ofBlack Swan. Asked whether she was nervous, as a Jew, about 
living in Paris after the recent attacks, Portman replied that after an early 
childhood in Israel she considered herself hardened to the idea of danger.

Fans of the outspoken and graceful Portman can watch her speaking English in 
two other forthcoming releases. She appears alongside Christian Bale in 
Terrence Malick’s mysteriousKnight of Cups, which premiered at Berlin earlier 
this year to fairly bemused audiences. Portman is also to star in Gavin 
O’Connor’sJane Got a Gun. This film, out late in the summer, also proved a 
tricky introduction to producing because its first director,the Scot Lynne 
Ramsay, walked off the set at an early stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/12/lynne-ramsay-jane-got-a-gun-lawsuit-settle>
. “I can only imagine something very difficult was going on for her, and it was 
devastating,” Portman has said.

Acting, rather than directing, seems to be top priority at the moment, 
although Portman’s company, Handsomecharlie Films, has a crusading documentary,
Eating Animals, based on Jonathan Safran Foer’s book, coming out this year.

Recent interest in Hollywood has focused on a dark new project that appears to 
have caught Portman in its web. Alex Garland, the British 
writer-turned-director who madeEx Machina, is thought to have cast her in 
Annihilation, the first of a futuristic trilogy based on the books of novelist 
Jeff VanderMeer. The story is believed to revolve around a doomed scientific 
expedition into an abandoned location known as Area X.

There is no sign yet of a light-hearted Judd Apatow caper on her schedule, but 
there is, unexpectedly, another musical: next year Portman will star alongside 
Michael Fassbender inWeightless. This is another Malick film, and so is 
unlikely to be either mainstream or full of feelgood numbers. Portman herself 
has recently indicated that her determinedly sober attitude to life as an adult 
star was inspired by something horrible and nameless that happened to a close 
friend in Israel in 2003, while she was in her senior year at Harvard. It 
convinced her, she said, that she had an obligation to do some good if she 
could.

MY LITERARY INSPIRATION

Salma Hayek

The Prophet, Kahlil Gibran

When her animated film of this 1923 bestseller premiered at Cannes last year, 
Hayek told the press it reminded her of her Lebanese grandfather: “It was like 
my grandfather was talking to me about life and teaching me through this book.” 
She spent four years developing the project.

Scarlett Johansson

Summer Crossing, Truman Capote 

An adaptation of one of Capote’s first novels is the actress’s directorial 
debut. Shooting in New York City later this year, Johansson has said: “Bringing 
this story to the screen as my full-length directorial debut is a life dream 
and deep privilege.”

Reese Witherspoon 

Luckiest Girl Alive, Jessica Knoll

After successful screen versions of Gone Girl and Wild, Witherspoon’s company 
has settled on Knoll’s latest novel, about a New Yorker with a dark secret.

Lupita Nyong’o 

Americanah, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie

The Oscar-winning Kenyan actress will work with producer Brad Pitt for an 
adaptation of this award-winning 2013 novel. Nyong’o will also star.

Anne Hathaway

The Lifeboat, Charlotte Rogan

The actress is producing an adaptation of this 2012 novel about a young widow 
on trial for murder in 1914. Hathaway is also to star.
 