
Amid a growing national outcry against what many see as public symbols of 
white supremacy, the state ofTennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee> on Monday honored one of its 
most controversial and infamous native sons: Nathan Bedford Forrest.

New Orleans mayor lays out broad plan to rid city of Confederate relics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/12/new-orleans-confederate-statues-mitch-landrieu>
As per a 1971 
<http://www.knoxnews.com/opinion/columnists/tom-humphrey-winds-of-change-could-blow-away-forrest-honors_68332711?_ga=1.238821440.1745898166.1436809838>
 state law, Tennessee’s Republican governor proclaimed 13 July Nathan Bedford 
Forrest Day. But a debate over how or whether to honor Forrest,a civil war 
cavalry general 
<http://www.civilwar.org/education/history/biographies/nathan-bedford-forrest.html?referrer=https://www.google.com/>
 and slave trader and key figure in the founding of the Ku Klux Klan, has grown 
increasingly heated following the apparently racially motivated massacre of 
nine black Americans at Emanuel AME church in Charleston, South Carolina, last 
month.

“Today means nothing to me, it means nothing to the people in this city,” said 
Myron Lowery, city council chairman in Memphis, where 63% of the city’s 653,000 
residents are black.

The council voted unanimously to begin a legal process to exhume Forrest’s 
remains from a city park, which untiltwo years ago was named after the general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/20/ku-klux-klan-memphis-rally>. The 
city is also attempting to remove a statue of Forrest.

“It is a symbol of racism, of bigotry, and hatred – there’s no need to honor a 
man that massacred people at Fort Pillow, there’s no need to honor a man who 
received his millions of dollars and fame from being a slave-trader,” said 
Lowery, speaking passionately about the need to move the general’s remains to 
Elmwood cemetery, where he was originally buried.

Forrest was 40 when he volunteered for the Confederate army. He had already 
become one of the wealthiest men in the south, rising from poverty to riches 
through the Tennessee slave trade. He is remembered as a brilliant tactician,
violent, ruthless and cunning 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/roadshow/fts/palmsprings_200801A41.html>, who rose 
from private to general.

Two events have fuelled more than a century of controversy around his legacy: 
the battle of Fort Pillow, and his involvement with the Ku Klux Klan.

In April 1864 at Fort Pillow, about 60 miles north of Memphis, Forrest ordered 
his force of 2,500 men to overrun a position held by fewer than 600 soldiers, 
among them many newly freed slaves. Just 62 black soldiers survived the attack, 
which was called a “massacre <http://www.nps.gov/abpp/battles/tn030.htm>” by 
Union troops. Forrest was later questioned by Congress forwar crimes 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/roadshow/fts/palmsprings_200801A41.html>. 

After the war, Forrest became the first leader of the KKK, a Grand Wizard. The 
secret society, founded bysix Confederate soldiers 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/roadshow/fts/palmsprings_200801A41.html>, would grow 
to include violent independent chapters throughout the country. It exists today 
as the oldest group in America organized around racial hate.

The debate over how prominently Forrest should figure in Tennessee history is 
a recurring one, but it has grown especially loud following the Charleston 
massacre, saidUniversity of Tennessee geography professor Derek Alderman 
<http://geography.utk.edu/about-us/faculty/dr-derek-alderman/>. 

“We are in the midst of some very dramatic reinterpretation and challenging of 
how we remember the Confederacy and how we remember certain parts of the 
south’s past,” said Alderman, a cultural geographer who studies, among other 
things, how public memorials relate to African American history.

Alderman believes that symbols such as the Confederate flag and even figures 
such as Forrest have been “appropriated and brought into the present in such a 
way they have a very hostile meaning for certain people, particularly African 
Americans”.

“There hasn’t always been a critical discussion of how those symbols are 
used,” he said, “and how they are used in fact that could create a sense of 
alienation and pain in certain people.”

The executive director of the Tennessee Historical Society, Ann Toplovich 
<http://www.tennesseehistory.org/Staff.htm>, said she had “no idea” such 
memorial days existed “until publicity related to the terrible events in 
Charleston brought attention to such proclamations”.
The debate over how prominently Forrest should figure in state history extends 
to the capitol building, where his bust sits in the statehouse. The state’s 
Republican governor, Bill Haslam, said on Monday he anticipated a “re-look” at 
legislation that honored Forrest.


“If we’re only going to honor a certain number of Tennesseans, it’s like the 
bust in the capitol, I’m not sure Nathan Bedford Forrest should be one of those 
folks,” Haslam toldWKRN-TV 
<http://wkrn.com/2015/07/13/gov-haslam-anticipates-legislation-will-relook-at-proclamations-like-nathan-bedford-forrest-day/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fnathan-bedford-forrest-day-tennessee-racism-civil-war-kkk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b6babf835e2dd962430df55f601324bd199e50c%2F0_0_4680_3000%2F4680.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nathan%20Bedford%20Forrest%20Day%20honoring%20key%20figure%20in%20KKK%20divides%20Tennesseans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fnathan-bedford-forrest-day-tennessee-racism-civil-war-kkk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nathan%20Bedford%20Forrest%20Day%20honoring%20key%20figure%20in%20KKK%20divides%20Tennesseans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fnathan-bedford-forrest-day-tennessee-racism-civil-war-kkk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b6babf835e2dd962430df55f601324bd199e50c%2F0_0_4680_3000%2F4680.jpg>
 Mike Goza, left, helps Mike Junor drape a Confederate flag over the base of 
the statue and tomb of Nathan Bedford Forrest. Photograph: Mike Brown/AP 
South Carolina's Confederate flag comes down as history of hate meets modernity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
Like the Confederate battle flag, which has come to symbolize white supremacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/10/selma-alabama-march-confederate>
 to many, references to Forrest can seem omnipresent.

Tennessee has a Nathan Bedford Forrest 
<http://tnstateparks.com/parks/about/nathan-bedford-forrest> state park. In 
Florida in 2013, Nathan Bedford Forrest high school wasrenamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/17/florida-school-kkk-change-name> 
after a 160,000-signature petition pressured local leaders.Forrest County in 
Mississippi <http://msgw.org/forrest/public_html/history/forrest.html> was 
named for the general.

There is fervent opposition to removing symbols associated with the civil war. 
One of the larger recent rallies drew 2,000 vehicles in Ocala, Florida, to an 
event calling for the return of the Confederate battle flag 
<http://www.tampabay.com/news/humaninterest/confederate-flag-rally-draws-thousands-in-ocala/2237102>
 to a historical display at the McPherson governmental complex. The county 
commission removed it after the shooting in Charleston.

In city of Tyler, Texas 
<http://www.cbs19.tv/story/29527640/east-texans-reacts-to-confederate-flag-rally>
, where about 100,000 people live 100 miles east of Dallas, dozens rallied to 
support the Confederate flag when the city considered removing it. On18 July 
<http://www.wyff4.com/news/KKK-rally-still-on-despite-Confederate-flags-removal/34109556>
, the KKK will rally in South Carolina, even though the state’s legislature has 
removed the flag from the grounds of its capitol in Columbia.

Back in Memphis, on Sunday hundreds rallied in support of the Forrest statue 
the city council has agreed to remove.
 