
ITV's live National Television Awards coverage attracted just over 6 million 
viewers on Wednesday, a slightly bigger audience than last yearon the night Ant 
and Dec picked up their 13th entertainment presenter gong in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/23/doctor-who-matt-smith-national-television-awards>
 – and the landmark prize to boot.

The National Television Awards averaged 6.2 million viewers and a 27.3% 
audience share between 7.30pm and 10pm, a slight upturn on2013's five-year low 
of 5.9 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/24/itv-national-television-awards-tv-ratings>
.

But this was still below the 7.4 million viewers and 30% share for host Dermot 
O'Leary's hosting of the O2 Arena event in 2010.

Competition on Wednesday included BBC1's Waterloo Road (2.4 million/10.7%), 
BBC2's Winterwatch (2.3 million/10%) and Channel 4's The Restoration Man (1.7 
million/7.6%) in the 8pm hour.

From 9pm, the NTAs were up against BBC1's Crimewatch (2.8 million/11.9%), 
BBC2's Winterwatch Unsprung (1.3 million/5.4%) and Russia on Four Wheels (1.1 
millon/5.2%), Channel 4's 24 Hours in A&E (1.9 million/8%) and Channel 5's 
Celebrity Big Brother (2.3 million/10.2%).

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk> overnight figures, including 
live, +1 (except for BBC channels) and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, 
but excluding on demand, or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, 
BBC2, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD 
simulcast services, unless otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 