
Aim

"To amend nationality legislation 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/Acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020041_en_1>, to create 
provisions for the support of asylum-seekers in accommodation centres and 
support arrangements for asylum-seekers generally. Also creates provisions 
relating to detention and removal; contains provisions on immigration and 
asylum appeals."

Main provisions

• Repeals the provision of automatic bail hearings created by the Immigration 
and Asylum Act 1999 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/13/immigration-asylum-act>
.
• Grants wider powers to those who authorise and extend bail to enter premises 
and detain.
• Extends the power to detain, which means an asylum seeker can be detained at 
any time during their application, not just prior to removal.
• Grants local authorities the power to enter into contracts with the Home 
Office in respect of National Asylum Support Service emergency accommodation, 
induction centres and accommodation centres.
• Creates a white list of safe countries. Citizens of these countries who have 
their asylum applications rejected cannot remain in the UK while they mount an 
appeal.
• Denies asylum seekers support unless they make their claim "as soon as 
reasonably practicable" after their arrival in the UK – at a port or airport – 
and they can explain how they reached the UK.
• Creates the accommodation centre scheme. Accommodation centres were intended 
to house asylum seekers for up to six months while their applications were 
considered.

Background

In June 2000 the bodies of 58 Chinese people  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2001/apr/06/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices5>
were discovered in a refrigerated lorry arriving in Dover. The tragedy occurred 
at a time when enormous media attention was already focused on the number of 
asylum seekers trying to smuggle themselves through the Channel tunnel from the
Sangatte 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2002/dec/08/race.immigrationandpublicservices>
 refugee camp near the Calais entrance to the tunnel. The Home Office drew two 
lessons from these incidents. First, that the asylum system was being abused by 
economic migrants seeking to join the UK labour market; and second that closer 
control of the entry of low-skilled workers would stem the number of people 
entering illegally.

In February 2002 the white paper Secure Borders, Safe Haven 
<http://74.125.77.132/search?q=cache:DI2XUNuo9AEJ:www.archive2.official-documents.co.uk/document/cm53/5387/cm5387.pdf+secure+borders+safe+haven&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1&gl=uk>
 introduced the concept of "managed migration", an idea that went far beyond 
the scope of theImmigration and Asylum Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/13/immigration-asylum-act>
 1999. It linked immigration policy to a recognition that migration provided an 
important resource for the economy, devising more regulation of economic 
migration to the United Kingdom. The government sought to discourage asylum 
seekers from coming to Britain by removing access to support for destitute 
asylum seekers who did not claim asylum immediately upon arrival.

During an interview with Radio 4's Today programme then-home secretary David 
Blunkett said the bill was designed tochange the message 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/1409383/White-list-will-end-'mad'-policy.html> 
that "if you get here and you claim asylum, then we'll support you". He said 
that the creation of the white list of safe states was intended to send a 
"major signal" that the government intended to take a tougher line on 
unjustified asylum claims.

Criticism

The most controversial aspect of the act was the decision to remove support 
for destitute asylum seekers, who would now have to prove that they had applied 
for asylum, were destitute and that the application for asylum had been made 
"as soon as reasonably practicable" upon arrival in the United Kingdom. 
Furthermore, the home secretary could withhold support from applicants who 
could not provide an account of how they had arrived in the United Kingdom, how 
they had been living since their arrival, or to anyone who did not co-operate 
with the authorities. In 2002 theRefugee Council said  
<http://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/policy/briefings/2002/nia.htm>that this would 
"potentially affect the lives and wellbeing of thousands of asylum applicants 
in the UK forcing them into extreme poverty and making it more difficult to 
pursue their asylum application". Refugees, the council feared, would have to 
choose between persecution or destitution.

In 2004 the court of appeal found that the policy breached 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2004/may/21/homeaffairs.uknews> article 3 
of the European convention on human rights and in October 2004 thehome 
secretary abandoned the policy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2004/jun/26/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices>
.

Further criticism focused on the expansion of the powers to detain asylum 
seekers, and the abolishing of the automatic right to a bail hearing. The act 
created a list of "safe countries" where failed asylum seekers could be removed 
to prior to their appeal. A joint parliamentary committee chaired by the Labour 
MP Jean Corston described this as an"unacceptable" threat  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2002/oct/24/asylum.politics>to human rights. 

The joint committee strongly criticised the enactment of a provision that 
withdrew refugee protection from people convicted of serious criminal offences 
as contrary to the UK's obligations under the refugee convention, as itallowed 
deportation even for crimes 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt200304/jtselect/jtrights/190/190.pdf>
 that were not "particularly serious".
 