
It is unclear exactly what leaks the Australian federal police are 
investigating in their raids on Labor party offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
 in Melbourne, but they are likely to be connected with reports of cost 
blow-outs and significant delays in the roll-out of the National Broadband 
Network.



As part of his election promises in 2007, Kevin Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/kevin-rudd> proposed spending $43bn 
on a high-speed national broadband network. Once elected, the plan was put in 
motion.

It involved the installation of a huge network of fibre optic cable (which 
carries information in the form of light pulses), that would bring super-fast 
internet directly to 93% of homes and business around the country.

Australian election 2016: AFP denies government knew of raids – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/20/australian-election-2016-afp-raid-labor-offices-over-nbn-leak-politics-live>
It was expected to deliver initial speeds of up to 1000 megabits per second. 
But with the potential for upgrades at the exchange and at the home, it was 
thought the network would be future-proofed, capable of higher speeds as 
technology improved. The plan was labelled “fibre-to-the-home”.

As communications spokesman in the Abbott-led opposition, Malcolm Turnbull 
proposed a cut-price, speed-compromised version of the NBN under the three-word 
slogan: “Fast. Affordable. Sooner 
<https://www.facebook.com/LiberalPartyAustralia/photos/a.173321122463.160263.13561467463/10151590746627464/?type=3&permPage=1>
.”


Turnbull argued that Labor’s plan was over-the-top and that most applications 
needed only 12mpbs 
<http://www.computerworld.com.au/article/366022/12mbps_enough_all_applications_turnbull_-_updated/>
. To cut costs and deliver the network faster, the then-opposition proposed a 
“fibre-to-the-node” network.

It would lay fibre-optic cable to nodes on street corners, which would then 
use the old copper networks, used for landline telephones, to make the final 
stretch to people’s homes. It would allow for speeds no higher than 50 to 
100mbps, with little opportunity for future upgrades.

The Coalition argued it would cost between $7bn and $10bn less than the Labor 
plan, and would be deliveredtwo years earlier 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2013/s3733409.htm>.

After the Coalition won power at the 2013 election, analysis and leaks began 
to appear, suggesting the plan was not only going to deliver a slower network, 
but would also take longer and cost more.

One leak revealed by Fairfax Media in February 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/nbn-malcolm-turnbulls-faster-cheaper-rollout-falters-20160228-gn5l0s.html>
 reported important targets were being missed, caused by faults and delays with 
constructions and approvals, as well as material shortages.

It said only 29,000 connections had been completed, compared with a target of 
94,000, and the cost of each connection had risen by 23%.

Official figures from the NBN 
<http://www.nbnco.com.au/content/dam/nbnco2/documents/nbn-corporate-plan-2016.pdf>
 now say the roll-out will cost between $46bn and $56bn – more than Labor’s 
$43bn plan that the Coalition derided as too expensive. And with the target of 
delivering it two years earlier than Labor looking impossible, the official 
delivery date is now “as soon as possible”.
 