
Labor has opened a new front in the controversy over the leaked NBN Co 
documents, asking the privileges committee to examine whether there has been 
“improper interference” or “attempted improper interference”, with Stephen 
Conroy’s free performance as a senator.


The Senate president, Stephen Parry, gave the matter precedence in the Senate 
on Wednesday afternoon, and senators will determine whether or not the matter 
proceeds to substantive consideration on Thursday.

In making the case for the matter to be given precedence, Conroy told Parry he 
wanted to pursue whether any contempt had been committedduring the police raids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
 and during the investigation into leaked documents by either the Australian 
federal police or by the NBN Co.

Cory Bernardi signals he may back Labor over controversial NBN raids
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/cory-bernardi-signals-he-may-back-labor-over-controversial-nbn-raids>
Conroy said he was concerned that his telecommunications and communications by 
his staff may have been intercepted and accessed by the AFP – an action, he 
said, that “may constitute a contempt”.

“I am also concerned that NBN Co may have acted on information obtained during 
the raids, over which I had claimed privilege, to penalise NBN Co staff alleged 
to have been connected to the provision of information to enable me to carry 
out my functions as a senator,” Conroy said in a letter to Parry.

“Any adverse action against an employee of NBN Co because of a suspicion that 
they provided a senator with information in relation to proceedings in the 
parliament may also constitute a contempt,” he said.

Parry agreed to give the issue precedence, but in a statement to the chamber, 
he said that decision was procedural rather than an overt signal that he 
believed the matter should go to the privileges committee for inquiry.

The Senate on Wednesday agreed that the privileges committee would determine 
whether material obtained by the AFP in their controversial raids during and 
after the election campaign will be protected.

The government had been signalling it was not inclined to support Labor in 
referring the matter to privileges,but waved the reference through 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/coalition-senate-labor-material-seized-police-nbn-leaks-raid-privilege>
 after Coalition senators expressed concern about the police conduct and the 
accessing of parliamentary communications.

The Liberal senator Cory Bernardi signalled he could side with Labor  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/cory-bernardi-signals-he-may-back-labor-over-controversial-nbn-raids>
in sending the matter off to the privileges committee.

Stephen Conroy talks to Katharine Murphy about the 'humiliating' NBN documents 
– Australian politics live podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/aug/25/stephen-conroy-talks-to-katharine-murphy-about-the-humiliating-nbn-documents-australian-politics-live-podcast>
The contempt motion raises the stakes in the transaction further, because it 
is possible, at least technically, that the Senate could resolve to apply 
sanctions.

The privileges act has penalty provisions which include “imprisonment for a 
period not exceeding six months for an offence against that house determined by 
that house to have been committed by that person”.

Labor appears confident it has the support to send the contempt inquiry to the 
committee when the vote happens on Thursday.
 