
The Writers Guild of America East (WGAE) on Monday warned that the American 
remake of Ant and Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway, starringNeil Patrick Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/neil-patrick-harris>, will have a small 
pool of writers to pull from because of disputes with ITV Studios America.

Members of the WGAE may only write for shows with guild agreements, which ITV 
Studios America has not yet reached even as it works toexpand its presence in 
the US television market. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/10/itv-profits-producing-hits-primetime-star-bid-content>
 “I’m having trouble discerning the business plan, because you can’t do that 
without us,” WGAE executive director Lowell Peterson told the Guardian.


Last week, ITV unveiled the latest part of the expansion: 10 episodes of 
Saturday Night Takeaway, hosted by Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/28/oscars-host-us-saturday-night-takeaway-neil-patrick-harris-ant-dec-nbc-itv>
, who isset to host the Academy awards in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/15/neil-patrick-harris-ellen-oscars-2015>
. The variety show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/28/sorry-neil-patrick-harris-but-the-variety-show-is-dead>
 is set to include segments featuring comedy sketches, celebrity guests, games 
and musical numbers.

But with one of the strongest unions in the US calling on its comedy-variety 
writers to not work for the show, the ability to execute these segments could 
be sharply reduced without a labour agreement.

Peterson said he warned ITV executives about the situation, but when the 
parties met on Monday, Peterson said the production company “took steps 
backward,” in the discussions.

The WGAE has been negotiating with ITV for a collective-bargaining agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/12/itv-writers-guild-afl-cio-us-benefits>
, which it holds with the major scripted television shows in the US. The guild 
is seeking minimum levels of compensation, health benefits and paid time off.

“ITV Studios America is very excited about the series,” ITV said in a 
statement. “We are looking forward to putting together a talented team, but we 
are not yet in production and no air dates have been set.”

WGAE writers and members of the guild’s western association have been told not 
to write for the show. ITV could hire non-union writers, but guild writers are 
considered more professional and experienced than others. “Getting a writer’s 
guild membership is a sort of prestige in the industry,” said Maria C Figueroa,
director of labor and policy research at Cornell 
<https://www.ilr.cornell.edu/directory/mcf22/>.

Figueroa said that while not every television show stopped running during the 
guild-organised strike of 2007 and 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/nov/08/television.usnews>, that action 
is a testament to the union’s organisational powers. “As you can see from the 
strike, they are very militant and they stay together,” said Figueroa.

ITV Studios America also faces a roadblock because NBC ordered the show and it 
has a signatory agreement with the WGAE. NBC did not respond to a request for 
comment.

Jonathan Handel, a counsel at TroyGould and a contributing editor at Hollywood 
Reporter <https://twitter.com/jhandel>, said that along with the legal 
implications of these agreements, NBC could also find itself in political 
battle with the WGAE if production goes through with non-guild writers. “They 
may be wary of putting on a show without writer’s guild writers – potentially 
for fear of a labour complaint against the network itself as well,” said Handel.
 