
Neil Patrick Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/neil-patrick-harris>, 
star of Gone Girl and Doogie Howser, MD, is to host an American remake of Ant 
and Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway, the pranks-and-sketches game show that has 
aired for more than 10 years in the UK.

NBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> has ordered 10 episodes of the 
show from ITV Studios America.

The show will be filmed in front of a live studio audience, as the UK version 
is, hosted by Harris, who recently confirmed he will be hosting the 2015 
Academy Awards.

NBC’s version will feature the original’s mix of comedy sketches, celebrity 
guests, pranks, musical numbers, competitions, games and hidden cameras.

However, according to New York Magazine’s Vulture 
<http://www.vulture.com/2014/10/nbc-neil-patrick-harris-variety-show.html>, 
which broke the story, the Harris show will not be called Saturday Night 
Takeaway and will not air on Saturdays.

The UK version launched on ITV in 2002 and has been one of the broadcaster’s 
biggest entertainment hits of the past decade.

It follows in the long variety show tradition, which has its roots in the UK’s 
music hall scene and US equivalent vaudeville, and in broadcasting stretches 
back to the earliest days of TV in the 1940s and 1950s.

The variety format was given modern twists – including premium rate phone-in 
competitions – and the show’s success also relied heavily on the rapport 
between the studio audience, viewers and the hosts, who are regularly winners 
of the favourite TV presenter category at industry awards events.

NBC will be hoping to replicate that by hiring Harris, a popular and versatile 
actor and performer.

“As I watched the show, I couldn’t stop smiling. Now that I’ve seen many 
seasons, my face hurts. It’s a game changer,” Harris said in a statement. 
“Nothing like this has been done before, and I can’t wait to roll up my sleeves 
and have some fun.”

Harris has been up front about his desire to host a variety show, telling 
radio DJ Howard Stern in May that he wanted to host a weekly variety show and 
had pitched an idea to CBS.

Three years ago, the actor said that he would like to do an “Ed Sullivan-y 
kind of show, with all the variety acts”

“As co-creators of the show, we’re hugely excited and very proud that Saturday 
Night Takeaway is heading to the USA,” said the show’s UK hosts Anthony 
McPartlin and Declan Donnelly. “There is no one better equipped to host it 
there than Neil Patrick Harris and we’re looking forward to working with the 
team to help make Takeaway a favourite with families across America.”

In June, Harris, who also starred in hit comedy How I Met Your Mother, won a 
Tony Award for best actor for Broadway show Hedwig and the Angry Inch.

The UK version of the Saturday Night Takeaway was beset by scandal in 2007 
when it emerged that viewers hadno chance of winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/18/television.ITV1?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 some phone-in competitions, such as Jiggy Bank, unless they lived within an 
hour of where the production team happened to be with the model pig featured in 
the game that week.

Some winners of premium rate phone-in competitions were chosen based on 
whether they might make “entertaining” contestants,according to a scathing 
investigation by Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/18/television.ITV1?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.

ITV was fined £3m by UK media regulator Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/may/08/itv> for the phone-in deception 
in Saturday Night Takeaway.

The show will be executive produced by McPartlin, Donnelly, Harris, Siobhan 
Greene, director of entertainment for ITV Studios UK, and Orly Adelson, 
president of ITV Studios America.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 