
The “spinning wheel of death”. We all hate it. But you may be seeing it a lot 
on the internet today. That’s because todayis the Internet Slowdown 
<https://www.battleforthenet.com/>, a web-wide uprising against one of the most 
blatant cases of potential injustice in the history of the net.

Cable companies in the US are lobbying the government 
<https://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/2014/05/16/how-telecoms-and-cable-have-dominated-net-neutrality-lobbying/>
 to destroy net neutrality, the basic underlying principle that has made the 
internet so awesome. It’s a classic power-grab; corporate behemoths want to 
lock down the web and make it more like Cable TV, where they get to choose 
which content gets seen by the most people (or seen at all). It’s a move that 
threatens not just the future of the internet economy, but the future of free 
speech, free press, and democracy.

Here’s the good news: the internet has been taking self-defence classes, and 
we’ve got quite good at staving off grave and imminent threats to online 
freedom. After months of organising, a broad and unlikely coalition of internet 
users, activist groups and major websites have banded together to declare today 
a mass day of action to show the world what the internet might look like if 
Team Cable gets their way and convinces the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) to help them gut net neutrality.

Throughout today, thousands of websites, including many you know and love like 
Etsy, Kickstarter, Netflix, Reddit, Mozilla, Foursquare, Namecheap, Meetup, 
Upworthy and Vimeo, will display prominent messages (or “widgets”) on their 
home pages featuring that dreaded spinning “Loading...” symbol that always 
seems to pop up during the cliffhanger moment in the video you’re streaming. 
The sites taking part in the slowdown will help to reach millions of people and 
direct internet users to take action atBattleForTheNet.com 
<https://www.battleforthenet.com/>, a one stop action site that makes it easy 
to flood decision makers with comments, emails, and phone calls.

So how can you participate? If you’ve got a website, blog or Tumblr, there’s 
still time to get the code and add theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Slowdown animated widgets to 
your site. If not, show your support for the slowdown by changing your profile 
picture to one of these spinning “Loading...” icons, and posting on social 
media. Better yet, make your own gifs, graphics, and action tools and share 
them with the internet using #InternetSlowdown.

Most importantly, talk to your friends and family about what the free and open 
internet means to you, and encourage them to read up and get active.

This is about so much more than how fast or slow websites load. History has 
shown that if a system can be used to censor and marginalise dissenting and 
alternative voices, it will be.Net neutrality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/net-neutrality> is the secret 
ingredient that makes the web a level playing field where everyone has a voice. 
It says that all websites are created equal, and that you should have reliable 
access to every single thing the web has to offer, whether you’re clicking 
links on a mainstream news site, binging on cat videos or reading your 
favourite political blog.

Most importantly, net neutrality is about free speech, and preventing powerful 
interests from discriminating against, censoring, slowing down and blocking 
content on the internet.

The unstoppable momentum of today’s Internet Slowdown is just a reflection of 
public outcry that has been simmering since the FCC first announced its 
proposal to allow for a “tiered” (read: divided) internet. We’ve bombarded them 
with petitions, camped out in tents on their doorstep, and John Oliver of course
crashed their website <https://www.battleforthenet.com/#understand>.

It has been widely reported 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/tech/internet/99-percent-comments-fcc-favor-net-neutrality-study-n195236>
 that more than 99% of the comments the FCC has received thus far broadly 
support net neutrality. If the FCC chooses to move ahead with a proposal that 
benefits cable executives while undermining public interest, then public 
comment periods are meaningless, and the FCC exposes itself as an agency that 
has no legitimacy.

Government agencies like the FCC should take heed: hell hath no fury like the 
internet scorned. Growing numbers of people are distrustful of the US 
government’s actions from NSA surveillance to police militarisation. Thanks to 
the internet, governments can’t get away with stuff quite the way they used to. 
There is rebellion brewing online and off.

If cable CEOs and their close buddies at the FCC shut their ears to those 
rumblings, they may find themselves on the run from an angry internet public 
that will settle for nothing less than a free, uncensored, and sometimes truly 
weird, internet.

Today is a historic day in the fight for internet freedom. I hope to see you 
in the digital streets demanding real net neutrality.

Evan Greer is campaign manager at Fight for the Future. You can follow her on 
Twitter@evan_greer <https://twitter.com/evan_greer>. 

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 