
The Dutch government intends to draft a law that would legalise assisted 
suicide for people who feel they have “completed life” but are not necessarily 
terminally ill.


 The Netherlands was the first country to legalise euthanasia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/apr/11/andrewosborn.sarahboseley>, in 
2002, but only for patients who were considered to be suffering unbearable pain 
with no hope of a cure.

But in a letter to parliament on Wednesday, the health and justice ministers 
said that people who “have a well-considered opinion that their life is 
complete, must, under strict and careful criteria, be allowed to finish that 
life in a manner dignified for them”.

Assisted dying: what can the UK learn from places where it is legal?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jul/12/assisted-dying-uk-learn-places-legal-oregon-netherlands>
 The proposal is likely to provoke critics who say the scope of Dutch 
euthanasia policy has already expanded beyond its original boundaries, with 
“unbearable suffering” not only applying to people with terminal diseases but 
also to some with mental illnesses and dementia.

The euthanasia policy has widespread backing in Dutch society, and cases have 
risen by double digits every year for more than a decade as more patients 
request it and more doctors are willing to carry it out. Euthanasia accounted 
for 5,516 deaths in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> in 2015, or 3.9% of all deaths 
nationwide.

Edith Schippers, the health minister, wrote in the letter that “because the 
wish for a self-chosen end of life primarily occurs in the elderly, the new 
system will be limited to” them.

 She did not define a threshold age.

Although details remained to be worked out, the new law would require “careful 
guidance and vetting ahead of time with a ‘death assistance provider’ with a 
medical background, who has also been given additional training”.

 Other aspects of the law would include safety mechanisms including 
third-party checks, reviews and supervision, she said.

My patient ended her life at Dignitas to avoid a slow, undignified death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/oct/06/patient-dignitas-assisted-dying-legal-uk>
 The proposal comes as a surprise because a commission enlisted to study the 
idea of allowing a “completed life” extension to current policy concluded there 
was no need for it.

 The ministers disagreed. “The cabinet is of the opinion that a request for 
help (in dying) from people who suffer unbearably and have no hope without an 
underlying medical reason can be a legitimate request“.

 They hope to draft a law, in consultation with doctors, ethicists and other 
experts, by the end of 2017.
 