
Zadie Smith’s first novel since 2012’s NW, a story about “two brown girls 
[who] dream of being dancers”, will come out this winter, her publishers have 
announced.

Smith’s Swing Time is “a story about friendship and music and stubborn roots, 
about how we are shaped by these things and how we can survive them”, said 
Hamish Hamilton. Set in north-west London and west Africa, it will follow the 
lives of two girls who both want to become dancers, but only one of whom has 
talent.

“The other has ideas: about rhythm and time, about black bodies and black 
music, what constitutes a tribe, or makes a person truly free. It’s a close but 
complicated childhood friendship that ends abruptly in their early 20s, never 
to be revisited, but never quite forgotten, either,” said Hamish Hamilton, 
which described the novel as “dazzlingly energetic and deeply human”.

Smith, whose debut novel White Teeth won the Guardian first book award, and 
whose On Beauty won the Orange prize, gave more details about the book in a
reading at Johns Hopkins University 
<http://hub.jhu.edu/2015/11/04/zadie-smith-new-book> in November 2015. 
Revealing two chapters from the unpublished novel, she said it was about “tap 
dancing, blackness and time”, and that while both of the girls grow up in a 
poor London neighbourhood, one of them, Tracy, goes on to dance professionally, 
while the “unnamed first-person narrator becomes a personal assistant to a pop 
star”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fnew-novels-zadie-smith-swing-time-and-ali-smith-autumn-announced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49d18bfa2c539a01dc7407627abebac3a320f028%2F0_363_7360_4419%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20novels%20from%20Zadie%20Smith%20and%20Ali%20Smith%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fnew-novels-zadie-smith-swing-time-and-ali-smith-autumn-announced%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20novels%20from%20Zadie%20Smith%20and%20Ali%20Smith%20announced&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fnew-novels-zadie-smith-swing-time-and-ali-smith-autumn-announced%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49d18bfa2c539a01dc7407627abebac3a320f028%2F0_363_7360_4419%2F7360.jpg>
 Ali Smith’s new work is a meditation on harvest, say publishers. Photograph: 
Christian Sinibaldi for the Guardian 
Hamish Hamilton has also announced a new novel from the Bailey’s prize winner 
Ali Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alismith>. Autumn, out in August 
this year, will be the first of four novels named after a season and will, said 
the publisher, be “a stripped-branches take on popular culture, and a 
meditation, in a world growing ever more bordered and exclusive, on what 
richness and worth are”.

The four novels, which will go on to form Smith’s Seasonal quartet, will be 
standalone, said Hamish Hamilton, “separate yet interconnected and cyclical, 
exploring what time is, how we experience it, and the recurring markers in the 
shapes our lives take and in our ways with narrative”.
 