
An inhaler that protects the lungs against air pollution has been developed by 
scientists and could help the many millions of people affected by toxic air to 
avoid its worst effects.

The inhaler delivers a molecule, first found in bacteria in the Egyptian 
desert, which stabilises water on the surface of the lung cells to form a 
protective layer. It is expected to be available as an inexpensive, 
over-the-counter product.

Outdoor air pollution is a global health crisis that kills over 3 million 
people a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/16/more-people-die-from-air-pollution-than-malaria-and-hivaids-new-study-shows>
 and it has long been linked to lung and heart disease and strokes. But 
research is also uncovering new impacts on health, including degenerative brain 
diseasessuch as Alzheimer’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/05/toxic-air-pollution-particles-found-in-human-brains-links-alzheimers>
,mental illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/13/air-pollution-linked-to-increased-mental-illness-in-children?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 and, this week,diabetes <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27605624>.

The impact of air pollution costs $5tn a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/air-pollution-costs-trillions-holds-back-poor-countries-world-bank>
, according to a World Bank report published last week. In the UK, at least
40,000 people a year die prematurely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/22/indoor-and-outdoor-air-pollution-claiming-at-least-40000-uk-lives-a-year>
 from air pollution, with a cross-party committee of MPs calling it a “public 
health emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/27/uk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars>
”.

But the government’s plans to tackle the issue were heavily criticised this 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/13/campaigners-criticise-uk-governments-response-to-air-pollution-warning>
, just as alerts were issued for extreme air pollution across much of northern 
England. A day later, it was announced that more ambitious plans for London 
from Mayor Sadiq Khan wereoverwhelmingly backed by the public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/londoners-overwhelmingly-back-sadiq-khans-air-pollution-crackdown>
.

Vehicles are a key contributor to air pollution but, a year after the VW 
emissions scandal broke, mostnew diesel cars still emit far more toxic nitrogen 
oxides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/30/emissions-new-diesel-cars-far-higher-than-official-limit>
 on the road than the official lab-based limit.

Action to clean up air is urgently needed across the world, but cutting 
emissions for vehicles and other sources will take years, meaning ways to 
reduce the harm in the meantime could be vital. The new inhaler has been 
developed by German medical devices companyBitop 
<http://www.bitop.de/cms/website.php?id=/en/index/startseite.htm> and is based 
on a molecule called ectoine, discovered in the 1980s in a desert bacterium 
which uses the compound to conserve water in 60C heat.

“It is quite an inert molecule that does one main thing, which is bind water, 
which stabilises cell membrane tissues against physical or chemical damage,” 
said Dr Andreas Bilstein, at Bitop. “It supports the natural barrier.”

When inhaled, this helps prevent the damage caused by air pollution particles 
that can lead to asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung 
cancer, Bilstein said: “Damage cannot occur as strongly and there is less 
inflammatory response, and so disease progression is reduced. The perfect 
situation is that the patient inhales in the morning and evening at home.”

The inhaler has been tested in three small groups of patients particularly at 
risk from air pollution, due to asthma, COPD and bronchitis, with the positive 
results due to be published soon, Bilstein said.

Ectoine does not interact with cell receptors, so it is classed as a medical 
device rather than a drug. This means large clinical trials are not required 
for official approval and the inhaler could be on sale soon, at an estimated 
cost of £17 a month, after Bitop selects a marketing partner. A version of the 
product for use in nebulisers will be available this year in Germany and 
Poland, while an ectoine-based nasal spray for allergy reliefis already 
available 
<https://www.benadryl.co.uk/allergy-relief-products/benadryl-allergy-naturease-nasal-spray>
.

Bilstein said the inhaler could be useful around the world, as particulate air 
pollution is not just a European problem: “Especially in Asia – China in 
particular – the demand for such a product is even higher. I was in New York 
last week, and the air was also not very clean.”

The protective effect of ectoine was discovered by Prof Jean Krutmann and 
colleagues at the Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, while 
investigating whether the molecule could protect skin against sun damage. Bitop 
funded a series of studies, nowpublished 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0111485> in 
prominent 
<http://www.atsjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1164/rccm.200812-1911OC#.V9q0oCorKL1> 
scientific journals <http://erj.ersjournals.com/content/41/2/433>.

“The point that it can prevent the lung inflammation induced by ultrafine 
particles is established – there is no more doubt,” Krutmann said. Antioxidants 
can also provide some protection but there has been controversy over the 
effectiveness of such food supplements, he said: “Personally, I think it is 
much better to eat lots of vegetables and fruit rather than taking any 
supplements.”

Dr Richard Russell, a consultant respiratory physician in the NHS and medical 
advisor to the British Lung Foundation, who was not involved in the research, 
said the inhaler was both credible and promising: “Ectoine is a beautifully 
elegant molecule and it clearly works by helping water to stabilise, giving you 
a film of water in times of stress.”

“The work that has been published thus far, in credible, internationally 
recognised journals, show that this stuff has positive properties, protecting 
against triggered inflammation,” he told the Guardian. Russell, who also 
lectures at Imperial College and Oxford University, said it might also be 
useful for the treatment of asthma, COPD and other lung diseases, not only 
prevention. “It could potentially do so much more. It is actually quite 
exciting and there is clearly a lot more to come from this story.”

Krutmann said slashing air pollution remained paramount. “It is very nice to 
be able to protect people against the detrimental effects, but this should not 
be used as an argument that we can now stop working on reducing particulate 
[air pollution]. The best thing is that we have clean air because then we don’t 
need any prophylactic treatment. But on the other hand we have to be realistic 
and in many countries you cannot just switch traffic overnight to electric cars 
and do other drastic things.”

“It will take many more years, especially in countries like China, and I think 
there is an ethical need to provide something to the general population to 
protect them,” he said.
 