
1) New Zealand

Eighteen wins on the spin and counting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/new-zealand-make-history-beat-australia-all-blacks-18-consecutive-wins>
. The All Blacks will not stay unbeaten forever but sometimes it feels that 
way. Over the next month they will face Ireland (twice), Italy and France and, 
barring accidents, it should be 22 straight victories by the time they fly 
home. The head coach, Steve Hansen, and his lieutenants deserve credit for the 
impressive manner in which the team has refocused and developed sinceretaining 
the Webb Ellis Cup last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
. Who said Dan Carter, Richie McCaw, Ma’a Nonu et al were irreplaceable? In the 
shape of Aaron and Ben Smith, Kieran Read, Dane Coles and Beauden Barrett, the 
All Blacks have the five best, most influential players in the world. The 
challenge for their opponents is not just to beat them; they have to catch them 
first. No team has more accurate skills on the run, no one capitalises on 
errors with such speed and alacrity.Aside from the recent pathetic clown 
caricatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/warren-gatland-new-zealand-herald-clown-lions-coach-all-blacks-criticism>
 of rival coaches, this has been a year for all Kiwis to be proud of. Keep it 
going and, potentially, 2017 could be better still.

World Rugby ranking: 1

All-conquering All Blacks show the benefit of putting skills before strength | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/all-blacks-skill-strength-the-breakdown>
2) England

An awful lot of water has passed under Richmond Bridge since England bowed out 
of the 2015 World Cup in the pool stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/04/england-crash-out-of-rugby-world-cup>
. The no-nonsense Eddie Jones was always likely to make an impact but nine wins 
out of nine, with power to add, has propelled his side above everyone bar the 
invincible All Blacks. No one is pretending England are the complete article –
they conceded five tries to Australia in Sydney last time out in a 44-40 
thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
 – but Jones has toughened them up mentally and demanded higher standards. Four 
consecutive Twickenham games against South Africa, Fiji, Argentina and 
Australia now stand between Dylan Hartley’s squad and an undefeated calendar 
year; if they want to take the next step they should be publicly looking to win 
all four. Owen Farrell and the Vunipola brothers will have key roles in the 
absence of the injured Maro Itoje, George Kruis, James Haskell, Anthony Watson, 
Jack Nowell and Manu Tuilagi and England’s strength in depth is about to be 
tested in earnest. If Jones’s pack crank up the power and play at pace, certain 
opponents will struggle to live with them.

World Rugby ranking: 2

3) Ireland

A Lions year tends to rouse the Celtic nations; Wales and Ireland have won the 
past three Six Nations titles immediately before a Lions expedition. Kicking 
off in Chicago against the rampant All Blacks is not the easiest assignment but 
there is a sense of Irish rugby regaining a little bit of confidence after 
another frustrating World Cup.Even New Zealand only won by the width of a 
fag-paper on their last visit to Dublin in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/24/ireland-new-zealand-autumn-internationals>
 and the return to fitness of Jonathan Sexton, Sean O’Brien, Peter O’Mahony and 
Iain Henderson will strengthen them in key areas this winter. Only Sexton will 
be involved at Soldier Field but the exciting uncapped Leinster youngsters Joey 
Carbery and Garry Ringrose should see some game time off the bench. The shrewd
Joe Schmidt has agreed to remain in charge until 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/22/joe-schmidt-ireland-contract-extension-2017>
 and the presence of England’s former assistant Andy Farrell on the Irish 
management team will further stiffen the collective sense of resolve.

World Rugby ranking: 6

4) Wales

Warren Gatland has temporarily stepped aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/warren-gatland-lions-wales-new-zealand-2017>
 as head coach to concentrate on his Lions duties, leaving Rob Howley to guide 
the Welsh team against Australia, Argentina, Japan and South Africa. In years 
past they might have viewed a couple of wins as reasonable; now there is a good 
case for arguing they should win all four games. Wales will be without four 
Lions certs in Sam Warburton, Alun Wyn Jones, Taulupe Faletau and Liam Williams 
for the visit of the Wallabies on Saturday but still have a largely settled 
look, aside from the talented Ross Moriarty at No8 and the up-and-coming 
fly-half Sam Davies on the bench. Davies will hope to start at least one game 
this autumn and the Ospreys teenager Keelan Giles is another emerging prospect. 
The return of Leigh Halfpenny ensures an embarrassment of goalkicking riches 
and Howley is hardly short of personal incentive. The bad news is that Wales 
often flatter to deceive in November and one or two key men are arguably past 
their best.

World Rugby ranking: 5

5) Australia

Still ranked third globally according to World Rugby but wobbling at the 
moment. An unprecedented 3-0 home series defeat to England was painful enough 
and New Zealand have picked mercilessly at the carcass over the past couple of 
months. About to meet Wales, Scotland, France, Ireland and England in 
successive weeks; if they underperform in Cardiff and pick up a few more 
injuries it is not inconceivable they could lose all five.

World Rugby ranking: 3

6) South Africa

Either in freefall or a steady downward glide, depending on whom you believe. 
Either way, two more defeats to England and Wales will make this statistically 
the Boks’ worst year in the professional era. They still have some fine 
individual playersbut many of their overseas-based stars are effectively now 
playing all year round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/14/schalk-burger-saracens-south-africa>
.Going down 57-15 to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
 in Durban was an insult to South African manhood but they have also lost to 
Ireland and Argentina this year.

World Rugby ranking: 4

7) Argentina 

Had the Pumas not run out of puff in the Rugby Championship they would be 
above the Springboks, whomthey beat in Salta  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/argentina-south-africa-rugby-championship-match-report>
in August. They may also have to tweak their madcap gameplan to start winning 
consistently against higher-ranked teams, but Daniel Hourcade’s side are 
visibly on the up. Beating Japan and Scotland and losing narrowly to Wales and 
England would be par for the course at the end of a long year as they adhere to 
their policy of omitting foreign-based players such as Juan Imhoff and Marcos 
Ayerza.

World Rugby ranking: 9

8) France

If ever a team needs to restore national faith it is France. Fail to rouse 
themselves swiftly and they could end up dropping out of the world’s top-eight 
nations, a major issue with the pool draw seedings for the 2019 World Cup due 
to be based on where sides are ranked at the end of the 2017 Six Nations. Guy 
Novès’s team are up against Samoa, Australia and New Zealand and need to win at 
least two of their three Tests to regain some momentum.

World Rugby ranking: 7
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnew-zealand-ahead-england-rugby-union-rankings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabaaab580fed319c787a9a79a41f823ed87b7585%2F127_165_4623_2774%2F4623.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Zealand%20remain%20far%20ahead%20while%20England%20and%20rest%20struggle%20to%20keep%20up%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnew-zealand-ahead-england-rugby-union-rankings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Zealand%20remain%20far%20ahead%20while%20England%20and%20rest%20struggle%20to%20keep%20up%20%7C%20Robert%20Kitson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fnew-zealand-ahead-england-rugby-union-rankings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabaaab580fed319c787a9a79a41f823ed87b7585%2F127_165_4623_2774%2F4623.jpg>
 Leigh Halfpenny’s return will boost Wales going into their Autumn 
International programme. Photograph: Stu Forster/Getty Images 
9) Scotland

This is an equally big autumn for the Scots; Vern Cotter is keen to hand over 
to Gregor Townsend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/gregor-townsend-scotland-coach-vern-cotter-glasgow>
 next summer on a high note and a crucial few weeks also looms for players with 
Lions ambitions. Stuart Hogg, Finn Russell, Jonny Gray and Tommy Seymour should 
be under serious consideration, but seeing off Australia, Argentina and Georgia 
would boost the confidence of all involved. Do the treble and, in terms of 
World Rugby rankings, they will be in contention to break into the top six next 
year.

World Rugby ranking: 8

10) Fiji

If Fiji were playing England at sevens there would be only one winner, as 
Great Britain’s players found out in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/fiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final>
 in August. Three Olympic gold medallists – the talented Josua Tuisova, Leone 
Nakarawa and Vatemo Ravouvou – will feature in the Flying Fijians 15-a-side 
tour squad with Nemani Nadolo due back at Twickenham where he scored a try and 
dented a few English bodiesat last year’s World Cup during the home side’s 
35-11 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/england-fiji-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
. John McKee remains in charge while Welshman Gareth Baber has just taken over 
from Ben Ryan as Fiji’s sevens coach.

World Rugby ranking: 10
 