
A new species of giant herbivorous dinosaur has been found in outback 
Australia, helping to rewrite the textbooks on how the gentle giants spread 
around the globe.

The species is a member of the group of dinosaurs known as sauropods – such as 
thebrontosaurus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/07/brontosaurus-is-back-new-analysis-suggests-genus-might-be-resurrected>
, which have long necks and four thick, pillar-like legs. It belongs to a 
subgroup called “titanosaurs”, thought to have evolved in South America.

Monster haul: Three new dinosaurs discovered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/jul/03/new-dinosaur-species-banjo> 
Named Savannasaurus elliottorum after the savannah landscape it was found in, 
and David Elliott, who discovered the bones on his sheep station in central 
Queensland, its 40-or-so fossilised bones make up one of the most complete 
sauropod skeletons found to date in Australia.

The species was reported on Thursday in the journal Scientific Reports 
alongside a specimen of another similar but previously described species, known 
asDiamantinasaurus matildae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/jul/03/new-dinosaur-species-banjo>.

Together, the two specimens led researchers to redescribe the evolutionary 
tree of sauropods, and propose a new theory of how they spread across the 
ancient megacontinent of Gondwana, which joined Australia, Africa, Antarctica 
and South America.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fhow-australian-sheep-farmer-discovered-new-species-giant-dinosaur-savannasaurus-elliottorum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20an%20Australian%20sheep%20farmer%20discovered%20a%20new%20species%20of%20giant%20dinosaur%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fhow-australian-sheep-farmer-discovered-new-species-giant-dinosaur-savannasaurus-elliottorum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20an%20Australian%20sheep%20farmer%20discovered%20a%20new%20species%20of%20giant%20dinosaur%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fhow-australian-sheep-farmer-discovered-new-species-giant-dinosaur-savannasaurus-elliottorum-video&media=>
How an Australian sheep farmer discovered a new species of giant dinosaur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/oct/20/how-australian-sheep-farmer-discovered-new-species-giant-dinosaur-savannasaurus-elliottorum-video>
The 95m-year-old savannasaurus specimen, nicknamed Wade, was found by Elliott, 
who runs theAustralian Age of Dinosaurs museum 
<http://www.australianageofdinosaurs.com/> on his farm near Winton. It 
documents a series of other dinosaur discoveries dating back nearly 20 years.


“I was mustering sheep for crutching,” Elliott said. “It was in 2006 and I 
found a little toe bone. I thought it was a theropod dinosaur, actually – it 
looked like a bit of a limb bone. I was really excited about it. It turned out 
to be a sauropod.”

Elliot’s wife, Judy, looked at two parts of the bone and saw they fitted 
together, revealing it was a single complete toe of a sauropod, rather than two 
different parts of a theropod toe.

Over the following years, the Elliott family, scientists and volunteers 
excavated 17 pallets’ worth of fossil fragments, reconstructing about 20% of a 
complete skeleton. The dinosaur was found to be between 12 and 15 metres long.

Cretaceous dinosaur footprints uncovered on Western Australian beach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/07/dinosaur-footprints-from-cretaceous-period-uncovered-on-broomes-cable-beach>
About the same time, Elliott discovered part of another sauropod skeleton, 
which turned out to be a specimen of a species calledDiamantinasaurus matildae. 
The find included the only skull of that species ever seen.

The two discoveries helped the researchers redraw the evolutionary tree of 
related dinosaurs, helping them to reconstruct their movement around the world.


“The more anatomical information you can derive from a specimen, the more 
accurately you can place it on the dinosaur family tree,” said Stephen Poropat, 
a paleontologist who works with the Australian Age ofDinosaurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/dinosaurs> museum.


With the new information, Poropat and colleagues found the diamantinasaurus 
was a less advanced member of the family than previously thought. The new 
savannasaurus was also to found to be a primitive member of the group.


The evolutionary analysis, which compared the specimens with similar ones in 
South America, meant there was a small window between 100m and 105m years ago 
when an ancestor of the two dinosaurs must have crossed over land from South 
America, through Antarctica, to Australia.

While the evolutionary analysis suggested the dinosaurs only made the journey 
about 100m years ago, the position of the continents at the time showed it 
should have been possible earlier.

“We realised there must have been some sort of barrier to them dispersing 
between South America and Australia before about 105m years ago,” Poropat said.

Oldest fossil of bird's voicebox gives new hint at soundscape of the Cretaceous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/12/oldest-fossil-of-birds-voicebox-gives-new-hint-at-soundscape-of-the-cretaceous-syrinx>
The researchers argued the cool climate of the polar region could have been 
that barrier. And a period of global warming that occurred about 105m years ago 
could have made the polar region more suitable to the dinosaurs. “Whether by 
accident or by choice, some of them found themselves in Australia,” said 
Poropat.

John Long, a paleontologist from Flinders University in Australia who wasn’t 
involved in the research, said the find was amazing.

“The Winton formation keeps yielding this amazing material 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/jul/03/new-dinosaur-species-banjo> 
and it’s showing such a great diversity of titanosaurs that were around in 
Australia in this middle cretaceous period,” Long said.

He said it was previously thought that most Australian dinosaurs travelled 
south from Asia. “It’s now emerging that most of our dinosaurs have a South 
American affinity,” he said.

The researchers’ theory about climate change allowing the dinosaurs to spread 
was interesting and “fair enough”. “It’s only putting an idea out there that 
needs more evidence.”

Long said if the theory were correct, it could be confirmed by other finds.

“Based on that, we could make the prediction that we would find more exciting 
dinosaurs that occur in South America. Like, for example, the horned 
carnotaurus – it’s a theropod meat-eating dinosaur with horns on its head.”
 