
New York attorney general Eric Schneiderman has launched an investigation into 
Mylan Pharmaceuticals, the maker of EpiPens, after the company was revealed to 
haveincreased the price of its life-saving allergy medication and device by 471%
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/24/epipen-ceo-hiked-prices-heather-bresch-mylan>
 since acquiring it in 2007.

EpiPen CEO hiked prices on two dozen products and got a 671% pay raise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/24/epipen-ceo-hiked-prices-heather-bresch-mylan>
According to the attorney general’s preliminary review of Mylan’s sales 
contract with a local school system, its terms may have included “potentially 
anticompetitive terms”.

EpiPens are used to administer medication to someone experiencing anaphylaxis, 
which is an allergic reaction that causes airways to swell and close.

“No child’s life should be put at risk because a parent, school, or healthcare 
provider cannot afford a simple, life-saving device because of a drug-maker’s 
anti-competitive practices,” Schneiderman said on Tuesday. “If Mylan engaged in 
anti-competitive business practices, or violated antitrust laws with the intent 
and effect of limiting lower cost competition, we will hold them accountable. 
Allergy sufferers have enough concerns to worry about – the availability of 
life-saving medical treatment should not be one of them.”

A Mylan spokeswoman told the Guardian that the EpiPen4Schools program provides 
free EpiPens.

“The program continues to adhere to all applicable laws and regulations. There 
are no purchase requirements for participation in the program, nor have there 
ever been to receive free EpiPen Auto-Injectors,” she said in an emailed 
statement. “Previously, schools who wished to purchase EpiPen Auto-Injectors 
beyond those they were eligible to receive free under the program could elect 
to do so at a certain discount level with a limited purchase restriction, but 
such restriction no longer remains.”

Mylan to provide EpiPen cost assistance as CEO is asked to testify on price 
hike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/epipen-price-hike-savings-card-mylan-heather-bresch-congress>
Schneiderman is not the only one who wants Mylan and its CEO Heather Bresch to 
answer questions about its business practices.

Shortly after the news about the EpiPen price hike spread, senators Susan 
Collins and Claire McCaskill requested that Bresch testify before the Senate 
special committee on aging. They asked that she appear within the next two 
weeks. The two weeks will be up on Thursday.

Additionally, congressmen Jason Chaffetz and Elijah Cummings who sit on the US 
House oversight and reform committee requested that Bresch send over documents 
relating to the price hike.

“A national dependence on accessibility to EpiPens has been well established 
since Mylan’s acquisition of the device in 2007. This command of the market has 
given Mylan the unbridled ability to increase the price of the two-pack EpiPen,”
they wrote 
<http://democrats.oversight.house.gov/sites/democrats.oversight.house.gov/files/documents/2016-08-29%20JC%20and%20EEC%20%20to%20Bresch-Mylan%20EpiPen%20Pricing.pdf>
. “While families and schools are struggling to keep up with your company’s 
unreasonable price increases, Mylan has profited richly from its pricing 
strategy.”

To help lawmakers understand the increasing costs of EpiPen, Mylan was to 
submit a briefing by 6pm on 6 September. It has until 12 September to send over 
documents including cost estimates, profit projections and past revenue from 
sales of EpiPens.
 