
The new year presents an opportunity to make a fresh start in your career – 
it's the chance to plan goals, evaluate priorities and break bad habits. Many 
of us vow to change jobs, get promoted or ask for a pay rise. "This year will 
be different," we tell ourselves. But withjust 8% of people achieving last 
year's resolutions 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/dandiamond/2013/01/01/just-8-of-people-achieve-their-new-years-resolutions-heres-how-they-did-it/>
, how can you make your career goals a reality?

Taking a break over Christmas and new year gives you time to think 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/christmas-reflect-career> about 
what you want to achieve in the year ahead, but mid-January is make or break 
point. Let your career goals slide early on and it'll be even easier to slip 
back into your old routine and ignore those well-intentioned resolutions.

With nearly half a million more 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CDkQFjAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ons.gov.uk%2Fons%2Fdcp171778_354442.pdf&ei=6XGhVJyfOcOwUYOngKgL&usg=AFQjCNGuP5YV2CRhuk4x8IwQNAlzZ8QEfQ&sig2=nx5CmpHChlFqPM_0UFi-9w&bvm=bv.82001339,d.d24>
 job vacancies being advertised in the UK, there is more chance than ever you 
will land your ideal job in 2015. So, what can you do to make sure you meet 
your work goals this year? And how can you decide on your next career steps?

Join us on Wednesday 7 January from 1-3pm GMT for a live chat with the 
experts. We'll be discussing:

• Assessing your career goals and ambitions

• Advice on sticking to career resolutions

• How to find a job that suits you

• Tips on writing a CV for your new career

• How to impress prospective employers

The Q&A takes place in the comments section below this article. Taking part is 
easier than ever: you cancreate a free Guardian account 
<https://id.theguardian.com/register?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>, or log in 
using your Twitter or Facebook profiles to comment. Alternatively, you can 
tweet us@GuardianCareers <https://twitter.com/GuardianCareers> or email your 
questions tocharlotte.seager@theguardian.com 
<https://mail.google.com/mail/u/0/?view=cm&fs=1&tf=1&source=mailto&to=charlotte.seager@theguardian.com>
 who can post them for you.

Panel

Sarah Byrne is online editor at Careershifters <http://www.careershifters.org/>
, an organisation which helps motivated people to change career into work they 
enjoy. Sarah has been involved with Careershifters since 2009.

Clare Whitmell is a Guardian contributor and a qualified business 
communication trainer. Clare specialises in writing and presentation skills 
coaching. She also blogs about CV writing and job-hunting tips on
JobMarketSuccess.com <http://www.JobMarketSuccess.com>.

Drew Roark has been a certified professional resume writer at Career Igniter 
<http://www.careerigniter.com> since 2009, and previously managed recruitment 
for Advanta Fulfillment Solutions. Drew has helped thousands of job seekers 
with their resumes of all industries and career levels.

Dasha Amron is a founder and managing director of Career Coaching Ventures 
<http://www.ukcareercoaching.com/> – a career and business coaching 
consultancy. Career Coaching Ventures provides CV & cover letter design, 
interview preparation and career coaching for individuals.

Sarah Archer is a qualified career coach, and co-founder of CareerTree 
<http://www.careertree.org.uk/>. She specialises in helping people change 
career to find work they love, and regularly advises clients on effective job 
search strategies.

Lynn Taylor is the author of Tame Your Terrible Office Tyrant; How to Manage 
Childish Boss Behavior & Thrive in Your Job 
<http://www.amazon.com/Tame-Terrible-Office-Tyrant-ebook/dp/B002JMV6E6/ref=tmm_kin_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1248579303&sr=8-1>
. She is regarded as a national workplace expert, is a work blogger for
PsychologyToday.com <http://www.PsychologyToday.com> and chief executive of 
Lynn Taylor Consulting.

Jonathan Burston is the founder of Interview Expert Academy 
<http://www.interviewexpertacademy.com/>, a consultancy which helps individuals 
to succeed at interviews. He has spent the last 20 years in senior, marketing 
and general management roles and as a professional interview consultant.

Jon Gregory is a job search, application and interview coach. He edits 
win-that-job.com <http://www.win-that-job.com> to provide free individual help 
and general advice. He's listed as a @GuardianCareers top tweeter and can be 
found @letsfirewalk.

Matthew Shaw-Cotterill is the regional sales manager of ReThink Recruitment 
<http://www.rethink-recruitment.com/>'s London office. He has over 17 years' 
experience in IT recruitment and talent management.

Jo Thurman is regional director of Personal Career Management 
<http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>, a leading career coaching company. 
Jo has been supporting individuals through their job search for more than 20 
years.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 