
At New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City’s Pride parade 
this summer, tucked between the rainbow-dyed dogs and the thousands of hairy 
legs in tiny shorts, was the head of the city’s HIV/Aids bureau, Demetre 
Daskalakis, wearing a mesh T-shirt and DJing the health department’s float.

The parade’s party atmosphere echoed the sex clubs where Daskalakis still 
occasionally offers consultations and the spin classes he teaches each week. 
And that atmosphere remained as health department staff handed out New York 
City-branded condoms to the cheering crowd. This might be because the health 
commissioner, Mary Bassett, was voguing next to the DJ table.

The health department in New York City, once the center of the country’s 
HIV/Aids epidemic, has made a point of directing funds to small, on-the-ground 
initiatives like the program that emerged from Daskalakis’s nights providing 
care in sex clubs.

Daskalakis, now the assistant health commissioner in charge of the Bureau of 
HIV/Aids Prevention and Control, achieved widespread acclaim while testing 
people in city sex clubs in 2013 to successfully combat a meningitis outbreak 
among gay and bisexual men. There the man known as “Dr Demetre” would offer HIV 
and hepatitis-C screenings and provide consultations while clubbers waited for 
the results of their tests.

But now he is funding the same programs he helped create. The bureau has 
contracts with 375 local and national groups. And money from the state’s Ending 
the Epidemic fund is being directed towards small transgender rights groups who 
do not yet have the resources to offer the sort of interventions provided by 
much more powerful HIV/Aids groups.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnew-york-city-hiv-aids-demetre-daskalakis-health-department%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4efed381b9ae6865945a2af215507d8bf6d820ab%2F0_46_1286_772%2F1286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20York's%20'queer%20health%20warrior'%3A%20city%20official%20funds%20grassroots%20fight%20against%20HIV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnew-york-city-hiv-aids-demetre-daskalakis-health-department%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20York%27s%20%27queer%20health%20warrior%27%3A%20city%20official%20funds%20grassroots%20fight%20against%20HIV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fnew-york-city-hiv-aids-demetre-daskalakis-health-department%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4efed381b9ae6865945a2af215507d8bf6d820ab%2F0_46_1286_772%2F1286.jpg>
 Demetre Daskalakis, the New York City assistant health commissioner in charge 
of the Bureau of HIV/Aids Prevention and Control. Photograph: Estella Yu 
“That money is being used to actually teach these organizations how to get 
bigger and thrive and be organizations,” Daskalakis said. “In fact, at the 
beginning of this, we don’t care what service they do, we just care that they 
grow.”

The comment might seem flippant, but Daskalakis surges with energy when he’s 
detailing HIV policies on a humid Monday afternoon at the health department 
headquarters or tweeting about Israeli singer Ofra Haza at 8am.

“HIV allows us to leverage the healthcare system to support the health of 
people who weren’t always getting that support,” Daskalakis said.

While the nature of government means a person with this much energy and 
experience may have to lower their ambitions – Daskalakis said he “tortured” 
his staff with ideas when he first started at the department – the bureau is 
the largest of its kind in the country with 413 staff members, and its 
initiatives are closely watched by other agencies. “We’re also bossing the feds 
around a little bit,” Daskalakis said.

One example of that is the city’s push to provide grants to groups that offer 
“status neutral” care to people whether they are HIV positive or negative – 
instead of focusing on people who already have the lifelong disease, this gives 
more flexibility in providing resources to at-risk communities.

Daskalakis said the city’s “status neutral” plan is part of a demonstration 
project the department is running for two federal health agencies – the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention and theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Resources and Services 
Administration. “Obviously we have to see if this going to work,” he said. He 
barely took a breath before continuing: “But it’s going to work, it’s a great 
idea.”

Some of the LGBT groups who have not worked as closely with the health 
department, like the Services & Advocacy for GLBT Elders (Sage), said they’ve 
noticed a more aggressive response to the epidemic in recent years.

“The whole orientation around ending the epidemic has been an important step 
forward – that if we take a more aggressive and more proactive and more 
energetic approach, that we can really turn the corner on HIV,” said Michael 
Adams, SageUSA CEO. “It has been encouraging to watch that orientation, and 
that’s coming from leadership at both the city level and the state level.”

Sage gets money from the city, mostly through the Department of Aging, but 
said elder health in the HIV crisis is often overlooked – even though 50% of 
the people living with Aids in the city are over 50 years old. His group is 
still working to get the city to respond to that population more strongly, but 
in general, he has been encouraged by the energy emanating from the department.

And when it comes to the bureau chief of HIV/Aids, Adams said advocacy is 
essential to the role. “It has always been and remains the case that in order 
to advance an effective response to HIV activism, advocacy is required and a 
willingness to challenge the status quo and challenge assumptions that are 
often really wrong-headed,” he said.

Challenging the status quo has been a driving force during Daskalakis more 
than 30 years in the field. When medical schools were keeping students away 
from hospital Aids wards in the 1990s, Daskalakis, trained as an infectious 
disease doctor, was skipping classes to follow rounds and listen to doctors 
treating those patients.

Now, he’s “a kid in the candy store” with the extensive collection of data the 
city has on HIV/Aids in its health department headquarters. And though he 
jokingly whispered in his office that the department’s role is “secretly an 
advocacy group in government”, it is no secret to any visitor who sees the 
small rainbow flags flying above the 22nd floor cubicles.

But his work in the department has even pushed Daskalakis to an even more 
activist bent.

He was “the gay health warrior” before he took over the HIV/Aids bureau in 
September 2014, but his time in office has ramped up his activist bent. 
Recently, he changed his title to “queer health warrior” to encompass sexual 
and gender identities beyond gay.

“I was dubbed gay health warrior and kind of realized that with all the work 
we’re doing in the transgender space, the gender nonconforming space, it’s a 
lie, that it’s not really accurate to what I’m doing anymore,” he said. “So I 
kind of thought though at least it has a little political overlay to it, I feel 
like it captures a lot of what we’re doing, which is sort of for all of that 
universe trying to sort of advocate for a population that in some way hasn’t 
had that.”
 