
All prices are based on a three-night trip departing on 30 December. 

For ravers


Amsterdam

Getting there: BMI (0844 8484 888; flybmi.com <http:>) has flights from London 
Heathrow from £196. The train takes four hours 16 minutes but the only 
available tickets for New Year cost £342.

Stay: Hotel Toren (00 31 20 622 60 33; thetoren.nl <http:>) occupies a 
handsome building on a quiet stretch of the Keizersgracht, a short walk from 
the Anne Frank House and some lively bars and restaurants. The rooms are all 
different: some airy and modern, others in traditional silks. Doubles from €195.

Eat: Don't waste valuable partying time queuing for a table; get a bite on the 
run. Raw herring is a speciality, and there are dozens ofharinghuis fish 
stands. The best is Zeebanket van Altena, next to the Rijksmuseum at Jan 
Luijkenstraat.

As the bells strike: After its closure in the 60s, the Westergasfabriek lay 
dormant until 2003, when it was restored as a cultural hub of galleries and 
restaurants, with a 3,500-capacity performance space in the old cylindrical 
gasometer. Local techno promoter Awakenings has been holding all-night New 
Year's Eve raves in the gasometer since its reinvention, and this year's event, 
dubbed Amsterdam United (amsterdam-united.nl <http:>; tickets €57.50), will 
feature an all-Dutch line-up until Dave Clarke in the 4am-6am slot.

The morning after: Stroll around the once run-down Jordaan area. Its winding 
streets are now home to cosy bars and cafes with a relaxed, studenty feel.

Berlin

Getting there: Easyjet (0905 821 9095; easyjet.com <http://easyjet.com>) has 
flights from £230.

Stay: Though somewhat bland, the Intercity Hotel (00800 7846 8357; 
intercityhotel.com <http://intercityhotel.com>) has two things going for it: 
availability, and a perfect clubbers' location right next to the Ostbahnhof. 
Doubles from €107.

Eat: For hearty German fare and a great atmosphere, head for Alte Pumpe (030 
2648 4265;altepumpe.de <http://altepumpe.de>), based in a pumping station on 
Lützowstrasse. Ask for a table next to the boilers and driving wheels – a prime 
photo opportunity.

As the bells strike: The Ostfunk party at the U3 Tunnel Club (u3-tunnel.de 
<http://u3-tunnel.de>), in a disused Metro station beneath Potsdamer Platz, is 
the place to go. From there, make for the cluster of clubs around Ostbahnhof 
station, where Berghain (berghain.de <http://berghain.de>), a techno mecca in a 
former powerplant, will be partying well beyond midday on the 1st.

The morning after: In Berlin, it's just an extension of the night before. 
Tresor (tresorberlin.com <http://tresorberlin.com>), a colossal club in, yup, 
an old power station, has lined up Detroit DJ Mike Huckaby.

Antwerp

Getting there: Cityjet (0871 666 5050; cityjet.com <http:>) has flights from 
London City airport from £145 return. It's only four hours by train, but 
available tickets now cost £329.

Stay: Hotel Postiljon (00 32 3 231 75 75; hotelpostiljon.be <http:>), a 
minute's walk from the Grote Markt, has doubles from £80.

Eat: After a beer or two with the locals, who congregate in the Grote Markt to 
down glasses of De Koninck in traditional bars such as Den Engel, escape to the 
reclaimed docks for dinner at the Velvet Lounge (00 32 3 237 39 78;
velvetlounge.be <http:>, reservations essential), the city's hippest place to 
eat.

As the bells strike: Make supper last till gone midnight, and watch the 
fireworks launch from a boat on the river Schelde. Finish up at the Dead 
Celebrity Ball at the Magiq Speigeltent (magiq.be <http:>) in the Hoboken 
district, or Petrol (00 32 3 226 49 63;petrolclub.be <http:>) down by the river.

The morning after: Grab a pastry from Patisserie Schoenaers at Belgielei 109 
(00 32 3 230 71 98;schoenaers.be <http:>) and head for the stadspark (city 
park), perfect for a brisk New Year's Day stroll.

Madrid

Getting there: Air Europa (00 34 902 401 501; aireuropa.com <http:>) has 
flights from London Gatwick from £150 return.

Stay: De Las Letras (00 34 91 523 7980; hoteldelasletras.com <http:>) may be a 
little pricey, but the roof terrace gives a fantastic bird's eye-view as the 
city gears up for midnight. The sleekly stylish rooms will help the hangover, 
too. Doubles from €183.

Eat: Forget formal dining; dip into the bodegas and tapas bars that line the 
streets. Top tips include Tabernilla del Gato Amadeus (Calle Cristo) and Juana 
La Loca (Plaza de Puerta de Moros).

As the bells strike: The place to gather is the Puerta del Sol; bring bottles 
of cava and grapes – tradition dictates that 12 are eaten as the clock strikes 
midnight.

The morning after: This is when the party really gets going: the Space of 
Sound Festival (spaceofsoundfestival.com <http:>) starts at 10am and takes over 
the 12,000-capacity Telefonica Arena, with 42 DJs in six rooms, including Sasha 
and Groove Armada. Tickets €80.

Moscow

Getting there: Swiss International Air Lines (0845 601 0956; swiss.com 
<http://www.swiss.com>) has flights from Heathrow to Moscow from £320 return.

Stay: The Moscow Savoy (00 7 495 620 8500; savoy.ru <http://savoy.ru>) has 
doubles from £110.

Eat: The best food is Georgian; eat at Mama Zoya (16d Frunzenskaya 
Naberezhnya, 00 8 499 242 85 50), a reasonably priced restaurant on a boat 
opposite Gorky Park. The decor – gnomes, palms and mannequins – is odd, but the 
views across the river are blinding.

As the bells strike: A minimal techno party in an ex-industrial district will 
see Moscow doing its best impression of Berlin. The Arma 17 club complex (00 7 
915 404 00 44;arma17.ru <http:>) is in an old gasworks behind Kursky rail 
station, and has coaxed techno heroes Ricardo Villalobos and Rudolf to see in 
2010.

The morning after: Stroll through Gorky Park and blitz the hangover with the 
cold air at the top of the Ferris wheel.

For romantics

Paris

Getting there: Rail Europe (0844 848 4070; raileurope.co.uk 
<http://raileurope.co.uk>) has three-day return fares from London St Pancras to 
Paris from £309.

Stay: Apartment Invalides (2binparis.com <http://2binparis.com>) is a charming 
one-bedroom apartment in the Orsay district, and costs from €160 a night over 
New Year.

Eat: The century-old Chartier restaurant in Montmartre (00 33 1 4770 8629; 
restaurant-chartier.com <http://restaurant-chartier.com>), complete with 
fin-de-siècle interiors of polished brass, wood panelling and floor-to-ceiling 
mirrors, is a perfect spot to start the evening, with classic French dishes 
that will cost you half as much as many of the more pretentious brasseries 
nearby. Afterwards, wander towards the river via "Le mur des je t'aime", a 
40-square-metre monument inscribed with "I love you" in 250 languages.

As the bells strike: Head for the Promenade Plantée, an elevated walkway that 
runs through the 12th arrondissement. You'll pass plenty of revellers heading 
in the opposite direction towards the overcrowded Champs-Elysées, but carry on 
towards the Seine, where dozens of intimate bars line the streets around the 
Pont de Bercy.

The morning after: Grab a coffee and croissant and go to the Marais district 
on the Right Bank. Home to a long-established Jewish community, it's a trendy 
area lined with boutiques, art galleries and stylish cafes.

Venice

Getting there: Easyjet (0905 821 0905; easyjet.com <http://easyjet.com>) has 
flights from London Gatwick to Venice from £295.

Stay: Venice gets heavily booked for New Year, but the gorgeous 30s-style 
Hotel Belle Epoque (00 39 041 244 0004;hotelbelleepoque.it 
<http://hotelbelleepoque.it>) still has rooms available from €160.

Eat: For the best seafood in town, book a table for two at Hostaria Da Franz 
(00 39 041 522 0861;hostariadafranz.com 
<http://osteriadafranz.netsolutionsvenice.com>), by the canal on Fondamenta San 
Giuseppe, just 15 minutes' stroll from San Marco Square. Order the lip-smacking
seppie (cuttlefish) cooked in black ink, and the anguilla (eel), prepared 
according to a secret recipe.

As the bells strike: San Marco Square will be awash with smoochers this New 
Year's Eve. The second "Capodanno Love" event is aiming to fondle its way into 
Venetian tradition, having hit the headlines for its climactic mass kiss last 
year, when over 60,000 lovers locked lips as the clock struck 12. Then sneak 
away from the masses and north towards the Naranzaria (naranzaria.it 
<http://naranzaria.it>) wine bar for a bottle of Prosecco on the loggia 
overlooking the Grand Canal.

The morning after: Jump on a vaporetto for an hour's cruise across to the 
peaceful island of Murano.

Budapest

Getting there: Easyjet (0905 821 9095; easyjet.com <http://easyjet.com>) has 
flights from London Stansted from £249.

Stay: The Mamaison Hotel Andrassy (00 36 1 4622 118; andrassyhotel.com 
<http://andrassyhotel.com>) has a great location and a slick Bauhaus style; 
doubles from €106 on New Year's Eve, €77 other nights (room-only).

Eat: Glide through the heart of the city on a boat trip featuring a 
four-course meal, with music provided by an award-winning local gypsy band and 
food prepared by Hungary's only Gault Millau-rated chef, Klöter Gregor-Grex. 
The buffet menu includes smoked salmon tartare, parsley soup with truffle oil 
and braised duck leg, and plenty of champagne and local wines. Book on
tinyurl.com/budapestboat <http://tinyurl.com/budapestboat>.

As the bells strike: At the stroke of midnight, toast with a glass of Unicum, 
the staple Hungarian herbal liqueur with allegedly medicinal properties.

The morning after: Soak away your hangover at one of Budapest's celebrated 
thermal baths. Avoid the overly touristy Gellert and head instead to the 
Lukacs, (Frankel Leo ut 25-29), handily placed for the city's best cake shop, 
Daubner Cukraszda (50 Szepvolgyi ut).

Lisbon

Getting there: Easyjet (0905 821 9095; easyjet.com <http://easyjet.com>) has 
flights from London Gatwick and Luton from £223.

Stay: York House (00 351 21 396 2435; yorkhouselisboa.com 
<http://yorkhouselisboa.com>) is a small boutique hotel 10 minutes from the 
heart of Lisbon. Twin rooms over New Year's Eve from €150; doubles from €200.

Eat: Set in the grand building of a former convent, A Travessa (00 351 21 390 
2034;atravessa.com <http://atravessa.com>) is one of Lisbon's most characterful 
restaurants, serving all manner of Portuguese, Belgian and French dishes.

As the bells strike: After dinner, wander towards the Bairro Alto for a shot 
of Ginjinha, a sour cherry liqueur, and on to the Principe Real district for a 
glass of midnight Champagne in the Pavilhão Chinês. This eccentric bar is 
ringed with antique cabinets housing bizarre collectibles, and has a smoky 
lounge and side rooms dotted with cosy loungers.

The morning after: Hop on tram 28 for a ride through Lisbon's ancient – and 
remarkably steep – streets. Highlights include the grand Estrela Basilica and 
the charming Castelo de São Jorge.

Ghent

Getting there: Rail Europe (0844 848 4070; raileurope.co.uk 
<http://raileurope.co.uk>) has three-day return fares from London St Pancras to 
Ghent (via Brussels) from £192. The journey takes about three hours.

Stay: In the heart of the city, in the Patershol district, Hotel Harmony (00 
32 9 324 2680;hotel-harmony.be <http://hotel-harmony.be>) is an intimate 
boutique hotel occupying a pair of 18th-century merchant houses, both elegantly 
decorated in bold minimalist style. Doubles over New Year's Eve cost from €180, 
including breakfast.

Eat: For a candlelit dinner for two, nothing beats Tête-à-Tête (Jan 
Breydelstraat 32; 00 32 9 233 9500). Ask for a table on the enclosed terrace, 
with its canal views. The seafood is top notch – try the lobster bisque with 
Armagnac.

As the bells strike: The new yacht harbour, Portus Ganda, is staging a big 
firework display.

The morning after: Work off some of that Leffe beer with a stroll around the 
centre, taking in St Michael's Bridge, from where there is an impressive view 
of the city skyline.
 