
When a director of the world’s most successful video game, Grand Theft Auto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grand-theft-auto>, started work on a 
titlebased around the story of the Iranian Revolution 
<http://www.1979revolutiongame.com/>, it raised a few eyebrows in the industry. 
At his studio in New York, Navid Khonsari explained the decision: “I knewiNK 
Stories <http://inkstories.com/> could create not just a pseudo-psychological 
experience but, by using real world events in a respectful manner, could give 
audiences the experience of substantial emotional impact.”

At The Future of Play 
<https://www.prote.in/en/feed/2014/07/protein-forum-the-next-level-for-video-games-round-up>
, a forum that took place in London in July about the future of video gaming, 
it was proposed that interactive play is expanding beyond gamer and games 
console, towards a more diverse, mainstream audience. This is provoking a 
growth in games that focus on social themes including politics, ethics and 
human emotions.

The reason lies in the changing media landscape. 
<http://stratechery.com/2014/apple-tv-might-disrupt-microsoft-sony/> On the one 
hand, interactive devices such as smartphones, tablets and increasingly smart 
TVs are beginning to dominate media consumption. On the other, there is a new 
wave of more immersive media on the horizon such asOculus Rift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/23/oculus-rift-virtual-reality-niche-max-cohen-morpheus>
 andGoogle Glass <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-glass>. It’s 
hard to believe that these developments will not in some way result in a 
convergence between the interactive experiences of games, and the narrative 
approach of more traditional storytelling formats.

So what does any of this mean for society at large? Media futures writer 
Marshall McLuhan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshall_McLuhan> argued that 
each new media trend has a profound impact on culture: “We become what we 
behold. We shape our tools and then our tools shape us.” So far much of the 
impact of our digital screen addiction has been the casual desire tothrow birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/flappy-bird> and juggle candy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/26/candy-crush-saga-king-why-popular>
. However there is a good argument that time-killing gaming apps will not be 
the interactive experience of choice on more immersive channels such as 
connected TVs.

Interactive media has the unique potential to place you in the shoes of other 
people and create genuinely empathetic experiences. It was back in 1999 that the
Sims enabled the characters in the game to grow up gay and enter into same sex 
relationships. 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/the-kiss-that-changed-video-games> 
However the prevalent idea about interactive media is derived from games like 
Khonsari’s former Grand Theft Auto series, which have long been criticised for 
the potential for extreme acts of violence they place in the hands of their 
players. Khonsari now believes that people are looking for more than this: 
“Traditional console publishers will continue to make the big blockbusters and 
those will be great, but audiences have a bigger and more dynamic appetite.”

Recently, two other examples of the “play with purpose” trend appeared in the 
news for different reasons. Depression Quest is a game that invites 
participants to explore and understand the world of depression. The difficult 
themes that it engages with made it avery difficult choice to launch on the 
same day that we learned of actor Robin Williams’ death. 
<http://www.polygon.com/2014/8/13/5998567/depression-quest-launches-high-profile-suicide-robin-williams-threats>
Bad Papers 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/8/15/6005965/play-this-bad-paper-a-journalistic-choose-your-own-adventure-story>
 on the other hand, is an interactive experience accompanying an investigative 
report by the New York Times on debt collection that allowed the reader to 
experience the story from the perspective of both debtor and debt collector. 
Khonsari thinks that games as a format allow us to open up a whole new 
perspective on historical events: “A narrative game, which allows critical 
decisions to be made by the player, seems like the ultimate tool to tell the 
story of a revolution.”

As we reach the tipping point when the vast majority of media consumption 
moves over to interactive, connected devices, the potential impact on culture 
and society should be given more attention, and trends around interaction 
design and social impact are a key development to keep and eye on. The big 
question about how big and significant the trend is likely to become is largely 
a commercial one. As Khonsari explains, for him it is all a question of great 
storytelling: “With 1979 we’ve put endless hours into crafting a story that 
will capture the imaginations and emotions of its players. Coming from the 
background of working on GTA, Max Payne, etc. I know how to deliver quality, 
and so the production value of 1979 will be outstanding as will the experience. 
Ultimately I believe that great stories manage to reach wide audiences.”

How the future of play with purpose will pan out remains to be seen, but we 
will give the last words to Marshall McLuhan, whose message is blunt but 
encouraging: “Anyone who tries to make a distinction between education and 
entertainment doesn’t know the first thing about either.”

David Hawksworth is co-founder and creative director of Given London 
<http://www.givenlondon.com> and Christian Johnsen is vice president, strategy 
director atCarat New York <http://www.carat.co.uk/>

Read more stories like this:

• Technology promotes behaviour among children that can be self-revealing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/aug/21/online-safety-children-technology-parents>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 