
“Extraordinary how potent cheap music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2002/sep/28/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures>
 is,” observes Amanda in Private Lives, Noël Coward’s play about the lovers who 
can’t live with – and can’t live without – each other. Amanda and Elyot are as 
much in thrall to music and its ability to evoke deep feelings as anyone else. 
Their special song is one of Coward’s own,Someday I’ll Find You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=akGOqVgKxzE>.

Cheap music is all over the Edinburgh festival this year and mightily 
enjoyable it is too. Alan Cumming celebrates it inhis show at the international 
festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/07/alan-cumming-sings-sappy-songs-review-edinburgh-festival>
, a night of heart-on-sleeve and catch-in-the-throat torch songs. When Cumming 
performsAdele’s Someone Like You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/23/adele-25-record-broken-success-ballads-blockbusters-singles-album>
, he makes it feel as if he really is singing about someone he once knew.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Ftorch-songs-edinburgh-festival-alan-cumming-lady-rizo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b38fffa1ac4b7335797b14bd2ee984ca69992df%2F0_251_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20flames%3A%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20shows%20that%20tell%20stories%20with%20torch%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Ftorch-songs-edinburgh-festival-alan-cumming-lady-rizo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20flames%3A%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20shows%20that%20tell%20stories%20with%20torch%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Ftorch-songs-edinburgh-festival-alan-cumming-lady-rizo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b38fffa1ac4b7335797b14bd2ee984ca69992df%2F0_251_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Finding the narrative at the heart of every song … Camille O’Sullivan. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
That, of course, is the art of the torch singer. Camille O’Sullivan, whose show
The Carny Dream 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/camille-o-sullivan-the-carny-dream> has 
packed out the Lafayette tent at Circus Hub, is a fringe regular who knows how 
to deliver a song as if she really means it. Her forte are ones that tell a 
story. She isas much an actor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/feb/29/camille-osullivan-constance-king-john-thou-art-not-holy-shakespeare-video>
 as she is a singer in the numbers that have become her signature songs, 
particularly Is That All There Is? andLook Mummy, No Hands 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tu-6PSindzA>. The danger is that she can 
over-egg them with that distinctive gravelly voice and expressive face. On the 
night I was there she veered dangerously in that direction and wasn’t helped by 
an over-amplification that introduced a harshness into the sound. But at her 
very considerable best, the French-Irish Camille genuinely deserves the 
appellation “chanteuse”, creating a magic as she finds the narrative at the 
heart of every song and offering us the persona best suited to deliver it. It 
makes her David Bowie tribute something special.

Like Amanda and Elyot, we all have songs that we hear as the soundtrack to our 
lives. InPhoebe Eclair-Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/07/phoebe-eclair-powell-playwright-fury-torch-epic-love-and-pop-songs-soho-theatre-edinburgh>
’sTorch <https://edinburghfestival.list.co.uk/event/578547-torch/> at 
Underbelly it’s not Coward and Peggy Lee but Lady Gaga, SIA, Katy Perry and 
Taylor Swift who provide the soundtrack to the life of an aimless young woman 
approaching 30 and looking for meaning in her life. Jess Mabel Jones, last 
glimpsed in the gloriousBackstage in Biscuit Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/09/backstage-in-biscuit-land-edinburgh-festival-2014-review-tourettes>
, certainly knows how to belt out a number and the numbers comes thick and fast 
as a club toilet becomes the stage on which her character recalls past 
relationships with men and, most importantly, her shifting relationship with 
herself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Ftorch-songs-edinburgh-festival-alan-cumming-lady-rizo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c08818202aa6a77fd126e31f8e94606f59bfbd6%2F0_1044_3840_2303%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20flames%3A%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20shows%20that%20tell%20stories%20with%20torch%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Ftorch-songs-edinburgh-festival-alan-cumming-lady-rizo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20flames%3A%20the%20Edinburgh%20festival%20shows%20that%20tell%20stories%20with%20torch%20songs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Ftorch-songs-edinburgh-festival-alan-cumming-lady-rizo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c08818202aa6a77fd126e31f8e94606f59bfbd6%2F0_1044_3840_2303%2F3840.jpg>
 Jess Mabel Jones, the star of Torch. Photograph: Richard Davenport 
It’s a good idea, and would probably be better still if the songs chosen 
really did seem to have a connection with that particular episode in her life 
but they feel pretty random, and the fact we don’t get to hear the entire song 
is not all that satisfying. It doesn’t help that, while the writing has some 
spark at times, it lacks direction and energy and the story peters out rather 
than reaching any climax.

Towards the end of Torch, the young woman reflects upon what it might be like 
to become a mother. InLady Rizo: Multiplied 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/lady-rizo-multiplied> at Assembly 
Checkpoint, the American singer with a line in cheeky self-revealing patter 
offers up a set that is one great love song. The typical torch song is to a 
current or lost love but Lady Rizo’s is to motherhood and the man in her life, 
her nine-month-old son. Here, the song Help Me Make It Through the Night is not 
the cry for help from a heart-broken lover but a plea from a sleep-deprived 
parent. It’s no less anguished or effective.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhcWVZI0YSbM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhcWVZI0YSbM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhcWVZI0YSbM&media=>
 Lady Rizo performs Baby, It’s You in 2010 
The glamour puss Lady Rizo is the alter-ego of Amelia Zirin-Brown, and a diva 
par excellence. The character and the real woman meld in a show that displays 
plenty of wit but also real tenderness.Come Look at the Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/07/heres-looking-at-you-kid-babies-on-stage-at-edinburgh-fringe>
 has nothing on what Lady Rizo offers in a sequence that will either have you 
cooing or questioning whether a baby should ever be used as a prop on stage. 
The show makes motherhood visible in a way that it is seldom seen in the 
theatre – this is surely Edinburgh’s only performance in which sequins and 
breast milk feature side by side.

Rizo does it in high style and with a flaunting cheek that knows we want to be 
seduced. It’s something she shares with Cumming. Towards the end of his show, 
Cumming sings Coward’s A Talent to Amuse. But what he and Rizo prove is that 
they can do so much more. They can make us feel too.
 