
When we set out to investigate young people's job skills for the 10th 
Education for All Global Monitoring Report,Youth and Skills: Putting education 
to work 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/efareport/reports/2012-skills/>
, it soon became clear that unless we focused on the disadvantaged, we weren't 
going to change anything. This was true in rich countries like the UK just as 
much as in the developing world.

Young people who have a hard time making their way in life because of poverty, 
rural isolation or disability – or because they face discrimination on the 
basis of their gender or ethnic identity – face more trouble when it comes to 
acquiring the skills they need to get decent work. In the job market they face 
a steep uphill struggle against the combined forces of discrimination and a 
lack of skills.

The problem starts at lower secondary school, which is where young people 
should consolidate their basic knowledge so that they can learn more 
sophisticated job skills. In some European countries, a fifth of those aged 
between 18 and 24 years-old drop out with no more than lower secondary 
schooling, and lack the skills they need to find a job.

Some countries, such as the Netherlands, offer these young people a chance to 
re-enter education. But such alternative pathways to learning skills are not 
being offered to Europe's youth on a large enough scale. One in five adults in 
the UK, our report reveals, have such poor literacy that they struggle to 
complete a job application form.

This lack of skills further detriments youth employment. New figures today 
show that long-term youth unemployment in England has increased by 23% since 
May 2010.

The struggle to obtain skills and jobs feeds into the kind of frustration that 
was an ingredient of last year's riots. As part of our research for this year's 
Global Monitoring Report, we interviewed some young people from Tottenham, the 
epicentre of the riots.

"They keep saying for us to have experience, but they don't really give us the 
opportunity to have an experience on that type of job, or any job," one young 
man told us.

Apprenticeships <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/apprenticeships> are one 
way out of that trap, but our report finds that in many cases apprenticeships 
mirror and perpetuate wider discrimination. Apprentices are more likely to be 
men, and young women who take apprenticeships get paid less while in them, find 
it harder to get a job and receive lower pay once they are in work.

In the UK, young women earn 21% less, on average, while in apprenticeships. 
The wage benefit for a woman who has completed an apprenticeship is 4%, 
compared with 20% for a man who has done the same training. And the share of 
black and other ethnic minority youths already employed who enter 
apprenticeships is 32%, compared with 44% for white youths.

The UK could do worse than take a leaf out of Germany's book. The success of 
Germany's apprenticeship system is a major reason why youth unemployment there 
is around 8% – lower than other parts of Europe. Open to all students who have 
completed lower secondary school, the system combines structured training in a 
company with part-time classroom tuition. About 60% of young Germans enrol in 
this dual system and 57% of those who complete an apprenticeship are 
immediately employed by their training company.

The young people we listened to in Tottenham were desperately aware of the 
handicap they face when applying for a job without work experience – the kind 
of experience that a successful apprenticeship system would provide.

While governments have a crucial role in setting up apprenticeship programmes 
and qualifications, employers also need to confront their responsibility to 
help build the skills that can give young people better lives and contribute to 
economic growth. When we asked the young people from Tottenham what they needed 
from employers, their answer came across loud and clear. "Offer training and 
just give people a chance," one young woman said.

It's time we took her advice and gave todays' generation the skills – and hope 
– that they need and deserve.

Pauline Rose is the director of the Education for All Global Monitoring Report 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/efareport/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 