
On 5 May 1926, the Manchester Guardian was reduced to two typewritten sheets 
of foolscap (three if you count the page stamped with a request to “Please 
display this Bulletin in your Window and keep the Public posted with the Latest 
News”). The newspaper was forced to publish this short bulletin rather than the 
normal paper because the print unions had been called to join theGeneral Strike 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-13828537>, begun at one minute to midnight on 3 
May.

The strike, which lasted until 13 May, was in support of the UK’s miners, who 
were fighting demands from mine owners to accept less pay and longer hours in 
order to keep the mines open and profitable. Unions for the railways, transport 
workers, dockers, power stations, printers and others came out on strike 
alongside the miners.Newspapers <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers> 
and print unions in particular played an important role not only in how the 
strike was reported to the public, but also in how it developed.
 Guardian bulletin 5 May 1926 
Download: The Manchester Guardian Bulletin, 5 May 1926 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/12/Guardian_Bulletin_5_May_1926_p1-3.pdf>

The Guardian’s 5 May bulletin, publicised in the paper the day before 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/18/Guardian_4_May_Suspension_of_publication.pdf>
, was available at the Guardian offices and was sent to subscribers and anyone 
who sent a request and postage to the manager.

The first section of the bulletin is an editorial entitled “In the dark”. It 
queries how the strike has come about, even though negotiations between the 
Trades Union Congress (TUC <https://www.tuc.org.uk/about-tuc>) and prime 
ministerStanley Baldwin 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/history/past-prime-ministers/stanley-baldwin> 
seemed to have been moving towards agreement on both sides on 2 May:


“For some reason or other, an offer made by Mr Baldwin, which is understood to 
have encouraged high hopes of a settlement amongst the trade union leaders, was 
abandoned by its author … without waiting for the final decision of the Trade 
Unions Congress upon it.”

Baldwin instead demanded the unconditional withdrawal of strike notices from 
the TUC before talks could continue. The General Strike began the following day.


The Guardian editorial expresses bewilderment over the reasons for Baldwin’s 
withdrawal of his offer. In fact, his about-turn was triggered by the press and 
one of the print unions, the National Society of Operative Printers and 
Assistants (Natsopa 
<http://www.printerscollection.org.uk/menuprinters-unions?start=10>). On 2 May, 
unbeknownst to the TUC who were continuing their negotiations, the London 
printers of the Daily Mail refused to print the paper because they objected to 
an editorial headed“For King and Country” 
<http://contentdm.warwick.ac.uk/cdm/ref/collection/strike/id/80> which was 
critical of trade unions. This unofficial strike led the government to call off 
the talks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fnewspapers-in-the-general-strike-1926-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3c3fa0adcfceb99f76694d3346139d3c661772b%2F48_48_3612_3046%2F3612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newspapers%20in%20the%20general%20strike%201926%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fnewspapers-in-the-general-strike-1926-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newspapers%20in%20the%20general%20strike%201926%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fnewspapers-in-the-general-strike-1926-archive-teaching-resource%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3c3fa0adcfceb99f76694d3346139d3c661772b%2F48_48_3612_3046%2F3612.jpg>
 Going to work in Stockport, 6 May 1926. Transport unions were included in the 
General Strike. Photograph: Walter Doughty for the Guardian 
Printers were included in the first wave of unions called by the TUC to join 
the General Strike. InThe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> Book of the General Strike by 
RH Haigh, DS Morris and AR Peters, the editors state: “The workforce of the 
Manchester Guardian actually appealed to the General Council of the TUC for 
permission to be exempt from the strike. Their plea however, alongside others 
registered by papers such as the Daily Herald sympathetic to the labour 
movement, was turned down.”


After 5 May, the Guardian was at first only able to produce a single daily 
sheet, printed privately, later increasing to four pages, for the duration of 
the strike.


Direct action! Seventy years of strikes in pictures from the GNM Archive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2015/mar/03/direct-action-seventy-years-of-strikes-in-pictures-from-the-gnm-archive>
The Guardian’s 4 May edition includes a comment piece 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/12/Guardian_4_May_1926_TUC_and_the_press.pdf>
 which is highly critical of the TUC’s decision to call out the print unions as 
part of the General Strike, thereby silencing the press. It calls this a 
“singularly misguided policy”, explaining that “To put the press out of action 
gives a most dangerous power to the Government, which … will enjoy a complete 
monopoly in the distribution of news and views.”

There is clearly much concern over the public’s access to unbiased reporting 
and how this may affect the outcome of the strike: “In a time of crisis a free 
press is specially needed, because it is important to keep open every channel 
through which moderate opinion can express itself.” In later issues the 
Guardian is also critical of the government for allowing the “wretched 
irrelevance” of the “Daily Mail incident” to break down negotiations.

The Guardian’s prediction about the government’s monopoly of the news turned 
out to be largely the case: the government established their own broadsheet 
publication, theBritish Gazette 
<http://www.20thcenturylondon.org.uk/mol-74-200-20>, a propaganda sheet edited 
by Winston Churchill, then Chancellor of the Exchequer. Printed on the presses 
of the Morning Post, the British Gazette had a circulation of around two 
million by the end of the strike. In response, the TUC published its own strike 
bulletin, theBritish Worker 
<http://www.unionhistory.info/timeline/Tl_Display.php?irn=5001769&QueryPage=..%2FAdvSearch.php>
, which was met with great suspicion by the government; a report in the 
Guardian on 6 May states that “publication ... was held up … while the police 
examined the first copy.” Later, the government succeeded in stopping the 
supply of paper available to the British Worker, meaning it was reduced from 
eight pages to a single sheet.

On 10 May, the Guardian’s London correspondent reported that “No liberal 
newspapers are appearing in London, so printers’ strike has silenced side of 
press here favourable to conciliation, while nearly all Conservative press is 
appearing.”


A newspaper, if it has done its duty, is an essential public service

The Guardian’s proprietor and editor, CP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott>, was 
appalled by the shutting down of the press during the strike. He was determined 
that publication of the paper would not be threatened in the future; within a 
few months of the end of the General Strike, a company union, theManchester 
Guardian and Evening News Society 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f4%2f3%2f1%2f1%2f7>
, was established. Members were not allowed to strike. In return, they received 
benefits such as pensions and sick pay, and a guarantee that their pay and 
conditions would remain at levels demanded by existing unions.


A notice to all employees of the Manchester Guardian and Evening News, 
outlining the proposal for the formation of the MGEN Society, hints at the 
frustration that Scott had felt during the strike: “A newspaper, if it has done 
its duty, is an essential public service and it is not right that this service 
should be constantly liable to interruption by the decisions of any one of many 
outside bodies.”

Members were allowed to remain in their old unions under the scheme, but many 
of these did not welcome the MGEN society. TheTypographical Association 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Typographical_Association> was especially 
hostile, and the archive holds several documents relating to their rejection of 
the new union, including pro-forma letters of resignation issued by the 
Association and signed by Manchester Guardian and Evening News Employees.

Jean Stead and the women of the miners' strike: teaching resource from the GNM 
Archive, June 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-miners-strike-1984-85-jean-stead-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
However, 80% of the Guardian and Evening News employees had voted in favour of 
the scheme and, as Ayerst puts it in his biography of the Guardian, “from 1927 
the MGEN Society went peacefully on its way bringing real benefits to its 
members.”

The society continued until the second world war, when the Typographical 
Association’s continued refusal to accept it eventually led to its demise, as 
it meant that the papers could not secure emergency alternatives for printing 
in the event of a bomb strike.

The Trades Disputes act <http://spartacus-educational.com/Ltrade27.htm> was 
passed in 1927, banning general strikes.

The catalogue for the GNM Archive <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/gnm-archive>, 
which contains photographs showing scenes from the General Strike in 
Manchester, as well as records relating to the foundation of the MGEN Society, 
is available to browsehere <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>. 
Please seethis page <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for 
further information on the archive collections and how to access them.

 