
Brazil were held to a goalless draw by 10-man South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica> on the opening day of the 
men’s Olympic football tournament in Brasilia.

The home side were bolstered by the presences of Neymar and the new Manchester 
City signing Gabriel Jésus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/gabriel-jesus-manchester-city-new-neymar-premier-league>
, but struggled for inspiration against well-organised visitors who held firm 
despite the dismissal of Mothobi Mvala shortly before the hour for a second 
yellow card.

Jésus came close to giving Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil>
 – and City – fans something to cheer when he hit the post 22 minutes from time 
when it seemed easier to score, but overall it was a disappointing start to a 
competition that Rogério Micale’s team is widely expected to win.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fgabriel-jesus-misses-open-goal-for-brazil-at-rio-2016-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gabriel%20Jesus%20misses%20open%20goal%20for%20Brazil%20at%20Rio%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fgabriel-jesus-misses-open-goal-for-brazil-at-rio-2016-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gabriel%20Jesus%20misses%20open%20goal%20for%20Brazil%20at%20Rio%202016%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fgabriel-jesus-misses-open-goal-for-brazil-at-rio-2016-video&media=>
Gabriel Jesus misses open goal for Brazil at Rio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/04/gabriel-jesus-misses-open-goal-for-brazil-at-rio-2016-video>
The other Group A fixture, between Iraq and Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/denmark>, finished goalless at the same 
venue in front of a tiny crowd despite both sides having chances to win.

'We ran out of beer': the night Nigeria won Olympic football gold against 
Argentina
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/olympics-football-1996-nigeria-argentina-rio>
The day’s most entertaining game came in Group C and saw Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> hold the defending champions 
Mexico to a 2-2 draw in Rio. Oribe Peralta opened the scoring for Mexico after 
52 minutes, with the Arsenal winger Serge Gnabry quickly levelling the scores. 
Rodolfo Pizarro restored the advantage but Matthias Ginter’s 78th minute 
equaliser. In that group’s other game, South Korea handed Fiji a humbling 8-0 
defeat.

Honduras <https://www.theguardian.com/football/honduras> defeated Algeria 3-2 
in the opening match of Group D, with their opponents mounting spirited 
comebacks from 2-0 and 3-1 down without being able to achieve parity. In that 
group’s other encounter, Portugal defeated Argentina 2-0, with substitute Pité 
Trabulo putting the result beyond doubt for Rui Jorge’s team after Goncalo 
Paciência’s 66th minute opener. In that encounter, Diego Simeone’s son Giovanni 
also appeared as a 78th minute substitute for Argentina.
 