
Can Carson Palmer replicate last season’s production at age 37?

The 2015 campaign was a magical one for the Arizona Cardinals’ quarterback. He 
ranked second in the league in touchdowns and fourth in total passing yards. 
There were career highs across the board on his stat sheet, and he led Arizona 
to the NFC title game — coming up short against the Cam Newton juggernaut in 
Carolina. This sounds like it should bode well for the Cardinals in 2016, but 
those gaudy, MVP-calibre numbers came after a season where Palmer played only 
six games due to injury. He’ll be turning 37 in December and while the 
quarterback position might be the safest it’s ever been in the modernNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>, age catches up to you. In his 13-year 
career, he’s only played every game in a season seven times. For comparison, 
Tom Brady — who’s 39 and has even more miles on him due to all his deep playoff 
runs — has played all 16 games in 13 out of 16 seasons. A regression seems 
likely, just because the idea of Palmer having back-to-back hall of fame-level 
seasons is hard to count on.

AFC West season preview: the Broncos could well go from first to worst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/05/afc-west-season-preview-denver-broncos-oakland-raiders-chiefs-chargers>
If he can stay on the field for the majority of the year, Palmer will 
certainly have plenty of weapons at his disposal — Larry Fitzgerald, John 
Brown, JJ Nelson, and Michael Floyd in the receiving corps, plus multiple 
running back options — which should make the Cardinals the favorite in the 
division on paper. Of course, there’s the old cliche about how they don’t play 
the games on paper, which would be quite a sight to behold if they did. People 
would be slipping all over the place.

Is Doug Baldwin now Russell Wilson’s favorite target?

If you had Seattle Seahawks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/seattle-seahawks> wide receiver Doug Baldwin 
on your fantasy team last year, you probably won your league, or at least made 
it to the playoffs, just on the strength of a remarkable second half. A knee 
injury cost Seattle tight end Jimmy Graham in week 12, which took away one of 
Russell Wilson’s favorite passing options. Baldwin stepped up and scored 11 
touchdowns in the final six games of the season. Graham will be back 
eventually, if not for week one, as he is still listed as questionable for the 
clash with the Miami Dolphins. Will Baldwin keep seeing the touches he got with 
Graham back? After signing a new deal with Seattle in June, will he still be as 
motivated?

More importantly, will Russell Wilson still be motivated now that he’s had sex 
with Ciara 
<http://www.etonline.com/news/192755_ciara_and_russell_wilson_confirm_they_finally_had_sex_hilarious_snapchat_videos/>
 (don’t blame us, they’re the ones that brought it up)? This will be his first 
full NFL season after consummating his marriage. It changes you.

NFC North preview: are the Vikings doomed without Teddy Bridgewater?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/31/nfc-north-preview-teddy-bridgewater-minnesota-vikings>
Regardless, Seattle still has an exceptional defense and is easily one of the 
elite teams in the NFC. It’ll be quite a battle between the Seahawks and 
Cardinals for the division title, though I fully expect both teams to secure 
playoff spots.

Is Jared Goff already a bust?

I don’t know if I can even answer this question without smashing my laptop 
with a tire iron. The Los Angeles Ramssurrendered six draft picks 
<http://www.espn.com/nfl/draft2016/story/_/id/15422430/los-angeles-rams-select-jared-goff-no-1-overall-pick>
 for the right to select Cal quarterback Goff at No1. Hailed as the quarterback 
of the future, it was assumed that he would ease into the role of the starter 
during the season — not right away, but eventually.

AFC South questions for 2016: can Andrew Luck drag the Colts to the postseason?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/30/afc-south-preview-andrew-luck-indianapolis-colts-nfl>
Then we saw him play professional football. Sure, it was the preseason, but of 
the three QBs at camp for the Rams (Goff, Case Keenum and Sean Mannion) Goff 
looked the worst, not only technically, but also in terms of poise and football 
intelligence. Yes, he’s a rookie. Sure, learning an NFL playbook and 
understanding how to run an NFL offense is like being forced to learn 
open-heart surgery while a 300lbs man threatens to kick the crap out of you. 
The problem is that while these are common issues for rookie quarterbacks, most 
of them don’t cost their team six draft picks that could have shored up other 
glaring issues with one of the NFL’s worst offenses.

Even if Goff magically climbs up the depth chart — he’s currently the 
third-string quarterback on a team that’s starting Keenum — he’s still not 
going to have anyone to throw to. The Rams’ best wide receiver is the mercurial 
Tavon Austin. Maybe you can see something in Kenny Britt that I don’t. This is 
going to be a very, very bad team save for their excellent defensive line and 
running back Todd Gurley, the reigning rookie of the year. It’s not fair to 
call Goff a bust before the season even starts, but it’s more than fair to say 
that he was not worth what they gave up. Instead of a transformational figure 
to usher in a new era in LA, the Rams might have found themselves a new Sam 
Bradford, who they’d likely love to have back, which reveals a very sad truth 
about the state of this football team. I’d say they’d finish dead-last in the 
NFC West if it weren’t for the 49ers.

Outside of the Colin Kaepernick circus, is there any reason to watch the 49ers?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Colin%20Kaepernick%20not%20standing%20for%20the%20national%20anthem%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Colin%20Kaepernick%20not%20standing%20for%20the%20national%20anthem%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video&media=>
Why is Colin Kaepernick not standing for the national anthem? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/02/why-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video>
“That’s one thing you like about Blaine [Gabbert]’s makeup, there are not 
too-high highs or too-low lows,” new San Francisco coach Chip Kelly saidabout 
his starting quarterback 
<http://sacramento.cbslocal.com/2016/09/05/49ers-preview-san-franciscos-season-revolves-around-second-chances/>
. “He’s very steady in his approach. You get the same Blaine Gabbert every day 
and I think that’s a good thing, especially at the quarterback position.” 
Imagine waking up every day and thanking the lord that your starting 
quarterback is Blaine Gabbert. I can’t just see the ceiling, the top of my head 
is currently rubbing against it.

Such is the nature of the NFL today — the age of the game manager. Peyton 
Manning had the worst season of his entire career last year, andstill won a 
Super Bowl for the Denver Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/07/super-bowl-50-denver-broncos-defense-overwhelms-carolina-panthers>
 thanks to their next-level defense. His back-up, Brock Osweiler, earned 
himself a four-year, $72m contract with the Houston Texans off of a few solid 
performances while Manning was benched for poor play. The Broncos’ new starter 
is Trevor Siemian, who was the 250th pick in the 2015 Draft. He was so sure he 
wouldn’t get drafted thathe had a job lined up in commercial real estate 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/08/13/trevor-siemian-denver-broncos-qb/> to 
fall back on. The only time he’s ever played in the NFL was taking a knee 
against Pittsburgh last year. Hearing that, does Gabbert even sound that bad?

The 49ers got to this point out of sheer front office ineptitude and 
instability. The coaching musical chairs post-Jim Harbaugh finally landed on 
Chip Kelly, who was run out of Philadelphiabecause his players did not seem to 
like him 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2538528-eagles-players-say-chip-kellys-dictatorial-style-is-the-issue-not-racism>
. He’s inherited a team that is only a few years removed from a Super Bowl 
appearance and a back-up quarterback in Colin Kaepernick,who makes more news 
for sitting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/barack-obama-colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest>
 than he does for playing. Their main running back, Carlos Hyde, was not able 
to stay healthy last year. Worst of all, they play in a division with the 
Seahawks and Cardinals. Their defense is nowhere near as competent as the 
Rams’, though they will surely battle them for offensive futility all season. 
Their first game is at home against the Rams on Monday night — two teams 
separated by seven hours worth of driving down the 5 freeway, but united by 
futility. LikeAlien Vs Predator 
<http://popcornhorror.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/AVP-Alien-Vs.-Predator-1-2L2HTDU1VH-1024x768.jpg>
, no matter who wins, we lose.

Predicted final standings

1) Seattle Seahawks

2) Arizona Cardinals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals>

3) Los Angeles Rams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-rams>

4) San Francisco 49ers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/san-francisco-49ers>
 