
Sometimes, life just gets a little weird. In the past seven days, Justin 
Bieber has beenblamed for a Steelers defeat 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/sportsnow/la-sp-sn-justin-bieber-steelers-20141112-htmlstory.html>
, George RR Martin haswaded into the Jets’ quarterback controversy 
<http://grrm.livejournal.com/388578.html> and a real life hawk issued a press 
release toapologise for landing on a human’s head 
<https://twitter.com/Seahawks/status/532289260322557952>. 

So perhaps we should not be surprised that last week would also be the week in 
which 12 (twelve) people called every game correctly in the Pick Six 
competition.

Still, that does mean that around 200 others tried and failed to do so. Do 
please join me, therefore, in dishing out virtual fist bumps toBaffledBySaussey,
Bouncebounceprod, CosmicTrigger, dazzabrimma, Dougal, fp701, JipJaapStam, 
jonnyoc, Mikeawesome, Switchskier, TheChamp23 and zoomster. I’ll be highly 
impressed if we get anything like as many clean sweeps from what feels like a 
very tricky set of games in week 11.

New England Patriots @ Indianapolis Colts

Sunday 8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am GMT

After outgunning Peyton Manning in his last game, Tom Brady moves on to 
Manning’s successor in Indianapolis. Andrew Luck is enjoying what many consider 
to be an MVP-calibre season 
<http://www.indystar.com/story/sports/nfl/colts/2014/10/28/andrew-lucks-odds-of-winning-mvp-of-nfl-not-too-shabby/18065535/>
 but his track record against the Patriots is less impressive. Two games are 
not much of a sample size, but Luck threw three interceptions in his first 
meeting with a Bill Belichick defense and four in the playoffs last year. 
Standing in his favour this time is the fact that this game will be played in 
Indianapolis. But standing against him and his team-mates is a Patriots team 
averaging more than 40 points over its last five games.

Patriots to win

Houston Texans @ Cleveland Browns
 Cleveland Browns quarterback Brian Hoyer calls signals at the line of 
scrimmage. Photograph: David Richard/AP 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

Christened by various media outlets as the Tom Brady Backup Bowl 
<http://www.cleveland.com/browns/index.ssf/2014/11/brian_hoyer_and_ryan_mallett_t.html>
, this match-up pits two quarterbacks with a shared history. Brian Hoyer and 
Ryan Mallett each spent the first three seasons of their careers holding the 
clipboard in New England. But while Hoyer has developed into a reliable signal 
caller for Cleveland, Mallett remains an unknown quantity; this will be his 
first NFL start. Texans head coach Bill O’Brien – who worked with both players 
as offensive co-ordinator for the Patriots – sold Mallett this week as “a very 
knowledgeable football guy” who is “doing a great job of operating the 
offense”. The rest of us will have to hold judgment until Sunday, but certainly 
Mallett will not have it easy against a Browns defense that has recorded 13 
interceptions this season.

Browns to win

Minnesota Vikings @ Chicago Bears 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905149558%2F29b81d26-67bc-4816-a920-905993f5188a-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905149558%2F29b81d26-67bc-4816-a920-905993f5188a-1020x612.jpeg>
 Is Vikings quarterback Teddy Bridgewater confident he can beat the Bears? 
Paolo thinks not. Photograph: Brace Hemmelgarn/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT


Two weeks ago, the notion that this game could feature in the Pick Six might 
have seemed laughable. Minnesota were a two-win team who looked like they could 
be in the running for next year’s No1 pick. Chicago, despite a disheartening 
loss to Miami, were still viewed as playoff contenders. But then came 
back-to-back victories for the Vikings allied with consecutive blowout defeats 
for the Bears. In the last two weeks, Chicago have given up more than 50 points 
to both New England and Green Bay. If it is hard to imagine a repeat of 
Minnesota’s modest offense scoring quite so freely, a Vikings victory is all 
too plausible. And yet, I find myself leaning the other way. The Bears’ 
greatest weakness, after all, is defending the pass, and for all his recent 
improvement, I’m not sure Teddy Bridgewater is confident enough yet to take 
advantage.

Bears to win

Seattle Seahawks @ Kansas City Chiefs 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905263920%2F020beb7a-909b-4306-951a-a01739394973-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905263920%2F020beb7a-909b-4306-951a-a01739394973-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chiefs linebacker Justin Houston reacts after a sacking of New York Jets 
quarterback Michael Vick. Photograph: Colin E. Braley/AP 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT


Six wins in seven games now for the Chiefs, whose only defeat in the last two 
months came on the road in San Francisco. Will a meeting with another NFC West 
team prove their undoing once again? Both Seattle and Kansas City are at their 
best running the ball and controlling the clock on offense, which is handy, 
since the forecast suggests they will experience freezing temperatures and 
possible snow on Sunday at Arrowhead Stadium – conditions that do not tend to 
favour the passing game. But while Seattle have been extremely effective in 
slowing down opposing rushers this season – giving up less than 80 yards per 
game on the ground – Kansas City have been less so, allowing 115.6.

Seahawks to win

Atlanta Falcons @ Carolina Panthers 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905878469%2Fc55cab77-fd93-4d17-bdfb-787410b2907a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905878469%2Fc55cab77-fd93-4d17-bdfb-787410b2907a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Carolina quarterback Cam Newton has been playing – and in this case, scoring – 
injured. Photograph: Grant Halverson/Getty Images 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

Somebody will have to win the NFC South. Whether or not they will need a 
winning record to do so remains to be seen. The Falcons and Panthers have three 
victories each so far this season, and yet both sit within one game of the 
division lead. So which of these teams do we choose to believe in? The Falcons, 
who have gained two-thirds of their victories this season against Tampa Bay and 
whose defense is giving up more than 400 yards per game? Or the Panthers team 
whose last win arrived more than a month ago, and whose quarterback, Cam 
Newton, has acknowledged that he is playing hurt? Honestly, I cannot think of 
many good reasons to side with either.

Falcons to win

Detroit Lions @ Arizona Cardinals 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905959021%2F4d9e4c92-00f2-4c60-9480-d9ed075eab28-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2011%3A%20Luck%20seeks%20fortune%20vs%20Brady%20%7C%20Paolo%20Bandini&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F14%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-11-andrew-luck-tom-brady%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415905959021%2F4d9e4c92-00f2-4c60-9480-d9ed075eab28-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Drew Stanton throws a pass against the St Louis Rams. Photograph: Mark J. 
Rebilas/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT

The front-page of this week’s Sports Illustrated 
<http://www.si.com/nfl/2014/11/11/arizona-cardinals-john-brown-sports-illustrated-cover>
 defined the Cardinals’ season perfectly, with an image of John Brown catching 
a touchdown pass, and a headline that read: “Next Man Up”. The Cardinals keep 
on losing key players to injury, and somehow they keep on winning. But even 
head coach Bruce Arians confessed this week that quarterbacks are different. 
Can this improbable 8-1 team really keep up its momentum now its $16.5m/season 
quarterback has gone down hurt? Drew Stanton won two out of three games in 
relief of Carson Palmer earlier this year, but this is a big test against a 
Detroit team boasting statistically the best defense in the league.

Lions to win

And the rest


Here are the remainder of this weekend’s games. These are not included in the 
Pick Six, but feel free to post your winners for them as well. If you do so, 
please keep them separate from your Pick Six predictions, as it will make life 
a lot easier when adding up your scores.

Sunday

1pm ET/6pm GMT

Cincinnati Bengals @ New Orleans Saints

Tampa Bay Buccaneers @ Washington

Denver Broncos @ St Louis Rams

San Francisco 49ers @ New York Giants

4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT

Oakland Raiders @ San Diego Chargers

4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT

Philadelphia Eagles @ Green Bay Packers

Monday 


8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT

Pittsburgh Steelers @ Tennessee Titans

(Bye weeks: Dallas Cowboys, New York Jets, Jacksonville Jaguars, Baltimore 
Ravens) 

 