
What a week it has been in the NFL. First we learned that the Vikings might 
not have been crazy to trade for Sam Bradford, then that Matt Forte does an
alarmingly good Arnold Schwarzenegger impression 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BKmZXGOh31e/>. I would ask who could ever have 
predicted such a thing, but in fact I already know the answer -grafhamboy - the 
one and only person to call every game correctly in week two.

Patriots make light of Brady and Garoppolo absences to beat Texans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/22/new-england-patriots-houston-texans-nfl-game-report>
That makes it two weeks, and only two people to score a clean sweep. Will you 
join them? And will I, unlike last week, remember to post the overall standings 
in the comments section below (sorry guys!). Here are the games you need to 
call:

Denver Broncos @ Cincinnati Bengals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cincinnati-bengals> (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm BST)

One touchdown, three interceptions and two wins. Trevor Siemian’s 2016 season 
is already starting to look suspiciously similar to Peyton Manning’s 2015. As 
long as the Broncos can run the ball and dominate on defense, they will remain 
extremely hard to beat - even for a Cincinnati team averaging almost 350 yards 
per game through the air. The Bengals have abundant talent at all of the 
offensive skill positions, but the key question here is whether their offensive 
line can hold up. No quarterback has been sacked more than Andy Dalton through 
two weeks, whilst the team’s running backs are averaging a meager 1.27 yards 
before contact. The Broncos will lose a little something up front with DeMarcus 
Ware injured, but I still suspect that Von Miller might have a fun afternoon 
with Andrew Whitworth and his old Texas A&M team-mate Cedric Ogbuehi.Broncos to 
win

Oakland Raiders @ Tennessee Titans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennesee-titans> (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm BST)

There’s a lot to like about Oakland this season. Derek Carr is developing into 
one of the league’s best young quarterbacks, a deep receiving corps boasts 
sufficient weapons to keep opponents from doubling up on Amari Cooper, and the 
team has obtained solid production out of three different running backs as 
well. But then there is the defense, which has given up 69 points and more than 
1,000 yards in two outings. Tennessee might not be the best equipped team to 
exploit the Raiders’ many flaws, but Marcus Mariota did remind us what he is 
capable of in leading two fourth-quarter scoring drives to snatch a 
come-from-behind win over Detroit. Typically I might suggest that homefield 
advantage could tilt this game in the Titans’ direction. But given that they 
have won just two of their last 17 games at Nissan Stadium, the opposite might 
actually be true.Raiders to win
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frichard-sherman-people-are-missing-the-point-of-nfl-protests-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Sherman%3A%20people%20are%20missing%20the%20point%20of%20NFL%20protests%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frichard-sherman-people-are-missing-the-point-of-nfl-protests-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Sherman%3A%20people%20are%20missing%20the%20point%20of%20NFL%20protests%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frichard-sherman-people-are-missing-the-point-of-nfl-protests-video&media=>
Richard Sherman: people are missing the point of NFL protests – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/22/richard-sherman-people-are-missing-the-point-of-nfl-protests-video>
Baltimore Ravens @ Jacksonville Jaguars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jacksonville-jaguars> (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm BST)

Elvis Dumervil is hoping to make this his first game back after offseason foot 
surgery, which feels rather fitting. It was against these same opponents last 
season that the linebacker collected a facemasking penalty on the penultimate 
play of the game (a play that, incidentally, should have been called dead for a 
false start) - allowing the Jaguars to kick a game-winning 52-yard field goal. 
Bad memories aside, what do Baltimore have to fear on Sunday? They are 2-0, and 
their hosts 0-2. And yet, in some areas they do not match up well. A struggling 
backfield led by Justin Forsett is not ideally equipped to exploit the Jags’ 
shoddy run defense. On the other side of the ball, Allen Hurns has a major 
height advantage on Baltimore’s No2 corner, Shareece Wright. But, when push 
comes to shove, I’m just not picking Gus Bradley over John Harbaugh.Ravens to 
win

New York Jets @ Kansas City Chiefs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kansas-city-chiefs> (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm 
BST)

Few teams were more daunting to throw the ball against in 2015 than Kansas 
City, who finished with the second-most interceptions (22) and fourth-most 
sacks (47) in the league. So far, this year looks very different. The 
departures of Sean Smith and Tyvon Branch have left gaps in the secondary, 
while Justin Houston’s injury vastly diminishes the team’s pass rush. Both 
DeAndre Hopkins and Will Fuller posted 100-yard games against the Chiefs last 
Sunday, and it is no coincidence that the team’s rally against San Diego a week 
previously occurred after Keenan Allen had left the field. The Jets might not 
be ideally equipped to exploit this weakness against the pass, however, with 
both Eric Decker and Brandon Marshall hobbled and likely to be game-time 
decisions.Chiefs to win

San Diego Chargers @ Indianapolis Colts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indianapolis-colts> (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm 
BST)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fnfl-week-3-predictions-denver-broncos-cincinnati-bengals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8b893bd6a55723b9e85587ec89d7174cc68557%2F0_123_4966_2979%2F4966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Week%203%20predictions%3A%20will%20Trevor%20Siemian%20grind%20out%20another%20win%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fnfl-week-3-predictions-denver-broncos-cincinnati-bengals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Week%203%20predictions%3A%20will%20Trevor%20Siemian%20grind%20out%20another%20win%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fnfl-week-3-predictions-denver-broncos-cincinnati-bengals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8b893bd6a55723b9e85587ec89d7174cc68557%2F0_123_4966_2979%2F4966.jpg>
 San Diego’s Melvin Gordon will look to gouge an Indy defense that’s struggled 
against the rush. Photograph: Donald Miralle/Getty Images 
Speaking of injuries, Philip Rivers might soon run out of team-mates to throw 
the ball to for San Diego. After Allen in week one, now Danny Woodhead has also 
been lost for the season - depriving the quarterback of both his two favourite 
targets. The Colts, though, have an even longer injury list - and look 
especially thin in the secondary with Darius Butler, Antonio Cromartie and 
Clayton Geathers all struggling, and Patrick Robinson working his way through 
the NFL’s concussion protocol. My suspicion is that Rivers will be able to move 
the ball through the air just fine, but even if he can’t, the Chargers might 
also do well to feed Melvin Gordon against opponents who have given up 250 
rushing yards so far.Chargers to win

Atlanta Falcons @ New Orleans Saints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-orleans-saints> (Monday 8.30pm 
ET/Tuesday 1.30 am BST)

Giving Drew Brees time to throw at the Superdome is not typically a recipe for 
success, so the Falcons have good reason to be concerned about a pass rush that 
has achieved just a single sack in two games. Already this season they have 
been torched by Derek Carr and Jameis Winston, surrendering eight touchdown 
drives of 75 yards or longer. Their one consolation is that the Saints are 
really not faring that much better, with two sacks and more than 900 yards 
allowed. Indeed, dig a little deeper into the numbers and you find that Atlanta 
has had nearly twice as many (11) QB hurries as New Orleans (six). Neither 
team, in the end, has much going for it on defense. What the Falcons have 
demonstrated, unlike their neighbours, is that they do have a viable running 
game to go with their downfield attack.Falcons to win
 