
Sam Bradford threw a touchdown pass to Kyle Rudolph, Marcus Sherels returned a 
punt for a score and the Minnesota Vikings snapped the Carolina Panthersâ€™ 
14-game home winning streak 22-10 on Sunday.

The Vikings (3-0) put the clamps on Cam Newton, intercepting the leagueâ€™s 
reigning MVP three times and sacking him eight times, one of those resulting in 
a safety by Danielle Hunter. The eight sacks were the second-most ever against 
Newton.

The Panthers had come in averaging 42 points per game in their last three home 
games, but could do little after bolting to a 10-0 lead. The Vikings held 
Carolina receivers Kelvin Benjamin and Devin Funchess without a catch.

Bradford improved to 2-0 as the Vikings starter, completing 18 of 28 passes 
for 171 yards. With Adrian Peterson injured, Matt Asiata and Jerick McKinnon 
combined for 70 yards rushing on 22 carries. Rudolph had seven catches for 70 
yards, including a15-yard TD catch 
<http://www.nfl.com/gamecenter/2016092501/2016/REG3/vikings@panthers> to put 
the Vikings ahead for good in the early in the third quarter.

Outside the stadium about 100 people gathered before the game to stage a 
peaceful protest over the police shooting of a 43-year-old black man last 
week.It was Carolinaâ€™s first home loss since 16 November 2014.

Denver Broncos 29-17 Cincinnati Bengals

Trevor Siemian threw four touchdown passes in his first road start and was 
nearly perfect under fourth-quarter pressure, rallying theDenver Broncos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/denver-broncos> to a 29-17 victory over the 
Cincinnati Bengals.
NFL (@NFL) 
55 yards.@trevorsiemian <https://twitter.com/TrevorSiemian> ðŸ‘‰ @DemaryiusT 
<https://twitter.com/DemaryiusT>. GOT 'EM. #DENvsCIN 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DENvsCIN?src=hash> #Broncos 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Broncos?src=hash> https://t.co/4CrtFvUNc6 
<https://t.co/4CrtFvUNc6>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/780136199075667969> September 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/780136199075667969> 
The defending Super Bowl champions are 3-0 under Siemian, who took over after 
Peyton Manning retired and Brock Osweiler went to Houston. He completed 11 of 
12 passes while rallying the Broncos to a pair of fourth-quarter touchdowns.

The previous Bronco to throw for four touchdowns was Manning in 2014 against 
the Dolphins. Siemian went 23 of 35 for 312 yards and a passer rating of 132.1.

Siemian had a 41-yard touchdown pass to Emmanuel Sanders to get it started, 
and stood in under a heavy rush and connected with Demaryius Thomas on a 
55-yard score with 4:23 left to clinch it. Sanders finished with nine catches 
for 117 yards.

Washington 29-27 New York Giants

Dustin Hopkins kicked a 37-yard field goal late in the fourth quarter for his 
fifth of the game and Washington avoid a near-disastrous 0-3 start with a 29-27 
win over the penalty- and error-prone New York Giants.

Kirk Cousins threw touchdown passes of 44 yards to DeSean Jackson and 55 to 
Jamison Crowder as banged-up Washington (1-2) handed new coach Ben McAdoo his 
first loss with the Giants (2-1).

Suâ€™a Cravens ended the Giantsâ€™ final drive with an interception in New York 
territory. It was Eli Manningâ€™s second pick of the quarter, with the other 
coming in the end zone by Quinton Dunbar after New York got to the Washington 
15 on a big play by Odell Beckham Jr.

This was a wild NFC East matchup that see-sawed the entire second half after 
Washington rallied from a 21-9 deficit.

The fourth quarter was wild with the matchup of Beckham and cornerback Josh 
Norman, leading to big plays by Beckham, an ejection of Giants center Weston 
Richburg and a personal foul against Norman for a big hit on Sterling Shepard.

In the end, Washington made the big plays in avoiding the 0-3 start. Only 
three teams since 1990 have made the playoffs after losing three in row to 
start the season.

Arizona Cardinals 18-33 Buffalo Bills

LeSean McCoy scored twice and safety Aaron Williams returned a botched 
field-goal snap 53 yards for a touchdown, leading the Buffalo Bills to a 33-18 
win over theArizona Cardinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals>.

Quarterback Tyrod Taylor also scored on a 20-yard run at a time the Rex 
Ryan-coached Bills spent the past week taking the brunt of criticism after 
opening the season 0-2. The win also came on the heels of Ryan firing offensive 
coordinator Greg Roman and replacing him with running backs coach Anthony Lynn.

McCoy scored on 24- and five-yard runs, and finished with 110 yards rushing 
after combining for just 117 in his first two games. Taylor had 76 yards 
rushing, including a 49-yarder, the longest by a quarterback in team history.

Ryanâ€™s defense also bounced back after allowing 493 yards in 37-31 loss to the 
New York Jets on Sept. 15. The Bills limited Arizona to 348 yards and 
intercepted Carson Palmer on each of Arizonaâ€™s final four possessions. Stephon 
Gilmore had two interceptions.

Arizona (1-2) unraveled a week after a 40-7 win over Tampa Bay, and had a 
five-game road winning streak snapped going back to last season. The Cardinals 
combined for just two yards net offense and no first downs on their first five 
possessions. Palmer finished 26 of 50 for 264 yards and was sacked five times.

Detroit Lions 27-34 Green Bay Packers

Aaron Rodgers threw for 205 yards and four touchdowns, including two in the 
first half to Jordy Nelson, and the Green Bay Packers snapped out of their 
offensive funk before holding off the Detroit Lions for a 34-27 win.

Rodgers was 15 of 24, leading the Packers to touchdowns on their first three 
series. Nelson had 101 yards on six catches, returning to the form that made 
him one of the NFLâ€™s best receivers before missing the 2015 season with a knee 
injury.

The Packers (2-1) led 31-10 at the half before the Lions slowly chipped away. 
Marvin Jonesâ€™ 35-yard touchdown catch with 3:34 left got Detroit (1-2) within 
seven. Jones had a career-high 205 yards on six receptions.

Matthew Stafford passed for 385 yards and three scores for the Lions, who held 
advantages in total yardage (418-324) and time of possession, holding the ball 
for 35 minutes. But the Packers burned the secondary with big plays, and Eddie 
Lacy ran for 103 yards on 17 carries.

Baltimore Ravens 19-17 Jacksonville Jaguars

Justin Tucker kicked a 54-yard field goal with 1:02 remaining, lifting the 
Baltimore Ravens to a 19-17 victory over the Jacksonville Jaguars.

Tucker raised both arms in celebration as his fourth field goal of the day 
split the uprights with plenty of distance. The Ravens improved to 3-0 for the 
third time in franchise history and first since 2009.

The Jaguars fell to 0-3 for the third time in the last four years and surely 
will hear more talk about coach Gus Bradleyâ€™s job security. Bradley is now 
12-39 in four seasons, the second-worst winning percentage of anyNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> coach with at least 50 games. Tucker 
also made kicks of 43, 42 and 37 yards.

The Jaguars had plenty of chances to win this one in a wild fourth quarter. 
They forced three consecutive turnovers in the final frame, but only got a 
field goal out of it. Blake Bortles threw two interceptions that ended drives 
in Baltimore territory, and Jason Myers had a 52-yard field goal blocked.

Oakland Raiders 17-10 Tennessee Titans

Derek Carr threw for 249 yards and a touchdown, and the Oakland Raiders beat 
the Tennessee Titans 17-10 with their defense finally coming up with some big 
plays.

The Raiders (2-1) forced three turnovers and had a sack after coming into this 
game having given up more yards than any team since at least 1940 through the 
first two games. Coach Jack Del made a couple of lineup changes, starting 
linebacker Cory James and rookie safety Karl Joseph, their top draft pick.

Oakland never trailed and took control in the second quarter, scoring 10 
points and outgaining the Titans 129-40 to take a 17-3 lead into halftime.

The Titans (1-2) rallied from a 15-3 deficit a week ago in beating Detroit 
16-15, and they thought they at least had forced overtime when Marcus Mariota 
found Andre Johnson alone in the end zone for a touchdown. But officials 
flagged Johnson for interference on Raiders cornerback TJ Carrie.

Two plays later, Carrie appeared to grab Harry Douglas in the end zone on the 
Titansâ€™ final play with no flag thrown. Carr knelt to run out the clock as the 
Raiders escaped with a win.

Cleveland Browns 24-30 Miami Dolphins

Jay Ajayi scored on an 11-yard run with 8:26 left in overtime, and the Miami 
Dolphins escaped with a 30-24 win over the Cleveland Browns.
NFL (@NFL) 
Parkey.
For the WIN.

... WIDE LEFT. #CLEvsMIA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CLEvsMIA?src=hash> 
https://t.co/srNJFADzHb <https://t.co/srNJFADzHb>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/780139240478822400> September 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/780139240478822400> 
Ajayiâ€™s gamewinner came one play after Miami quarterback Ryan Tannehill found 
a wide-open Jarvis Landry for a 32-yard gain, as the Dolphins (1-2) avoided 
what would be their first 0-3 start since 2011. Tannehill threw for 319 yards 
and three touchdowns for Miami, and Landry caught seven of those passes for 120 
yards.

Cody Parkey missed three field goals for Cleveland, including a 46-yarder as 
time expired in regulation. The Brownshad a golden chance to win after Corey 
Lemonier stripped the ball from Tannehill and recovered the fumble himself with 
20 seconds left. But Parkey went wide left, some Dolphins fans who were leaving 
turned around in the stairwells, and to overtime they went.
 