
Rushing touchdowns were scarce in week 11, with only 10 scored – and only six 
by players not named Jonas Gray. But they were still a lot more common than 
winners in our weekly Pick Six contest. In fact just one person,simon57, called 
every game correctly.

Lets have a round of virtual hips, hips and hoorays for him … and then we want 
to hear who you are picking in this week’s six games:

Dallas Cowboys @ New York Giants

Sunday 8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am GMT


Cowboys fans better hope their team made the most of its bye week, because the 
next seven days might define its season. After this trip to New York comes a 
Thanksgiving Day clash with Philadelphia. Win both, and Dallas will take a big 
step towards a division title. Lose both, and fears of yet another 
end-of-season collapse will quickly rise to the surface. The good news is that 
the Cowboys match up well with the Giants, as the NFL’s leading rusher, DeMarco 
Murray, goes up against the league’s most porous run defense. But the bad news 
is that New York played San Francisco close last weekend despite five 
interceptions from Eli Manning. The Giants are better than their 3-7 record 
would suggest, and will be motivated to undermine their division rivals. But I 
am still picking against them.

Cowboys to win

Cleveland Browns @ Atlanta Falcons
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416505112893%2F7acaafce-3b02-409a-9ee4-1d3dd0831e27-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2012%3A%20Murray%20can%20hurry%20Cowboys%20past%20Giants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2012%3A%20Murray%20can%20hurry%20Cowboys%20past%20Giants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416505112893%2F7acaafce-3b02-409a-9ee4-1d3dd0831e27-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cleveland Browns’ Josh Gordon catches a pass during practic this week. 
Photograph: Chuck Crow/AP 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

Cleveland have a 6-4 record and sit bottom of their division; Atlanta have a 
4-6 record, and sit top of theirs. The NFL can be an unjust place at times, and 
many people would file the league’s handling of Josh Gordon’s suspension this 
season under that precise label.Banned for 10 games 
<http://profootballtalk.nbcsports.com/2014/09/12/josh-gordon-will-be-suspended-10-games-under-new-drug-policy/>
 after (barely) testing positive for marijuana, the Browns wide receiver 
finally returns this Sunday. Nobody knows how much rust he will show, but given 
that he caught 87 balls for 1,646 yards and nine touchdowns in 14 games last 
season, and that the Falcons’ defense ranks last in the league against the 
pass, it would be foolish to rule out a productive afternoon. That said, 
Cleveland are hurting on the other side of the ball, with Karlos Dansby and 
Jabaal Sheard joining a long list of absent or hobbled players in the front 
seven. Their pass rush has been among the worst in the league, and giving Matt 
Ryan time to throw the ball at home is rarely a recipe for success.

Falcons to win

Cincinnati Bengals @ Houston Texans 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416505187196%2F4370aeb7-44b1-41e5-9f27-b84222208830-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2012%3A%20Murray%20can%20hurry%20Cowboys%20past%20Giants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2012%3A%20Murray%20can%20hurry%20Cowboys%20past%20Giants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416505187196%2F4370aeb7-44b1-41e5-9f27-b84222208830-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cincinnati Bengals quarterback Andy Dalton tosses the ball to running back 
Jeremy Hill. Photograph: Derick E. Hingle/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

We all know the old saying about teams winning or losing on any given Sunday, 
but perhaps it is time we added a new sub-clause for Andy Dalton. From one game 
to the next, it is nigh on impossible to know if he is going to play like one 
of the better quarterbacks in theNFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> or 
one of the worst. He looked very much the latter two weeks ago against 
Cleveland, completing 10 of 33 passes with three interceptions and no scores. 
But in New Orleans last Sunday he went 16 of 22 with three touchdowns. Dalton 
has tended to disappoint when returning to Houston, a city in whose suburbs he 
grew up. But does this make me feel confident about the pick I am about to 
make? Not really, no.

Texans to win

New York Jets @ Buffalo Bills 
 Snow covers a sign at Ralph Wilson Stadium, home of the Buffalo Bills in 
Orchard Park, New York. Photograph: Harry Scull Jr./AP 
Monday 7pm ET/midnight GMT

A game that was originally scheduled to take place in Buffalo has now been 
moved to Detroit, and delayed by one day, after a week of relentless snowstorms 
in western New York state. The Bills had initially hoped to press ahead with 
hosting the game at Ralph Wilson Stadium, offering $10 an hour plus game 
tickets to any fan with a shovel who showed up to help clear the venue. But on 
Thursday they admitted defeat, the NFL announcing the switch to Ford Field. In 
the meantime, however, Buffalo’s preparations have been heavily disrupted, with 
players unable to practice on Wednesday or Thursday due to local travel 
restrictions. Jets head coach Rex Ryan played down the significance of lost 
training time, reminding reporters that these rivals met as recently as four 
weeks ago – when Buffalo won 43-23. But I find it hard to believe that such 
disruption would not have some impact on the field.

Jets to win

St Louis Rams @ San Diego Chargers 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416505272388%2F5e1a6986-4a63-41da-ba27-ada6a33423e3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2012%3A%20Murray%20can%20hurry%20Cowboys%20past%20Giants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2012%3A%20Murray%20can%20hurry%20Cowboys%20past%20Giants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-12-cowboys-giants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F20%2F1416505272388%2F5e1a6986-4a63-41da-ba27-ada6a33423e3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 San Diego Chargers quarterback Philip Rivers throws the ball against the Miami 
Dolphins. Photograph: Steve Mitchell/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT


San Diego’s declining performances seem that little bit less mysterious after 
Antonio Gates revealed that quarterback Philip Rivers has been playing through 
a chest injury (even if the Chargers have since protested that his comments 
were misconstrued). But the Rams’ inconsistency remains as perplexing as ever. 
Last week they suffocated one of the best offenses in the league en route to a 
22-7 victory over Denver. And yet the standings show they have won just four 
out of 10. If their defense shows up as strongly as it did against the Broncos, 
they should have a good chance against opponents who have scored just 13 points 
in their last two games. But my instinct is to trust the Chargers at home, 
where they have lost just once in 2014.

Chargers to win

Baltimore Ravens @ New Orleans Saints 
 Baltimore wide receiver Steve Smith Sr is fired up for the Ravens’ game in 
New Orleans. Photograph: Nick Wass/AP 
Monday 8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT


So far this season, the Ravens are 3-0 against the NFC South. They can 
complete the sweep with a win in New Orleans, although this one might not come 
easy. For all of their recent struggles, the Saints have a history of producing 
their best football in prime time. Quarterback Drew Brees has a passer rating 
of 109.6 in his nine Monday Night Football home games. Of course, Baltimore 
also have a few players who tend to show their best when the spotlight is 
brightest, and Steve Smith Sr told reporters this week that he was relishing 
the opportunity to remind the ex-girlfriends who dumped himexactly what they 
were missing 
<http://ttp://www.baltimoresun.com/sports/ravens/ravens-insider/bal-ravens-wide-receiver-steve-smith-jokes-about-exgirlfriends-superdome-power-issues-20141119-story.html>
. But New Orleans could not really lose three in a row at the Superdome, could 
they?

Saints to win

And the rest

Here are the remainder of this weekend’s games. These are not included in the 
Pick Six, but feel free to post your winners for them as well. If you do so, 
please keep them separate from your Pick Six predictions, as it will make life 
a lot easier when adding up your scores.

Sunday

1pm ET/6pm GMT

Tennessee Titans @ Philadelphia Eagles

Detroit Lions @ New England Patriots

Green Bay Packers @ Minnesota Vikings

Jacksonville Jaguars @ Indianapolis Colts

Tampa Bay Buccaneers @ Chicago Bears

4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT

Arizona Cardinals @ Seattle Seahawks. 

4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT

Miami Dolphins @ Denver Broncos

Washington @ San Francisco 49ers

(Bye weeks: Pittsburgh Steelers, Carolina Panthers) 
 