
Last week I messed up. A copy-and-paste error led to me failing to recognise 
fully half of the contestants who had correctly called all six games correctly 
in week 11, and for that I can only apologise. Well, that and belatedly seek to 
make amends. Congratulations toFatSamurai, Flattery2 and especially to Angchan 
– to whom this has somehow now happened twice in the same season. Sorry!

Five others matched their achievements in week 12, so please remain on your 
feet, ladies and gentlemen, as we offerbobajob86, DSizzle2013, FraserAH, 
onestepforward and Steve Mansfield an equally rapturous round of applause. And 
then plonk yourself down in your comfiest chair, and get to picking this weeks 
games.

Kansas City Chiefs @ Atlanta Falcons (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

The path to the postseason does not get any easier for the Chiefs. Even after 
an impressive road win over the Broncos, their 8-3 record is still only 
sufficient to place them second in the AFC West, with further divisional 
matchups against Denver (7-4) and Oakland (9-2) still to come after this game 
against NFC South leaders Atlanta (7-4). In Kansas City’s favour is an 
improving pass rush: both Justin Houston and Tamba Hali were deemed healthy 
enough to have snap-count restrictions lifted for the win at Mile High Stadium, 
and subsequently combined for four sacks. Dee Ford, who leads the team with 10, 
missed that game but was back at practice on Wednesday. As a trio, they should 
certainly make life difficult for Matt Ryan – but will that alone be enough? He 
faced plenty of pressure from the Cardinals’ No1-ranked defense last week and 
still helped his team to put 38 points on the board.


Falcons to win


San Francisco 49ers @ Chicago Bears (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

With a shot at next year’s second overall draft pick on the line (Cleveland 
won’t blow the No1 from here, right?), neither team’s fans will much relish the 
idea of winning this Sunday. Players and coaches, though, are out there 
fighting for their careers, and at least one has done a pretty good job these 
past few weeks. Colin Kaepernick threw for 1,110 yards, and rushed for 223 
more, in the month of November – putting up a total of nine combined touchdowns 
against just three turnovers. Week by week, he is making a case to be retained 
as the 49ers’ starting quarterback for next year. In Chicago, by contrast, they 
might be happy to take anybody who can stay healthy for more than two weeks at 
a time. Matt Barkley threw for 316 yards and three scores in his starting debut 
against Tennessee, but much of that came in junk time against a prevent 
defense. In a game between two very bad teams, having a reliable option behind 
center should make all the difference.


49ers to win


Miami Dolphins @ Baltimore Ravens (Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT)

Six consecutive wins have propelled Miami into the thick of the playoff hunt, 
but is their form sustainable? They have been outgained by three of their past 
four opponents, including the Jets and 49ers. Teams are working out how to slow 
down Jay Ajayi – held to fewer than 80 rushing yards in each of this last three 
games – and, whilst the returns of left guard Laremy Tunsil and left tackle 
Branden Albert should help his cause immensely, the Ravens own the stingiest 
run defense in the league. They should get a major upgrade in the secondary, as 
well, after Jimmy Smith rejoined practice on Wednesday. Oh, and visiting teams 
have averaged just 14.3 points per game at M&T Bank Stadium.


Ravens to win


Tampa Bay Buccaneers @ San Diego Chargers (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fnfl-weekend-predictions-falcons-matt-ryan-chiefs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f650b8ca6df7f5af7222b17fcfc5d6c9b1659d3%2F0_62_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20weekend%20predictions%3A%20Falcons%20to%20check%20Chiefs'%20postseason%20push&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fnfl-weekend-predictions-falcons-matt-ryan-chiefs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20weekend%20predictions%3A%20Falcons%20to%20check%20Chiefs%27%20postseason%20push&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fnfl-weekend-predictions-falcons-matt-ryan-chiefs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f650b8ca6df7f5af7222b17fcfc5d6c9b1659d3%2F0_62_3300_1980%2F3300.jpg>
 Jameis Winston and the Bucs are playing well on both sides of the ball. 
Photograph: Reinhold Matay/USA Today Sports 
The Chargers are a talented team who find ways to lose games that they should 
win. The Buccaneers a team whose talent was questioned after a poor start 
(anyone remember that 40-7 shellacking in Arizona?), but who have lately been 
winning matchups – from a road victory in Kansas City to a suffocation of 
Seattle – in which few people had even given them a hope. An offense featuring 
Jameis Winston and Mike Evans knows how to hang in a shootout, but it is the 
improvement on defense that is most eye-catching. Russell Wilson had been 
sacked 20 times and thrown two picks all season before he went to Tampa Bay. 
The Bucs reached him six times, and made sure that he matched his interception 
total in a single afternoon. Coast-to-coast road trips always make me uneasy, 
but this team is playing well on both sides of the ball.


Buccaneers to win


Washington @ Arizona Cardinals (Sunday 4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT)

Only one of these teams looks like a playoff contender. Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nfl-team> earned that status by 
beating two possible rivals – Green Bay and Minnesota – in November before 
pushing Dallas right to the end. With the league’s No2-ranked offense, led by a 
quarterback playing at an All-Pro level – Kirk Cousins completed 72.4% of his 
passes for 1,086 yards, eight scores and no interceptions last month – this is 
a team that nobody wants to face. The same could not be said for Arizona. The 
Cardinals have won once in their last five games and have practically been 
eliminated from the playoffs at 4-6-1. Their quarterback keeps getting pummeled 
behind a broken offensive line and only one of his receivers can be trusted to 
catch the ball. So why would I give them a shot in this game? Maybe it’s the 
No2-ranked pass defense – the best Cousins has faced yet in this run. Maybe 
it’s the injuries that threaten to keep DeSean Jackson and Jordan Reed out of 
Washington’s lineup. Maybe it’s nothing more than a hunch.


Cardinals to win


Indianapolis Colts @ New York Jets (Monday 8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT)

Andrew Luck cannot have fond memories of playing the Jets. In two career 
meetings with these opponents, he has thrown five interceptions and both times 
posted a passer rating below 53.0. Assuming he does make it through the NFL’s 
concussion protocol, however, this time ought to go better. The Jets’ defense – 
and especially their pass defense – is flagging, with Darrelle Revis a shadow 
of himself andreportedly contemplating retirement 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/football/jets/darrelle-revis-confidant-doesn-play-anymore-article-1.2893490>
. Only two teams have fewer sacks, and we all know what Luck is capable of on 
those rare occasions when he is actually given time to pick a pass.


Colts to win

 