
In our regular five things we learned blog this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/nov/04/tom-brady-peyton-manning-ben-roethlisberger-nfl>
, we had some discussion of the greatest quarterbacks of all time. Today, I 
would like to broach a far more essential topic: that of the greatest Pick Six 
contestant of all time.

By calling all six games correctly in week nine, Daithi completed his third 
clean sweep of the season. This despite having missed out week four altogether.

I’m not sure we’ve ever had someone go six-for-six three times in one season, 
let alone in half of one. So hats off toDaithi … and hip-hip-hoorays also for 
grafhamboy, NornGridiron, mercat and Steve Mansfield –each of whom also enjoyed 
a perfect round last week. Fear not, however, if you are yet to achieve the 
feat in 2014. There is still plenty of season to go, and I suspect this might 
be a high-scoring week.

Miami Dolphins @ Detroit Lions

Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

While the Dolphins were dismantling San Diego last week, the Lions were 
enjoying a restful bye. It arrived at just the right moment, giving them time 
to recover two key offensive players. While much of the focus will fall on
Calvin Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/24/calvin-johnson-fitness-test-detroit-lions-nfl-wembley>
, Reggie Bush’s return might prove even more essential against a Miami team 
that defends the pass much better than the run. It will be strength against 
strength on the other side of the ball, as Miami’s fourth-ranked rushing attack 
goes up against a Detroit group who are giving up just 74 yards per game on the 
ground. This for me is the hardest game of the week to pick, Ryan Tannehill’s 
recent successes with a read-option scheme offset by Lions’ stout defensive 
performances thus far. I’m taking the home team … without much conviction.

Lions to win

Kansas City Chiefs @ Buffalo Bills 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297578893%2Fbeb0babe-0ca7-4d02-bb71-58475394f56f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297578893%2Fbeb0babe-0ca7-4d02-bb71-58475394f56f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Minnesota Vikings linebacker Jasper Brinkley tackles Buffalo Bills running 
back Fred Jackson. Photograph: Timothy T Ludwig/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

The Chiefs and Bills have both been underestimated this year. Not only do they 
have 5-3 records, each teams’ losses have come (mostly) against good teams. 
Buffalo have so far been defeated by the Patriots, Chargers and Texans; Kansas 
City by the Broncos, 49ers and (OK, less impressively) Titans. With running 
backs Fred Jackson and CJ Spiller both out of action, the Bills relied heavily 
on turnovers to win their most recent game, against the Jets. Jackson returned 
to practice this week and should have some role on Sunday, but if Buffalo are 
hoping for similar generosity from Alex Smith and the Chiefs, they are likely 
to be disappointed.

Chiefs to win

Dallas Cowboys @ Jacksonville Jaguars 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297695904%2F0f9d3640-b455-4b29-a446-f9d1d0c36fd1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297695904%2F0f9d3640-b455-4b29-a446-f9d1d0c36fd1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tony Romo is hurled to the ground by Washington’s Jason Hatcher. Photograph: 
Tom Pennington/Getty Images 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

Sometimes there just are not enough tricky match-ups to fill out this contest. 
With six teams on a bye, I had 12 games to pick from this week and several look 
likely to finish in a blow-out. Dallas are heavy favourites to win at Wembley, 
but adding at least some uncertainty to the picture is Tony Romo’s back injury. 
Will he play? If so, will he be at 100%? If not, can Brandon Weeden do a better 
job than he did against Arizona? The Jaguars are 1-8 for a (multitude of) 
reason(s), but they have finally got their running game going with Denard 
Robinson and, having made the same journey last year, perhaps they can adjust 
better to the travel weariness and jet lag that comes with playing in London. 
Then again, perhaps not.

Cowboys to win

San Francisco 49ers @ New Orleans Saints 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297789885%2F69cc884f-0761-49fb-8154-1752ecfc3324-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297789885%2F69cc884f-0761-49fb-8154-1752ecfc3324-2060x1236.jpeg>
 San Francisco 49ers head coach Jim Harbaugh congratulates wide receiver Anquan 
Boldin for scoring a touchdown against the St Louis Rams. Photograph: Kyle 
Terada/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

For the Saints and 49ers, context is everything. At the midway point, both 
have four wins and four defeats, yet their prospects look very different. New 
Orleans sit top of the NFC South and look poised to kick on and win their 
division comfortably after a slow start to the year. San Francisco are third in 
the NFC West, three games out of first place after consecutive defeats, and 
have a fight on their hands just to secure a wild card. This week Jerry Rice 
added his voice to the chorus of observers who believe Jim Harbaugh ison his 
way out as head coach 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/11/jim-harbaugh-jerry-rice-san-francisco-49ers-gone-coaching-2015>
. Part of me expects a backlash from the 49ers, an emphatic win to prove that 
reports of their demise have been greatly exaggerated. But a bigger part of me 
believes in the Saints after wins over Green Bay and Carolina.

Saints to win

Atlanta Falcons @ Tampa Bay Buccaneers
 Wide receiver Vincent Jackson and quarterback Josh McCown celebrate after a 
Tampa touchdown. Photograph: Kim Klement/USA Today Sports 
Sunday 1pm ET/6pm GMT

When these teams met in week three, Atlanta looked like playoff contenders. An 
emphatic 56-14 victory moved them to 2-1 with a pair of divisional victories 
under their belts, and seemed to herald the revival of the prolific offense 
that had fired the Falcons to 36 regular-season wins between 2010 and 2012. 
Instead, it was a false dawn. Atlanta went on to lose five straight – and four 
of those by at least two scores. The Buccaneers have won only once in the 
interim, with head coach Lovie Smith now turning back to quarterback Josh 
McCown (last seen injuring his thumb in the first game against Atlanta) in a 
bid to revitalise his team. This ought to be a closer game than last time 
around, but it’s hard to feel good about a recovery plan that begins with a 
quarterback who posted a 65.8 passer rating during his previous appearances. 

Falcons to win

Carolina Panthers @ Philadelphia Eagles
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297937521%2F81dc9d7b-18f5-461d-8773-1b9a195e438e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NFL%20Talkboard%20and%20Pick%20Six%20week%2010%3A%20Lions%20seek%20to%20ambush%20Dolphins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fnov%2F07%2Fnfl-talkboard-pick-six-week-10-lions-dolphins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415297937521%2F81dc9d7b-18f5-461d-8773-1b9a195e438e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mark Sanchez runs with the ball past Houston Texans defensive end JJ Watt. 
Photograph: Kevin Jairaj/USA Today Sports 
Monday 8.30pm ET/Tuesday 1.30am GMT

Mark Sanchez could not have asked for a much more favourable set of 
circumstances as he makes his second run at being a starting quarterback in the
NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>. The Eagles team he inherited when 
Nick Foles went down hurt last week had five wins under their belt; Sanchez 
guided them to a sixth. He should now have at least a month (and likely a few 
weeks more) to show what he can do with an able supporting cast. Perform well 
enough, and it is quite possible that he could win the job full-time. But 
Sanchez also needs to know when to let others shoulder the burden. Against a 
defense that is giving up 4.8 yards per carry, we should expect to see a heavy 
dose of LeSean McCoy. The Panthers have played well at times this year – most 
notably in wins over Detroit and Chicago – but Cam Newton’s struggles over the 
last three weeks are a legitimate cause for alarm. 

Eagles to win

And the rest

Here are the remainder of this weekend’s games. These are not included in the 
Pick Six, but feel free to post your winners for them as well. If you do so, 
please keep them separate from your Pick Six predictions, as it will make life 
a lot easier when adding up your scores.

Sunday

1pm ET/6pm GMT

Tennessee Titans @ Baltimore Ravens

Pittsburgh Steelers @ New York Jets

4.05pm ET/9.05pm GMT

St Louis Rams @ Arizona Cardinals

Denver Broncos @ Oakland Raiders

4.25pm ET/9.25pm GMT

New York Giants @ Seattle Seahawks

8.30pm ET/Monday 1.30am GMT

Chicago Bears @ Green Bay Packers

(Bye weeks: Indianapolis Colts, Minnesota Vikings, New England Patriots, San 
Diego Chargers, Washington, Houston Texans)



 