
Patients are getting poorer care from the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in England as its funding crisis 
deepens, with trusts forecasting a £2.3bn deficit by the time the financial 
year ends, a survey of finance chiefs has found.

The King’s Fund <http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/> thinktank said the NHS was 
nearing “make or break” , with “widespread pessimism” within the service.

It also noted a return to central control of budgets from Westminster with 
funding decisions increasingly tied to tough cost reduction targets.

More than half the trust finance directors (53%) who responded to its latest 
quarterly survey believe care provided in their area is deteriorating, the 
first time such a figure has been reached since the surveys began in 2011.

Just under half the finance chiefs in clinical groups commissioning care (48%) 
feel the same.

The £2.3bn figure is an extrapolation made by the fund based on responses from 
83 NHS service providers, a response rate of about 35%. It was published just 
24 hours before Monitor, theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> body 
overseeing the financial performance of trusts, reveals the current position.

Monitor has previously reported a £1.6bn deficit at the end of September, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/challenging-environment-for-nhs-providers> 
halfway through the financial year, which ends in six weeks.

The King’s Fund survey revealed that most trusts fear they will not be able to 
meetnationally imposed caps on spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/11/are-locum-doctors-and-nurses-really-bankrupting-the-nhs>
 on agency staff. Some say the caps could prevent them recruiting the numbers 
they need to care for patients safely.

Nine in 10 hospitals and more than two-thirds of health trusts generally are 
forecasting deficits, and two-thirds of trusts are now reliant either on their 
reserves or getting extra help from the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>.

Though clinical commissioning groups are generally in a better financial 
position, nearly a fifth predict deficits.

One in 11 patients going to hospital A&E departments waited longer than four 
hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/14/nhs-growing-numbers-of-patients-are-waiting-too-long-for-ae-care>
 in the quarter up to the end of December, the worse performance since 2003, 
while only a slightly smaller proportion werewaiting for longer than 18 weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/09/nhs-hospital-waiting-time-figures>
 for a planned admission to hospital, the fund said.

The King’s Fund chief economist, John Appleby, said the findings were further 
evidence the NHS is facing “a huge financial challenge”. The position might be 
even worse than predicted.

Even with the additional funding recently provided by the Treasury, and 
switches in funding between different budgets, “it is touch and go whether the 
Department of Health will be able to balance its budget at the end of the year”.

Appleby said: “At the same time, performance is deteriorating with key targets 
being missed with increasing regularity and increasing concerns being raised 
about the quality of patient care ... This is shaping up to be a make or break 
year for the NHS.”

The DH’s permanent secretary, Dame Una O’Brien 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/dame-una-obrien-to-leave-department-of-health-after-25-years>
, announced in December she would be leaving in April, “as we plan for the next 
phase of change in the department and the wider health and care system”.

Appleby said: “I think it is incredibly serious for Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> ... You can see from a 
Treasury point of view, ‘what has gone on with financial control here?’”

Paul Healy, a senior policy advisor at the NHS Confederation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/09/nhs-hospitals-930m-overspend-calls-for-urgent-funding>
, which represents most health service providers and commissioners, said: “NHS 
leaders know the status quo isn’t sustainable and are working hard to join up 
across the health and care system, so as to be more efficient, deliver better 
value and offer a more individual service for the public.”

Dr Mark Porter, who chairs the British Medical Association, said: “It is clear 
that the government is managing the NHS into greater deficit by cutting 
resources while expecting service improvements at a time of rising demand.”


The Healthcare Financial Management Association, the professional body for 
finance directors, said they warned in November it was time for a “plan B” or 
quality could suffer, and the King’s Fund report suggested this prediction may 
be coming true.

“Six months ago finance directors were relatively confident quality standards 
could be maintained despite the pessimistic outlook – at least for the 
remainder of this financial year – but the situation has gone from bad to worse 
in the meantime,” said Paul Briddock, its policy director.

“It’s clear from the new figures that the unprecedented pressure to meet 
financial targets is taking its toll.

“Finance directors have warned that their financial plans for the year are at 
medium to high risk of not being met and that there is slippage against their 
savings plans so our hunch would be that the actual year-end deficit will be 
even larger.”

Health minister Alistair Burt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/03/more-than-half-of-gps-say-the-quality-of-their-service-has-deteriorated>
 said: “There should never be a choice between providing safe care – our top 
priority – and balancing the books, which is why we’re investing £10bn to fund 
the NHS’s own plan for the future, including nearly £4bn next year. Despite 
being busy, the NHS continues to perform well – last year the service performed 
1.6m more operations and treated 2,100 more people every day within the 
four-hour A & E target compared to 2010.”

Labour’s health secretary, Heidi Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/heidi-alexander>, said: “These findings 
are further proof that Jeremy Hunt has lost complete control of the NHS’s 
finances.

“Despite the scale of the cash crisis in the health service, ministers are 
determined hospitals make eye-watering ‘efficiency savings’ which experts – and 
now NHS bosses – say cannot be delivered without putting patient care at risk.

“Jeremy Hunt needs to come clean with the public about the scale of the 
financial crisis in the NHS and what it means for patient care.”
 