
NHS will soon test the National Laboratory Medicine Catalogue (NLMC) – a 
unique data set which will standardise the way pathology tests are requested 
and reported electronically in hospitals, clinics and labs across the UK. It 
will address a number of quality and patient safety issues in both requesting 
and reporting, and improve the reliability and effectiveness of pathology 
services.

NLMC has been developed by pathologists, working under the direction of the 
Royal College of Pathologists and in collaboration with the Department of 
Health and NHS Connecting forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/health>. It is the 
first sophisticated system of its kind and size in the world.

Pathology services underpin almost all aspects of clinical care: most 
decisions on diagnosis or treatment involve pathology investigations and, 
often, expert interpretation of the results.

It is therefore vital that any laboratory system for transmitting pathology 
test requests and results does so in a reliable and reproducible way, linked to 
nationally agreed standards. Such systems also require the capacity to fulfil 
the needs of the service both in the immediate and longer terms.

Pathology Bounded Code Lists (PBCL) is the current method of transferring 
electronic messages between clinical laboratories and GP/consultant systems. 
But it does have its limitations and they are becoming more pronounced as 
laboratory data needs to be shared more widely between multidisciplinary teams, 
clinical networks and disease registers (eg cancer).

It also needs to support transfer of data electronically (GP2GP) when patients 
change their GP. New names, units of measurement and reference ranges for both 
existing analytes and novel tests and have, over the life of PBCL, confounded 
what was originally a robust system.

Additionally, the NHS landscape has also moved forward and so the need for 
information exchange is greater than simply local laboratory to GP.

PBCL needs to evolve in order to enable coding, laboratory processing, as well 
as reporting, and to do this across all pathology disciplines.

NLMC represents this evolution and provides an opportunity for laboratories to 
re-think their IT needs in a way that allows interaction with requesting 
clinicians and advances the wider use of anonymised data for research and 
service development.

The move to network pathology services to serve the needs of much larger 
communities is also stimulating the standardisation of methods, codes, units of 
measurement and reference ranges used to help with result interpretation. We 
now need greater standardisation in order to manage the way in which different 
testing methods – all appropriate but sometimes varying — may generate 
different values for the same sample.

The solution lies in NLMC. Its data model, developed by the Department of 
Health in conjunction with the Royal College of Pathologists and NHS Connecting 
for Health, contains uniquely defined pathology test requests and associated 
report items (analytes, specimens, methods of collection and other information 
used for laboratory processing). These are validated for use within and by the 
NHS. .

These standardised and codified test requests and outcome reports cover all 
NHS pathology specialities.

The process of checking analyte names with codes, sample types, methods of 
collection, units of measurement and data combination codes for some 3,500 
items requires the input of a wide range of subspecialists in pathology and 
that is why the NLMC now needs peer review, prior to gaining approval by the 
Information Standards Board for uptake by laboratories and system suppliers.

This first release focuses on the requesting of laboratory investigations and 
will be followed by report items once they have been approved for review by the 
NLMC governance board hosted by the Royal College of Pathologists.

Pathologists and industry professionals now have an opportunity to test the 
NLMC as it is rolled out for review next month.

• For further information and to enrol to review the NLMC please contact 
cfh.nationalcatalogues@nhs.net <mailto:cfh.nationalcatalogues@nhs.net>.

Dr Ian Barnes is the National Clinical Director for Pathology at the 
Department of Health. Dr Gifford Batstone is the National Clinical Lead for 
Pathology for NHS Connecting for Health.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the healthcare network
 <http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/healthcare/start.php> to receive 
regular emails and exclusive offers.
 