
Nick Clegg has dismissed calls for knife detectors in schools following the 
fatal stabbing of teacher Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/29/schoolboy-15-held-death-teacher-leeds>
 in Leeds.

The deputy prime minister said making schools a high-security environment 
would mean "fear would have triumphed", and he suspected Maguire would not have 
wanted that to happen.

Some campaigners have suggested there should be more checks on pupils and 
better education to stop them carrying knives. A survey by Sky News found that 
almost 1,000 pupils were caught with weapons including guns, axes and a meat 
cleaver in schools in the last three years.

Clegg said it would be a "great shame" to change the "look, the feel, the 
ethos" of schools overnight by forcing pupils to undergo airport-style security 
checks before going into lessons. He stressed that schools had the power to 
introduce knife arches if they thought it was appropriate.

"I think everybody is profoundly shocked by this. The notion that any teacher 
should lose their life in the classroom is just horrific and I think, perhaps, 
it was especially poignant because she was clearly such a widely respected 
teacher who, by all accounts, went in on her day off, had been there for years 
and so on.

"In terms of our reaction, I don't want to see every school feel like an 
airport terminal. We want our classrooms to be classrooms, not battle zones," 
he said.

"I say this with some caution – I didn't know Ann Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/ann-maguire>, of course – but I suspect 
from what little I have read about or know about her, a dedicated teacher like 
that wouldn't want to see the education system – I think her headmaster has 
said that she herself wouldn't want see the school system turn into a 
high-security environment. So that's the balance we are trying to strike."

Headteachers from the Association of School and College Leaders have taken a 
similar stance, warning that schools should not become fortresses.

A 15-year-old boy appeared at Leeds youth court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/01/ann-maguire-15-year-old-court-charged-teacher-murder>
 on Thursday charged with Maguire's murder. He spoke to confirm his name, 
address and date of birth, and to say he understood the charges. The case was 
referred to Leeds crown court.
 