
Nico Muhly <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nico-muhly> is skimming through 
the printed score of his new work. He barely glances at the pages – but all of 
a sudden he stops.


“Wait a second, that’s not right,” he says, frowning and narrowing his eyes at 
something. Circling an apparent rogue musical note in a thick marker, he 
mutters: “I will deal with THAT later.”


It is this obsessive attention to detail that has made Muhly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nico-muhly>, an American, into one of the 
most celebrated and sought after classical composers of the last decade.

Facing the music: Nico Muhly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/16/facing-the-music-nico-muhly> 
His operas and orchestral pieces have lit up the stages of the world’s most 
famed concert halls, his compositions have scored several major films, and he 
has lent his considerable talents to Björk, Sufjan Stevens and Antony and the 
Johnsons along the way.

But while the music may be beautiful, the subjects that inspire the pieces are 
often more troubling. From the stabbing of a teenager by a lover met in an 
internet chatroom inTwo Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/25/two-boys-review>, to the 
exploration of Mormon polygamy in Dark Sisters, the 33-year-old likes to put a 
bit of real human tragedy at the heart of his operas.

His newest work is no different. Sentences, an opera which will make its debut 
at the Barbican this weekend, traces the life and work of mathematicianAlan 
Turing <https://www.theguardian.com/science/alan-turing>, who cracked the 
German Enigma code during the second world war but was later prosecuted for 
homosexuality.


Turing’s life was recently dramatised in an Oscar-nominated film starring 
Benedict Cumberbatch but Sentences, which has been in the works for two years, 
will certainly not be The Imitation Game with stirring violins.

Indeed, it was the process of coding and decoding, and the moral questions 
around artificial intelligence, that first sparked Muhly’s interest in Turing 
years ago, rather than the human drama.

“No one wants a gay martyr oratorio,” the composer says, and bursts out 
laughing “Like, I already did that, it’s so 2011– like a chunky heel.”

He speaks almost overwhelmingly fast, switching between the serious and the 
camply sarcastic in the blink of an eye.

“In a sense the piece skirts all the obvious things and focuses on the 
obsessive nature of that kind of work and the obsessive nature of that kind of 
life,” he continues.


“Turing’s work may have begun as mathematics, but it is amazing to think about 
the impact it had on physical people’s bodies – it literally saved lives.


“Also my argument is that with people like that, whose work is so 
all-encompassing, the tragedy of their lives is very much linked with the work 
itself. It’s the same with composers.”

Muhly makes it clear he has no intention of making the hackneyed connection 
between the fact he is a troubled gay composer writing about the life of a 
troubled gay mathematician.

“I don’t want be like [he puts on a mocking, high-pitched voice]: ‘I responded 
to his story in a very personal way.’

“Well obviously, because I wrote the damned thing. There’s so much bullshit 
with composers and there’s this self-aggrandising relationship to talking about 
your music that I find so off-putting.”

Never one to take the path well travelled, the work, added Muhly, is 
“anti-narrative”.


Instead the story of Turing is pieced together through seven episodic sections 
which span chronologically from his cycling obsession though to his death by 
poisoning, and the lingering question of whether or not it was suicide.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fnico-muhly-takes-on-alan-turing-no-one-wants-a-gay-martyr-oratorio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0bba0255a23f70e93ffeb2d469b00e025685fb3%2F0_509_2718_2501%2F2718.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nico%20Muhly%20takes%20on%20Alan%20Turing%3A%20'No%20one%20wants%20a%20gay%20martyr%20oratorio'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fnico-muhly-takes-on-alan-turing-no-one-wants-a-gay-martyr-oratorio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nico%20Muhly%20takes%20on%20Alan%20Turing%3A%20%27No%20one%20wants%20a%20gay%20martyr%20oratorio%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F06%2Fnico-muhly-takes-on-alan-turing-no-one-wants-a-gay-martyr-oratorio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0bba0255a23f70e93ffeb2d469b00e025685fb3%2F0_509_2718_2501%2F2718.jpg>
 Alan Turing aged 16 in 1928. A section of Sentences’ libretto uses a letter he 
wrote to his mother about the death of his schoolfriend Christopher Morcom. 
Photograph: Sherborne School/AFP/Getty Images 
In one early section, which deals with the death of Turing’s schoolfriend, and 
the first boy he loved, Christopher Morcom, the libretto is simply a letter he 
wrote to his mother at the time.

But why do such tortured topics have such an appeal for the young composer? 
Muhly pauses to consider.


“You know I feel like if I could give voice to it it would probably destroy my 
love for it. I guess that’s just how I think about things. And also, real shit 
is way more crazy than fiction. You open up the paper and it’s this 
unbelievable litany of craziness.”

In fact, Muhly’s composing has recently taken a “weirdo left turn” of late, a 
shift he says has given his newer work “more teeth”.


He adds: “There’s a violence to it that I feel is easier for me to tap into as 
an older person than I was when I was 22, in a chaotic moment in my life. And 
making beautiful stuff was really anchoring.”

This friction between chaos and control is one that has dominated Muhly’s life 
for the past 10 years as he battled, unknowingly, with severe depression and 
mental illness.


Having had a manic depressive episode more than a decade ago, the composer was 
prescribed a cocktail of drugs which he continued to take for what he describes 
as “10 medically unexamined years”.


The impact of ignoring his own depression was enormous and one he only came to 
terms with, and addressed, three months ago.

“When you mess with the chemicals in your brain, it changes your relationship 
to everything,” he says.


“It’s like that thing that the frog only jumps out if you put it in hot water 
but if you slowly raise the temperature it will not jump out and will just boil 
to death. And I had got right to that point, I was at 99 degrees.”

In a characteristically eloquent metaphor he adds: “The prose of my life was 
fine but the poetry was really fucked.”

Indeed, writing in a disarmingly honest blog <http://nicomuhly.com/> about his 
mental health last week, Muhly said he had come to the realisation that since 
he was 22, he had become disconnected from most normal human emotion, unable to 
feel pride, happiness or even sadness.


“I never really knew any other conditions aside from my slightly terrifying 
and almost religious relationship to my work,” he wrote.

The treatment he sought has changed everything, says Muhly, though he is still 
grappling with his own recovery and the unfamiliar concept of deriving pleasure 
from his own work.


“It’s changed everything in my life,” says Muhly. “My emotional landscape used 
to feel like this inscrutable aspect of my life over which I had no control. 
Now it is so much wider and with that comes things I am not used to feeling and 
haven’t felt in 11 years.

“Being sad is a new thing, I had no idea what that felt like. I have been 
upset, but actually sad – that’s completely foreign to me.


“And the same with feeling happy about something I have done, that is also 
completely foreign. And when I say foreign, it was like a language I hadn’t 
spoken in 10 years.”

He may be a devout anglophile but Muhly, who was raised in Rhode Island and is 
based in New York, admitted his decision to share his own mental health 
struggles in an online blog, in wholly unrepressed and relaxed fashion, is 
thoroughly American.

“In New York, everyone you meet immediately leads with ‘who do you see?’ 
referring to their shrink, and you tell everyone about it,” he says with a 
smile. “But here in the UK nobody talks about mental health, it’s like there 
isn’t even a language for it.”

His smile vanishes and he becomes instantly serious again. “I wish that were a 
bigger conversation here and I wish there was a way it didn’t feel so taboo but 
also so codified.


“The thing with mental illness is that if you articulate what the chemical 
imbalance is then it is just like having diabetes, you just learn to deal with 
it. The minute you put a name to it, that is so liberating.”

Muhly has given himself no time to wallow however. After Sentences, he will be 
taking part in an installation project at the National Gallery. He is composing 
a score for the Manchester international festival and has a new ballet opening 
in Paris in the autumn.


As he gets up to leave for an appointment at the English National Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>, Muhly recalls with a combination of 
horror and amusement the suggestion by many around him that he should try 
mindfulness meditation to help level him out.

“You could almost hear the dippy voice and the wind chimes,” he says. “I was 
like, what is this bullshit that people are doing now, it’s so crazy – you want 
me to sit in a room and think about my body?” Raising his eyebrows, he adds 
drily: “I would sooner visit a bat cave.”


World premiere of Nico Muhly’s Sentences (performed by Iestyn Davies and the 
Britten Sinfonia), Barbican Hall, London, Saturday 6 June. 

 