
Nicola Jennings <http://www.nicolajennings.co.uk> studied theatre design at 
the Wimbledon School of Art. She spent several years working in theatre and 
illustrating books before she joinedThe London Daily News 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/London_Daily_News> in 1987 as a caricaturist for 
the Diary. She then went on to draw caricatures for theDaily Mirror’s  
<http://www.mirror.co.uk>television pages and work for the Sunday Times  
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/>and the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer>. Her first cartoon for the Guardian 
appeared in 1990.

Nicola Jennings, caricaturist: GNM Archive teaching resource, February 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/gallery/2015/feb/02/nicola-jennings-caricaturist-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-february-2015>
Her drawings have also appeared in numerous other publications. Television 
work includes animated cartoons forChannel 4’s <http://www.channel4.com> A Week 
in Politics (1995-1997), title sequences for political documentaries and live 
drawing on the BBC 2’s Midnight Hour (1994). She has also provided 
illustrations for Quentin Lett’s 50 People Who Buggered Up Britain (2008) and 
Letts Rip! (2010),John Crace’s <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/johncrace> 
Digested 21st Century and his recent book I Never Promised you a Rose Garden 
(2014). Nicola wonCaricaturist of the Year  
<http://www.cartoonmuseum.org/about/awards>in 2008. She teaches caricature 
workshops for theRoyal Drawing School 
<http://royaldrawingschool.org/courses/public-courses/sunday-sessions-an-a-z-of-drawing-caricatures-drop/>
.

Nicola’s influences are many – Hans Holbein <http://www.hans-holbein.org>, 
James Gillray 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/james-gillray-art-caricature>
,Thomas Rowlandson 
<http://www.royalcollection.org.uk/exhibitions/high-spirits-the-comic-art-of-thomas-rowlandson>
,the spy cartoons from Vanity Fair 
<http://www.darvillsrareprints.com/vanityfairinformation.htm>, Marc Boxer 
<http://www.cartoons.ac.uk/artists/markboxer/biography> and Gerald Scarfe 
<http://www.geraldscarfe.com>. She became a caricaturist to: “poke fun at the 
establishment and to tease out the truth from the bluff and the formal façade.” 
As noted in the introduction to theHidden Face Exhibition  
<https://www.theguardian.com/newsroom/story/0,11718,1415844,00.html>catalogue 
in 2005: “Nicola uses caricature to peel away the mask and prick the pose of 
her subjects uncovering the real intentions of those we elect and applaud.” 
Guardian cartoonistAndrzej Krauze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gall/0,8542,575866,00.html> compares her work to 
Goya <http://www.franciscodegoya.net> in recording the severity of what is 
going on in modern day life. He also praises her economy and puts her work in 
the tradition ofHonore Daumier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/oct/29/daumier-cartoons-satire-royal-academy-review>
 in whose work there was “only a face and a little bit of hand – masterpieces 
of drawing. This is how I think of her drawings.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422266647644%2F6ce3af77-27e8-46d6-9f4c-891727dea8de-1481x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422266647644%2F6ce3af77-27e8-46d6-9f4c-891727dea8de-1481x2040.jpeg>
 Guardian front page Friday 29 April 1994 with exclusive interview with Nelson 
Mandela and Nicola Jennings’ accompanying illustration. Photograph: Guardian 
While focusing on caricature as the central element of her work, Nicola has 
also applied this to the editorial cartoon and comment drawing. Her work has 
appeared in a range of sections in the Guardian including Comment, Opinion and 
Editorial, g2, Review, Books, Birthdays, People column and the Diary page. The 
above caricature ofNelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> appeared on the front page of 
the Guardian on 29 April 1994, two days after he had been elected as the first 
black president of South Africa. It was used to complement a UK exclusive 
interview that Mandela had given Johannesburg correspondentDavid Beresford, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidberesford> outlining his hopes for 
the country.

The time that Nicola has to do a caricature or cartoon depends on the 
newspaper section and when it is commissioned. For same-day cartoons she might 
have four hours but often they can be the very last minute. She was asked to 
produce a caricature of Nigel Farage forJohn Crace’s political sketch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/18/john-crace-review-year-farage-salmond-cameron-politics-miliband>
 in two hours. She might get a brief from the section’s editor or designer, 
which could be a verbal description of the story. Sometimes she will receive a 
partly written piece from the journalist who is still working on it or she 
might get the finished article.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422265842885%2F57c69b35-c700-4cc7-b1ba-809318b68aa0-1491x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422265842885%2F57c69b35-c700-4cc7-b1ba-809318b68aa0-1491x2040.jpeg>
 Preparatory sketch of Marilyn Manson by Nicola Jennings. Illustration: Nicola 
Jennings/Guardian News & Media Archive  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422266102812%2Ffc5a036b-68ce-4d7a-97cd-ee4a9c46304b-784x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422266102812%2Ffc5a036b-68ce-4d7a-97cd-ee4a9c46304b-784x1020.jpeg>
 Pen and ink line drawing of Marilyn Manson by Nicola Jennings. Illustration: 
Nicola Jennings/Guardian News & Media Archive  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422266267617%2F14d143c7-a49f-4146-83ce-f5e8d6adbfd1-731x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Jennings%2C%20caricaturist%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%2C%20February%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F02%2Fnicola-jennings-caricaturist-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-february-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422266267617%2F14d143c7-a49f-4146-83ce-f5e8d6adbfd1-731x1020.jpeg>
 Finished caricature of Marilyn Manson. Illustration: Nicola Jennings/Guardian 
News & Media Archive 
The GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> collection has three 
drawings of the musicianMarilyn Manson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/marilyn-manson>, the sketch, the pen and ink 
line drawing and finished caricature, which demonstrate the way in which Nicola 
plans and executes a commission. First of all she makes a preparatory sketch 
and then passes it to the editor or designer to look at. She will then trace 
her sketch on a light box onto good quality paper and then she will begin to 
create the caricature. She uses a dip pen and ink “to get a really sharp, 
textured line” and then colours it with Dr Martin’s inks or colour washes it 
with gouache.


Sometimes she might scan the black and white ink drawing and colour it in 
Photoshop with a digital pen and tablet. She can also draw the whole image on 
the computer but this takes a lot of time and she often has short deadlines. 
You can see the process of creating a caricature ofGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cartoon/2010/jun/30/george-osborne-caricature> 
in the video below.

 Animation of a Nicola Jennings caricature of George Osborne. 
Nicola enjoys caricaturing politicians. She also likes drawing musicians as 
they often have “mad hair” which makes them interesting to do. One of her 
favourite subjects is theQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cartoon/2012/apr/21/queen-elizabeth-ii-caricature>
 as she has a fleshy face, always looks bad tempered and is hard to read - 
Nicola enjoys the challenge. By caricaturing she aims to: “arrive at an 
accurate description of the personality by analysing not only the proportions 
of the face but also its expressions and movements”. As Alan Rusbridger noted, 
in the introduction to the Hidden Face Exhibition catalogue, “It is her 
intelligence, her restrained and gentle sense of humour – she never surrenders 
to the cheap gibe – and her unshakeable belief in challenging the status quo 
that sets her work apart. Her work is both iconic and innately suited to the 
pages of the Guardian.”


A gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/gallery/2015/feb/02/nicola-jennings-caricaturist-gnm-archive-teaching-resource-february-2015>
 to accompany this resource includes a selection of her cartoons and 
caricatures held by the GNM archive along with some more recent work.


You can see Nicola Jennings’ latest caricatures here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/series/nicola-jennings-caricatures>.


A catalogue 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=NJE> 
of Nicola Jennings’ cartoons is available to search online and the collection 
can be consulted in theGNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> 
reading room in London by appointment.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>


More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page
 