
Nicolás Sánchez, Matias Moroni and Santiago Cordero scored two tries apiece as 
a rampant Argentina thrashed an inexperienced Japan in Japan as the Pumas 
warmed up in style for next Saturday’s autumn international in Wales.

Wales v Australia – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/05/wales-v-australia-live-rugby-union>
Sánchez also kicked three penalties and five conversions for a tally of 29 
points while the replacement scrum-half, Tomás Cubelli, scored Argentina’s 
seventh try six minutes from time.

Japan, featuring 13 uncapped players in the matchday 23 for Jamie Joseph’s 
first game in charge since taking over from Eddie Jones, scored consolation 
tries through the No8 Amanaki Mafi and the debutant winger Lomano Lemeki. The 
fly-half Yu Tamura converted both and kicked two penalties, including one to 
open the scoring and give the hosts a fifth-minute lead at the Chichibunomiya 
Rugby Stadium.

That was as good as it got for the Brave Blossoms as Sánchez and the 
scrum-half Martín Landajo orchestrated the high-tempo attacking style that has 
typified the Pumas’ play this season and the bruising Argentina pack took 
control.

Moroni, playing out of position on the wing, and Sánchez crossed to help give 
the visitors a 21-6 lead at the break and Cordero, on the other wing, scored 
his first try at the end of a sweeping move soon after the break.

Pablo Matera: ‘If you’re a nervous flyer you can’t play for Argentina’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/07/pablo-matera-flyer-argentina-twickenham-australia-rugby-championship>
Japan stunned South Africa at last year’s Rugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 but were always going to struggle with so many new faces against a hardened 
Pumas side, which has already played New Zealand, South Africa and Australia 
twicein the Rugby Championship this year.

Mafi, one of the few forwards remaining from the World Cup campaign, barged 
over from the base of a ruck after 52 minutes, while Lemeki, a standout in 
Japan’s stunning Olympic sevens campaign, ran in a brilliant individual effort 
at the death.

Japan next head to Tbilisi to face Georgia before rounding out their November 
campaign with matches against Wales in Cardiff and Fiji in Vannes, France. 
Argentina also head to Europe where they are sure to face tougher matches in 
Wales, Scotland and England. 
 