
They are the highway to success; the route to top jobs and fat pay cheques. 
They've been called thekey to social mobility 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-18142385> and the answer to skills 
shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/feb/07/government-extra-apprenticeships>
. Apprenticeships have it all, it seems. But could it be a myth?

New figures suggest the government is setting a worrying example to employers: 
only a tiny minority of apprentices are taken on as new recruits after their 
placement ends. And the total figures for apprenticeship places in government 
are distorted because the vast majority are given to internal applicants who 
already have jobs.

In the last five years, only 3% of all government apprentices were taken on as 
new recruits with full-time permanent contracts after their scheme. Out of 
nearly 4,000 places, 85% were given to people already employed in the 
departments. Among external apprentices, 90% were not given full-time, 
permanent jobs when their placement ended.

The figures were released by 13 central government departments, following 
Freedom of Information requests by the Guardian.

The coalition government has championed apprenticeships, encouraging more 
employers to set up schemes.More than a million people applied for placements, 
across different sectors in Britain last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/dec/31/1m-apply-apprenticeships-2012>
, and David Cameron said he wants it to become the"new norm" for school leavers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-21734560>. "Apprenticeships – and investing in 
apprenticeships – is actually a win/win situation," he said. "We want to see 
apprenticeships expand even further." But the government uses most apprentices 
for short stints, without employing them afterwards.

The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS), which has 
responsibility for apprenticeships, has itself only taken on 89 apprentices 
since it was formed in 2009. Of these, just 10 were externally recruited – the 
rest were already employed by the department. And only one of these has been 
taken on in a full-time, permanent position. BIS turned down invitations to 
explain the figures.

At the Ministry of Justice (MoJ), 2,543 apprenticeship places have been 
awarded over the last five years. Just one place was given to an external 
candidate – who has yet to be taken on full-time. A spokesperson said: "Under 
this government, the number of apprenticeship opportunities in the department 
has increased by 62%."

The Department of Work and Pensions (DWP) has taken on 345 external 
apprentices since 2010, with wages starting at £16,250. None of the apprentices 
have been put on full-time, permanent contracts as yet. A DWP spokesperson said 
the scheme is "designed to support young long-term unemployed from 
disadvantaged backgrounds".

"Since these youngsters are not recruited through the usual rules governing 
open and fair competition, they cannot be kept on permanently at the end of 
their apprenticeships," she said. "But they can apply for any vacancies 
available at the time."

In the UK, there are more than 200 different types of apprenticeship 
programmes across sectors 
<http://www.education.gov.uk/childrenandyoungpeople/youngpeople/qandlearning/apprenticeships>
, with placements ranging from one to four years. There are plenty ofsuccess 
stories about placements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/mar/11/why-i-chose-apprenticeship-over-university>
 and for many young people they offer a perfect blend of vocational and 
academic learning, leading to fulfilling careers.

But business leaders have warned that schemes can allow some cost-cutting 
organisations 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/careers-blog/rise-in-apprenticeships-under-coalition>
 to exploit cheap, disposable labour. Young apprentices can legally still be 
paid as little as£2.68 per hour <https://www.gov.uk/national-minimum-wage-rates>
 – well under half the minimum wage for adults.

Mike Heslop, founder of Centrex, told the Financial Times last year 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1fbefb5e-f2ab-11e1-ac41-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2X8n32Sy3>
: "I don't think the government has done a bad job in trying to implement 
something to help. But it is a little short-sighted as there are companies that 
will take advantage of this."

Sue Tumelty, founder and managing director of the HR Dept, added: "If it is 
just seen as cheap labour then everybody loses. The company won't get any 
value, as the individual isn't learning, and the individual isn't motivated as 
they recognise they are being used as cheap labour."

Cameron has claimed <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/feedarticle/10297108>: 
"For every £1 we spend on apprenticeships it's estimated that the economy gains 
£18. That's why businesses have told us we need to go further in encouraging 
apprenticeships to the highest level."

Speaking on the Daily Politics show last month 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-22952415>, businesswoman Julie White 
admitted there was a danger that, in some companies, apprentices could just be 
used for cheap labour. "Some of them don't get full-time jobs," she added. 
"There isn't enough work out there for them all."

But Vince Cable, the Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills, 
told the programme: "Apprenticeships are the thing we're doing more of than 
anything else."

A new cross-department Civil Service apprenticeship scheme, due to start in 
September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/07/school-leavers-civil-service-apprentices>
 will see the first 100 apprentices taken on, with minimum salaries of £18,763.

A Cabinet Office spokesman said: "It is specifically designed to harness the 
talent and energy of 18 to 21-year-olds who have chosen not to go to university 
– and the vast majority of those taken on will be external applicants. By 
giving them experience at the heart of government, and as part of a structured 
training programme, they will develop to become accomplished and respected 
civil servants with a permanent position and a promising career ahead of them."

The Cabinet Office added that, where departmental apprenticeships don't 
automatically lead to full-time posts, line managers are expected to ensure 
apprentices are work-ready and support them in applying for internal vacancies.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 