
1 | Protect and promote human rights

Public resources are wasted on enforcing laws that criminalise HIV 
transmission and dehumanise at-risk populations. By contrast, laws that protect 
at-risk populations are powerful, low-cost tools that help ensure that 
financial and scientific investments for HIV are not wasted. Enacting laws 
based on sound public health and human rights will ensure new prevention and 
treatment tools – such asPrEP <http://www.whatisprep.org/> [pre-exposure 
prophylaxis], male circumcision and microbicides – reach those who need them. 
Changes in the legal and policy environment, along with other interventions, 
could lower new adult HIV infections to an estimated 1.2 million by 2031 
(compared to 2.1 million if current efforts continue unchanged).Mandeep 
Dhaliwal,UNDP <http://www.undp.org/>

2 | Make drugs cheaper

One way to make limited funds go further is to challenge drug companies on the 
high price of life-saving drugs. The use of unmerited patents by pharmaceutical 
companies to secure monopolies on their products must stop.Make Medicines 
Affordable <http://www.makemedicinesaffordable.org> is working with civil 
society to challenge unmerited patents and useTrips agreement 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TRIPS_Agreement> flexibilities. Julia Powell, 
International Treatment Preparedness Coalition <http://itpcglobal.org/>

We will lose the battle against HIV without LGBT decriminalisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/18/we-will-lose-the-battle-against-hiv-without-lgbt-decriminalisation>
In lower middle-income countries, the average antiretroviral (ARV) treatment 
cost for a new adult patient is around $350 [£283]. Of that, just 40% is the 
cost of the ARV – 35% is non-ARV recurrent costs (clinical salaries, laboratory 
etc) and then 25% is programme management. We really need to dissect non-drug 
costs and find ways to reduce costs with regard to generic licensing and 
optimising manufacturing costs.Anand Reddi, Gilead Sciences 
<http://www.gilead.com/>

3 | Support LGBT groups

There are some great new global funds supporting funding for local and 
national LGBT groups so that they can gather data on access to medicines for 
their community, in a way that ensures their confidentiality and safety. The
Rapid Response Fund <http://www.aidsalliance.org/rapidresponsefund>, funded by 
theElton John Aids Foundation <http://ejaf.org/> (EJAF), the President’s 
Emergency Plan for Aids Relief <http://www.pepfar.gov/> (Pepfar) and UNAids 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiqqbKJr9DPAhVHlxoKHSSRC5MQFggeMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.unaids.org%2F&usg=AFQjCNEqbtql7Zd2bs6OosksSlnt0byzrA&sig2=jo6jfnUWp3RcL0I6QtZRTQ>
, will support civil society organisations that are led by, or work closely 
with, MSM [men who have sex with men] and LGBT people and communities, to 
implement rapid responses to situations or events that threaten their access to 
HIV services. Grants of up to $20,000 [£16,000] are available.Mike Podmore, 
STOPAIDS <http://www.stopaids.org.uk/>

4 | Support adherence to ARVs

Drug resistance is a huge issue and one to which we are only just waking up. 
The World Health Organisation has produced a2017-21 action plan 
<http://www.who.int/hiv/drugresistance/hivdr-action-plan-2016-2021/en/> which, 
I think, underlines that we have neglected to focus on adherence and support 
people not just to access ARVs, but to stay on them.Mike Podmore

How to combat the threat of HIV drug resistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/11/hiv-drug-resistance-aids-free-generation>
5 | Integrate HIV into health sectors

Finance ministers tend to think in terms of sectors (eg health) or a clusters 
of sectors (eg the social sectors – education, health, social welfare), rather 
than in terms of individual issues like HIV. We need to integrate Aids 
financing into domestic health financing and make the argument to finance 
ministers that they need to increase investment in the social sectors, and 
health in particular. We need to underscore why this is an important investment 
in human capital and, therefore, in economic development.David Wilson, World 
Bank <http://www.worldbank.org/>

6 | Collect and spend taxes on health

Some countries with major HIV epidemics have actually progressively reduced 
the share of the government budget they allocate to health, and many African 
countries with major HIV challenges collect a smaller share of GDP as revenue – 
and spend more collecting that small share – than comparable economies 
elsewhere. We must ensure that a significant share of the greater revenue 
collected is allocated to health, and spent as efficiently as possible.David 
Wilson

7 | Integrate HIV and water and sanitation programmes

Safe water can make an enormous difference to the health and wellbeing of 
people living with HIV. It can increase drug effectiveness by reducing 
diarrhoea and collaboration between HIV specialists atSafaids 
<http://www.safaids.net/> and in the water and sanitation sector have 
identified ways 
<http://www.wateraid.org/news/blogs/2016/august/aids-2016-integration-for-hiv-and-wash>
 to integrate water and HIV programming more effectively in southern Africa to 
streamline investments. In addition, arecent systematic review 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25768871> showed that water and sanitation 
interventions to reduce morbidity among people living with HIV were 
cost-effective, particularly when incorporated into complementary programmes.
Louisa Gosling, WaterAid

8 | Coordinate responses

In the HIV/Aids space, we can work with others focusing on health to share 
costs. In Malawi, for example, our mobile clinic teams test and treat for 
malaria and TB even though our core focus is HIV. Also, in our door-to-door 
testing pilot – where a team of eight canvases a village over a week to perform 
HIV tests – that same team will check for bed nets. If they do not have one, 
our HIV testing team will leave one and teach the family how to use it. One 
team, but two major health issues covered.Joel Goldman, The Elizabeth Taylor 
AIDS Foundation <http://elizabethtayloraidsfoundation.org/>

Pregnant and diagnosed with HIV: the group providing support for mothers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/01/pregnant-diagnosed-hiv-support-for-mothers>
9 | Push for more funding

We must reject the assumption that we will/can have less money and, instead, 
make it clear that less money, or even maintaining the same levels of funding, 
will lead to an increase in infections and deaths globally. Many organisations 
working on the global HIV and TB responses are shouting loudly about the 
funding alarm. It became even more urgent when theKaiser Family Foundation 
<http://kff.org/> found that global donor financing had reduced by 13% from 
2014 to 2015. Our only way forward is to increase general public awareness and 
demand for donors and INGOs to increase HIV and TB funding up to 2020, and make 
it possible to end the epidemics by 2030. If not, we risk a terrifying rebound 
of the epidemics that we will struggle to get a grip on again.Mike Podmore

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/29/live-qa-how-do-we-increase-the-hiv-response-with-limited-funds>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.


 