
Eighty years after women in the UK were first given the vote on the same terms 
as men, they haven't exactly transformed the political landscape, as Lesley 
Abdela demonstrated in her piece yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/07/women>. In nine decades, 
we've seen just one female prime minister, one female foreign secretary and one 
female home secretary, while the majority of big political jobs are still held 
by men. Men make up three-quarters of the cabinet and four-fifths of both the 
House of Commons and the House of Lords. As the Labour MP Barbara Follett 
reflected recently, we still have a long way to go, since the House of Commons 
ranks a shameful 51st on the international women's representation league.

It's easy to dismiss the presence of more than 100 women MPs on those green 
benches for the last 11 years as simply brightening up the place a bit with 
their colourful jackets. Certainly the image of the so-called "Blair's Babes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/mar/16/women.labour>", all 
photographed standing admiringly around their leader when Blair first came to 
power, didn't help the cause of women MPs. Nor did the habit some of them 
developed of asking particularly toadying questions along the lines of "Would 
the prime minister agree that this government has made wonderful improvements 
in the health service?"

Yet it's wrong to assume that women's suffrage and women's representation has 
made little difference. A recent book,Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in Parliament: the New 
Suffragettes by Boni Sones chronicles the experiences of many of today's MPs 
and asks for their assessment of what women have achieved in parliament. And 
when you hear the catalogue of new laws that have been passed, largely due to 
the backing of women MPs, you realise that yes, they have shaken things up 
quite a lot.

Think of many of the key achievements of the Blair/Brown years and you are 
thinking of women's achievements – from SureStart, the new deal for lone 
parents, the big extension in childcare, the increase in both maternity and 
paternity leave, the introduction and extension of flexible working for 
parents, the minimum wage, and progress on the pay gap. Only this week we have 
seen the newequalities bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/jun/27/equality.constitution> in 
parliament, piloted by Harriet Harman, ending discrimination for older people 
as well as women and ethnic minorities. Might the men have got there alone? I 
doubt it, because women MPs have themselves experienced how hard it is to 
juggle work and family, making them much more forceful in agitating for new 
laws. They have also lobbied women journalists, in the unofficial circles that 
exist at Westminster, to push such issues up the political agenda.

There have been less mainstream issues too, like domestic violence, rape, 
trafficking of women and children, and access to cancer services that have all 
been championed by women MPs. AsVera Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/verabaird> points out, men are much less 
likely to raise these issues – "they don't have the imminence in your psyche 
and your emotions if you're never going to be capable of experiencing them." Of 
today's 125 women Mps, 104 have just had their photograph taken again, for
women's parlimentary radio <http://www.wpradio.co.uk/>. This time some 
Conservatives and Lib Dems have been included, and the images will be put on 
display at the National Portrait Gallery this autumn. A quick look at the faces 
shows how things have moved on in 11 years. While Blair's Babes looked naive, 
fresh-faced and aware of how different they were, today's MPs look less excited 
and more ordinary. And that's perhaps the biggest achievement of the women MPs: 
today it's quite normal to see women up there at the centre of power, without 
anyone batting an eye.
 