
A late development in the betting on this year's Nobel prize in literature has 
seen a "dramatic" shortening of odds on an outsider, the Norwegian author and 
dramatistJon Fosse <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/jon-fosse>, 
while Japanese novelist HarukiMurakami continued as favourite to win the prize  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/04/haruki-murakami-favourite-nobel-prize-literature>
.

Ladbrokes suspended betting temporarily after a sudden flurry of bets on 
Fosse, who is best-known in the UK as a playwright (his play I am the Wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/11/i-am-the-wind-theatre-review> 
was described as "cryptically haunting" by Michael Billington when it was 
staged at London's Young Vic in 2011).

A Ladbrokes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ladbrokes> spokesman said: 
"There were quite a few bigger-than-average bets in Fosse's home country of 
Norway – nothing untoward, but he was well-backed so we cut the odds from 100/1 
first to 33/1, and then to 14/1. It was quite a dramatic tumble, especially for 
an outsider."

He added that bookmakers were more sensitive to sudden movement in odds "with 
a prize like this. There are lots of contenders and the prices are high, say 
100/1. It's a big liability and it can quickly stack up." Bookmakers often 
suspend trading if unusual patterns of betting occur, in order to recalibrate 
prices.

Bets are being taken again now by Ladbrokes; Murakami is favourite with odds 
of 3/1, Joyce Carol Oates is second-favourite, at 6/1, followed bythe Hungarian 
Peter Nadas <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/peter-nadas> at 7/1, 
and South KoreanKo Un <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/ko-un> and 
AlgerianAssia Djebar 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/166891/Assia-Djebar>, both at 10/1.

William Hill also suspended betting on the prize at the weekend. A spokesman 
said that the mystery surrounding the decision-making, including the timing of 
the final selection, meant that it was at risk of "losing a lot of money". 
Traditionally the Swedish Academy, which awards theNobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/nobel-prize-literature>, times the 
announcement for the week before the Booker prize, meaning that the winner 
could be unveiled next week. A full timetable of science prizes has already 
been announced.

The Swedish Academy of 18 members – writers, poets, literary scholars and 
others – decide on the winner after a summer acquainting themselves with the 
works of the five or so writers in contention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/may/21/five-authors-nobel-prize-2013>
. On the Nobel prize website,Peter Englund, permanent secretary of the Swedish 
Academy, said 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nomination/literature/questions-peter-englund-2013.html>
: "We try to contact the person who received the award about half an hour 
before the decision is announced."

He added that the most-criticised award may have been the prize to Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn> in 1970. "It was 
very criticised at the time, not in the least from the Soviet side, but also in 
Sweden."
 