
Noel Gallagher has spoken about the lack of working-class voices in 
contemporary music, suggesting the likes ofArctic Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> and Kasabian have made no 
impact in terms of encouraging any new “noise coming from the council estates”.

During an interview for the BBC Master Tapes show, via NME 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04tjf5g>, a member of the audience questioned 
the Oasis founder about the health of the current British music scene. “You 
only have to look at the charts, what happened at the end of the 90s, all those 
bands used to be in the top 10, like us,Manics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/manic-street-preachers>, Pulp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pulp>, the Verve, Suede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/suede> and Blur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur>, and I think bands like that have been 
marginalised and sidelined,” he said. “There’s X Factor and all that kind of 
thing, but you name me the last great band that came out of this country? 
There’s not really been any great bands in the last 10 years.”

Specifically lamenting the lack of exciting bands (adding that One Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> were “not a band” but a 
group), Gallagher said that Arctic Monkeys and Kasabian had done little in the 
last decade to expand the variety of musicians operating in an increasingly 
middle-class music industry:

Shame on those two bands for a start because they didn’t inspire anybody else. 
The working classes have not got a voice any more. There doesn’t seem to be a 
noise coming from the council estates, you know what I mean?

I’d have eaten Bastille <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bastille> alive in 
an afternoon in the 90s, one interview, destroyed, gone, never to be heard of 
again. Easy, had ’em for breakfast. My bass player summed it up – we’re 
constantly saying: ‘Where is the next band coming from?’ and he rightly says: 
‘Never mind the band, where are the people?’”

Gallagher added: “When I first started I wanted to get in the charts and wreck 
it, like stamp Phil Collins out and Wet Wet Wet, they’ve got to go, and all 
that 80s gear, we don’t need that any more. I don’t see anything from the 
working class, I just don’t see it.”

The musician’s recent statements echo his comments from a 2013 interview in 
weekly men’s magazine Shortlist, claiming that it was only the “middle-class” 
bands thatrefused to play at <http://www.nme.com/news/noel-gallagher/69195> 
Teenage Cancer Trust gigs taking place at London’s Royal Albert Hall.

The new album from Noel Gallagher’s High Flying Birds 
<http://www.muzu.tv/noel-gallaghers-high-flying-birds/in-the-heat-of-the-moment-music-video/2327517/>
, Chasing Yesterday, is released in March.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fnoel-gallaghers-high-flying-birds%2Fin-the-heat-of-the-moment-music-video%2F2327517%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fnoel-gallaghers-high-flying-birds%2Fin-the-heat-of-the-moment-music-video%2F2327517%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fnoel-gallaghers-high-flying-birds%2Fin-the-heat-of-the-moment-music-video%2F2327517%2F&media=> 