
The tranquil chorus of the natural world is in danger of being lost to today’s 
generation as people screen out the noises that surround them, a senior US 
researcher warns.

Rising levels of background noise in some areas threaten to make people 
oblivious to the uplifting sounds of birdsong, trickling water, and trees 
rustling in the wind, which can often be heard even in urban centres, said Kurt 
Fristrup, a senior scientist at the US National Park Service.

The problem was exacerbated by people listening to iPods through their 
earphones instead of tuning in to the birds and other sounds of nature that can 
easily be drowned out by traffic, music and others noises, he said.

'A great silence is spreading over the natural world'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/sep/03/bernie-krause-natural-world-recordings>
“This learned deafness is a real issue,” Fristrup told the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in San Jose. “We are 
conditioning ourselves to ignore the information coming into our ears.”

“This gift that we are born with – to reach out and hear things hundreds of 
metres away, all these incredible sounds – is in danger of being lost through a 
generational amnesia,” he said.

“There is a real danger, both of loss of auditory acuity, where we are exposed 
to noise for so long that we stop listening, but also a loss of listening 
habits, where we lose the ability to engage with the environment the way we 
were built to,” he added.

For the past 10 years, the US National Park Service has recorded sound levels 
at more than 600 sites across the US, including Yosemite in California, 
Yellowstone and Denali in Alaska. Not one was unaffected by some form of noise 
from human activity, be it over-flying aircraft, motorbikes, motorboats, or 
tour buses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnoise-pollution-is-making-us-oblivious-to-the-sound-of-nature-says-researcher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424133557608%2Ffdf225b5-eb82-4547-9c96-19c0d0948e29-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Noise%20pollution%20is%20making%20us%20oblivious%20to%20the%20sound%20of%20nature%2C%20says%20researcher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnoise-pollution-is-making-us-oblivious-to-the-sound-of-nature-says-researcher%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Noise%20pollution%20is%20making%20us%20oblivious%20to%20the%20sound%20of%20nature%2C%20says%20researcher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fnoise-pollution-is-making-us-oblivious-to-the-sound-of-nature-says-researcher%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424133557608%2Ffdf225b5-eb82-4547-9c96-19c0d0948e29-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yellowstone National park, Lewis Lake Photograph: Cavan Images/Cavan 
Images/Cavan Images/Cor 
Fristrup’s team combined the sound levels recorded from national parks with 
similar data from urban settings to create a model of noise levels across the 
US. They predict that noise pollution is growing faster than the US population, 
and more than doubles every 30 years.

“It’s not surprising people are putting on earphones or even noise cancelling 
earphones to try and create a quieter or more congenial environment,” he said.

“As you raise background sound levels it has the same effect on your hearing 
that fog would have on your vision. Instead of having this expansive experience 
of all the sounds around you, you are aware of only a small area around you,” 
he said. “Even in most of our cities there are birds and things to appreciate 
in the environment, and there can be very rich natural choruses to pay 
attention to. And that is being lost.”

People quickly become accustomed to changes in their environments, including 
rising noise levels, and over time, Fristrup fears that we will accept far 
worse environmental conditions than we should, and forget how much quieter the 
world could be. “If finding peace and quiet becomes difficult enough, many many 
children will grow up without the experience, and I think it’s a very real 
problem,” he said.

The warning came as other scientists reported beneficial health effects from 
listening to natural sounds. Speaking at the same meeting, Derrick Taff, a 
social scientist at Pennsylvania State University, described preliminary 
experiments which suggest that listening to recordings from national parks, of 
waterfalls, birdsong and wind, helped people recover from the stressful events.

In one experiment, Taff told participants who visited his lab to give an 
impromptu talk that would be judged by researchers standing behind a one-way 
mirror. Measurements of their heart rate and the stress hormone, cortisol, 
before and after the speech, found that people calmed down faster when they 
listened to nature recordings than when the same audio tracks were interspersed 
with sounds from road traffic, aeroplanes, and even normal conversation.

“We know that natural sounds are very important to people. They are some of 
the main reasons people visit protected areas. They want to hear the natural 
quiet, the birdsong, and the wind and water,” Taff said. “We may be losing this 
as people are listening to the iPods all the time, but I do believe that the 
public is appreciative of these sounds. My advice is to go to your protected 
areas and experience what you are missing.”

Why natural sounds might be calming to people is unclear, but Fristrup 
speculates that over millions of years of evolution, we may have come to 
associate the more tranquil sounds of the natural world with safety. “I suspect 
there’s something about these intact soundscapes that reminds our ancestral 
brains of a place that’s safe, where there’s no sense of a predator nearby, and 
that these more cluttered soundscapes are problematic for us because we know 
we’ve lost that surveillance capability,” he said.
 