
It was Earth all along: The team of scientists manning a huge radio telescope 
high in the Caucasus regionhave said 
<https://www.sao.ru/Doc-en/SciNews/2016/Sotnikova/> that the signal they 
believed at first to have originated from distant star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/29/russian-radio-telescope-strong-signal-hd164595-seti>
 HD164595 was most likely the result of “terrestrial interference”.

The Ratan-600, a telescope located in Zelenchukskaya in the Caucasus mountains 
straddlingEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and Asia, 
surveys as much of the sky as possible for signals of possible interest. Last 
year, the team told a group of fellow astronomers in Moscow it believed the 
telescope intercepted a “candidate signal” worthy of further monitoring.

Unfortunately, though the information took a year to reach the Search for 
Extraterrestrial Intelligence (Seti) community in the rest of the world, the 
astronomers from Moscow State University and the Russian Academy of Sciences 
(RAS), further scrutiny turned out to be necessary: “Subsequent processing and 
analysis of the signal revealed its most probable terrestrial origin,” wrote 
Yulia Sotnikova of the RAS.

Seth Shostak of Mountainview California’s Seti Institute wrote of his own 
skepticism <http://www.seti.org/seti-institute/a-seti-signal> late on Tuesday, 
having scanned the star system in question for the signal: “Despite the fact 
that it would be both exciting and enticing to say that this signal was really 
from aliens inhabiting HD 164595, that would be an unwarranted assertion given 
the inability to confirm this signal. In the Seti business, one telescope is 
not enough and an array is even better.”

The Ratan-600 is a valuable instrument for collecting weak signals from larger 
areas of the universe than most telescopes can study. “Such observations at 
Ratan-600 are made possible owing to its large collecting area of thousands of 
square meters, and this high sensibility of the telescope allows us to search 
for extremely weak signals in the Universe,” wrote Sotnikova. Those weak 
signals are valuable to astronomers searching the universe for something new: 
any artificial signal would likely be undetectable by most means.

The latest Ratan-600 survey has not been processed completely; Sotnikova 
writes that it is too early to claim “any reliable scientific results”.

“Using the obtained measurements, we are only able to estimate the upper limit 
of the detection of the studied areas,” she wrote. “It can be said with 
confidence that no sought-for signal has been detected yet.”
 