
Nome, in the north-west of Alaska, is an old gold-rush metropolis peopled by 
workers from out of town. It’s rather splendid, and in the sweep of its town 
centre you get the feeling that it has hardly changed since the glory days. 
Huge civic buildings of yesteryear (nearly all of which have massive old gold 
pans outside their entrances like the trade symbols of medieval merchants) 
jockey with bustling engineering companies and colourful bars.

I’ve been making a circumnavigation of the Arctic Circle for a documentary. 
We’re reaching the end of our journey, and this is the first town the crew and 
I have been to that has more than two bars. It has a galvanising effect on us. 
We check into our hotel and head back out with unseemly haste. We discover the 
main activity in the bars of Nome is – weirdly – scratchcarding. People sit up 
at the bar in silence, industriously working their way through fistfuls of 
scratchcards and throwing them over their shoulders. At one place, the Polar 
Bar, the floor is knee-deep in discards.

Our hotel has the pleasant feeling of a coastal English guesthouse looking out 
over the sea. Only the sea in this case is the Bering. It’s frozen solid. When 
seas freeze up here, they take on pleasingly similar characteristics to those 
they had when unfrozen: a boiling tidal sea freezes with mountainous angry 
ridges and dramatic troughs, a flattish sea freezes flatly. Both, however, are 
marked with scary, deep cracks that you want to get over quickly if you happen 
to be striding out offshore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443622729790%2Fa6e7f667-ea57-48e9-b689-c4d172cabe52-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nome%2C%20Alaska%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20spring%20water%20is%20as%20hot%20as%20I%20can%20bear.%20The%20effect%20is%20miraculous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nome%2C%20Alaska%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20spring%20water%20is%20as%20hot%20as%20I%20can%20bear.%20The%20effect%20is%20miraculous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443622729790%2Fa6e7f667-ea57-48e9-b689-c4d172cabe52-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The town of Nome, next to the frozen Bering sea. Photograph: Alamy 
Up around Nome there are several hot springs, all of which have huge and 
historic significance for wildlife and people alike. They have been revered as 
supremely holy places for as long as human memory stretches back. You develop a 
strange animal attraction towards heat in these temperatures, and stumbling 
across a natural source of the stuff is still a cause for wonder. Around them, 
flora of all kinds spring to surprising life. This in turn brings animals, and 
thus a coherent little habitat evolves.

The prospectors of the early 20th century were led to the magic of the springs 
and overnight these sacred places of native lore were “discovered” and given 
names (“Pilgrim Springs!”, “Serpentine Springs!”) and bars, brothels and 
casinos popped up. But the rush receded and the passing trade dwindled. Today 
they are by and large back to their wild state on land owned by powerful Alaska 
Native businesses.

We take a helicopter up to Pilgrim Springs, about a 45-minute flight from 
Nome. The road out of town rolls on, first to its winter limit (about five 
miles), which is as far as the snow plough is prepared to clear between October 
and May. Up to this point there are several attractive houses with drives and 
frozen fields around them. The springs announce themselves by the presence of 
tall trees, among which we see tiny splodges of dark that muster then move with 
gathering pace. These are moose. But for the noise of the helicopter, we 
probably wouldn’t have spotted them, but our approach spurs them into action.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443622834933%2Fe2e3a1a4-085c-445e-8c45-1c9010ded773-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nome%2C%20Alaska%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20spring%20water%20is%20as%20hot%20as%20I%20can%20bear.%20The%20effect%20is%20miraculous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nome%2C%20Alaska%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20spring%20water%20is%20as%20hot%20as%20I%20can%20bear.%20The%20effect%20is%20miraculous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443622834933%2Fe2e3a1a4-085c-445e-8c45-1c9010ded773-1020x612.jpeg>
 Armstrong at the hot springs with his guide. Photograph: ITV Studios 
Next to the springs themselves is a group of rather well-preserved derelict 
buildings, including a tall chapel. We sit in the helicopter waiting for the 
blades to stop spinning, staring out of the windows at this extraordinary 
place. The atmosphere is … well, somewhat creepy. It doesn’t help that the 
buildings are the remnants of an abandoned orphanage. Or that the toys of the 
orphans – old rusty tricycles – are still peeping up through the deep snow.

We find our way into what must have been the boarding house. Upstairs the 
rooms are full of jumbled cots and bunkbeds for tiny people. And one’s heart 
breaks for the poor children who were sent here following theflu pandemic of 
1918 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/interactive/2008/jan/03/flu> to live under 
the care of a Jesuit priest and a couple of nuns. In those days the only route 
here was three and a half hours by train from Nome to a lonely station and then 
two hours by horse and cart.

I am in a fabulous state of suspension where the earth itself has taken 
control of me and my workings

With Kevin Bahnke, our Alaska Native guide, I wander over to the pools, 
admiring the fine filigree effect of the steam freezing on to the plants beside 
the water. We find a suitably easy pool for sloping into and I find myself 
stripping off in -25C temperatures. Once you have made the decision to swim in 
the Arctic Circle, you have to remove your clothes as fast as possible and 
squelch through the snow to the water’s edge. It seems impossible that a 
3ft-deep expanse of water could hold its heat when spread out across that cold, 
cold ground. But the water is as hot as I can just about bear. We carefully 
inch our way into the cauldron heat until we reach that reckless point of no 
return and hurl ourselves fully in.

Then – and only then – do I see and feel the religious comfort of this place. 
The effect is miraculous. I am in some fabulous state of suspension where the 
earth itself has taken control of me and all my workings – all I have to do is 
wallow and occasionally groan at the sheer pleasure of it. I see why the 
shamans came here to find their divine powers. Whole neural pathways previously 
given over to survival can be freed up to think philosophical thoughts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443622973123%2Fd7ba6399-4d65-449b-bd79-40b2b37ef96a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nome%2C%20Alaska%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20spring%20water%20is%20as%20hot%20as%20I%20can%20bear.%20The%20effect%20is%20miraculous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nome%2C%20Alaska%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20spring%20water%20is%20as%20hot%20as%20I%20can%20bear.%20The%20effect%20is%20miraculous%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fnome-alaska-hot-springs-alexander-armstrong%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443622973123%2Fd7ba6399-4d65-449b-bd79-40b2b37ef96a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Two hotspots at Pilgrim Springs have been isolated where the temperatures are 
high enough to generate power that could provide free energy for a decent-sized 
town. Photograph: Courtesy of Chris Pike with the Alaska Center for Energy and 
Power 
Kevin and I stay in the pool for almost an hour, talking and gently sweating 
as the health-giving sulphurous rill gurgles into the pool at one end and out 
at the other all the while. While we lightly poach ourselves, I learn that the 
Land Settlements for the Alaska Natives were brought into law by Richard Nixon 
in the 70s, having festered, unresolved, ever since Alaska became a state in 
1959. Neither side seemed able to agree terms until, with the discovery of oil 
in Prudhoe Bay in 1968 and the wafty scent of billions of petro-dollars in the 
air, a quick resolution needed to be found. The Federation of Natives finally 
agreed to keep 44m acres and to give over the rights to their other claims for 
just under a billion dollars, which was duly shared out between the various 
regional corporations, like the one Kevin works for.

Kevin also tells me about the current exploration for hydrothermal power at 
the springs: so far they have isolated two hotspots where the temperatures are 
high enough to generate power that could provide free energy for a decent-sized 
town. Maybe Pilgrim Springs’s biggest story is still ahead.

We drag ourselves out of the water and sit in a glorious sweaty post-bath heap 
that makes the gusty, tousling Arctic winds the very last word in comfort – for 
about four minutes. As we circle in the chopper on our way back, the whole site 
disappears back into its natural context, just a fold in the scrubby hills 
where the furious geology of the underworld makes a sudden and unexpected call.

Extracted from Land of the Midnight Sun by Alexander Armstrong, published by 
Bantam Press on 8 October, £18.99. To order a copy for £15.19, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/334825/>. Armstrong’s 
three-part documentary,Land of the Midnight Sun, starts on ITV in mid-October
 