
Denis O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien>, the Irish 
media tycoon, has hit back at his critics with a lengthy article in the Irish 
Times.

Last week I reported on claims that he has influenced journalistic decisions 
at his radio stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2011/nov/07/denis-o-brien-press-freedom>
 and also taken legal action against several journalists.

It followed the departure of two high-profile radio hosts - Sam Smyth and 
Eamon Dunphy.

But, in a piece headlined Depiction of me as enemy of journalism undeserved 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/opinion/2011/1115/1224307583083.html>, he 
writes: "The allegations against me of improper editorial influence are 
malicious and simply not true."

He runs a sprawling telecoms empire, Digicel, which is the major source of his 
wealth. Through another company, Communicorp, he owns two Irish national radio 
outlets, Today FM and Newstalk, plus a 21.6% stake in Ireland's biggest 
newspaper publisher, Independent News & Media (INM).

O'Brien writes: "If one looks at the coverage relating to me over the past 
month in INM titles, theIrish Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times>, RTÉ and other media there is a 
disturbing trend of nastiness and cynicism.

"Because Today FM decided to drop a presenter [Smyth] of a programme that had 
been running for 14 years and had falling audience numbers, suddenly there is 
an eagerness to depict me as a pariah among journalists, columnists and 
broadcasters."

After pointing out that Dunphy had accused him - on his Newstalk show in 
October - of "despising journalism", he writes:

"It is as untrue as it is unwarranted. I have great respect for the many 
professionals in the Irish media industry."

He devotes considerable space to taking issue with Dunphy before moving on to 
reopen old arguments against his long-time media rival, Tony O'Reilly, the 
former chief executive of INM.

He complains that articles about him published in two INM titles, the Irish 
Independent <https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent> and Sunday 
Independent, reflect a pro-O'Reilly, anti-O'Brien agenda.

Here is the key passage: 

"I have been the largest shareholder in INM for the past four years. My 
'punishment' – apart from the economic cost – has been a prolonged, nasty, 
well-orchestrated campaign against me across a range of issues.

Articles are regularly published without me being given an opportunity to 
respond. But then the normal demarcation between board and management, on the 
one hand, and editorial on the other, does not exist.

The hostile reaction to my shareholding in INM has been seamlessly executed 
through the editorial pages of all their publications. The editorial pages 
reflect the views of senior management faultlessly.

The Sunday Independent has a unique position on the Irish media landscape for 
all the wrong reasons. Its phone polls of questionable provenance, absence of 
objectivity, and its unwarranted attacks on individuals will provide the next 
generation of media studies students with the raw material for a fascinating 
thesis."

O'Brien, who was criticised in a report by judicial tribunal that investigated 
how his company obtained a mobile phone licence, also takes the opportunity to 
restate his rejection of its findings.

Source: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/opinion/2011/1115/1224307583083.html>
 