
One of Ireland's most influential journalists, Vincent Browne, argues that 
Denis O'Brien <https://www.theguardian.com/media/denis-o-brien> is not a fit 
person to control Independent News & Media (INM).

In an Irish Times article today 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/opinion/2012/0815/1224322198397.html>, he 
accuses O'Brien - the largest shareholder in INM - of interfering in editorial 
affairs.

He also cites the findings of the Moriarty tribunal 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moriarty_Tribunal>, which concluded that a 
consortium formed by O'Brien to secure a mobile phone licence in the 1990s had 
succeeded because of payments made by O'Brien to the then communications 
minister in "clandestine circumstances." O'Brien has strenuously denied this 
finding.

Browne also takes a sideswipe at the former INM controller, Tony O'Reilly, by 
accusing him also of interfering with editorial policy, notably at the group's 
Sunday Independent title.

But O'Brien is his main target. He writes of leaked INM memos 
<http://www.broadsheet.ie/2011/11/21/denis-obriens-editorial-interference-the-smoking-gun/>
 concerning O'Brien's annoyance with journalist Sam Smyth, an Irish Independent 
writer and former presenter on Today FM (owned by O'Brien's company).

O'Brien believed Smyth was conducting "almost a vendetta" against him and 
wanted him be taken off the story of the Moriarty tribunal. Browne points out 
that Smyth has since been removed from his Today FM programme and, despite 
being contracted to theIrish Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>, "not one article by him 
has been published for some months."

Sources: Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/opinion/2012/0815/1224322198397.html>/
Politico.ie <http://politico.ie/>/Broadsheet.ie 
<http://www.broadsheet.ie/2011/11/21/denis-obriens-editorial-interference-the-smoking-gun/>
 