
As you look at this image of Robert Rauschenberg’s Oracle imagine the sound of 
splashing water. Now add the crackle of a local radio station and finally 
picture lights flashing in semi-darkness. “Listening happened in time. Looking 
also had to happen in time,” Rauschenberg once said. As much a sculpture made 
from stuff found in his New York neighbourhood – ‘gifts of the street’ as the 
artist liked to call it – Oracle is a piece of theatre. It is also great fun to 
watch [as isMud Muse with its 100 gallons of bubbling bentonite mix made soon 
after and on view in the room next door at Tate Modern’s current exhibition].

Rauschenberg worked on Oracle at the same time as his silkscreen paintings of 
the recently assassinated John F. Kennedy, icons of 1960s Pop Art. The 
transistors used for the sound transmission were cutting edge technology at the 
time. He loved collaboration, in this instance with the Swedish engineer Bill 
Klüver.

 Each of Oracle’s five components is built from scrap metal: a car door, an 
air vent, a window frame, a small tub. All are the same muted grey, and all are 
on wheels for the arrangement to be reconfigured afresh each time it goes on 
display. For Rauschenberg it was essential that things did not become too 
fixed. It is this that makes his art seem so alive and energetic some fifty 
years on. Rauschenberg wanted his art to relate to the world as we experience 
it in all its messiness, ‘to act in the gap between art and life’ rather than 
for it to keep a distance.

 Severely dyslexic, he had a particular knack for language, not least in his 
titles. In ancient Greece, an oracle was usually a female priestess who made 
mysterious pronouncements about the future by allegedly communicating with the 
gods. Rauschenberg’sOracle broadcasts the news via radio instead. Like so much 
of his art,Oracle reminds us not to wait for divine intimations but to take 
charge of the future ourselves. Was there ever a more timely moment for such a 
reminder?

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Guardian’s art and 
design <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your 
pictures you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have 
permission to do so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence 
to publish your pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may 
reuse your pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms>.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear immediately – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.

The Robert Rauschenberg exhibition 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/robert-rauschenberg> is 
at Tate Modern, London until 2 April 2017
 