
The White House was due to announce a series of measures aimed at moving the 
controversial US drone killings programme out of the "legal shadows" on 
Thursday.

In a major counter-terrorism speech billed as marking the end of an unfettered 
"war" on terror,Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
was expected to reveal that he will move responsibility for future drone 
operations from the CIA to the Pentagon so they can be more closely monitored 
by Congress.

A more limited range of strikes in countries such as Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> are likely to be carried out by the 
US military working within a new set of legal guidelines agreed by Obama this 
week, giving greater clarification on how and when officials can target 
suspected terrorists operating abroad.

Attorney general Eric Holder told congressional leaders in a letter on 
Wednesday that they would be briefed in private on whether future drone attacks 
on suspected terrorists passed the new legal threshold.

Both the White House and the CIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> 
declined to comment on details of the policy ahead of the speech but government 
sources told the Guardian they would add to existing congressional oversight 
measures in place. Until recently the administration did not even publicly 
admit the existence of the drone programme.

Human rights campaigners have cautiously welcomed the attempt to bring US 
drone warfare policy into the open, but called on President Obama to publish 
the new legal tests that he was due to announce later on Thursday.

Dixon Osburn, a director at Human Rights First, said: "On its own, it is not 
clear that taking things away from the CIA makes a difference – the special 
operations command at the Pentagon is also secret – but at least the military 
are schooled in the rules of war."

"It looks like Obama is trying to return his counter-terrorism strategy to 
something that operates within the law. We want to know what that legal 
framework is though."

Earlier, the White House marked this new effort to draw a line under the 
controversial drone-strike policy by admitting for the first time that four 
American citizens were among those killed by its covert attacks in Yemen and 
Pakistan since 2009.

In a letter to congressional leaders 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2013/05/23/us/politics/23holder-drone-lettter.html>
 sent on Wednesday, attorney general Eric Holder Holder claimed one of the US 
citizens killed, Anwar al-Awlaki, was chief of external operations for al-Qaida 
in the Arabian Peninsula (Aqap) and had been involved in plots to blow up 
aircraft over US soil.

However, Holder said three others killed by drones – Samir Khan, Abdul Rahman 
Anwar al-Awlaki and Jude Kenan – were not "specifically targeted". The second 
of these victims, Anwar al-Awlaki's son, issaid by campaigners to have been 16 
<https://www.facebook.com/abdulrahman.14.10.2011> when he died in Yemen in 2011.

The Bureau of Investigative Journalism estimates 
<http://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/category/projects/drones/> that between 
240 and 347 people have been killed in total by confirmed US drone strikes in 
Yemen since 2002, with a further 2,541 to 3,533 killed by CIA drones in 
Pakistan.

"The president will soon be speaking publicly in greater detail about our 
counter-terrorism operations and the legal and policy framework," Holder told 
22 senior members of Congress in Wednesday's letter.

"This week the president approved a document that institutionalises the 
administration's exacting standards and processes for reviewing and approving 
operations to capture or use lethal force against terrorist targets outside the 
United States and areas of active hostilities."

The attorney general said this document would remain classified, but relevant 
congressional committees would be briefed on its contents. No further details 
were given of other killings in the five-page letter.

White House spokesman Jay Carney said Obama would also outline his renewed 
attempt to shut theGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> detention centre in the 
speech, and seek to explain why previous efforts had failed.

The White House said Thursday's speech will cover "broad counter-terrorism 
policy, including military, diplomatic, intelligence, and legal efforts".

"[Obama] will review the state of the threats that we face, particularly as 
the al-Qaida core has weakened but new dangers have emerged," it added. "He 
will discuss the policy and legal framework under which we take action against 
terrorist threats, including the use of drones.

"He will review our detention policy and efforts to close the detention 
facility at Guantánamo Bay. And he will frame the future of our efforts against 
al-Qaida, its affiliates and its adherents."
 