
In Bruegel’s painting The Triumph of Death 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Triumph_of_Death#mediaviewer/File:Thetriumphofdeath.jpg>
, an army of skeletons cavorts on a blasted and desolating landscape: over 
there, the rustic fishpond clotted with filth and corpses; here, the dinner 
party ruined, and a lady’s waist is girdled in a grinning stick-figure’s arms; 
a skeleton ebulliently disports himself with a fiddle. It’s a little fiesta of 
death, a brutal and wry vignette of the Last Judgment in all its febrile 
absurdity. It’s terrible and dramatic. It is also, somehow, quite beautiful. It 
is art.

Auschwitz was not like that: the eschatology begun in 1941 for the Jewish 
nation was, by comparison, orderly and punctilious, and – this is its terror – 
of all things, it was boring. A vast bureaucratic machine – enchained by an 
abstract rage, and at enormous effort and cost, to the detriment of its 
military desiderata – manufactured the deaths of at least 6 million Jews, and 
other categorised unpersons. Their demolition was performed systematically, 
according to staff numbers and schedules; it was for this reason that Hannah 
Arendt called Auschwitz a “corpse factory”. A modern, reasoned, diligent 
production line in combination with a medieval sadism and nihilism and 
blood-thinking: this toxic compound made theHolocaust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/holocaust> singular.

And it’s what makes the Holocaust so difficult to pivot a fiction around. 
“Hier ist kein warum”, Primo Levi was told on arriving at Auschwitz: here there 
is no “why”. The victims were denied all will; and without the exercise of 
will, there is no drama. (The accounts of survivors are, by definition, 
exceptional. Most people were killed quickly, and quickly forgotten.) The 
Holocaust almost entirely lacks the necessary constituent of the tragic, in the 
Greek sense – resistance. And this sleepless fact constitutes a major aesthetic 
problem, whether or not one holds – with Adorno (“After Auschwitz, to write a 
poem is barbaric… It is transfigured and stripped of some of its horror”) – 
that any artistic catharsis, any explication of the inexplicable, is a 
historical injustice. Confronting the Holocaust, there occurs an unwilling 
suspension of belief. It is both unbelievable and true, the obverse of 
fiction’s more usual metaphysic. Leave morality aside, if we may. What story is 
there? What redemption, irony, love? What tears can literature bring that 
history hasn’t already shed?

Martin Amis has spent several decades considering the nature of evil. It feels 
odd to say that of a comic writer: as though probity must always be solemn and,
ex hypothesi, humour must always be frivolous. (Jesus, Beckett realised, was 
estrangingly laughless.) But, with his little italic licks and bodaciously 
adverbial prose, with his Dickensian overstatement and Martian outsights (in 
London Fields: “The rain made toadstools of the people on the street… Faceless 
stalks in mackintoshes, beneath the black flowers of their umbrellas…”), with 
The War Against Cliché and the attempt to make style a sufficiency of content,
Martin Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/martinamis> has long been a 
lyrical polemicist searching for a moral cause.

In Einstein’s Monsters, Amis proved that the only thing thermonuclear weapons 
are a deterrent to is life on Earth; inKoba the Dread, his strange and 
brilliant treatise on Stalinism and Martin Amis (with the aperçu: “given total 
power over another, the human being will find that his thoughts turn to 
torture”), he arraigned modern writers and intellectuals, many of them Martin 
Amis, for not knowing enough about Soviet mass-murders. A collection of essays,
The Second Plane, anatomised the chronically virginal Islamist male and his 
(therefore) tendentious relationship to reality and the west. After all of 
which, the Holocaust seems an inevitable subject (no serious person thinks 
about anything else, as W G Sebald wryly remarked).Time’s Arrow, of course, 
featured a Nazi doctor but, with the reversal of causality borrowed from 
Vonnegut, the ironic terror came from its being about the Holocaust not 
happening, un-happening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fobserver-anthony-burgess-prize-2014-runner-up-christopher-hyland-onzone-of-interest-martin-amis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425394556172%2Fa0d7e112-7886-410d-9b3d-f9f11d1ab09f-2060x1459.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Observer%2FAnthony%20Burgess%20prize%20runner-up%20essay%2C%202014%3A%20Martin%20Amis%E2%80%99s%20The%20Zone%20of%20Interest%20by%20Christopher%20Hyland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fobserver-anthony-burgess-prize-2014-runner-up-christopher-hyland-onzone-of-interest-martin-amis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Observer%2FAnthony%20Burgess%20prize%20runner-up%20essay%2C%202014%3A%20Martin%20Amis%E2%80%99s%20The%20Zone%20of%20Interest%20by%20Christopher%20Hyland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fmar%2F08%2Fobserver-anthony-burgess-prize-2014-runner-up-christopher-hyland-onzone-of-interest-martin-amis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F3%2F1425394556172%2Fa0d7e112-7886-410d-9b3d-f9f11d1ab09f-2060x1459.jpeg>
 ‘A little fiesta of death’: The Triumph of Death by Pieter Bruegel, 1562. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The Zone of Interest <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/zone-of-interest.html> 
is, superficially, suddenly different from anything Amis has done before. It is 
told in the form of three narrative-overlapping epistolary monologues: we get 
Golo, the handsome nephew of Martin Bormann, Hitler’s private secretary; Doll, 
a dumb official at Auschwitz, and Golo’s superior there; and Szmul, a 
Sonderkommando, one of the group of Jewish prisoners forced to assist in 
killings and disposals. Tenses are utilised carefully. Doll writes a diary. 
Golo gives a morally and stylistically smoothed account of himself, years after 
the ending of the war. And over the testimony of Szmul, the novel’s moral 
centre, the shadow of the future always hangs and the past is literally dead: 
“I live,” he writes, “in the present and do so with pathological fixity.” That 
sentence bears some contemplation.

The plot is simple. Golo – despite the scenes of quotidian carnage, in which 
he plays a reasonably large part – has the hots for Doll’s wife, Hannah; and 
the vice, as it were, is applied versa. Recalling Celan’s poemTodesfuge 
<http://www.celan-projekt.de/todesfuge-englisch.html>, with its juxtaposition 
of courtly romantic love and Auschwitz, life for Golo and Hannah seems to badly 
imitate the French novelists. Ardent letters are exchanged and intercepted. A 
spyhole is employed by the husband to watch his wife undress. He plots to have 
the interloper killed (“A Murder in Auschwitz” might have been a rather 
superfluous chapter-title). He fails. Meanwhile, the Red Army is doing its 
stuff, and Doll’s job has become such a drag.

Doll portrays himself as something of a poor bastard, an apotheosis of 
mediocrity, forced to his daily grind of increasingly anhedonic (but obviously 
necessary) murdering. He seems, in the shabby lineaments of his mind, the 
incarnation of Arendt’s judgment on Eichmann: he can barely spell hislangue de 
bois of endless clichés and evil banalities, which come wrapped in Murdochian 
inverted commas when he thinks he’s being playful. He also, forgivably, has a 
lot of fun with some of the delicious crudities of the German language: 
“Titten” and “Arschen” and (accidentally misspelled, for those of us who care 
about such things) “Brustwarten”.

There is one character-slip, when Doll taunts Szmul about his marriage, and 
asks, “Was it a love whose month was ever May?” Now: either Doll is better 
educated than he pretends to be, and can make casual allusions toLove’s 
Labour’s Lost, one of Shakespeare’s most slangy and boring plays (God knows 
what a nightmare it must be in German translation), or Amis didn’t expect 
anyone to notice the theft. It is, to be pedantic, not at all in keeping with 
the character. But Doll’s moral atrophy, really, goes deeper. It inheres in his 
syntax. In a momentary agenbite of inwit, he acknowledges problems with “one” – 
“about whether it denotes quantity, or is being used as a … [his ellipsis] 
‘pronoun’’’. Doll is clearly a person-manqué. But it is nonetheless he who 
exhibits some moral disturbance in his gradual physio-mental breakdown, and he 
who – however nugatory the confession – says before he is hanged, “I have 
sinned gravely against humanity.” This evolution seems true.

Not so with Golo (or “Angelus”). He’s a German Humbert Humbert, intensely 
stylised and undoubtedly unreliable. “I? I was six foot three. The colour of my 
hair was a frosty white. The Flemish chute of the nose, the disdainful pleat of 
the mouth, the shapeful pugnacity of the chin…”, and so on to “the extensile 
penis” and “calves Michelangelan”. In his own words, Golo was among the “minor 
obstructors”; by the incidental details of his account, he oughtn’t to have 
escaped the purview of the Nuremberg tribunal.

Golo’s unreliably sympathetic narration is the most technically excellent 
thing about the novel. He is, however, responsible for many of the burps of 
expository indigestion: we are told of “the Baltic lands of Latvia and 
Lithuania”, and get a paragraph onThe Sorrows of Young Werther, the Goethe 
novella so beguiling forlorn…”, etcetera. Conversations come garnished with 
qualms (normally on his interlocutor’s side): “‘You know they pay for their own 
tickets?’”; “‘I heard that they were killing psychiatric patients in Konigsberg 
… To clear bed space. … For all the men who’d cracked up killing women and 
children in Poland and Russia. I thought, Mm…”

But these factual snacks only emphasise the fundamental unreality of the 
novel, and return us to questions we raised earlier. The prose is beautiful but 
rarely is the story, or the characterisation, believably possible. These 
elements are often devalued in Amis but their loss is somehow felt much more in 
a Holocaust novel, when a known reality keeps impinging. To say that one 
narrator is unreliable hardly obviates this necessity. Much of the pathos ofThe 
Zone of Interest is epiphenomenal: little in the fiction itself, or in the 
characters’ straining to be real, insists on a reaction from the reader. 
Rather, such sentiments as the novel arouses belong more to the enormous fact 
of “the concentrationary universe” than to Amis’s very decent, earnest novel. 
It is for this reason thatThe Zone of Interest must belie its title.
 