
Some time in the heady sixties, I came across a poem by Artaud, which began, 
"All categories are shit". It was an anarchic phrase that haunted me for years. 
Even as I explained to a room of mildy interested students that they must 
abandon their personal observations of the world for the objective categories 
of sociological theory, I would have a sudden and disturbing image of Artaud 
throwing open the door and, in one bound, freeing my charges from the 
conceptual apparatus I was endeavouring to tie around their necks.

Nowadays, though, it isn't only social scientists who are trying to squeeze 
the complexity of the world into a set of categories. Market researchers have 
abandoned their old reliance on such traditional categories as social class, 
educational background, age and occupation and have feverishly begun to divide 
the population in terms of lifestyle.

The latest example of this escalating trend comes from an organisation called 
the Research Business International, which was commissioned by Barclays to: 
"undertake a study examining the cultures that have driven British society". 
(Banks and insurance companies seem to have a particular fondness for this type 
of pseudo-sociological research.)

Their report, entitled Tribe, is a fine example of pathological 
categorisation. In all, 39 tribes are distinguished - 23 past and present, 16 
future. Many of the definitions are so trivial and superficial that one 
suspects they were not so much based on research as dreamed up one night in a 
warm bath.

Take your pick from the beatniks ("dressed in black, drank coffee and talked 
about life"), the feminists ("remembered for burning their bras, but for most 
women the real liberation was in making flat shoes fashionable"), or the eco 
warriors ("take their style cues from the hippies and are prepared to give up 
everything for the planet. Swampy becomes a popular icon, and moves the tribe 
towards Robin Hood").

In his introduction, John King, marketing director of Barclays (life and 
pensions), declares, with appropriate incoherence, that: "Tribe will take you 
on a journey of the past, of the present and of the future. It will demonstrate 
that all of these things rest with you."

One can only hope that Barclays soon find something a little more substantial 
on which to spend their spare cash.

In the meantime, I'll be helping to nudge the process along by sending King a 
photocopy of "All categories are shit".

Â• Laurie Taylor presents Thinking Aloud on BBC Radio 4 every Wednesday at 4pm
 