
The response to almost half the reported incidents of child abuse in 
Australian immigration detention was inadequate and the immigration department 
cannot be sure of the number, nature and severity of incidents, an independent 
panel has found.


Those are the conclusions of the Child Protection Board’s damning Making 
Children Safer report 
<http://www.border.gov.au/ReportsandPublications/Documents/cpp-report-making-children-safer.pdf>
, released by the federal government on Friday.

It details a detention system plagued by the premature closure of child abuse 
investigations, miscategorisation of incidents and lacking capacity to respond 
to complex incidents.

Hamid Kehazaei inquest exposes failures of Australia's secretive immigration 
regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
The report called for considerable improvement in the reporting of abuse and 
found that less than 1% of cases resulted in criminal convictions.

The panel assessed 242 alleged incidents of child abuse and found responses 
were “adequate” or “good” in only just over half (57.4%) of the cases.

But the panel said there were a total of 1,211 “possible incidents of child 
abuse” between 1 January 2008 and 30 June 2015 and the immigration department 
“cannot be assured on either the number, nature or severity of the reported 
incidents of child abuse”.

Detainees gave examples of submitting complaint forms or making oral 
complaints but hearing nothing from the department or service providers, it 
said.

The panel found that reports of incidents involving children were “very brief” 
with inadequate “often generalised, nonspecific descriptions being used and an 
apparent reluctance to describe exactly what happened”.

For example, a person of interest was described as “rubbing against” a child 
without a description of what they were “rubbing with and where on the victim 
the rubbing took place”, making assessment of the incident difficult.

A number of reports involved pornographic material on USBs being used during 
serious child abuse offending or to groom children within the facility.

The panel called for improved categorisation of the nature and seriousness of 
incidents. It noted problems including using separate incident classification 
systems, systems not requiring a detailed description, double counting and 
miscategorisation both in overstating or understating incidents’ severity.

“There was a pattern of premature closure of matters and a lack of 
transparency in the complaint process,” it said.

The panel said that the immigration department’s capacity to investigate child 
abuse had to be “significantly strengthened” to ensure that inquiries are not 
finalised until all available facts are established and effectively responded 
to.

'Absolutely inappropriate': Malcolm Turnbull blasts teachers' refugee protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/absolutely-inappropriate-malcolm-turnbull-blasts-teachers-refugee-protest>
Over the past three years the remote immigration detention facilities have 
been plagued by reports of shocking conditions, poor management and 
deteriorating mental health of asylum seekers.

The Guardian’s publication of the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 showed the trauma and abuse inflicted on asylum seekers and refugees – 
particularly children – on Nauru.

But one of the consistent concerns raised in the Nauru files has been the 
practice of “downgrading” incident reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/12/nauru-files-show-wilson-security-staff-regularly-downgraded-reports-of-abuse>
, where incidents in detention that should be classified as “critical” or 
“major” were downgraded to “minor” or “information”.

The panel said the department and service providers “often lacked the 
capability to effectively respond to complex incidents”.

For those in community detention, the panel found there were “no risk 
frameworks in place”. It said service providers’ policies on abuse “in many 
cases” were inadequate.

Despite the serious nature of many instances of child abuse in immigration 
detention, less than 1% of all cases resulted in criminal convictions, the 
panel found.

Only one case at the Nauru detention centre was referred to the Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> public prosecutor and the case did 
not proceed.

But the panel noted that some government policies, including the 
prioritisation of children for community detention and the policies of enhanced 
border protection, had resulted in a “significant reduction in the number of 
child abuse incidents”.

The Australian government claims to have removed all children from detention, 
a disputed claimbased on recategorising sections of some centres as “community 
detention” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/03/asylum-seeker-children-still-in-detention-despite-claims-all-have-been-released>
.

The panel said Nauru’s regional processing centre’s move to become an “open 
centre” in the last 18 months had a “clear and positive impact” on families and 
children.

Human rights day: installation invites public to open hearts for offshore 
detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/07/opening-hearts-unwraps-offshore-detention-its-about-letting-yourself-feel-something>
In its response, the immigration department said it was developing a risk 
management framework but it was “not possible ... to be present with families 
in the community to fully identify all emerging risks”.

The department accepted most of the recommendations, including to improve 
categorisation of incidents, to require service providers to deliver accurate 
and complete incident reports, and to ensure inquiries were not finalised 
without all available facts and an effective response.

The immigration minister, Peter Dutton, blamed the problems in immigration 
detention on the “impossible burden” he said the previous Labor government’s 
policies had created.

“Protecting children is everyone’s responsibility,” he said. “[The immigration 
department] has and will continue to work with state and territory child 
protection agencies which have legislative responsibility for the safety and 
wellbeing of children.”

The child abuse board consists of Margaret Allison, Dominic Downie and John 
Lawler. It recommended its report be sent for consideration to the royal 
commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse, which the 
government agreed to do.
 