
Years before I did Krapp's Last Tape 
<http://www.businessweek.com/videos/2011-12-15/12-14-john-hurt-on-beckett-s-krapp-s-last-tape>
 I'd seenPatrick Magee <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uphqyjAkYIU> and Jack 
MacGowran 
<http://www.apieceofmonologue.com/2011/03/jack-macgowran-samuel-beckett-video.html>
 do it – both of the bishops of the church of Beckett. Magee was very growly, 
sweaty, kind of pained; MacGowran couldn't help but give it a clownish quality 
because that's what his wonderful face did.

I first played Krapp under the auspices of the Gate theatre at the Barbican's 
Beckett festival in 1999. A year after the Barbican, we ran for several weeks 
at the Ambassadors in the West End. It's a long time to do a piece like that – 
particularly 10 performances a week. It's not a long play but it's an intense 
one. I wasn't entirely happy with the play then. Doing that number of 
performances a week is rather too many to get what they call "in the zone" – 
you can find yourself doing it more technically than you would like.

It was much better by the time I did it last, in Dublin, in 2013. Michael 
Colgan had taken over the direction by then. I cut the anger out of it a lot. 
I've never felt that anger is a very powerful emotion. I don't like it when 
people shout on stage without any particular reason. It carries no weight. You 
need to find another way.

I'd never done any Beckett before Krapp and I haven't done any of his other 
plays since. I've always felt that Krapp is an autobiographical piece. You do 
feel, all the time, that it's Sam saying, "There but for the grace of…" 
Everybody who plays it has to find a specific reason for its existence. For me 
it's a kind of essay in aloneness – and an essay on self-deception, too, which 
Krapp is well aware of. He is like any addict. One side of him says "I 
shouldn't do this" and the other side says "But I'm going to – and what's more 
you know I'm going to." There are all kinds of private arguments going on there.

It was filmed by Atom Egoyan 
<http://www.beckettonfilm.com/plays/krappslasttape/interview_eg.html> around 
the time of the Ambassadors shows. You'd think the play would translate to film 
very easily but Beckett was really a writer for the theatre. While the play 
appears to be quite intimate and small, it actually isn't – it's a highly 
theatrical device for a start. Egoyan opened it up. There was all sorts of 
bric-a-brac in the room and a window and I could never get used to those 
things. I felt I'd been slightly robbed of the play – a selfish reaction but 
then I'm very selfish about this play.

I recorded the voice of the younger Krapp, which is played throughout the 
piece, for the Barbican performance. It has been used for all the later 
stagings, from the West End to Washington DC and New York. The more I come to 
dislike what I did on the tape, the more it plays into the hands of the present 
Krapp.

The costume hasn't changed since the Barbican run. Beckett was a great 
cricketer and we found a wonderful pair of white 1920s cricket boots with the 
studs removed. And they squeaked! We thought, Well, Sam would have been 
thrilled. They still squeak. I don't know why…

• John Hurt performs White Rabbit, Red Rabbit at Holt festival 
<http://www.holtfestival.org> on Friday 25 July at 6.30pm. Holt festival runs 
to 27 July.

• From Pinter to Hurt: Krapp's Last Tape in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2014/jul/03/krapps-last-tape-six-performances-pinter-hurt>

• Krapp's Last Tape review – Richard Wilson echoes Stockhausen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/02/krapps-last-tape-review-richard-wilson-echoes-stockhausen>
 