
After last year's unpredictable circus surrounding Michael Moore's 
rabble-rousing, Palme d'Or-winning Fahrenheit 9/11, this year'sCannes film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cannesfilmfestival> is shaping up to 
be a more subdued and comfy affair, with a lineup featuring old favourites like 
David Cronenberg, Gus Van Sant, Wim Wenders, Lars von Trier and Atom Egoyan.

The 58th Cannes festival opens tonight with Lemming, a domestic drama with 
Charlotte Rampling, Charlotte Gainsbourg and Andre Dussollier. During the 
12-day festival, the 21 competition films will be dissected, handicapped, 
championed and trashed by the 4,000 entertainment reporters and photographers 
attending Cannes.

Among films in the festival's main competition are Cronenberg's A History of 
Violence, starring Viggo Mortensen as a diner owner whose deadly encounter with 
burglars brings two shady characters (William Hurt and Ed Harris) into his 
life; Egoyan's Where the Truth Lies, with Kevin Bacon and Colin Firth as an 
estranged musical-comedy duo whose breakup years earlier is shrouded in 
mystery; and Van Sant's Last Days, featuring Michael Pitt in an introspective 
study of a rock star's final hours, inspired by the death of Kurt Cobain.

Along with Egoyan, Van Sant and Cronenberg, the competition features such 
Cannes veterans as von Trier with Manderlay, his followup to Dogville starring 
Bryce Dallas Howard in the role originated by Nicole Kidman; Wenders with Don't 
Come Knocking, featuring Sam Shepard, Sarah Polley and Tim Roth; Jim Jarmusch 
with Broken Flowers, starring Bill Murray, Jessica Lange, Sharon Stone and 
Tilda Swinton; Michael Haneke with Cache, a domestic thriller starring Daniel 
Auteuil and Juliette Binoche; Amos Gitai with Free Zone, starring Natalie 
Portman in a road-trip drama in the Middle East; and Hsiao-hsien Hou with Three 
Times, featuring Qi Shu and Chen Chang in a love story told in three different 
time periods.

"We are delighted about the return of big names at the top of their art," said 
festival director Gilles Jacob. "It's not a question of showing all of an 
auteur's films, but about rifling through the chapters of a body of work, 
following a simple and tried-and-true principle: It is often the same people 
who make the best films."

Still, the festival's highest profile screening will not be an arthouse event 
but Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, which is being shown out of 
competition days before its May 19 international release.
 