
Lianne La Havas <http://www.liannelahavas.com/> grew up in south London, where 
her multi-instrumentalist father taught her how to play piano and guitar. Two 
weeks into an art foundation course she dropped out to focus on music, and 
toured withPaloma Faith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/paloma-faith> as a 
backing vocalist. La Havas was signed to Warner in 2010 and released her debut
Is Your Love Big Enough? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/08/lianne-la-havas-love-big-enough-review>
 in 2012; it was nominated for the Mercury prize and won iTunes album of the 
year. In 2014 Prince played a gig in her living room; later that year she sang 
on his albumArt Official Age. Her second album Blood 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DNLkD8QEnAM> was released in July this year 
and she is touring, 4-14 December. On 14 March she willplay the Royal Albert 
Hall 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/events/2016/albert-sessions-lianne-la-havas/>
, London. 

1 | Film

Belleville Rendez-vous <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UOPbAXn5zI>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a9054b5827b7fc58f843bdbf658c80d56c033d8%2F0_0_3440_2064%2F3440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a9054b5827b7fc58f843bdbf658c80d56c033d8%2F0_0_3440_2064%2F3440.jpg>
 Belleville Rendez-vous: ‘You come back to it years later and it’s even more 
amazing.’ Photograph: Moviestore/Rex Shutterstock 
I had an ex-boyfriend who lived in France and got me into a few French films 
but this [cartoon] really stuck out. It’s one of those things where you come 
back to it years later and it’s even more amazing. There’s all these nuances in 
the music that I kind of want to have for myself. There’s a scene in there, 
where we first meet the three old lady singers, the triplets of Belleville, and 
they perform an impromptu song where they click and slap their knees and stamp 
their feet to the rhythm. And the rhythm that is created is so off-the-cuff but 
it’s impeccable: it’s like some amazing jazz journey but almost like the blues 
as well.

2 | Nonfiction book

Mortality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/26/mortality-christopher-hitchens-review>
 by Christopher Hitchens
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1208980554c4171a6836c8f85e6cee97dfd5ba3e%2F0_122_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1208980554c4171a6836c8f85e6cee97dfd5ba3e%2F0_122_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Christopher Hitchens: ‘wit, class and impeccable use of language’. Photograph: 
Felix Clay for the Guardian 
 He was one of my favourite people ever: he said things like they were but 
with the most eloquence I think I’ve ever heard. This was his final book: it 
was left unfinished because he passed away, but they’ve included his notes and 
it’s like seeing into his mind. The book is short but so potent. It’s about his 
living with cancer and how it made him feel, and his devout atheism. Lots of 
people said, “Maybe you want to become religious now,” and he was like, 
“Absolutely not, but you know, it doesn’t mean that I’m happy about dying.” 
It’s so honest and heartbreaking: I love the depth he goes into, because it’s 
so personal. I never saw him speak, but I watched all of his debates online 
that I could find: I loved seeing him tear down his opposition just with wit 
and class and his impeccable use of language.

3 | Exhibition 

Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty <http://blog.metmuseum.org/alexandermcqueen/> 
at the V&A, London
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda0b63db98861960572082816c7bf4b5d40fe7f4%2F0_73_1958_1174%2F1958.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda0b63db98861960572082816c7bf4b5d40fe7f4%2F0_73_1958_1174%2F1958.jpg>
 A model sports a creation by Alexander McQueen during Paris fashion week, 
2009: ‘He used nature, the environment and his heritage in his clothes.’ 
Photograph: Pascal le Segretain/Getty Images 
I caught this on the very last day and I felt very lucky. It was so inspiring: 
I was thinking about it for months afterwards. And it was all the more poignant 
because we know how his life ended. But you’re left with these incredible 
artefacts, and you can see how he used nature, the environment, and his 
heritage in his clothes. There was an incredible dress that was completely 
covered in duck feathers, arranged in such a way that the shape of the body was 
so beautiful and feminine, almost like bondage. It was quite gothic and a 
little bit scary. It’s all so iconic: even if you didn’t know something was 
designed by him you would guess. I came away from the exhibition feeling like 
my heart was full.

4 | Restaurant

Bengal Tiger <http://www.bengaltigerindianfood.com/>, New York 
 Bengal Tiger, New York: ‘Incredible: the flavours were so deep, and it tasted 
like proper home cooking.’ Photograph: Yelp.com 
Being from London and liking Indian food, you don’t think that anywhere is 
going to be as good as either India or what we have here in London. And America 
is certainly not the place I thought I’d find amazing Indian food but this is 
probably the best-tasting I’ve ever had. I had veggie pakora, samosa, and chana 
saag with roti and rice. It was all incredible: the flavours were so deep, and 
it tasted like proper home cooking but in a lovely cosy setting. It was up this 
set of stairs and you think it’s going to be this disgusting place but actually 
you open the door and it’s this really welcoming restaurant. There’s only a few 
tables and it was busy and bustling, yet with a calm atmosphere.

5 | Music 

Keenan O’Meara <http://keenanomeara.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf39065a68c3b2052d4b5b89c0be817a260c16d0%2F0_17_1892_1135%2F1892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf39065a68c3b2052d4b5b89c0be817a260c16d0%2F0_17_1892_1135%2F1892.jpg>
 Keenan O’Meara: He could have been singing with Bing Crosby – but then his 
guitar-playing is something that’s his own.’ Photograph: YouTube 
This is a singer I really love: basically no one knows about him yet but he is 
incredible. He’s just supported meon my US tour 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DsXAKIoVhaU>. He’s at the beginning of his 
career but it seems like he’s got a wisdom beyond his years that you can hear 
in his voice and guitar-playing. His voice sounds like he could have been 
singing with Bing Crosby perhaps, singing those songs years ago, but then his 
guitar-playing is something that’s his own. I can hear lots of styles in there, 
maybe some gypsy jazz, maybe even someGrizzly Bear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Puph1hejMQE>. I know he’s a fan of James Blake 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6p6PcFFUm5I>: you wouldn’t think that 
immediately when you hear his voice, but it is something kind of otherworldly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8721712a9768611b285ee7bd30beadac98d65f4%2F0_8_940_1411%2F940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Lianne%20La%20Havas%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-lianne-la-havas-christopher-hitchens-life-of-pi-martel-alexander-mcqueen-keenan-omeara%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8721712a9768611b285ee7bd30beadac98d65f4%2F0_8_940_1411%2F940.jpg>
6 | Novel 

Life of Pi by Yann Martel <https://www.theguardian.com/books/yann-martel> 

This is a great book: I loved all the humour and subtle wit. And the fact that 
it challenges the concept of telling a story itself: it’s like a thing within a 
thing. There’s a point in the novel where you feel like you’re reading and 
reading and nothing is happening, but then suddenly so much is happening and 
your hunger is satisfied. It’s like the author has been having a laugh with you 
because he knows what’s going to happen. It’s amazing writing: it makes you 
feel so immersed. I was kind of disappointed by the film: you didn’t get all of 
those nuances and that tongue-in-cheek side of it.
 