
Snow on the roofs of the ski chalets at the upmarket ski resort may be one of 
the defining images ofDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, but 
it will be the warming of the planet that is at the top of the issues under 
discussion at the World Economic Forum.

In the kind of speaking double act beloved of the event’s organisers, Al Gore, 
the former US vice-president, who has describedclimate change as “the biggest 
challenge our civilisation faces” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/18/seven-themes-dominate-davos-climate-change-political-instability-2015>
, will discuss the subject alongside Pharrell Williams. The pop star, who 
reached No 1 with Happy, is appearing as creative director of Bionic Yarn, a 
company that turns fibres from recycled plastic into durable textiles.

The energetic Gore is also participating in other events looking at how 
business should respond to climate change, alongside Lord Stern, president of 
the British Academy, and speakers from the insurance company Axa.

• Elsewhere, conflict is the number-one issue for the political and business 
elite this year. The rise of Islamic State has awoken fears over failures of 
national governance and the collapse of nation states. Several Middle Eastern 
leaders are in attendance, including Egypt’s president Abdel Fatah al-Sisi;King 
Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-abdullah> of Jordan; Haidar 
al-Abadi, the prime minister of Iraq; and Massoud Barzani, the president of the 
autonomous Kurdistan region.

The Ukraine crisis is a reminder that “long-forgotten” disputes can flare back 
into life, the World Economic Foundation says, with widespread consequences for 
a whole region. Petro Poroshenko, the president of Ukraine, will be looking for 
backing as his country risks defaulting on its debts. He should get support 
from George Soros, the billionaire investor and philanthropist, who is pushing 
European governments to offer Kiev more help. He will be lobbying the likes of 
Germany’s Angela Merkel, France’sFrançois Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> and Italy’s Matteo Renzi.

The terror attacks in France this month will also be debated and the former UK 
prime ministerTony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, will 
take part in a session on Wednesday examining whether religion is a pretext for 
conflict.

• Global authorities were slow, at least initially, to respond to the Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> outbreak and provide resources to the 
countries affected, according to the organisers at Davos. The forum will ask 
what lessons can be learned.

Panellists include Kofi Annan, former secretary general of the United Nations, 
as well as Margaret Chan, director general of theWorld Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation>.

Alpha Condé, the president of Guinea, who has faced accusations of being 
initially slow to respond to Ebola, is also speaking. The New York Times quoted 
him recently as saying: “While shaving, I think of Ebola; while eating, I think 
of Ebola; while sleeping, I think of Ebola.”

• Central banks will be a major topic of conversation in the meeting rooms, 
coffee shops and bars of Davos as monetary policy inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the US continues to diverge 
and inflation falls across the global economy.

The shock abolition of Switzerland’s currency gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/15/currency-markets-switzerland-franc>
 last week has left many financial firms nursing losses and reminded us all 
that 2015 could be a turbulent year in the markets. Thomas Jordan, the Swiss 
central bank chief who sparked the turmoil, can expect a lively reception.

At least seven other central bank chiefs are attending, including the Bank of 
England governor,Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>.

However, the European Central Bank president Mario Draghi is not attending 
this year. He will be stuck in Frankfurt handling the ECB’s meeting on 
Thursday, where a bigquantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2015/jan/07/quantative-easing-aint-easy-to-quantify>
 (QE) programme could be announced.

At a debate on the prospect of higher interest rates in the US, delegates from 
emerging markets will be pushing American officials to handle the ending of the 
QE programme responsibly after seeing “hot money” pour into their economies. 
They do not want a repeat of the currency crisis that struck Argentina during 
last year’s meeting.

• Meanwhile, the tumble in the oil price to five-year lows means different 
things to different Davos attendees. It is a bitter blow to exporters, raises 
political risk in the Middle East and hits growth in emerging markets.

Once he arrives in Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland>
, Abdalla Salem El-Badri, Opec’s secretary general, will face criticism from 
producers over the cartel’s refusal to cut supplies.

 * This article was amended on 20 January to insert the correct bylines.  