
The young man strutting down Hartley Road, Nottingham, is gabbling into his 
mobile phone until he draws level with us. "Don't go taking no pictures of me, 
man," he growls at photographerDavid Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/interactive/2011/may/27/camera-club-tourism-audio-slideshow>
. It's the morning after widespread rioting, and there was a disturbancenot far 
from where we're standing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/aug/10/uk-riots-cost-violence>. We 
reassure him that he's not in our focus and the chat and the jaunty stride 
resume. A few yards on, he turns round to give us a broad beam and a thumbs-up.

Something about the sudden switch from menace to charm, coupled with that 
jack-the-lad swagger, briefly brings to mind Arthur Seaton, the antihero of
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/18/alan-sillitoe>. Yet this young 
man is black and there were comparatively few black faces round here in 1958 
when David's father, Alan, published his first and most famous novel. What's 
more, at 11.30am on a Tuesday morning, Arthur would have been at work at the 
nearby Raleigh cycle works.

Raleigh and Hartley Road feature on the Alan Sillitoe Trail 
<http://empedia.info/maps/30>, a virtual guide to the Nottingham landmarks of 
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning, written while "sitting under an olive tree 
in Majorca". It's been devised by multimedia producerPaul Fillingham 
<http://www.dreamtargets.com/sitemap.htm>. "Eventually, visitors will be able 
to download the guide as an app and visit locations by bike," he says.

A nice thought, if a little ironic in the circumstances. Bikes are now made in 
the far east rather than the east Midlands, andNottingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham> University sprawls across the site 
where Arthur and his creator earned their livings. After four years in the 
factory, Sillitoe joined the RAF, then spent 16 months in hospital after 
contracting TB. He moved to Majorca to convalesce, starting his first novel in 
1955.

Sillitoe, who died last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/25/alan-sillitoe-obituary>, is 
invariably bracketed with those "angry young men" whose careers also flowered 
from flinty, northern soil –John Braine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/john-braine> and Keith Waterhouse
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/keith-waterhouse>, David Storey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/jan/31/theatre.stage> and Stan Barstow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/aug/01/stan-barstow-obituary>. However, 
all four were grammar-school boys. Sillitoe left school at 14. "The family were 
not just working class; they were poor," says ProfessorStephen Daniels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/stephen-daniels>, a social 
geographer at Nottingham. Indeed, David has just been photographing the remains 
of a row of boarding houses on Beaconsfield Street where, according to the 
guide, the family lived "after moving due to rent problems".

Now 49, David – who spent his teens in Notting Hill, rather than Nottingham – 
is understandably keen to keep his father's legacy alive. A committee has been 
founded to raise funds for a statue. "And we've also organised Sillitoe-related 
events, including a short story competition," he says. "One of the winners 
suggested that an Arthur Seaton today would be working in a mobile-phone shop." 
Not breaking shop windows and stealing phones, then? "No," says Sillitoe 
firmly. "And he wouldn't have set fire to buildings either." Well, Seaton had 
done two years of national service. On the other hand, he does say: "That's 
what all these loony laws are for, you know: to be broken by blokes like me."

Arthur had already shrugged off the collectivist values of the postwar years. 
He was "trying to screw the world … because it's trying to screw me." "That's 
why he still seems relevant, in a way that other characters from that era 
don't," says Anthony Cartwright, who has some claim to be a modern heir to 
Sillitoe. His novelHeartland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/25/anthony-cartwright-heartland-bnp-football>
 is largely set in a working men's club during the 2002 World Cup finals; 
Cartwright himself has worked in factories, pubs and a meat-packing plant in 
and around his native Dudley. But the novelist admits his upbringing was middle 
class. So where are the Sillitoesde nos jours – novelists from the English 
working class who seemed so prolific 50 years ago?

Ross Raisin <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ross-raisin> would seem to fit 
the bill: his novelGod's Own Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/22/featuresreviews.guardianreview40>
 has the authentically gritty language and grim subject matter.Catherine O'Flynn
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/05/catherine-o-flynn-novel> won 
the first novel category of the Costa prize withWhat Was Lost, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/30/fiction.roundupreviews3> set in 
one of those impersonal shopping centres that replaced so many factories. 
However,Nicola Monaghan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/nicola-monaghan> is probably the 
closest to a 2011 Sillitoe equivalent. She grew up on Nottingham's Broxtowe 
estate, the kind of place where evacuees from Sillitoe's Radford went for a 
better life. They rarely found it, as Monaghan's drug-fuelled sagaThe Killing 
Jar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099496878/the-killing-jar>
 makes all too clear. Her second novel,Starfishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099507925/starfishing>
, was partly set on a financial trading floor in London, but she has since 
returned to her home city and is now running an MA in creative writing at 
Nottingham University.

In another part of the campus, meanwhile, Professor Julie Sanders 
<http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/english/people/julie.sanders> in the School of 
English Studies has set up a module on Nottingham-based writers fromDH Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dhlawrence> to Jon McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/20/artsfeatures.bookerprize2002>, 
viaJohn Harvey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/john-harvey> and, 
of course, Alan Sillitoe. It seems momentum is gathering to provide a suitable 
legacy for a writer who found success despite a start in life many would 
struggle to imagine. That social mobility is not lost on his son. "That's why 
it's so important," he says, "that young people get the chance to read him." 
Not least the young people who live on the Sillitoe trail.
 