
More than one-third of all Saudi-led air raids on Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> have hit civilian sites, such as 
school buildings, hospitals, markets, mosques and economic infrastructure, 
according to the most comprehensive survey of the conflict.


The findings, revealed by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/how-saudi-arabias-airstrikes-have-hit-civilian-life-in-yemen>
 on Friday, contrast with claims by the Saudi government, backed by its US and 
British allies, that Riyadh is seeking to minimise civilian casualties.

The survey, conducted by the Yemen Data Project 
<http://www.yemendataproject.org/>, a group of academics, human rights 
organisers and activists, will add to mounting pressure in the UK and the US on 
the Saudi-led coalition, which is facing accusations ofbreaching international 
humanitarian law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/26/boris-johnson-inquiry-alleged-saudi-legal-breaches>
.

It will refocus attention on UK arms sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/uk-in-denial-over-saudi-arms-sales-being-used-in-yemen-claims-oxfam>
 to Saudi Arabia, worth more than £3.3bn since the air campaign began, and the 
role of British military personnel attached to the Saudi command and control 
centre, from which air operations are being mounted. Two British parliamentary 
committees havecalled for the suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/crispin-blunt-report-foreign-affairs-committee-says-arms-sales-to-saudis-yemen-judged-high-court>
 of such sales until a credible and independent inquiry has been conducted.

How Saudi Arabia's airstrikes have hit civilian life in Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/how-saudi-arabias-airstrikes-have-hit-civilian-life-in-yemen>
Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> disputed the 
Yemen Data Project figures, describing them as “vastly exaggerated”, and 
challenged the accuracy of the methodology, saying somewhere such as a school 
building might have been a school a year ago, but was now being used by rebel 
fighters.

The independent and non-partisan survey, based on open-source data, including 
research on the ground, records more than 8,600 air attacks between March 2015, 
when the Saudi-led campaign began, and the end of August this year. Of these, 
3,577 were listed as having hit military sites and 3,158 struck non-military 
sites.

Where it could not be established whether a location attacked was civilian or 
military, the strikes were classified as unknown, of which there are 1,882 
incidents.

Saudi Arabia intervened in March 2015 to support the Yemeni government against 
Iran-backed Houthi rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/19/understanding-houthi-motives-complicated-essential-yemen-future>
 in control of the capital, Sana’a. The UN has put the death toll of the 
18-month war at more than 10,000, with 3,799 of them being civilians.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Faftermath-of-hospital-in-yemen-following-airstrike-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aftermath%20of%20Yemen%20hospital%20following%20airstrike%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Faftermath-of-hospital-in-yemen-following-airstrike-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aftermath%20of%20Yemen%20hospital%20following%20airstrike%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Faftermath-of-hospital-in-yemen-following-airstrike-video&media=>
Aftermath of Yemen hospital following airstrike that killed at least 11 people 
in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/aug/15/aftermath-of-hospital-in-yemen-following-airstrike-video>
Human rights organisations in Yemen have documented repeated violations by the 
Houthis, including the use of landmines and indiscriminate shelling. Human 
Rights Watch noted this year that Yemeni civilians had “suffered serious laws 
of war violations by all sides”.

The Yemen Data Project has chosen to focus exclusively on the impact of the 
air campaign, rather than fighting on the ground, citing the difficulty of 
gaining access to frontline fighting and impartial information.

One of the most problematic findings of the survey for Saudi Arabia is the 
number of reported repeat attacks. While some attacks on civilian sites can be 
explained away as mistakes or being the location of military camps in densely 
populated areas such as Sana’a, repeated strikes on school buildings and 
hospitals will add to demands for an independent investigation.

One school building in Dhubab, Taiz governorate, has been hit nine times, 
according to the data. A market in Sirwah, Marib governorate, has been struck 
24 times.

Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/yemen-attacks/giv-22601ON2fUzOkmwNB/>
The UK’s shadow defence secretary, Clive Lewis, said of the survey: “It’s 
sickening to think of British-built weapons being used against civilians and 
the government has an absolute responsibility to do everything in its power to 
stop that from happening. But as ministers turn a blind eye to the conflict in 
Yemen, evidence that humanitarian law has been violated is becoming harder to 
ignore by the day.”

The Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesperson, Tom Brake, said the data 
added more weight to calls for the suspension of arms sales. “Despite 
consistent evidence showing targeting of civilians, first Cameron and now May’s 
governments have continued their hypocritical defence of Saudi Arabia’s brutal 
campaign in Yemen,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthird-of-saudi-airstrikes-on-yemen-have-hit-civilian-sites-data-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc750ff434c290b6c4bdbc5f8a974e6e363616ca%2F0_28_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20in%20three%20Saudi%20air%20raids%20on%20Yemen%20hit%20civilian%20sites%2C%20data%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthird-of-saudi-airstrikes-on-yemen-have-hit-civilian-sites-data-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20in%20three%20Saudi%20air%20raids%20on%20Yemen%20hit%20civilian%20sites%2C%20data%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fthird-of-saudi-airstrikes-on-yemen-have-hit-civilian-sites-data-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc750ff434c290b6c4bdbc5f8a974e6e363616ca%2F0_28_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
 The damage inside a school building in Sana’a. Photograph: Mohammed 
Huwais/AFP/Getty Images 
Sixty-four members of the US Congress, from the Democratic and Republican 
parties, sent a letter to Barack Obama last month urging the president to
postpone sales of new arms 
<https://lieu.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/congressman-lieu-leads-bipartisan-effort-postpone-arms-sale-saudi-arabia>
 to Saudi Arabia. The US also provides the Saudis with intelligence, 
surveillance, reconnaissance and logistical support.

The Democratic congressman Ted Lieu, who organised the letter and is a colonel 
in the US air force reserve, said: “The actions of the Saudi-led coalition in 
Yemen are as reprehensible as they are illegal. The multiple, repeated 
airstrikes on civilians look like war crimes.”

How many Yemenis need to die before we stop selling arms to Saudi Arabia? | 
Kate Allen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/yemenis-die-uk-arms-saudi-arabia>
Campaigners are calling for an independent inquiry to establish whether 
attacks on civilian targets are because of poor intelligence, lack of precision 
on the part of the Saudi-led coalition planes, or a high degree of disregard 
for civilian lives.


Staff at the Yemen Data Project said they adopted rigorous standards, using 
news reports aligned with both sides in the conflict and crosschecked against 
other sources, such as social media, non-governmental organisations and 
evidence on the ground.

According to the project, the Saudi-led coalition hit more non-military sites 
than military in five of the past 18 months. In October 2015, the figures were 
291, compared with 208; in November, 126 against 34; December, 137 compared 
with 62; February 2016, 292 to 139, and March, 122 compared with 80.


Despite a ceasefire announced in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/yemen-ceasefire-houthi-saudi-truce>
, air raids have continued.

Over the course of the war, the survey lists 942 attacks on residential areas, 
114 on markets, 34 on mosques, 147 on school buildings, 26 on universities and 
378 on transport.

Six major Saudi-led coalition attacks in Yemen in 2016 – timeline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/six-major-attacks-in-yemen-in-2016-by-saudi-led-coalition-timeline>
Asked by the Guardian about the figures during a visit to London, the Saudi 
foreign minister, Adel bin Ahmed al-Jubeir, portrayed the Saudi air force as 
professional and armed with precision weapons.


He said the Houthis had “turned schools and hospitals and mosques into command 
and control centres. They have turned them into weapons depots in a way that 
they are no longer civilian targets. They are military targets. They might have 
been a school a year ago. But they were not a school when they were bombed”.

The attachment of British military staff at the Saudi command centre has 
become increasingly controversial.

A UK Ministry of Defence spokesperson said: “The United Kingdom is not a 
member of the Saudi-led coalition and UK personnel are not involved in 
directing or conducting operations in Yemen, or in the target selection process.

“The MoD does provide training and shares best practice to the Royal Saudi air 
force, including training on targeting. We also provided guidance and advice to 
support continued compliance with international humanitarian law.”

The Yemen Data Project was set up this year in response to a lack of reliable 
official military figures. It says the project brings together figures from 
backgrounds in security, academia, human rights and humanitarian issues, and 
describes it as “independently funded to avoid any partisan affiliation”.


“Where independent reporting is not available, the data has been 
cross-referenced with sources from opposing sides to the conflict to ensure the 
reporting is as accurate and impartial as possible,” the project said.


Given the general lack of transparency from parties to the conflict and a 
paucity of independent reporting on the ground, the data had been verified and 
cross-referenced to the greatest extent possible, it added.

The number of civilian casualties is not included, because much of this area 
is highly politicised and it has not been possible to independently verify 
claims.
 