
There is no denying that the lack of adults taking out a loan to start an 
apprenticeship is a real concern.

Loans for people over the age of 24 
<https://www.gov.uk/advanced-learning-loans> were introduced in April this year 
and data shows that by the end of October only 404 adults had applied for one. 
The government expects 25,000 to have been taken out by the end of the academic 
year.

Take-up in many sectors has been disappointing, including low wage sectors 
where learners are reluctant to take on debt and employers are unable to make 
up the shortfall.

Talking to training providers, it is apparent why the first few months have 
been such a disappointment. Firstly, the government's loan scheme now only 
funds up to 50% of an apprenticeship programme, with the employer or learner 
having to make up the rest of the cost. If, however, the same individual 
qualifications are taken outside of an apprenticeship programme, a loan will 
fund 100% of the costs. This differential is obviously acting as a deterrent.

Another major issue is that the majority of independent training providers 
have to pay VAT at 20% on the funds allocated through a loan, which they did 
not have to do when the programme was funded by theSkills Funding Agency 
<http://skillsfundingagency.bis.gov.uk/>. VAT is not applied to colleges, but 
the majority of apprenticeship training is delivered by independent providers – 
our members train around 75% of England's 750,000 apprentices – and therefore 
it becomes a significant factor.

We lobbied hard over the matter before the scheme began and although the issue 
is under review, there seems no prospect of a resolution.

Furthermore, functional skills – the teaching of applied English and maths for 
the workplace – has to be paid for by the learner and employer if studied 
within an apprenticeship framework, but are fully funded if done outside an 
apprenticeship.

It is important to emphasise that we are not opposed to loans in principle. 
They put learners in the driving seat and will generate new, responsive and 
flexible delivery methodologies for learning. However, loans for learners who 
are already employed are not an appropriate way to fund further learning. We 
certainly feel that functional skills should be fully funded up tolevel 2 
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/parents/levels-of-apprenticeships.aspx>, 
because this will remove a major discrepancy.

The government should be moving to exempt all loans from VAT and it should be 
encouraging apprentices to carry on with their learning by writing off alevel 3 
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/parents/levels-of-apprenticeships.aspx> loan 
if they go on to do alevel 4  
<http://www.apprenticeships.org.uk/parents/levels-of-apprenticeships.aspx>
apprenticeship. In addition, a much better loans marketing strategy is required 
to boost awareness of the scheme.

For our part, we have published a free advanced learning loans guide, 
available online 
<http://www.aelp.org.uk/news/general/details/advanced-learning-loans/>, which 
offers advice on how to improve the number of learners taking out loans by 
adapting provision to the needs of specific groups of learners in particular 
sectors.

Over the past 18 months, various reviews on apprenticeships have voiced 
criticism that too many apprenticeships are completed at level 2. Our worry is 
that loans are acting as a barrier for adults who want to progress on to 
advanced and higher apprenticeships. We need to ensure older learners are 
encouraged to progress and hope the government will act quickly.

Stewart Segal is chief executive of the Association of Employment and Learning 
Providers <http://www.aelp.org.uk>. 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/fe-leadership-and-management/> to our FE 
leadership and management hub for free to get access to expert advice, debate 
and comment.

 