
Ontroerend Goed has visited Adelaide often enough for the cafe owner to 
acknowledge the theatre collective as “those chain-smoking Belgians”. And 
indeed Alexander Devriendt, the group’s artistic director, is on his third 
cigarette. “Theatre, for me, is the most experimental medium,” he says. “In the 
black box, you can do really anything. And we have always abused that.”


Devriendt is more gentle in person than one may expect, given his work relies 
on audience discomfort. Ontroerend Goed (unpronounceable: we settle for “O.G.”) 
has blindfolded, bullied, spied on and seduced its audiences but, for 
Devriendt, participation is just a tool of theatrical expression.

“If I want to make a show, for example, about how everyone’s world view is 
just a projection of their inner selves, the best way to communicate that, 
emotionally and intellectually, is make you feel it and do it yourself.”


In Fight Night, its new work co-produced with the Adelaide company the Border 
Project, which opens tomorrow night at the festival before touring to Sydney 
Theatre festival <http://www.theborderproject.com/project/fight-night/> , the 
audience has it relatively easy; the task is to eliminate the actors by voting 
them off, one by one, until there is a winner. Decisions must be made on the 
basis of very limited information: appearance, clothing, a sound bite.

“In making each show, I have a question for myself, and this time it was: ‘Why 
do I vote, and for whom?’ I always vote socialist, but I realised that I don’t 
vote based on their political program, which I don’t know, but because I like 
their candidate,” says Devriendt. “He just seems trustworthy ...


“I’m interested in the decisions we make as individuals, in the context of 
limited power. That interests me more than just showing a metaphor for a 
political situation.”

It is the re-creation of real-life dilemmas and situations that seems to forge 
such strong connections with audiences. But Ontroerend Goed came about largely 
by accident, born out of the experimental poetry performances of Devriendt and 
friends when they were literature students. Their first work, titled Porror (a 
portmanteau of porn, poetry and horror, he helpfully explains) toured jazz 
clubs, spawned two sequels and won a theatre award.

“Suddenly we were told that what we made was theatre,” Devriendt says, “and 
given money to make more.” Uncertain years followed, when the collective tried 
to be “proper” theatre artists. So they decided to make a show contrary to 
everything theatre was. “Instead of a big audience, one person. Instead of 
sitting down, being wheeled around in a wheelchair. Instead of seeing a 
performance, being blindfolded and interacting through your other senses.”

Smile Off Your Face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2007/aug/17/thesmileoffyourfaceismor?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 was picked up by the European festival circuit, and made Ontroerend Goed into 
international stars. More shows followed, Internal and A Game of You, to form a 
trilogy of interactive shows that tested a single audience member’s predictable 
responses to emotional and physical intimacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394600820764%2Ffda5e9bf-676c-430e-bf20-3c17926ed144-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ontroerend%20Goed's%20Fight%20Night%3A%20the%20audience%20gets%20its%20revenge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ontroerend%20Goed%27s%20Fight%20Night%3A%20the%20audience%20gets%20its%20revenge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394600820764%2Ffda5e9bf-676c-430e-bf20-3c17926ed144-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fight Night: Ontroerend Goed's new production asks the audience to choose 
between actors Photograph: Reinhout Hiel/Sydney Theatre Company 
Trilogy caught the zeitgeist, fitting neatly into the emerging trend of 
immersive, one-on-one performance. But the convergence was accidental, and 
superficial. Where much one-on-one theatre is consciously feel-good, predicated 
on long-standing ideas about communion, ritual and theatre, Trilogy is harsh 
love at its best, and a psychological wringer at its worst. In all three works, 
the audience member is eventually made aware of the mechanical trickery behind 
the illusion of human connection; of being on a factory line of elicited 
responses.

Critics often suggested the work was ethically dubious. “We were told we were 
breaking fixed rules. But we hadn’t studied theatre, so we didn’t know the 
rules,” Devriendt responds.

Internal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/aug/17/internal-edinburgh-audiences?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
, in particular, attracted controversy. In it, each audience member has a 
credible date with one of the performers, which segues into a terrifying group 
therapy session. “I told performers not to act, but to perform a version of 
themselves,” says Devriendt. “They had to find a meaningful connection with the 
other person. It is theatre, but you still have a genuine moment.”

I saw Internal in 2010. At the time I felt I understood its cynicism, but it 
has since become a sad memory, the same way I feel sad about having trusted 
manipulative friends, I tell Devriendt. “Yes,’’ he says, ‘’but you did have a 
genuine moment. We are all performing, a little bit, all the time, in real life 
– but these are still genuine experiences. Being aware of the set-up does not 
change that.

“The question for me in Internal was: how much can you get to care about a 
stranger in 20 minutes? And I was amazed at the answer. I didn’t think it was 
possible to happen that fast. But I think it’s beautiful. The same for actors. 
They are performing, but … ‘’ he stops. ‘’I am sure he would remember you. I 
remember everyone I met in our shows.”

He admits that Internal is particularly problematic. “One of the actors later 
went on an actual date with a participant. I had to pull him back and say: 
‘Listen, it’s meant to be a metaphor!’ ”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394601028672%2F63074002-81e5-453f-83d3-36ec6450da0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ontroerend%20Goed's%20Fight%20Night%3A%20the%20audience%20gets%20its%20revenge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ontroerend%20Goed%27s%20Fight%20Night%3A%20the%20audience%20gets%20its%20revenge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F12%2Fontroerend-goeds-fight-night-the-audience-gets-its-revenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F12%2F1394601028672%2F63074002-81e5-453f-83d3-36ec6450da0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ontroerend Goed: the Belgian collective became theatre makers by mistake 
rather than design Photograph: Sarah Eechaut/Sydney Theatre Company 
Then came Audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/07/ontroerend-goed-theatre-audience>
. Like Fight Night, Audience interacts with the audience as a collective 
entity, but the more subtle questions were overshadowed by the outrage over a 
section in which a female audience member is singled out and bullied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/dec/11/audience-ontroerend-goed-review>
. Devriendt has used a plant ever since. He feels that, as with Internal, the 
point he was trying to make was sometimes overshadowed by the reactions.

“There is a sort of joy when the whole audience stands up for something,” he 
admits. “It rarely happens. In Fight Night there is a moment where I hope they 
will, but I know they won’t. Real opposition would only happen if most people 
opted out.”

What is the solution? Should the audience rise up, overthrow the performers, 
mount a revolution? Devriendt smiles knowingly. “You know what the horrible 
thing is? The designated spots where people can react are the spots where they 
will. That’s the metaphor I am afraid of myself.”


Still, he stresses, there is no pressure for the audience to respond 
virtuously. “We still want to create a work of art where the audience is not 
responsible for the artistic point. Sometimes the audience is not prepared to 
give a layered, artistic answer. I want to make shows which aren’t possible 
without you, but will give you the artistic viewpoint at the end – because you 
are still buying a ticket.”

• Fight Night is at the Queens Theatre, Adelaide festival, until 16 March, 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/theatre/fight_night> and then at 
Sydney Theatre Company’sWharf 2 Theatre from March 20 to April 13 
<http://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2014/fight-night.aspx>.
 