
Hospitals might thwart the spread of dangerous infections by taking a tip from 
Florence Nightingale and throwing open their windows. But while the Victorian 
nurse championed fresh air and cleanliness as a defence against infections, the 
incoming air might help control nasty pathogens by letting more microbes inside.

Jack Gilbert, a microbiologist at the US government's Argonne National 
Laboratory in Illinois <http://www.bio.anl.gov/PI/gilbert.html>, offers the 
unconventional view that unwanted microbes might gain a foothold in hospitals 
because they had too little competition from other organisms.

The idea mirrors that seen in the gut, where antibiotics can kill off the 
balanced and healthy community of bacteria, only to make way for hardier bugs 
that cause illness.

"When surgery first started 300 years ago, you would have people walking 
around with blood and pus all over their outfits. In that situation it makes a 
lot of sense to make the system very clean," Gilbert said at the annual meeting 
of theAmerican Association for the Advancement of Science in Vancouver 
<http://www.aaas.org/meetings/2012/>.

"But if you go into any wound infection clinic and speak to a surgeon, they 
are constantly sterilising the bejeebers out of their operating room. There is 
theoretically nothing there – they have scrubbed themselves with sterilising 
agents – but somehow, magically a pathogen gets into the person when they're in 
the operating theatre and they get sick.

"This is a situation where one organism from one person hasn't had any 
competition from any other microbes on the skin or in the environment because 
there's nothing else there," he said.

Nightingale noted the virtues of open windows in her Notes on Nursing in 1859 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notes_on_Nursing>. "True nursing ignores 
infection, except to prevent it. Cleanliness, fresh air from open windows, are 
the only defence a true nurse either asks or needs," she wrote.

Last month, Jessica Green at Oregon University reported that air conditioned 
hospital rooms had less diverse populations of microbes 
<http://www.nature.com/ismej/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/ismej2011211a.html> 
compared with rooms that were aired by leaving the windows open. But the air 
conditioned rooms had a greater portion of pathogens that lived on humans or 
belonged to groups that caused disease.

In a 2009 study, Andreas Voss at the Canisius-Wilhelmina hospital in the 
Netherlands,found that fewer than half of hospital staff washed their hands 
after using the toilet 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S019567010900125X>. He 
speculated that they might be more lax about their personal hygiene because the 
hospital environment was so clean.

"There's a good bacterial community living in hospitals and if you try to wipe 
out that good bacterial community with sterilisation agents and excessive 
antiobiotic use, you actually lay waste to this green field of protective 
layer, and then these bad bacteria can just jump in and start causing hospital 
borne infections or mediated infections," Gilbert said.

"If you open the windows and let all of these other bacteria in from outside, 
you will either dilute out the pathogens or not allow the pathogens to 
establish themselves because there is too much competition for the nutrients 
and energy that the bacteria need to survive," he added.

Mark Enright, research director at AmpliPhi Biosciences 
<http://www.ampliphibio.com/index.php/about/management> and a microbiologist at 
Bath University, said: "I do think that opening windows is a good thing. Air 
flow is a good thing in hospitals; you don't want pockets where organisms can 
pool and swarm and pass on."

But he described the idea that hospitals were too clean as "quite an extreme 
view".

"Given the opportunity, any bacterium that gets into the bloodstream and into 
sterile tissue will in invade and cause problems and produce toxins that can 
kill," he said.
 