
Has Sharon White at Ofcom flunked it by declining to order an immediate 
breakup of BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/bt-should-let-rivals-use-infrastructure-to-lay-faster-broadband-cables-ofcom-says>
? No. The argument for liberating Openreach – as advocated by Sky, Vodafone and 
TalkTalk – was always too full of wishful thinking.

There are many reasons to bemoan BT’s performance in broadband but abolishing 
one monopoly supplier to create another monopoly supplier would have achieved 
little in itself.

An independent Openreach, loaded with a chunk of pension liabilities, might 
have chosen to sweat its old copper assets just as intensely as critics sayBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> does. Competition would not have 
been advanced one jot. Even more heavier-handed regulation might have been 
required to improve the UK’s broadband infrastructure.

White is sensibly retaining the breakup option and thus waving a weapon at BT 
chief executiveGavin Patterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gavin-patterson> to discourage 
foot-dragging. But, for now, the focus is on encouraging rivals to invest in 
competing fibre cables while injecting accountability into Openreach. It is a 
good, pragmatic choice.

First, BT will have to allow rivals to build their own fibre networks by 
opening up Openreach’s underground cable ducts and telegraph poles. Second, 
there will be heavier fines if Openreach misses service standards. Third, 
Openreach will have an independent board.

Forget superfast, look who's missing basic broadband – infographic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/ng-interactive/2016/feb/23/forget-superfast-missing-basic-broadband-infographic-economic-impact>
The opening up of the infrastructure is the most important innovation. BT 
reacted by shrugging its shoulders and saying rivals have had that right since 
2009 and few have bothered to use it.

Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> counters that life will be 
different in future: fibre enthusiasts will enjoy easy access and lower costs 
and be allowed to make decent returns.

Much depends on the regulator getting its sums right. But, if it has, there is 
the chance of a proper contest, to the benefit of consumers. Sky will no longer 
have to grumble that BT is wedding everyone to a “slow lane” copper-based 
future. It will be able to exploit its rival’s lack of vision by betting on 
ultrafast fibre and scooping the winnings. Go for it.

Ofcom’s other two main prescriptions for Openreach will have to pass a 
real-world test. Penalties advertised as “substantial” must bite. And the new 
arm’s-length governance set-up – a separate board and investment budget – must 
avoid the endless wrangling seen in the banking sector over ringfencing.

But Ofcom’s basic thinking is correct. More competition for Openreach, not a 
messy divorce from BT, sounds a quicker way to upgrade the country’s broadband.

Paying dividend pays dividend for Lloyds bosses

It’s easy to look pretty in today’s banking sector. All you have to do, it 
seems, is pay a dividend that investors can believe in. It worked for Lloyds 
Banking Group on Thursday asa £2bn distribution to shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/lloyds-hands-chief-executive-85m-pay-package>
 was greeted with a 13% surge in the share price.

The market’s excitement was odd because Lloyds did little more than it had 
previously pledged on dividends. Perhaps investors were worried that the Bank 
of England, at the 11th hour and amid the Brexit brouhaha, would insist that 
more capital should be retained.

As it is, Lloyds’ 2.25p-a-share ordinary dividend (ignoring the 0.5p special) 
offers a yield of 3.2%. Not bad by recent standards, but there was nothing in 
Lloyds’ actual trading figures for 2015 to indicate old-fashioned growth.

Pre-tax profits actually fell 7% to £1.64bn, dragged down by yet another 
thumping provision for mis-selling payment protection insurance. Net income was 
virtually flat. And bossAntónio Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio> said he won’t 
achieve his desired cost-to-income ratio until the end of 2019, about two years 
later than planned.

Lloyds hands chief executive £8.5m pay package
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/lloyds-hands-chief-executive-85m-pay-package>
One of the culprits for the latter was “the lower for longer interest rate 
environment”. That’s not going away soon. PPI provisions will, Lloyds hopes, 
but the lending climate in the UK looks downright dull.

Even at Lloyds’ preferred “underlying” level – in other words, ignoring the 
nasties – profits were only up 5% to £8.1bn. That was in a good year for the UK 
economy; the weather could turn rougher.

On the bright side, there are worse prospects than dull market leadership, 
especially when it is endorsed by a disgracefully tame competition regulator. 
The alternative investment choices for bank investors are litigation hell 
(HSBC), investment banking befuddlement (Barclays) or a bag of uncertainties 
(Royal Bank of Scotland).

There is a separate question of whether Horta-Osório and colleagues, now that 
they have taken Lloyds out of the emergency ward, still need to be paid danger 
money.

The long-term incentive plan for 2016 awards £20m-worth of shares to 11 
individuals. That is more than generous given the rewards already reaped.
 