
Did you know that there is a word for "to chase girls around the haystacks 
after dark"?Mark Forsyth certainly does 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2013/aug/11/roddy-doyle-the-guts-language-podcast>
, and he took every opportunity to use it during his Edinburgh book festival 
talk on some of the English language's most obscure words.

Author of two books on the subject - The Etymologicon and The Horologicon - 
Forsyth's etymological enthusiasm was palpable and infectious.

When exhausted by that haystack "sprunting", what better to do than 
"gongoozle" (to stare idly at a canal or watercourse and do nothing) to avoid 
becoming "wamblecropped" (overcome with indigestion).

The supermarket, he revealed, was a treasure-trove of neologistic usage, with 
double-sided shelves known as "gondolas", and hanging advertising boards called 
either "danglers" or "wobblers" depending on whether they, well, dangle or 
wobble.

But while Forsyth made a good case for English being one of the world's most 
eccentric languages, he pointed out that it is actually very difficult to 
introduce an entirely new word; when asked how he would do so by an audience 
member, he recommended slipping it into a number one single.

Crime writer Ian Rankin  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ianrankin>has made 
an Edinburgh specialism of mingling with musicians - he was on stage at the 
weekend with Joy Division'sPeter Hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-hook> - but he's more likely to slip 
unusual words into a novel than a song.

So when you next hook up with Rebus, look out for "fud" - a Scottish word 
which, as Rankin revealed inone of a series of "Authors' words" videos 
<http://youtu.be/b0n3SKh4e2g>, is a lot less rude now than it was when it was 
originally used.

We'll be adding to the series throughout the festival, collaring unsuspecting 
authors and asking them to tell us their favourite words, with entertaining - 
and at times mildly disturbing - results. You can see more of them in our live 
blog. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/aug/10/edinburgh-international-book-festival-liveblog>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAgjCNLmWEBs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAgjCNLmWEBs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAgjCNLmWEBs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
What would be yours? It doesn't have to be joyous, like Patrick Ness's choice, 
or five syllables long and unspellable - like Ann Widdecombe's - you just have 
to love it. Post your word in the comment thread below and remember to tell us 
why you've chosen it.
 