
Australia’s four major opera companies should receive more than $24m in extra 
federal funding over four years, according to recommendations from the 
long-awaitedNational Opera Review 
<https://www.arts.gov.au/sites/g/files/net1761/f/national_opera_review_final_report.pdf>
.

Along with the proposal for extra funding, the review also recommended that 
one of the companies,Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> 
Queensland, be given three years to sort its finances out or lose its status as 
a Major Performing Arts (MPA) company, which secures it government funding.

The review also recommended that Opera Australia – the country’s principal 
opera company – no longer be funded for the long-run musicals which have become 
prominent in recent years, such as South Pacific, The King and I, and this 
year’s My Fair Lady.

What Australia needs to learn from Victoria's arts funding push
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/21/what-australia-needs-to-learn-from-victorias-arts-funding-push>
“Significant commercial activities ... should not be funded because there are 
viable independent commercial competitors in the market,” it said.


The review, led by business leader Helen Nugent, includes more than 118 
recommendations. In a statement, the office of the arts minister, Mitch 
Fifield, said the government would “give careful consideration to the 
recommendations before providing a response”.

But Fifield’s office welcomed the “most comprehensive review of opera 
undertaken in Australia” which “highlights the significant role that the major 
opera companies play in Australia’s cultural life and the complex challenges 
these companies face”.

Opera Australia also welcomed the findings. “The strong suggestion that Opera 
Australia present more works and greater diversity of repertoire across the 
year is enthusiastically welcomed by me, particularly as this will mean more 
opportunities for Australian artists,” said artistic director Lyndon Terracini.


The National Opera Review, which was expected to be released in March this 
year, is aimed at promoting the “financial viability, artistic vibrancy and 
accessibility” of the four opera companies with MPA status in Australia: Opera 
Australia, Opera Queensland, State Opera of South Australia and West Australia 
Opera. It recommends extra funding of $24.14m over four years. “Australia’s 
major opera companies play a vital role in the nurturing of artists and the 
evolution of the art form. They are an integral part of Australia’s rich opera 
ecosystem,” the review said.


The review also recommended Victorian Opera be upgraded to status as an MPA 
company, which would secure government funding. However Opera Queensland – 
which recorded a loss for six years straight before a surplus in 2015 – was 
found to be in breach of the financial criteria. The review recommended it be 
given three years to reduce its overheads and increase private sector support 
before its MPA status be removed.

Arts workers should be angry about funding cuts – we can't work harder for less
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/13/the-arts-industry-has-the-right-to-be-angry-about-funding-cuts-it-cant-possibly-work-any-harder>
“Without continued government support, it would not be possible for Opera 
Queensland to continue to operate,” the review said.

Opera Queensland is not the only company under threat. Across the country 
there are fewer operas being staged and fewer new operas being produced, and 
mainstage audiences are in decline. The review had a number of recommendations 
to support artistic vibrancy and accessibility of Australian opera and the 
development of talent, including that funding agencies “engage proactively” 
with the companies to increase opportunities for Australian artists in leading 
mainstage roles. It noted that while Australians made up 92.8% of leading 
performances in 2010, the number dropped to 60.4% in 2016.


“The impact on Australia’s community of established operatic singers ... has 
been profound. This was one of the most serious and widespread issues raised 
with the review during its extensive consultations,” the review said. It also 
recommended $1.2m of funding go towards an annual innovation fund to support 
the creation of new works.

The review comes one day after the resignation of the Opera Australia CEO, 
Craig Hassall 
<http://www.limelightmagazine.com.au/news/craig-hassall-resigns-opera-australia-ceo>
, who has been appointed chief executive of the Royal Albert Hall in London. 
Announcing Hassall’s departure, Opera Australia’s chairman, David Mortimer, 
referred to the “challenges” faced by the company; renovations commence on the 
Sydney Opera House in May, closing the Joan Sutherland theatre for seven 
months. Artistic director Lyndon Terracini has said the closure will amount to 
a “huge loss of income 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/stage/opera-australia-and-australian-ballet-lash-government-over-opera-house-renovations-20160823-gqz1fk.html>
” for Opera Australia.

Increased government funding for opera could come at the expense of other arts 
sectors.In the most recent arts funding round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/16/australia-council-cuts-theatre-companies-lament-dark-days-for-arts>
 announced in May, the Australia Council passed down the majority of the 2015 
arts funding cuts to the small-to-medium sector. In the 2015-16 financial year, 
however, opera received a funding boost, ending up with $23.7m of the total 
Australia Council pool of $173.8m.


With the National Opera Review’s recommended increase of $6.39m in year one of 
the four-year incremental spend, opera would be taking in $2m more than 
theatre, making it second highest-funded arts industry in Australia after 
symphony orchestras.

The report acknowledged that its recommendations had the potential to affect 
the funding of the 24 other major performing arts companies that share in MPA 
status, as established in 2011 by the Cultural Ministers Council.

“Many of the panel’s recommendations have the potential to affect these other 
companies, either directly or indirectly,” it said. “The review had to deal 
with the complexity of crafting its recommendations mindful of the potential 
impact on the other companies not within its mandate.”

• This article has been amended to reflect that Opera Queensland recorded a 
surplus in 2015
 