
Baseball fans are familiar with the old adage “pitching wins championships”. 
However, if you take a look at theodds to win the 2014 World Series 
<http://www.vegasinsider.com/mlb/odds/futures/> it could be the bookies 
actually believe something closer to “brand- name pitching wins championships”.

The Oakland A’s are amongst the favorites to win it all for the first time 
since 1989, after general manager Billy Beane brought intop-shelf talent Jeff 
Samardzija 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/oakland-athletics-land-pitcher-jeff-samardzija>
 and landedJon Lester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/31/boston-trade-jon-lester-oakland-athletics>
 at the trade deadline. Vegas likes Detroit even more now GM Dave Dombrowski 
has made David Price thethird Cy Young Award winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/01/mlb-trade-deadline-deals-price-detroit-beane-boston>
 in the Tigers rotation.

The Orioles? They’re tied for the third-best record in all of baseball and 
even though their pitching has beenlights out in the second half 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/split.cgi?t=p&team=BAL&year=2014> 
bookies ain’t believin’ in the Birds. They’re ranked seventh on that odds list 
at 12-1.

Why the disrespect? Is it because they didn’t add a big name to their 
store-brand pitching corps at the deadline? Is it because most baseball fans 
couldn’t pick the Orioles starting rotation out of a lineup? There’s a good 
chance that’s the case, but that doesn’t make it right.

The Orioles have caught fire and are on the verge of creating some real 
separation between themselves, theToronto Blue Jays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toronto-blue-jays> and the New York Yankees 
in the American League East. The pitching performances of their no-name hurlers 
are a major reason why.

The O’s went 17-8 in July  
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/BAL/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>while 
their lineup, suffering from Chris Davis’ super-slump and the loss of their 
marquee catcher, Matt Wieters,hit all of .229 for the month 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/split.cgi?t=b&team=BAL&year=2014>. 
Meanwhile the staff, hammered for the first two months of the season, put 
together the third-best ERA in the AL, helping the surging O’s hold on to first 
place. In fact, Baltimore, a team known for an offense that covers up pitching 
flaws, have seen their monthly ERA’s lower each month of the season, bottoming 
out at 2.60 in August, heading into Wednesday.

So, why don’t the O’s get talked up like other AL hopefuls such as the A’s, 
Tigers and Angels? Is it becauseWei-Yin Chen 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/chenwe02.shtml> isn’t doing it for 
baseball fans? Well, he’s held opponents to three runs or less in 10 of his 
last 12 starts.Chris Tillman 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/t/tillmch01.shtml> isn’t a name you 
hear often, but he owns an ERA of 2.76 over his last 11 appearances, and the 
rookie prospect Kevin Gausman is showing signs of fulfilling his promise and 
becoming a frontline starter. The bullpen was tight even before the deadline 
acquisition of lefty Andrew Miller from Boston, thanks to closer Zach Britton
finding a role as a closer, 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/b/brittza01.shtml> finishing 23 
games, allowing runs in just once over his past 20 trips. Submarine southpaw 
Darren O’Day has a 1.08 ERA.

No, you won’t find any of these players on posters, but they’re more than 
capable and they’re a major threat.

Should Baltimore have added a marquee arm? That’s not an unpopular sentiment, 
especially given all the action last week. But as a friend of mine who’s an O’s 
fan recently pointed out, just who were they supposed to get? Here’s what he 
had to say:

 * Cliff Lee 
<http://fantasycpr.com/2014/08/06/cliff-lee-likely-season-can-replace/> – (no 
money to pay him) 
 * David Price – (won’t re-sign in Baltimore) 
 * Jeff Samardzija – (wanted to test free agency) 
 * Jon Lester – (acquisition would’ve ruined the minor league system) 
 * Jorge De La Rosa – (would cost a top prospect) 
Baltimore have a hard time signing free agents and so the chances are 
acquiring a pitcher like Lester would have meant blowing major prospects for a 
pitcher who was no more than a glamorous rental – the O’s just can’t take those 
sort of risks. It took a long time for Baltimore to become competitive again 
and with so much going right in 2014, and a handful of promising pitchers in 
the minor-league pipeline, GM Dan Duquette’s decision to avoid luxury items was 
his best move of all.

Happy anniversary!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F07%2Fbaltimore-orioles-postseason-pitchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F7%2F1407382528539%2F228954b9-e742-4066-a343-d9266b1c9c55-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orioles%20make%20postseason%20pitch%20despite%20trailing%20in%20big-name%20game%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F07%2Fbaltimore-orioles-postseason-pitchers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orioles%20make%20postseason%20pitch%20despite%20trailing%20in%20big-name%20game%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Faug%2F07%2Fbaltimore-orioles-postseason-pitchers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F7%2F1407382528539%2F228954b9-e742-4066-a343-d9266b1c9c55-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anthony Bosch after being charged with conspiracy to distribute steroids. 
Photograph: Joe Raedle/Getty Images 
The Biogenesis performance-enhancing drugs scandal 
<http://www.boston.com/sports/baseball/redsox/extras/extra_bases/2014/08/criminal_charges_filed_against_biogenesis_founder.html>
 is back, and right on the one-year anniversary of Major League Baseball’s 
suspension ofmore than a dozen players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2013/aug/05/mlb-players-suspended-biogenesis-ped>
 for their connection to the defunct South Florida anti-aging clinic.

Following a two-year federal investigation known as Operation Strikeout the 
founder of the clinic, Anthony Bosch, was charged with conspiracy to distribute 
steroids; he turned himself in to authorities on Tuesday along with six others 
with links to the Biogenesis. Now some are speculating there could be more 
player names revealed.ESPN’s Outside the Lines program 
<http://espn.go.com/espn/otl/story/_/id/11311178/anthony-bosch-surrenders-dea> 
claims names of players not previously mentioned in the scandal came up during 
federal investigations and adds: “The names have not been released, but the 
sources said the names likely will be in discovery filings.”

However, that doesn’t necessarily mean that new names will be suspended. 
Fourteen players –including Alex Rodriguez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/11/alex-rodriguez-suspended-for-2014-season-arbitrator-rules>
, Ryan Braun and Nelson Cruz – received suspensions, but 25 names were said to 
have appeared in documents linked to the clinic, suggesting the MLB did not 
posses enough proof to suspend 11 players.

Meanwhile Bud Selig, who made his pursuit and punishment of those using PEDs a 
top priority during a controversial, costly and aggressive investigation, is 
reaching the end of his time as MLB commissioner. On Tuesday,USA Today confirmed
 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/08/05/mlb-commissioner-tim-brosnan-tom-werner-rob-manfred-selig-successor/13633565/>
 there are three finalists to fill the role. They are Rob Manfred, the MLB 
chief operating officer, MLB executive vice president for business Tim Brosnan 
and the chairman of the Boston Red Sox, Tom Werner. The owners will vote on 14 
August, with the winning candidate requiring 23 of 30 votes. The 79-year-old 
Selig will step down in January, but will remain in an advisory role.

Oh boy, Troy
 Troy Tulowitzki is not happy. Photograph: Chris Humphreys/USA Today Sports 
After four years of losing baseball, not to mention the Rockies misspelling 
his last name in a recent t-shirt giveaway, it seems the Colorado all-star 
shortstop Troy Tulowitzki has had just about had it. Tulo, who is rehabbing a 
strained hip flexor,told the Denver Post on Wednesday 
<http://www.denverpost.com/rockies/ci_26288997/troy-tulowitzki-says-something-needs-change-rockies-before>
:

Something needs to change. Hopefully that comes fairly quickly. You can’t 
force it. But at the same time, we’re all frustrated with this year – 
especially me.

There are a lot of things in this world that need to change and won’t – you 
can put Colorado turning this season around on the list. It’s the same old 
sorry story out for the Coors Field crew: the Rox score a lot but opponents 
score more. In 22 years of Denver baseball the home team has reached 90 wins 
twice, and with a pitching staff once again hitting rock bottom in the rockies, 
nothing will be happening “fairly quickly”. The best-case scenario could be for 
Colorado to tear up the team yet again, deal Tulowitzki (he’s owed at least 
$94m from next season until 2020), Carlos Gonzalez and anything else in the 
pantry that can help stock up the system with pitchers who can figure out how 
to throw in the thin atmospheric conditions.

It’s no easy task, but Rox pitchers don’t actually have to dominate to win – 
during those two 90-win seasons, the staff ranked just eighth in ERA in the 
National League.

McTrouble in Pittsburgh

Baseball fans in the Steel City are holding their collective breaths as the 
injury situation surrounding their reigning MVP works itself out. Outfielder 
Andrew McCutchen suffered a fractured rib – more specifically, he has an 
“avulsion fracture involving the costochondral cartilage of the left 11th rib” 
– on Sunday, but somehow, for now, is staying off the disabled list with the 
team taking a wait and see approach. 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/11313418/pittsburgh-pirates-say-andrew-mccutchen-remain-active-roster>
 The Pirates are in the midst of a four-club war for NL Central division 
supremacy, but without McCutchen in the lineup for any significant amount of 
time their chances will be more or less zilch to come out on top. The Buccos 
lynchpin is having another stellar season, batting .311 with an on base 
percentage of over .400 and 17 home runs – production no other Pirate comes 
near amassing.

Meanwhile, this Pirates talk provides an excuse to show what has become one of 
my favorite plays of all time 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/early-lead/wp/2014/07/31/watch-the-pirates-turn-a-walk-into-an-inning-ending-double-play/>
, one that actually happened last week with the Bucs playing out in San 
Francisco:
Your browser does not support iframes. 
With one out and runners on first and second, Giants pitcher Jean Machi walked 
Chris Stewart. The runner at second, Travis Snider, was sleeping off the base; 
Machi threw to the bag and caught him in a rundown. Then Gaby Sanchez took off 
for no reason whatsoever and also got gunned down. So bases loaded with one out 
turned into an inning-ending double play … which you will never, ever see 
again. Trust me.

And finally...
Your browser does not support iframes. 
We follow two bonehead plays with one act of baseball greatness, and a catch 
some are calling one of the best of the season. 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/08/ezequiel-carrera-tigers-catch-yankees> 
Ezequiel Carrera made his 2014 debut for the Tigers at Yankee Stadium on 
Monday, tracking down Jacoby Ellsbury’s fly ball in acrobatic fashion and 
making a diving, over the shoulder grab that most of us couldn’t even pull off 
in a video game.

 Click here for the Major League Baseball standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>
 