
The Academy had a grand night for a change, and many people are to be 
congratulated. The condensed format of the best song nominees, and the 
production numbers, was a mercy.Hugh Jackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugh-jackman> carried off the very tricky 
role of host with old-fashioned style and cool aplomb – I suspect he has the 
job for the next few years, especially if he can bring the same air of amateur 
musical show to further proceedings.

Above all, the idea of having five past winners introduce the nominees in the 
four acting categories was a stroke of genius. It brought class and comradeship 
to the sometimes tacky contest, and it meant that every nominee was treated 
with respect and affection. There are still too many prizes given on the big 
night; some of the short subjects could easily give way to a more gracious in 
memoriam section – this year the dead made a rich but poignant list, and we 
might have seen more of Cyd Charisse, Paul Newman,Anthony Minghella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella>, Sydney Pollack and so on.

As the evening developed, it was increasingly clear that Slumdog Millionaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-5>
 was going to sweep the boards, so yet againBritain, novelty and brave 
adventure do well at the Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/20/oscars-britain-kate-winslet-olivier-kingsley-christie-day-lewis-lean-mirren-mendes>
 and the mainstream American product falters. When the Slumdog mob – Europeans 
and Indians, adults and kids – took the stage to claim the best picture Oscar, 
a landmark was being established which directly reflects America's reduced 
place in the world. To all intents and purposes, Slumdog was a foreign picture 
and one that Warner Bros rejected out of hand as unmarketable before Fox 
Searchlight guessed the truth – that the inherited energy and panache of 
Bollywood are things the American audience is craving for.

What else drew attention? The surprising brevity and modesty of Jerry Lewis's 
appearance – there was always the prospect that this tyrant genius could hold 
the show up for ransom. Sean Penn's win over Mickey Rourke was a minor 
surprise, but a sane decision and a sure demonstration that Penn is now the 
model American actor (he was also amiable enough to give a great salute to 
Rourke). It's hard to know what Rourke will do next, but as for Penn it becomes 
clearer that he can play anyone.

The dresses were good. The set was fabulous. The fuss and the vulgarity were 
hidden away. There was some awareness that most of the viewers are probably 
enduring hard times. Couple those things with the way thebox-office has picked 
up in the last few months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/feb/20/us-box-office>, as 
poorer people rediscover the cheapness of movie tickets, and hope for the 
future is astir. All we need now is for some American movie to pick up the 
dangerous subject of money (the heart of Slumdog) and make it come alive in 
American terms. But it's hard to see an American capable of doing it, so very 
likely Danny Boyle will be getting offers all round now to do a Hollywood 
Bollywood. The madness of our financial system cries out for comic demolition – 
it needs Preston Sturges. But the glimpses of the big 2009 films gathered at 
the end of the Oscar show looked old-hat already, before they've even opened.

Never mind, it was a good night and a lot of fun, and nearly all the awards 
went to deserving homes.
 