
If the bookies are right and Heath Ledger is named best supporting actor at 
the Oscars, his may not be the only posthumous award dished out on 22 February. 
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences announced yesterday that it is 
bending the rules to allow Anthony Minghella and Sydney Pollack a shot at the 
best film gong,Variety reports 
<http://www.variety.com/awardcentral_article/VR1117999153.html?nav=news&categoryid=1982&cs=1>
.

The Reader, Stephen Daldry's controversial adaptation of the novel by Bernhard 
Schlink, which is up for fiveOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>, 
was the final project for Pollack and Minghella under their Mirage Enterprises 
partnership, but both died before the film was completed. That caused problems 
for the Academy, which does not usually honour more than three producers for 
best film: The Reader has at least four, with Donna Gigliotti and Redmond 
Morris named alongside Minghella and Pollack.

The body decided that three was the maximum after an army of producers marched 
to the stage to pick up the best film award for Shakespeare in Love in 1998. 
But it revised its rules in 2006 to allow for deviation in "a rare and 
extraordinary circumstance" after complaints over the exclusion of producers of 
one of that year's nominees, Little Miss Sunshine.

"In the end, the committee determined that the circumstances of The Reader – 
in which the two original producers (Minghella and Pollack) both died partway 
through the process – met its definition of 'rare and extraordinary' and that 
all four submitted individuals should be named as nominees," the Academy said 
in a statement.

Oscars voters haven't always been kind to posthumous nominees – in its 81-year 
history, 53 individuals have received a total of 70 posthumous nominations; 
only 13 went on to win.

Minghella, who won for best director in 1997 for The English Patient, died in 
March <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/18/anthonyminghella.theatre> 
last year from complications following surgery for cancer of the tonsils. 
Pollack, who won two Oscars in 1986 for the epic romance Out of Africa,followed 
in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/may/27/obituarieshttp://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/may/27/obituaries>
, also after a battle with cancer.
 