
.

11.12pm: Code amber at the 81st annual Academy Awards. Welcome, welcome one 
and all: to the liggers behind the cordons, the dignitaries in their limos and 
to the hoi-polloi like us, camped out in front of the TV set. The carpet is 
laid, the lamps are lit and the sharpshooters have taken up their positions on 
the rooftops overlooking the Kodak theatre (presumably just a cautionary 
measure, in caseMickey Rourke <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mickey-rourke> 
gets too lary).

A swift note to those flummoxed by the time-stamp: we're working on Greenwich 
Mean Time, on account of sitting in a deserted office in London as opposed to, 
say, in row D, right next to Jack Nicholson. Trust this doesn't break the 
illusion. Right now, for instance, it is a shade after 3pm in California. The 
early arrivals will be showing up any moment now.

11.28pm: Have we time for an Oscar preamble? I'm guessing that we do, seeing 
as the carpet is currently playing host to Fearne Cotton, an irritable-looking 
woman in a black dress and a few hired goons dangling security passes around 
their necks. Time enough for preambling, I feel.

What will win and who will lose? Evidence suggests (screams, more like) that 
most of the big awards are all over bar the presentation. The drumbeat for the 
likes of Slumdog Millionaire, Kate Winslet andHeath Ledger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/heathledger> began with the Globes, continued 
through the Baftas and appeared to reach a depressing crescendo two days ago 
with the reputed leak of a winners' list that installed Slumdog as best 
picture, Winslet as best actress and Mickey Rourke as actor. Now it must be 
pointed out that the Academy have sworn up and down that this list is a 
fiction, a hoax, a tissue of lies, and that the votes were still being counted 
when it was sprung on the world.

Now cynics will obviously contend that this was always going to be their 
response. What else are they going to say? "Oh yeah, that's the list. Still, 
tune in anyway on the night of 22 February to see whetherAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> is wearing a white dress or a 
black one"?

Down on the red carpet Fearne Cotton is insisting time and again that "the 
Oscars are mad". People don't realise this, she asserts with the fiery, 
wild-eyed conviction of an angry down-and-out. The Oscars are mad! Pray God 
that the world will listen. If theOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> are mad they need urgent psychiatric 
attention, and Fearne is but one woman; a lone voice in the wilderness.

11.39pm: Thanks for the early comments. Yes, Zoe Margolis, I have some 
industrial strength coffee at my elbow (perilously near my elbow) as I type. 
And yes, annapickard, the sole purpose of Jack being here is so he can get 
drunk off his arse (we tried for Helen Mirren but she was "unavailable", they 
told us). So right now he's sitting here in his tux, sober as a judge and as 
excited as a kitten. Come sun-up he will be rolling in a gutter, singing Moon 
River to a passing policeman. Coincidentally this is also Mickey Rourke's 
itinerary for the evening.

11.50pm: What's become of the red carpet? Whither the Kodak theatre? We have 
become lost in the backrooms and corporate corridors of some infernal LA 
convention centre. Fearne Cotton has slipped the leash and is running 
frantically back and forth, shouting "Wow!" and hugging passersby.

Whoops, and now she's run slap-bang up against the child stars of Slumdog 
Millionaire. At least their air of unruly excitement seems genuine; an antidote 
to all the counterfeit glee that's wafting around their ears. "Can I just say 
that that was so cute?" coos Fearne afterwards. She can and she does, almost 
killing the moment into the bargain. Almost, but thankfully not quite.

0.01am: The cast of Slumdog Millionaire seem to be dominating the first part 
of this Oscar night, just as the bookies are predicting they will dominate the 
last. Here come grinning Dev Patel and demure Freida Pinto, who appears to have 
shown up without her "secret husband", which is a shame. Notebooks out, 
fashionistas: Pinto confesses that her dress is by John Galliano.

Still on a sartorial note, Miley Cyrus has gone out on a limb with her own 
outfit. Subediting Chai remarks that she looks "like a mountain of doilies". 
I'm hoping that Fearne will pursue this line of inquiry. "Wow, Miley, you look 
both amazing and mad! Have you come as a mountain of doilies?"

0.17am: Ahead of the event, Academy president Sid Ganis was at pains to point 
out that this year's Oscars "is going to be a show that takes some bold risks". 
Swirling rumours from the red carpet suggest that this means that it is to 
feature some musical numbers. Outside the Kodak, everyone is contorted with 
anticipation at this prospect. Musical numbers! It only goes to prove that 
Fearne was right, and that the Oscars have officially gone as bazonkas as a 
bagful of snakes. Batten down the hatches, people. This will be razzle and 
there may even be dazzle. So don't say you haven't been warned.

0.27am: Shame. Fearne Cotton does not say that Miley Cyrus looks like the 
Thunder Mountain of Doilies. She says she looks "beautiful" and is wearing "a 
princess dress". Down on the comment board, NeverEnoughShoes likes it too, 
however, so what do we know?

Oh, and here comes Josh Brolin <https://www.theguardian.com/film/josh-brolin> 
â€“ so good in Milk but destined, surely, to fall to the posthumous challenge of 
Heath Ledger in the hunt for the best supporting actor Oscar. Brolin says that 
his plans for the night are to sweep up some awards and then head off to the 
party. I'm guessing that he will fulfill at least one of those ambitions.

0.39am: The first truly bizarre moment of this year's Oscars comes courtesy of 
(you guessed it) Mickey Rourke. He ambles up the red carpet wearing the white 
suit of a cinematic paladin, the Sir Gallahad of Beverly Hills.

But check out those accoutrements. That gold chain rattling round his pants is 
the choke chain that once nestled at the throat of his late dog, Loki (handy 
for when he got a bit too frisky or murderous). That medallion round his neck 
contains a picture of Loki in happier times. Just look at Loki. His ears are up 
and his tongue is pink and he gazes out at Fearne with a stare of sweet, 
soulful wisdom.

For her part, Fearne inspects the gold choke chain and declares that it is 
"beautiful". Rourke seems happy enough with that verdict. With that he prepares 
to lead Loki on what may be his last walk, up the steps and towards an Oscar. 
No nature breaks on the way, please. Let's keep it clean down there.

0.52am: One of this year's key questions solved. Angelina Jolie is wearing a 
black dress, not a white one. Inevitably her arrival causes quite a stir. "The 
crowd behind me are literally going bonkers," claims excitable Fearne Cotton. 
Watch out, Fearne! They'll bum-rush the cordons and devour you whole; 
screaming, screaming all the while.

More alarmingly, this mounting mood of insanity appears to be claiming the 
presenters too. Back in London, Claudia Winkleman insists that she will "eat 
her hair and wail" if Slumdog Millionaire doesn't win the best picture 
Oscar.Will she really do this? It almost makes me want Slumdog to crash and burn

1.03am: Are they all in the theatre? Hurry up, hurry up; there is only so much 
red carpet we can stare at, only so much Fearne we can stomach (mad and 'mazing 
though she is).

1.20am: Finally, it's the 81st annual Academy Awards. Actually I'm lying - the 
ceremony hasn't quite started yet, but the carpet trundling seems to have 
stopped and by the time I finish writing this, we will be under way ... under 
way ... any minute now.

In the meantime, let's recap. Slumdog Millionaire is the prohibitive favourite 
to win the best film gong, with The Curious Case of Benjamin Button trailing a 
distant second. Kate Winslet is likewise the hot favourite to win her first 
acting Oscar for her role inThe Reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-6>
 as the Evil Nazi Death Camp Fraulein What Can't Read (this, it should be 
pointed out, is not how Winslet would describe the role herself).

The race for best actor is a tad more open. Mickey Rourke is the slight 
favourite here for his superb, cathartic turn in The Wrestler, although Sean 
Penn is in with a shout courtesy of a brilliant impersonation of Harvey Milk in 
theGus van Sant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/gus-van-sant> biopic. 
Insiders are also speculating that Rourke's high-living, high-rolling, 
high-profile antics since the Baftas may end up swinging late voters in Penn's 
favour. It's a curious case of affairs when the brawling, paparazzi-bashing 
Penn is set up as the noble good guy to Rourke's reprobate. Maybe, once all 
this is over, they can team up for a remake of some odd couple buddy movie: 
Tango and Cash, perhaps, or Turner and Hooch.

1.29am: Thanks to Conrad Quilty-Harper who emails me with Ryan Seacrest's 
astounding red carpet interview 
<http://defamer.gawker.com/5158382/ryan-seacrests-awkward-slumdog-interview> 
with the young cast of Slumdog, over on E!

Hate to admit it, but it's enough to make me think well of Fearne Cotton. 
First up, Seacrest assembles the kids and breezily confesses that he "can't 
pronounce all these names". Then, after grilling one child who looks about nine 
years old, he turns to the camera and marvels that this kid "doesn't speak 
English" (Seacrest's Hindi, by contrast, is presumably beyond reproach).

I know this is the same Seacrest guy who is constantly boasting that he is 
"live on E!", but that's really no excuse.

Aha, it is the end of the beginning. Now, at long last, the ceremony is about 
to commence.

1.41am: So here they come: the 81st Academy Awards.

Out walks Oscar host Hugh Jackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hugh-jackman>, the razzle-dazzle roughneck; 
Clark Gable channelling the spirit of Bruce Forsyth (or should that be the 
other way around?).

With respect to the recession, Jackman promptly hurls himself into a no-frills 
musical routine, complete with the cardboard backdrops of an am-dram production 
and gallant support from Anne Hathaway (who can actually sing). Against all the 
odds, it's pretty good: amiable, warm-hearted and unashamedly shambolic. Say 
what you like, you'd never have caught Jon Stewart doing something like this.

Random thought: hasn't Jackman built a career on snagging the jobs that 
Russell Crowe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> turned down 
(X-Men; Australia)? This raises the enticing prospect that Crowe was offered 
the gig first. I'd like to have seen that. Crowe would have mumbled a poem into 
the mic, tussled with the bouncers when his monologue overran and then laid out 
a guest presenter who made a light-hearted crack about his weight. It would 
have been both mad and amazing.

Ah well, maybe next year.

Another random thought: does this opening routine mean that we are in for the 
Depression-era Oscars? If so, one wonders how far they are going to push the 
envelope. Will we be treated to a Soup Kitchen Spectacular, in which Robert De 
Niro and Miley Cyrus spoon out gruel to the hungry? Or maybe a Dustbowl 
Interlude, in which a wind machine blows top-soil into the eyes of the great 
and the good. Time will tell.

1.46am: Jackman's celebrity roast comes out of the oven a little underdone. 
First he flirts withKate Winslet <https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> 
(who seems to be have been seated suspiciously near the front). Then he plumps 
himself down in Frank Langella's lap, and informs the debauched melted candle 
otherwise known as Mickey Rourke that he "looks great". Even dear departed Loki 
would have struggled to say that with a straight face (straight muzzle?).

1.59am: The first award for the night is the Academy Award for best supporting 
actress, presented by a quintet of former winners (including Anjelica Huston, 
who seems intent on lavishingPenÃ©lope Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/penelopecruz> with faint praise: "Even if we 
didn't understand every word you said ...")

If anything, Cruz is the slight favourite for this one, although everyone will 
fancy their chances here.

And the Oscar goes to .... PenÃ©lope Cruz for her turn as the Latin virago in 
Woody Allen'sVicky Cristina Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-19>
.

"Has anyone fainted here before, because I may be the first one," gulps Cruz, 
who goes on to pay tribute to Allen as well as Spanish mentors Pedro AlmodÃ³var 
and Bigas Luna (who gave Cruz her first role, in 1992's Jamon Jamon). "Art is 
our universal language," she concludes, perhaps in riposte to Huston.

2.03am: Second award of the night: best original screenplay. It goes to Dustin 
Lance Black forMilk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-2>
.

At the podium, Black provides the first tears of the night, as he recalls how 
the assassinated gay rights activist Harvey Milk was an inspiration for him and 
pushes for the repeal of Proposition Eight.

Thanks to Hazlit, who informs me that Russell Crowe actually hosted the 
Australian Film awards a few years back. Rather depressingly, Hazlit goes on to 
say that the event was eminently forgettable. Maybe we'll stick with Jackman 
after all.

The award, incidentally, is presented by Tina Fey and Steve Martin who are 
genuinely, rousingly amusing, veering off into perfectly timed jibe at 
Hollywood Scientologists and waxing lyrical about "our religion, which we made 
up". Hasn't Martin hosted this shebang a few times in the past? He was good 
value, as I recall.

2.06am: And the award for best adapted screenplay goes to ... Simon Beaufoy 
for Slumdog Millionaire. One suspects that this award is the first of many. On 
stage, Beaufoy offers thanks to directorDanny Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danny-boyle> and proucer Christian Colson â€“ 
"the other two musketeers". Chances are they will have the chance to return the 
favour before too long.

2.14am: Turns out we were misled by the interminable parade out on the red 
carpet. We are now rattling through these awards at a rate that suggests that 
the organisers might have double-booked the Kodak Theatre. Maybe Sunday night 
is Bingo night.

So the Oscar for best animated feature goes where everyone said it would â€“ to 
Pixar's terrificWALL-E 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-8>
, and few will have an issue with that.

Moments later the gong for best animated short is handed to Kunio Kato for La 
Maison en Petits Cubes. I don't know whether Kato was the hot favourite or the 
wild-card outsider in this category. I'm not sure whether he did either.

2.19am: "The film now moves from the page to the stage," announces Sarah 
Jessica Parker, and her co-presenterDaniel Craig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig> flicks a nervous glance to the 
wings. Maybe he thinks that the film literally is moving, right this minute, 
and that any second it is going to fly out from behind the curtain and knock 
him senseless.

But no, he's all right. It's just the preamble to the award for art direction 
and it goes toThe Curious Case of Benjamin Button 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-4>
. David Fincher's yarn led the field coming into the night with a whopping 13 
nominations. For all that, it is currently running in the shadow of Slumdog.

2.26am: Union flags at the ready. Rule Britannia etc, etc, etc. Michael 
O'Connor scoops the costume design award for his work onThe Duchess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-20>
, which goes down as another British success. Over at the next bank of desks, 
my colleague Jason Solomons is delighted. He tipped O'Connor for this award 
some six months ago, when The Duchess first came out.

No thanks for Jason from the podium, however. Typical. You trumpet these 
people for all you're worth. You build them up and make them what they are. And 
where's the thanks? There is no thanks. Instead, they walk away without a 
backward glance â€“ all the way to the Oscar then on to the party, perhaps to 
dance with a showgirl and jump in a swimming pool. "Jason who?" he's thinking 
now. "Jason who?"

2.29am: Whoops, fell behind and missed out on the makeup award. What am I 
thinking? The Oscar goes to ... The Curious Case of Benjamin Button, which is 
now two for 13. Congratulations to the powder crowd.

2.37am: Accompanied by Natalie Portman, Ben Stiller shuffles out on stage in 
the guise ofJoaquin Phoenix <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joaquin-phoenix>. 
He is sporting a Unabomber beard and a zonked-out thousand-yard stare. "This is 
ridiculous," says Portman. "You're chewing gum at the Oscars." Stiller simply 
wanders off and inspects his shoes.

And the Oscar for cinematography goes to the great Anthony Dod Mantle for 
Slumdog Millionaire. Seems a good choice to me. Mantle is one of the world's 
great cinematographers and, with Slumdog, he conjured up a brilliant, vibrant, 
vital and grimy vision of Mumbai. Not sure, but I think that Slumdog and Button 
are now locked in a dead heat on two awards apiece. The night is still young, 
however.

2.43am: Oh, and we should point out at this point that no, the Academy were 
not lying when they poured scorn on the notorious Leaked List of Winners. This 
list, remember, said that Amy Adams would win the best supporting actress 
Oscar, and that In Bruges would be named best original screenplay. In the 
event, the winners were PenÃ©lope Cruz and Milk. All at once these Oscars seem 
almost dramatic again.

2.50am: Another five minutes, another award. This one is for live-action short 
and it goes to Spielzeugland, which means "Toyland". Toyland sounds more 
enticing, and is altogether more easy to type.

Incidentally, I'm wary of saying this, but these Oscars are really rather 
funny. What's not to like about James Franco and Seth Rogen's Beavis and 
Butthead routine, slobbed on the couch in front of this year's contenders. 
Their giggling and guffawing atThe Reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-6>
 is somehow more damning (and more exposing of the film's overweening 
pomposity) than a thousand bad reviews.

3.02am: OK, so here is one of those "bold risks" that Sid Ganis was promising. 
And as predicted it is musical in nature. Here is a grand slice of 
Depression-era escapism. It features Hugh Jackman in a top hat and BeyoncÃ© in a 
red dress (and a top hat), and they are singing show-tunes and Abba medleys at 
each other. On and on it goes, boldly going to riskiness and back, and 
afterwards the crowd applauds indulgently. I think my ears are bleeding. 
Someone fetch me a tissue.

The "man who created that number" is Baz Luhrmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/baz-luhrmann>, apparently. He sits in his 
seat looking suitably sheepish as the applause peters out around him. And with 
that we cut to a commercial break. One of these commercials is for razor 
blades. Considering what we have just been subjected to, this strikes me as 
somewhat irresponsible.

3.12am: We have now reached the Oscar for best supporting actor; the nearest 
thing to a foregone conclusion. It goes â€“ posthumously â€“ to Heath Ledger for 
his splendidly scary, slippery performance as the Joker inThe Dark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-16>
 and is collected by his family.

Of course, this award probably should have gone to him a few years back for 
Brokeback Mountain. But few would begrudge this. Ledger was a devastatingly 
good actor, whose death at the age of 28 caught us all by surprise. He now 
joins Peter Finch as the only thespians to ever win a posthumous acting Oscar. 
The final chapter has been written and if it's not a happy ending, exactly, it 
is at least a satisfying one.

3.17am: My, the documentary category is strong this year. In the event the 
Oscar goes, not to the legendaryWerner Herzog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wernerherzog>, nor to the makers of the 
camcorder Katrina masterpiece, Trouble the Water.

It goes, instead, to James Marsh's marvellous Man On Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2009/feb/23/oscars-interactive-results#film-41>
, about the French high-wire daredevil Philippe Petit.

"This is the shortest speech in Oscar history - Yes!" says Petit. "But I also 
want to say, because I always break my own rules, that's what I do, I also want 
to say ..." And with that he's off on a delightful ramble. Thank heavens he was 
more surefooted when he walked that tightrope all those years ago.

3.28am: Huge Action (as aTeaButNoE dubs him) is back on stage, sans the top 
hat, to usher in the postproduction awards. Now these are traditionally 
regarded as the â€“ how shall we put this? â€“ less glamorous section of the Oscar 
telecast. Except that Huge is having none of this. "This is the cool stuff," he 
barks. "Take a look." And with that we are treated to a angry, hectoring 
montage of stunt scenes â€“ as opposed to, say, an elderly sound editor bent low 
over an Avid.

And the Oscar for best visual effects goes to ... The Curious Case of Benjamin 
Button. David Fincher's epic fable has now nosed into the lead, with three 
gongs so far.

3.38am: Award No 2 for The Dark Knight, which wins for sound editing. Claiming 
the award is sound editor Richard King. He bears a spooky resemblance to 
Richard Jenkins, the best actor nominee for The Visitor. Has anyone seen these 
two people together at the same time? Has Jenkins reasoned that the best chance 
he stands of winning an Oscar this year is to pass himself off as some sound 
editor no one knows anyway. Cunning move, Jenkins.

Seconds later comes the award for sound mixing, which on no account is ever to 
be confused with sound editing; perish that thought. As if to drive the point 
home, the Academy gives this Oscar to a very different film â€“ Slumdog 
Millionaire, bringing it level with Benjamin Button on three awards.

Scratch that, Slumdog now has four. It's just won the editing Oscar too. Chris 
Dickens takes the award and says that he loved working on the film and "didn't 
want it to end". Isn't this a handicap for an editor? "I love this film so much 
that I don't want it to end. Here's a final cut that runs 867 minutes."

3.50am: He has been a screeching clown, a gurning sidekick, a sour chatshow 
host in The King of Comedy and a charity powerhouse. And now, it transpires, 
Jerry Lewis is an Oscar-winner as well. The original Nutty Professor accepts a 
lifetime achievement gong from his successor Eddie Murphy in recognition for 
his humanitarian efforts over the past 50-odd years.

At the podium, Lewis seems subdued, possibly ailing, and it is only at the end 
that he cracks his trademark goofy grin, brandishing his statue at someone in 
the crowd. For all the talk of Jerry's achievement, however, there is no 
mention of The Day the Clown Cried, his notorious 1970s tale of a loveable 
entertainer who cheers up the kids in the concentration camps. The film was 
yanked from circulation and has never been knowingly screened. Nearly four 
decades on, however, and here comes Kate Winslet as the runaway favourite to 
win an Oscar for playing an Evil Nazi Death Camp Guard What Can't Read. Once 
upon a time it could have been Jerry.

3.57am: You want the Oscar for original score? You got it.

Well actually, you haven't got it. AR Rahman has got it. He wrote the score 
for Slumdog Millionaire, so he probably deserves it more than we do in any 
case. And with that, Danny Boyle's Mumbai picaresque puts further distance 
between itself and that film about the buttons. It now has five Oscars to 
Benjamin's three.

4.06am: It's a bumper musical-medley-mash-up, live on stage and as bold and as 
risk-taking as Philippe Petit walking blindfolded on a bit of dental floss. 
Having just necked a bottle of scotch.

After that, the Oscar (for best original song) comes as something as an 
afterthought. It goes, again, to AR Rahman for Slumdog Millionaire (its sixth 
of the night).

"All my life I have had a choice between hate and love," he tells us. "I chose 
love, and that is why I am here tonight."

Damn it. I knew I should have chosen love. Why did I have to go and choose 
hate? It just looked, I dunno, more cool somehow. Ah well, too late now. Should 
have gone for love.

4.15am: Now here comes Liam Neeson and Freida Pinto to present the award for 
best foreign language film. Why is Neeson presenting this award, specifically? 
Surely it can't be in any way connected to his recent role in Taken, which 
seems to feature him strangling, chinning, shooting and decapitating anyone and 
everyone who speaks in a foreign language. Note to whoever wins this thing: 
give Neeson the widest possible berth. Only accept the Oscar if Pinto hands it 
to you! Avoid the death-dealing fists of Neeson!

Now this category seemed a toss-up between the Israeli animation Waltz With 
Bashir and the French drama The Class. But this has always been a weird and 
unpredictable prize, and true to form it goes to a rank outsider â€“ Departures, 
from Japan.

Kudos to Kristopher Tapley, a writer over at Incontention.com, who seems to be 
one of the only people who predicted this one. Departures, he wrote this week, 
"is the sort of safe, solid work that tends to take out the frontrunner in this 
category time and time again". I have yet to see Departures, and maybe it's 
great. Even so, right now, I can't help feeling that both Bashir and The Class 
have been robbed.

4.26am: And the Oscar for best director goes to ... Danny Boyle, for Slumdog 
Millionaire. Fulfilling a promise to his children, he accepts the award "in the 
spirit of Tigger" â€“ the irrepressible cat from Hundred-Acre Wood. Boyle goes on 
to thank "everyone who helped us make the film and everyone who didn't", which 
I guess includes us.

Is this a good result? I think it is. Boyle is a shrewd, brilliant, energetic 
director and made Slumdog Millionaire a far better film that it otherwise might 
have been. He has paid his dues and been around for years. Chances are he will 
be around for plenty more. Long may he bounce, Tigger-like, from one production 
to the next.

4.38am: Gather round people, it is the Kate Winslet Oscar Moment. By God it's 
been a while in coming and now here it is. It will not be denied; its hour has 
come at last. Five former Oscar-winners (Shirley MacLaine, Nicole Kidman, 
Sophia Loren et al) take to the stage to anoint their successor. Loren sports 
an orange tan that suggests her last vacation was on Three Mile Island. She's 
glowing, but not necessarily in a good way.

And the award itself? It might have been Jolie, it might have been Streep. But 
it's not. It's Winslet for The Reader, completing a treble that began at the 
Globes and continued through theBaftas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/baftas>
 and ends a run of five nominations without a win. Needless to say, she is 
rather emotional.

"I've dreamt of this moment since I was an eight-year-old, looking in the 
bathroom mirror, and this [the Oscar] was a bottle of shampoo," she says. "It's 
not a shampoo bottle now."

And after that, the waterworks. Mention of the film's late producers â€“ Anthony 
Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> and Sydney 
Pollack â€“ chokes her up and she pauses for breath. Ploughing on she heaps hasty 
praise on her fellow nominees â€“ "goddesses", every one â€“ and then comes reeling 
off the stage. It's sixth time lucky for Kate Winslet, and her own personal 
psychodrama, her own epic quest, has now had its final act.

4.47am: Exit Winslet, enter five former best actor Oscar-winners (Robert De 
Niro, Michael Douglas, Adrien Brody, Anthony Hopkins, Ben Kingsley). Brody is 
going for the Rasputin look and looks a little scary. Oh, and PS: that's Sir 
Ben Kingsley to you.

What follows next is the closest thing we have seen to an upset. Sean Penn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/seanpenn> takes the prize for his splendid 
turn as the assassinated gay activist Harvey Milk in the Gus van Sant biopic. 
Rourke, the slight favourite for the award, is floored. Did his much reported 
extracurricular activities scupper his chances?

"You commie, homo-loving sons of guns," grins Penn, whose speech overruns 
wildly. He goes on to call for equal rights for everyone, gay or straight, and 
pays tribute to his fallen foe. "Mickey Rourke rises again," he says. "And he 
is my brother."

"That was the Penn-ultimate award," quips stupidshallow, and they are 
absolutely right. There is just the big one left to go.

4.57am: We have now reached the end of the show, the top of the hour. We have 
had jokes and songs and Depression-era dance routines. We have seen Benjamin 
Button flounder, and seen Sean Penn upset Mickey Rourke and Kate Winslet make 
it sixth time lucky. And now here comes Steven Spielberg to announce the winner 
of the Academy Award for best picture.

And the winner is .... Slumdog Millionaire. It is its eighth award of the 
night, a bumper haul that puts it well ahead of its rivals. But this one is the 
crown; the one that really matters.

Now ostensibly the winner of this particular gong is producer Christian 
Colson. Except that Slumdog Millionaire doesn't work that way. The film is a 
collaboration, an ensemble piece. Fittingly, the stage is promptly mobbed by 
cast and crew, young and old. It is an Oscar for all of them, and they all look 
purely overjoyed to receive it.

5.08am: Roll carpet, roll credits. The 81st Academy Awards have come to an end 
and Slumdog has had its day. So too did Kate Winslet and Sean Penn. PenÃ©lope 
Cruz snared the Oscar for best supporting actress - ooh, about three weeks ago, 
it feels like - while Heath Ledger received a posthumous award as best 
supporting actor. It was also, it should be noted, a vintage year for British 
talent.

And OK, this was by and large a pretty predictable affair. The main awards 
went where they were meant to, with the possible exception of Penn's upset 
victory over Mickey Rourke. For all that, it's hard to begrudge most of these 
results. Slumdog was the film that came out of nowhere (last summer there was 
even talk of releasing it straight on to DVD). It is arguably the world's first 
truly globalised blockbuster; a tale of the Mumbai slums, shot by a Brit and 
partly cast with Hindi-speaking players, that broke out to take the world by 
storm.

Right, that's it, the cleaners are running a vacuum cleaner around my feet and 
the parties are about to begin. Thanks a bunch for sticking with me, and for 
all your comments. Sorry for the typos, the rambling, the inexplicable breaks 
in transmission. Oh, and the rambling as well. Sleep well, one and all. Choose 
love, not hate.
 