
Otto Dov Kulka's exploration of the time he spent in Auschwitz as a child has 
won the Jewish Quarterly-Wingate prize.

Widely acclaimed in reviews – the Observer called it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/24/landscapes-metropolis-death-kulka-review>
 "one of the essential books to emerge in recent years" – Kulka's Landscapes of 
the Metropolis of Death tells how he was sent as a boy from Terezín ghetto to 
theFamilienlager (family camp) of Auschwitz-Birkenau 
<http://en.auschwitz.org/m/>, escaping death because he was in hospital 
recovering from diphtheria at the time ofthe closure and death marches 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auschwitz_concentration_camp#Evacuation.2C_death_marches.2C_and_liberation>
.

It beat works including Edith Pearlman's short story collection Binocular 
Vision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/28/edith-pearlman-binocular-vision-review>
 and Shani Boianjiu's novel about life for three young women conscripted into 
the Israeli army,The People of Forever Are Not Afraid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/29/peopole-of-forever-not-afraid-shani-boianjiu-review>
, to win the £4,000 award, which has been taken in the past byImre Kertész 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2012/feb/12/imre-kertesz-hungary-wrong-side-history>
,Amos Oz <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/feb/14/amos-oz-interview> and
WG Sebald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/wgsebald>.

The panel called Kulka's work "the greatest book on Auschwitz since Primo 
Levi", with the chair of judges, Rachel Lasserson, saying the 
Czechoslovakia-born author had "achieve[d] the impossible; a mythological and 
strangely beautiful new language for living with Auschwitz".

Translated by Ralph Mandel, the book is the Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
professor's look at the "images that well up" in his memory, "those fragments 
of memory and imagination that have remained from the world of the wondering 
child of 10 to 11 that I once had been" – an exploration of "what in my private 
mythology is called 'the Metropolis of Death'".

In the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/25/landscapes-metropolis-death-kulka-review>
, Thomas Laqueur also compared the memoir to Levi. "Primo Levi's testimony, it 
is often said, is that of a chemist: clear, cool, precise, distant," he wrote. 
"So with Kulka's work: this is the product of a master historian – ironic, 
probing, present in the past, able to connect the particular with the cosmic. 
His memory is in the service of deep historical understanding, rendered in 
evocative prose that is here eloquently translated from Hebrew."

• This article was amended on 3 March 2014. An earlier version misspelled 
Ralph Mandel's name as Ralph Mendel.
 