
I share Mandy Merck’s scepticism about the political, as opposed to 
rhetorical, persuasiveness of Hilary Benn’s speech (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/04/benns-speech-on-syria-and-the-definition-of-fascism>
, 5 December), but she is wrong to equate fascism with nazism. Of the many 
variants of fascist ideology and politics, few share nazism’s eliminationist 
antisemitism; but what they have in common with Islamic State is a millenarian 
ambition rooted in fantasies of purification and domination.
Jane Caplan
Emeritus professor of modern European history, University of Oxford

• Matthew Taylor’s otherwise excellent article on Gary Neville (Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/04/gary-neville-confrontational-runt-national-treasure>
, 5 December) fails to mention Phil’s twin and Gary’s sister, Tracey Neville, 
an England netball international and now coach of the England netball team. 
Shame.
Nick Bidmade
London

• Pity you didn’t name whoever it was at ITV who apologised for muddling up 
Sir Lenny Henry and Ainsley Harriott (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/04/itv-ainsley-harriott-lenny-henry-knighthood>
, December 5). Still, those white middle-aged television executives are all 
alike to me.
John Cranston
Norwich

• Bit harsh on Mike Godwin (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/07/philip-larkin-is-far-from-forgotten-in-hull>
, 8 December), whose only offence seems not being present at the Philip Larkin 
knees-up. He was, after all, only following in the steps of the great man, who 
found solitary solace in the “blent air 
<http://www.artofeurope.com/larkin/lar5.htm>” of a churchyard and whose love of 
spending time with a “crowd of craps 
<http://www.artofeurope.com/larkin/lar6.htm>” at a party was well-documented.
Jonathan Taylor
Cornwall

• There is a “discussion” each year in our family as to whether the T-Rex 
shall be allowed to lie down with the lamb in the model nativity scene beside 
the Christmas tree (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/07/away-in-a-manger-with-owls-and-an-octopus-innovative-nativity-plays>
, 8 December).
Richard Harley
Alresford, Hampshire

• Was Hitler initially regarded as a rather overblown chump with a bonkers 
haircut (Trump calls for ‘total and complete shutdown’ of borders to Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
, 8 December)?
Rob Harris
Westbury-on-Severn, Gloucestershire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 