
Jonathan Pryce

Played Lear at London's Almeida theatre 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/event/kinglear> in 2012, directed by Michael 
Attenborough. Some critics questioned the production's implication that Lear 
might have abused his daughters.

Tradition dictates that you should play Lear while you're young enough to lift 
Cordelia up and carry her. I was 65, and I put my back out doing it – I 
couldn't carry her for the entire second half of the production's run. I was 
having a lot of trouble with my knees, too. Having to kneel all the time was 
very painful. But at least when you're a king, there's always someone there to 
help you up.

I had been thinking about doing Lear for a while. Then, when I was playing 
Davies inThe Caretaker 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/music-arts/review-jonathan-pryce-stars-harold-pinter-caretaker-brooklyn-academy-music-article-1.1073823>
 [by Harold Pinter], some critics likened my performance to a kind of 
lower-class King Lear, so I decided to finally take the plungeMore than one 
director had asked me to do it, but I choseMichael Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/11/michael-attenborough-to-leave-almeida>
 and the Almeida. I wanted it to feel intimate. A small space can be a 
challenge during the epic heath scenes but, ultimately, King Lear is a domestic 
tragedy. The Almeida seemed the right place.

We hit upon an abuse theme by accident. One day during rehearsals, I went to 
kiss one of the daughters, and it lasted a bit too long. Then I went to kiss 
the next one, and it lasted even longer. We broke for lunch and Michael said: 
"My God, that was a really weird moment." We took it from there. We didn't go 
into it saying: "How are we going to make Lear appear to be a bad father?" But 
it began to make sense. Ultimately, it was less about abuse than the power 
parents can have over their children: that way of making their children feel 
they're a disappointment.

Lear is a fabulous role: it encompasses everything from tragedy to comedy. I'd 
playedEdgar 
<http://www.cliffsnotes.com/literature/k/king-lear/character-analysis/edgar--poor-tom>
 at theLiverpool Everyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/06/jonathan-pryce-everyman-theatre-liverpool>
 40 years before, when I was just starting out. Playing the older man's part 
was very different. As Edgar, I'd been prepared to appear half-naked. I 
certainly wasn't going to do that as Lear.
 Edward Petherbridge, right, in My Perfect Mind. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
Edward Petherbridge

Had a stroke while rehearsing a version 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-21689435> in New Zealand in 2007 
and abandoned the role. In 2013, he made a show,My Perfect Mind 
<http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/my-perfect-mind>, about his experience.

Doing any Shakespeare play is like trying to assemble flatpack furniture: you 
have to make it 3D by following Shakespeare's mysterious instructions. You feel 
you must get it absolutely as he intended, but it's very easy to come out with 
something that he might not even recognise: a commode, say, rather than a desk.

This struck me particularly when, in 2006, I was asked to play Lear for the 
Bacchanal company in Wellington, New Zealand. The offer came just before 
Christmas and it was the most wonderful present, but I didn't feel any 
particular affinity with the part: I was thinking more about the fact that Lear 
represents a kind of pinnacle for any actor. To begin with,I found the old man 
very difficult to relate to. He's so emotionally immature, so outrageously 
blinkered. I pride myself on being quite a good father to my three children. I 
know they love me. I don't have to set them a competition.

I wonder, then, whether New Zealand was actually quite lucky not to have had 
my Lear. Two days into rehearsals, I had a stroke, and had to withdraw. I 
hadn't wasted my time learning all those lines, though: we use many of them in
My Perfect Mind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/07/my-perfect-mind-review>. As we 
worked on that show, I thought about why Lear is giving his kingdom away. I 
wondered, suddenly, whether he has actually had a stroke. He's obviously 
feeling his age, at any rate, and wanting to lose the burden of running the 
country.

Would I still like to play Lear? Yes. If New Zealand telephoned again – or 
even Timbuktu – I'd be on the next plane.
 Oliver Ford-Davies. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Oliver Ford Davies

Appeared as Lear at the Almeida, London, in 2002 
<http://www.albemarle-london.com/Archive/ArchiveShow.php?Show_Name=King%20Lear%20(Almeida)>
. WrotePlaying Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/jan/11/theatre.artsfeatures>, a book 
about the character's joys and challenges.

Most actors, when they reach a certain position of eminence, think they've got 
to do Lear. Along with Hamlet, it's the apex for Shakespearean actors. You come 
to Hamlet with youthful vigour and a certain degree of innocence. But with 
Lear, having had 30 or 40 years of acting, you're supposed to know what you're 
doing.

You try to shake off the idea that it's a test, but it does feel like one. 
When I went to interviewIan McKellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/may/07/rsc.theatre> in 2005, he said: 
"I don't have to do Lear, do I? Everybody expects me to." Not long after that, 
he agreed to do it for the RSC. But other actors have dodged the role. Once, 
while filming withAlbert Finney <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NRMCTgJnmTo>, I 
asked whether we were going to see his Lear. "Oh God," he said, "eight shows a 
week doing Lear – no, no, no."

The first two acts are very hard.Lear is completely lacking in self-knowledge: 
both Hamlet and Macbeth get long soliloquies, but Lear is only given brief 
stabs of insight. And it's very difficult to determine what the play is 
ultimately about. Shakespeare does this strange thing of sticking to the story 
for the first two acts, then makes Lear go mad in a storm. You think: "Why did 
he do that? Is it meant to show that we're powerless in a random universe?"

The best Lear I ever saw was Paul Scofield 
<http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL2F54A72AB1C36182>'s in 1962. I saw it 
three times. He had a wonderful iron control and brooding intensity. But even 
Scofield's wasn't totally satisfactory. I don't think it's possible. Lear is 
the ultimate opportunity to "fail again, fail better".
 Kathryn Hunter. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Kathryn Hunter

Played Lear at Leicester's Haymarket theatre in 1997. Also co-wrote My Perfect 
Mind (see Edward Petherbridge, above).

It was the director Helena Kaut-Howson 
<http://www.helenakauthowson.talktalk.net/tess.html> who had the idea of 
casting a woman as Lear <http://www.cix.co.uk/~shutters/reviews/97015.htm>. She 
had recently lost her mother, who was extraordinary: very Lear-like. She didn't 
know I had a secret obsession with the character. I was about 35 and it seemed 
a completely crazy idea, but I said yes – and an incredible journey began.

Like many people, I first read Lear at school. I was 14 but immediately 
identified with Lear rather than Cordelia. I wonder now if this is because 
adolescence is a kind of crisis point, the same way old age is: both often 
involve going out into the storm, wondering why this isn't a perfect world.

I was always going to play Lear as a man – King Lear rather than Queen Lear – 
because so many of his attitudes are typically "male". But getting his 
physicality right was a challenge. Most of us imagine Lear as big, bearded, 
God-like. But one day during rehearsals in Leicester, I followed an old man – 
he must have been in his 80s – into Iceland. He was quite small and frail, but 
he had a real sense of authority. I thought: "If he were wearing a crown and 
surrounded by dignitaries, why couldn't he beKing Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/king-lear>?" Really, it's Lear's passions 
and heart that are huge, rather than his stature.

The play's first scene is the most difficult. But the more I think about it, 
the more plausible it seems. Lear is planning his retirement: he's going to 
retain his title and "all th' additions to a king", then go off and live with 
Cordelia. Often, when people die, those who are left fight over their will. 
Lear is thinking: "I'll make my will now, while I'm still alive and divide 
everything up." It might be a slightly preposterous plan, but it's not insane.
 Timothy West. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Timothy West

Has played the part three times, most recently in 2002-03, with English 
Touring Theatre <http://www.ett.org.uk/productions/40/king-lear>.

I was ridiculously young the first time I played Lear. It was at the 1971 
Edinburgh festival 
<http://www.scran.ac.uk/database/record.php?usi=000-000-588-499-C> and I was 
still in my 30s. The second time was in Dublin in 1991. Each time you play the 
part, you change, the world changes, and audiences change. In 1971, the general 
feeling from the audience was: "Poor old guy with those two awful children – 
what a very unfair thing." By 1991, it was more: "Why does Lear need 100 
knights? I can't even get somebody to do my garden."

I believe strongly that Lear is not as old as he says he is. If you play him 
as so old that it's reasonable for him to abdicate, then it just becomes a play 
about difficult family relations. It's much more effective to show that this 
man still has all his marbles to begin with and really should be ruling the 
country. The fact that he wants to go on being treated as a king without doing 
any of the work is, I think, one of the great sins in the Shakespearean book.

The role is physically and emotionally exhausting, particularly because you 
have to play through the real symptoms of whatever you decide the madness is. 
The first time I played Lear, I consulted a surgeon about senile dementia. He 
said: "No, you don't want to talk about senile dementia. What he's got is
arteriosclerosis 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/atherosclerosis/Pages/Introduction.aspx>." He'd 
read the play and said it fitted all the known symptoms. He was jolly nearly 
right.

There's a great reward in telling such a complex story every night. And it's 
always very satisfying to die at the end of a play. You feel you can't go any 
further. You can get your costume off and go out and have a drink.
 