
Research your interviewers

You may feel like a stalker but doing a bit of digging before the interview to 
find out the names, roles and responsibilities of those on the panel is wise, 
says Cathy Lovell, student services manager for the Open University. “Use 
LinkedIn as a resource to research the team interviewing you. This will give 
you a chance to brainstorm possible questions and practise answers.”

Claire Jenkins, job interview expert and founder of 121 Interview Coaching 
<http://www.121interviewcoaching.co.uk/>, agrees. “This is where LinkedIn 
really is fantastic for preparing. It’s a chance to see what your interviewers 
look like and a great opportunity to find if you have anything in common with 
them.”


Preparation is key, but remember not to script your answers

Prepare, but don’t memorise answers

Preparation is key but be careful not to script your answers. “I’ve seen too 
many candidates go into blind panic if they can’t remember the exact flow and 
wording of what they wanted to say,” says Hannah Morton-Hedges, careers adviser 
and managing director ofMomentum Careers Advice 
<http://www.momentumcareersadvice.com/>.

“You need to be prepared to think on your feet to answer the exact question 
they have asked and not fall into that problem of trying to fit your rehearsed 
answer around the question.”

To get round this, Victoria McLean, founder of CityCV.co.uk 
<http://www.citycv.co.uk/>, advises preparing and practising out loud for 
typical types of questions you are likely to be asked. “You know you will be 
asked about your motivation and about your strengths, about a weakness or a 
failing, as well as a biographical question so try to prepare a loose answer 
for each of these genres.”

Manage your nerves

A panel interview is enough to bring out the nerves in even the most calm 
interviewee but it’s worth remembering that the panelists want you to do well, 
says Bev White, managing director ofPenna <http://www.penna.com/> Career 
Services. “Knowing that, breathe slowly and deeply before you go in, drop your 
shoulders and smile as that is a great way to let go of tension.”

Before going in, she recommends a technique called “the rule of five” to let 
go of anxiety. “Say out loud the answer to the following questions: what five 
things can you see? What five things are touching me now? What five things can 
I hear now? What five things can I taste now? What five things can I smell now?

“Saying these out loud has a positive affect on reducing or eliminating 
anxiety. Try it, it works,” adds White.

Engage the whole panel 

Building a rapport during in an interview is hard enough when there are only 
one or two people to focus on, but there are techniques you can use to make it 
easier when faced with a whole panel.

“It is natural to focus attention on the one who makes us feel most 
comfortable – usually the ‘good cop’ – but this can exclude the others,” says 
Morton-Hedges.

How to avoid the top six most common job interview mistakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/2015/may/28/how-to-avoid-the-top-five-most-common-job-interview-mistakes>
While you should answer the person who actually asked you the question, you 
should try and make them all feel included, she says. “Use wide hand gestures 
and make eye contact with all. General good rapport building skills – smiling, 
and being upbeat – will be noted by everyone on the panel, not just the person 
asking the question.”

Think positively

When sitting in the hot seat, it’s easy to imagine the panellists are judging 
you negatively. “This is often referred to as mind reading where we imagine 
they think we are rubbish or don’t know what we are talking about,” says Sarah 
Connell, a business psychologist and founder ofMindingMe Psychologists 
<http://www.mindingme.co.uk/>. 

Be mindful of these unhelpful thoughts and challenge them by asking yourself 
what evidence you have that they think you’re rubbish, Connell says. “Replace 
the negative thought with something more helpful, for example, ‘This is a great 
opportunity and the interviewer wants to hear what I have to say’.”

“We often think they are there to try to catch us out but I know from my 
experience interviewing that I am really pleased when someone is doing well. 
Remember they are on your side,” she adds.

Don’t forget body language 

“Non-verbal messages are just as important as verbal ones,” says Rachel Locke, 
adviser for theNational Careers Service 
<https://nationalcareersservice.direct.gov.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>. “Positive body 
language such as maintaining eye contact, good posture, leaning towards your 
questioner; all convey enthusiasm and interest.”

Lisa LaRue, a qualified career coach and founder of CareerWorx 
<http://www.careerworx.co.uk/>, recommends practising body language with a 
friend or family member. “Get them to give you some feedback on how you come 
across including posture, eye contact, tone and pitch of voice, and facial 
expressions.”

“During the interview your aim is to come across as natural, confident and 
relatively relaxed. There’s a fine balance between appearing over confident, or 
arrogant, and too relaxed or disinterested.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 