
The UK environment secretary has defended government plans to seek a private 
investor for its environmental science agency.

But the Labour party said that the lack of detail from Owen Paterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-paterson> made the move look like a 
"secretive sell-off" and "anti-science".

The Guardian reported on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/28/food-and-environment-research-agency-privatisation>
 that plans were in motion to open up the Food and Environment Research Agency 
(Fera), which undertakes research on pesticides, bee health, GM safety, alien 
pests and food-testing, to a joint venture with investment from the private 
sector.

On Thursday Paterson announced <http://t.co/fzNKFu4Bht> a procurement exercise 
to find a partner for the joint venture that will "free it [Fera] from public 
sector constraints." The Guardian understands 29 organisations have expressed 
an interest.

Paterson claimed the move would "protect and enhance its [Fera's] scientific 
capabilities in the long term".


He added: "Procuring the right external partner, with the necessary commercial 
expertise and experience will help Fera to maximise its market potential and 
grow its non-government revenue."

He appeared to reference union concerns that long-term science issues will 
suffer under commercial pressures and that private sector involvement will lead 
to job cuts. "I am also confident that a joint venture would offer new 
opportunities to Fera’s staff."

But Maria Eagle, the shadow environment secretary, said: "This announcement 
does nothing to quell fears that the agency will be privatised and scientific 
standards will be compromised for commercial concerns. The public deserve to 
know the full detail of how the new private sector partnership would work to 
make sure the highest scientific standards are maintained."

She added: "Without that detail this looks like a secretive sell-off by a 
government that has shown once again that it is anti-science.”

Paterson also announced that a new Department for Environment Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Rural Affairs agency would 
be created as part of the changes. The Animal Health and Veterinary 
Laboratories Agency will be merged with bee health inspectors, the plant health 
and seed inspectorate, the GM Inspectorate and UK government decontamination 
service. Such an agency will remain in solely public ownership, unlike the new 
joint venture.

The preferred bidder for the joint venture will be announced by the end of the 
year, Paterson said.
 