

The timing couldn’t have been better. The Green Bay Packers broke their three 
game losing steak on Sunday,defeating 
<http://espn.go.com/nfl/recap?gameId=400791677> the Minnesota Vikings 30-13 at 
TCF Bank Stadium. The much-needed victory increased their record to 7-3, 
putting them on top of the NFC North over their divisional rivals thanks to the 
head-to-head tiebreaker.

Clearly relieved after the game, head coach Mike McCarthy praised 
<http://www.packers.com/news-and-events/article-game-recap/article-1/Big-win-for-Packers-All-better-now/425e1998-d713-42c7-adc0-89467efeba3f>
 his entire team, “I feel very good about how we played in all three phases. We 
got back to playing the style of football we like to play.”


After struggling the last few games, the Packers put in an impressive group 
effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/packers-score-big-win-over-vikings-and-seahawks-overcome-49ers>
 on the road to stun a Vikings team poised to take a two-game lead over them. 
Aaron Rodgers threw two touchdowns, Eddie Lacy ran for 100 yards and, most 
encouragingly, their defense forced six sacks. Safety Morgan Burnett, not 
Rodgers, provided the defining play of the game, forcing Adrian Peterson to 
fumble in the fourth quarter, essentially sealing the game.


It didn’t, however, seal the division. As much as Sunday’s win resulted in a 
swing in the standings, the regular season could be a battle for the Packers. 
Their November swoon hasn’t left them much wiggle room. They face the Chicago 
Bears in a matter of days, on Thanksgiving, leaving them little time to rest or 
prepare. They also have to keep pace with the Vikings, who are also 7-3 and 
play them again at Green Bayin Week 17 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/nfl-shutdown-corner/green-bay-packers-get-much-needed-win-to-take-back-first-place-004235294.html>
.

This season was supposed to be easier for these Packers. Early on, they looked 
like a lock to win their division, something they’ve done every year since 
2011. At times, it looked like they could sleepwalk their way to the NFC 
Championship Game. They were one of a handful of teams that began their season 
6-0 before almost inexplicably dropping three straight.


It’s not like those games, which included a 19 point loss to the Denver 
Broncos and a deflating low-scoring non-showing against the Detroit Lions, can 
be explained away as flukes. Those games exposed this Packers team as something 
other than the world-beaters that were bullying teams with their offense back 
in September and October. By nearly every other quarterback’s standards Rodgers 
is having a brilliant season but he is not quite clicking with some of his 
receivers and his completion rate for the last three games stands at 52.1%, 
57.4% and, on Sunday, 47.1%. Over that same same spell he has still thrown 
eight touchdowns and just one pick – he is Aaron Rodgers after all – but the 
fact that the chemistry between quarterback and receivers isn’t quite there (he 
hasthe lowest completion rate of his career 
<http://www.nfl.com/player/aaronrodgers/2506363/profile> in 2015) may cause 
trouble come the playoffs.

Added to that, the Packers defense is still strictly so-so, ranking 21st in 
the league. Of the Super Bowl contenders, only the Patriots (16th) are giving 
up anywhere near as many yards – and they have Tom Brady enjoying a superhuman 
season. Meanwhile, two teams the Packers may well have to get past to get to 
the Super Bowl are locking teams down on defense. The Panthers have the fourth 
best defense in the league and the Cardinals the third. Another NFC team, the 
Seahawks, have the second best. The Packers may remember them from last 
season’s playoffs.

Until Sunday, Minnesota were in the midst of a five game winning streak under 
the improving Teddy Bridgewater. So while the Vikings lost their best chance of 
taking control of their division, they still are in a much better position than 
they could have hoped for when they stumbled to a 2-2 start of the season. 
Unfortunately for them, that path back to the top almost certainly will have to 
go through Lambeau Field now. Circle your calendars for 3 January.

Quote of the week

“Don’t single us out. At the end of the day, it’s the name. Don’t worry about 
the name – we’re players and we work our butts off, too. I’m just frustrated 
with it.”

- Washington’s Jason Hatcher on the officiating in their 44-16 loss to the 
Carolina Panthers <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carolina-panthers>.

After Washington’s humiliating loss, Hatcher accused 
<http://espn.go.com/nfl/story/_/id/14198899/jason-hatcher-washington-redskins-says-refs-treat-team-unfairly-nickname>
 the officials of taking out their dislike of their racially-charged nickname 
on the team itself during the game. Of course, considering the final score, 
more favorable officiating may not have made much difference in the “contest” 
against Cam Newton and the still undefeated Panthers (whoalso tweaked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/carolina-panthers-take-a-swipe-at-washingtons-redskins-name>
 the team for its name the day before).

Does Hatcher have a point? Well, unless one roots for Carolina, it’s hard to 
deny that Washington was the victim of somequestionable calls 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2015/11/redskins-unnecessary-roughness-called-back-chris-culliver-greg-olsen-defenseless-receiver-carolina-washington>
 early on in the game. It seems like a bit of a stretch that those might have 
had anything to do with their name, but there have been incidents of referees 
who haveasked out 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/football/nfl-ref-asked-working-redskins-games-disrespectful-article-1.1910574>
 of working Washington games precisely because they found it offensive.


Ultimately though, the main rule of judging officials is “Never presume malice 
in decisions that could be explained away by mere incompetence.” It’s hard to 
imagine that there’s some sort of conspiracy out there to targetWashington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/washington-nfl-team>, although there is some 
irony that an employee of a team with a name that many believe to be a racial 
slur is accusing another group of expressing unfair bias.


Stat of the week

346 lbs. That’s the weight of Kansas City Chiefs nose tackle Dontari Poe who 
hassurpassed 
<http://www.foxsports.com/nfl/story/kansas-city-chiefs-san-diego-chargers-dontari-poe-william-perry-touchdown-112215>
 William “Refrigerator” Perry in the record books, but not in our hearts, as 
the heaviest player in NFL history to score a touchdown. The Chiefs went on to 
crush the San Diego Chargers 33-3.

NFL (@NFL) 
Dontari Poe weighs 346 lbs & is now, officially: The heaviest player to ever 
score an offensive touchdown.#KCvsSD 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/KCvsSD?src=hash> https://t.co/ZXBYiqCVT2 
<https://t.co/ZXBYiqCVT2>
 <https://twitter.com/NFL/status/668567261628633089> November 22, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/NFL/status/668567261628633089> 
Fantasy player of the week

Jameis Winston. The Tampa Bay Buccaneers quarterback had a career day at the 
expense of the Philadelphia Eagles. In the midst of a 45-17 victory, Winston 
tied an NFL record for rookie quarterbacks by throwing five touchdown passes in 
the game. Oh, and along the way he also picked up 246 yards. So, 
congratulations to Eagles fans who were also Winston owners for your incredibly 
conflicted victory this weekend. (Unless you were one of those Philadelphia 
fans rooting for Chip Kelly togo back to college 
<http://www.delcotimes.com/sports/20151121/bob-grotz-kellys-return-to-college-ranks-looking-more-likely>
.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfUXl5VxWWl8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfUXl5VxWWl8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfUXl5VxWWl8&media=>
How did the New England Patriots cheat this week?

Well, we don’t know yet. They’re not playing until Monday night, when they 
face off against the Buffalo Bills. However, there are rumors in New England 
that, in lieu of reviewing game tape, Patriots head coach Bill Belichick has 
been binge watching Marvel’s Jessica Jones on Netflix trying to learn some 
tricks by researching main villain Kilgrave’smind control powers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m5WuUrYkXNY>.

Gif of the week

For the record, there was no mind control or officiating biases that caused 
Washington to do this on Sunday:

Deadspin (@Deadspin) 
Washington's day is off to a stellar start: pic.twitter.com/qap7QeOc4i 
<https://t.co/qap7QeOc4i>
 <https://twitter.com/Deadspin/status/668490846061404160> November 22, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Deadspin/status/668490846061404160> 
Elsewhere around the league

• A horrific season for the Baltimore Ravens continues as quarterback Joe 
Flacco tore an ACL and isout for the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/baltimore-ravens-lose-joe-flacco-and-justin-forsett-for-rest-of-season>
. He made his last appearance of the 2015 season memorable, however, completing 
one final drive to set up a game-winning field goal in what ended up being a 
16-13 victory over the St Louis Rams.


• One quarterback exits, another returns. With the return of Tony Romo, the 
Dallas Cowboysended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/nfl-round-up-romo-wins-on-return-while-winston-ties-nfl-record>
 their seven-game losing streak with a 24-14 win over the Miami Dolphins. The 
win helped quiet downtalk 
<http://www.nfl.com/news/story/0ap3000000584627/article/dallas-cowboys-support-for-de-greg-hardy-is-waning>
 centering around troubled (and troubling) defensive end Greg Hardy, whose time 
on the team might finally be coming to an end.


• The tallest quarterback in the NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/brock-osweiler-broncos-nfl-start>
 made his first start of the season Sunday. The 6ft 8in Brock Osweiler had a 
successful outing, going 20-for-27 in a 17-15 win over the Chicago Bears in his 
first game subbing for Peyton Manning. Warning: if Manning is out for an 
extended period of time, or possiblyfor good 
<http://www.totalprosports.com/2015/11/22/this-peyton-manning-retirement-home-parody-commercial-is-hilarious-video/>
, Osweiler’s height will become the new “Ryan Fitzpatrick went to Harvard,” the 
piece of trivia that announcers feel obligated to bring up every game he 
appears in.

• No, Matt Hasselbeck is still not retired. In fact, the 40-year-old has gone 
3-0 as the quarterback to theIndianapolis Colts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/indianapolis-colts> after Sunday’s 24-21 win 
over the Atlanta Falcons. The only shame about this story is that Kevin Costner 
is far too old to play him in an inspirational PG-13 film about overcoming 
adversity. (Wait, Costner does know that he can’t pull off those sports movies 
any more, right?)

• Speaking Of Old Guys Department: 35-year-old Arizona Cardinals quarterback 
Carson Palmer’s career year continued with a thrilling 34-31 comeback win over 
theCincinnati Bengals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cincinnati-bengals>. 
The Cardinals improved their record to 8-2 while the once undefeated Bengals 
fell to 8-2. Don’t worry, Andy Dalton, stick around for another eight to 10 
years and your time will come.

 