
Some of the gems of a museum-quality art collection – which could easily have 
been scattered in a fire sale when the Irish economy crashed and burned – are 
going on show in London this week atMall Galleries 
<http://www.mallgalleries.org.uk/>. It is, the gallery’s director, Lewis 
McNaught, observes in wonder, the first major exhibition of Irish art in London 
for more than 30 years – although many of the artists spent their lives 
crossing the Irish sea, and showed regularly with London dealers and art 
societies.
 Market Day (c1977) by Colin Middleton. 
“Some of the great names here, like [John] Lavery and [William] Orpen and Jack 
Yeats, will be familiar, but many will be quite unfamiliar – and I think people 
will be astonished at their quality,” says McNaught.

The paintings and sculptures all come from a collection assembled over decades 
by Allied Irish Banks (AIB), begun when it moved in 1980 to a grandiose new HQ. 
The collection was unusual because the bank set out not just to commission 
boardroom portraits but to collect backwards – to assemble a collection that 
traces the history of Irish art back into the 19th century. As Frances Ruane, 
who advised on acquisitions, notes in her catalogue introduction, the 
collection outgrew the lobbies and meeting rooms until the bank’s thousands of 
employees became accustomed to pictures hanging on almost every wall. The bank 
bought the work of young contemporary artists, which was cheap, as well as the 
work of Yeats, Orpen and Lavery, which even in the 1980s was not.Louis le 
Brocquy <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/apr/26/louis-le-brocquy>
, who has several paintings and two glowing tapestries in the show, would 
become the first living Irish artist to smash the £1m barrier at auction.

Among the other works are a number of very unusual acquisitions for Irish 
corporatives, which document almost a century of the Troubles – from Seán 
Keating’s large oil painting ofbored, exhausted guerrilla fighters slumped 
against a farm cart in the 20s 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/7/7b/Keating,_Men_of_the_South.jpg>, 
toWillie Doherty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/sep/29/derry-willie-doherty-retrospective-unseen>
’s eerie 1994 image of scorched concrete blocks closing a border road in 
northern Ireland, and FE McWilliam’s 1972bronze of a woman blown sideways 
<http://www.artfund.org/supporting-museums/art-weve-helped-buy/artwork/11704/women-of-belfast-ix-f-e-mcwilliam>
 like a bundle of twigs by a bomb blast in Belfast.
 On the Run: War of Independence (1921) by Séan Keating. 
A striking 2007 canvas by the self-taught Dublin artist Shane Blount, showing 
his brother David mourning the loss of their sibling Joseph, closes the 
exhibition and virtually closed the collection. In 2008, the roar of the Celtic 
Tiger became a whimper, and the previously booming Irish economy, fuelled by 
cheap credit and soaring property prices, collapsed in the world banking 
crisis. AIB, like other Irish banks, was rescued by the Irish tax payer, who 
would cheerfully have sold off any assets that weren’t nailed down. Disposing 
of the AIB’s art was discussed, but in the end it was kept as a national 
collection, and dozens of the best works were transferred to the lovelyCrawford 
Gallery in Cork <http://www.crawfordartgallery.ie/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fhidden-history-irish-art-mall-galleries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431518067972%2Fe83abdba-c0fe-440d-a9b8-f6a29d8f0182-2060x1796.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paint%20the%20town%20green%3A%20the%20hidden%20history%20of%20Irish%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fhidden-history-irish-art-mall-galleries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paint%20the%20town%20green%3A%20the%20hidden%20history%20of%20Irish%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmay%2F13%2Fhidden-history-irish-art-mall-galleries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431518067972%2Fe83abdba-c0fe-440d-a9b8-f6a29d8f0182-2060x1796.jpeg>
 It’s a Blue Giraffe (2007) by Shane Blount. 
“It would have been a great loss to the Irish people if this collection had 
been broken up. It’s often said from outside thatIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> produces great writers but not 
artists,” says curator Nicholas Usherwood. “Well this exhibition proves 
otherwise.”

Many of the earlier works show the influence of overseas artists whom the 
Irish studied and worked with, including Whistler on Paul Henry’s misty western 
landscapes, the post-impressionists on the glowing colour of Roderic O’Connor, 
and an exotic landscape in which Mary Swanzy seems to have swallowed whole the 
work of Gauguin.

“Gorgeous,” McNaught says firmly, gazing up at the Swanzy. “Yes, you can see 
the influences, but I think in all these works there is a softness, almost a 
poetic quality, that marks them out as distinctively Irish.”

• The Art of a Nation: Irish Works from the AIB and and Crawford Art Gallery 
Collection is atMall Galleries 
<http://www.mallgalleries.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/art-nation> (020-7930 
6844), London, until 31 May
 