
Neither major party in Australia is promising to outlaw shell companies that 
disguise their true beneficial owners, despite the revelation that more than800 
Australians were on the files of Panama–based law firm Mossack Fonseca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/04/how-law-firm-mossack-fonseca-worked-with-australian-clients-linked-to-tax-investigations>
 and contrary to pledges made with great fanfare at the Brisbane G20 meeting in 
2014.


A spokesman for the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, said there were no 
immediate plans to change the current laws.

How Mossack Fonseca worked with Australian clients linked to tax investigations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/04/how-law-firm-mossack-fonseca-worked-with-australian-clients-linked-to-tax-investigations>
Labor’s assistant treasurer Andrew Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-leigh> said Labor would 
“carefully consider proposals for making information regarding all companies 
available on a public register” but did not make a specific promise.

Mark Zirnsak, of the Tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tax-australia> Justice Network, 
says implementing the G20 pledge that beneficial ownership information be 
publicly available should be Australia’s immediate response to the Panama 
papers revelations.

“The government should respond to the Panama papers by following through on 
its G20 commitments and implement a public registry of who the real owners of 
companies are,” Zirnsak said.

“Shell companies with front people have a long history of being vehicles for 
all sorts of harmful and criminal activities, from tax evasion, to money 
laundering, to illicit arms dealing and funding terrorism. It should be against 
the law for an Australian to act as a front person of a shell company where the 
real owner or controller of the company is hidden. It should also be against 
the law for an Australian to own or control a company where they have not 
disclosed that fact,” he said.

The Panama Papers: what's been revealed so far?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/06/panama-papers-all-revelations-so-far-data-leak>
The UK government will require the disclosure of the beneficial owners of 
companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/21/vince-cable-public-register-company-ownership>
 in a public register from June, despite complaints from British business, and 
at the Brisbane G20 all governments agreed to principles on beneficial 
ownership transparency, including that beneficial ownership information be 
recorded.

But, like many other countries, Australia has not acted on the pledge, and a 
Transparency International report late last year 
<http://www.transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/just_for_show_g20_promises> 
found Australia had complied with only one of the principles – the one that 
requires a legal definition of what beneficial ownership is.

“Current laws and regulations do not require legal entities, other than those 
with anti-money laundering obligations to maintain information on beneficial 
ownership. Consequently, there is also no requirement that the beneficial 
ownership information is maintained within Australia,” the report says.

If it suspects wrongdoing by a publicly-listed company, the Australian 
Securities and Investment Commission has been given powers to help it trace the 
beneficial ownership of shares.

The chair of the Senate inquiry into tax avoidance, senator Sam Dastyari, told 
Guardian Australia the inquiry may now take further evidence on what the Panama 
papers reveal about income tax avoidance by high wealth individuals. The 
committee – which uncovered rampant tax minimisation and avoidance by major 
international and Australian companies – was due to report on 22 April.

Zirnsak said Australia should also extend whistleblower protection laws to 
cover private businesses so that individuals would report shady practices.

A world of hidden wealth: why we are shining a light offshore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/a-world-of-hidden-wealth-why-we-are-shining-a-light-offshore>
Labor has promised to do this.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, announced last December Labor would 
extend whistleblower protections to the private and not-for-profit sector, and 
that anyone who took adverse action against whistleblowers would face two years 
jail and a $18,000 fine, with whistleblowers able to take civil action for 
reinstatement and compensation.

On 12 May, British prime minister David Cameron will chair an international 
summit in London on tax avoidance and evasion. Given an Australian election is 
likely to be called around that time Australia will be represented by the high 
commissioner and former foreign minister Alexander Downer.

Other EU countries are due to introduce central registers of corporate 
beneficial owners by 2017 as part of their implementation ofthe EU’s Anti-Money 
Laundering Directive 
<http://www.out-law.com/en/articles/2015/june/new-eu-anti-money-laundering-rules-to-take-effect-from-26-june/>
. However, these registers need only be accessible to ‘competent authorities’, 
financial intelligence units, obliged entities and “persons who can demonstrate 
a legitimate interest to access the information”, and not the wider public.
 