
Offshore companies connected to 44 of Africa’s 54 countries appear in the 
Panama Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/world/panama-papers> leak, according 
to new research.

More than 1,400 companies in the files of the offshore law firm Mossack 
Fonseca have names that indicate mining or resource extraction interests – 
raising fresh concerns about how tax havens can be used to exploit the natural 
wealth of the world’s poorest continent.

Panama Papers: inside the Guardian's investigation into offshore secrets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/16/panama-papers-inside-the-guardians-investigation-into-offshore-secrets>
The files contain at least 37 offshore companies with operations in Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> that have been named in legal 
proceedings or criticised by national or international agencies.


The research 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/blog/20160725-africa-investigation-launch.html> 
was published on Monday by African partners of the International Consortium of 
Investigative Journalists (ICIJ), which coordinated the initial investigation 
into the offshore law firm’s leaked files.


Across Africa, 18 media organisations have published their findings – 
including theAfrican Network of Centers for Investigative Reporting 
<https://panamapapers.investigativecenters.org/>, The Namibian 
<http://www.namibian.com.na/Nam-arms-dealers/43379/read> and Verdade 
<http://www.verdade.co.mz/opiniao/editorial/58788> in Mozambique.

The revelations include:


 * Twelve of 17 companies named by Italian prosecutors as being connected to a 
middleman in an alleged bribery scheme surrounding an Algerian oil and gas deal
appear in the files 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160725-natural-resource-africa-offshore.html>, 
including one company described as a “crossroads of illicit financial flows”.

 * Mossack Fonseca allegedly helped process a $30m loan 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160725-nigeria-oil-mogul.html> for a client in 
Nigeria despite press reports that he had been “on the run” over potentially 
criminal petroleum deals.

 * At least 30 wildlife safari companies 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160725-safari-tourism-offshore.html> in Africa 
are identified as being connected to offshore companies, mostly incorporated in 
the British Virgin Islands.

Mossack Fonseca told the ICIJ in response to the recent findings that it 
follows “both the letter and spirit of the law”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fpanama-papers-reveal-scale-of-offshore-firms-african-operations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa458c8f9ba5a9e3e542cb71c8dc6b56250b71ba3%2F230_234_4213_2528%2F4213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Panama%20Papers%20reveal%20scale%20of%20offshore%20firms'%20African%20operations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fpanama-papers-reveal-scale-of-offshore-firms-african-operations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Panama%20Papers%20reveal%20scale%20of%20offshore%20firms%27%20African%20operations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Fpanama-papers-reveal-scale-of-offshore-firms-african-operations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa458c8f9ba5a9e3e542cb71c8dc6b56250b71ba3%2F230_234_4213_2528%2F4213.jpg>
 Mossack Fonseca was at the centre of the Panama Papers leak. Photograph: 
Arnulfo Franco/AP 
It said: “We have not once in nearly 40 years of operation been charged with 
criminal wrongdoing. We’re proud of the work we do, notwithstanding recent and 
wilful attempts by some to mischaracterise it.”

The offshore industry has long protested against the charge that it 
facilitates the theft of Africa’s natural resources.

A report published in 2014 
<https://www.jerseyfinance.je/media/PDF-Jerseys-Value-to-Africa/Jersey%E2%80%99s%20value%20to%20Africa%20summary%20report.pdf>
 by a lobbying group for Jersey’s financial services sector argued that tax 
havens facilitated efficient investment in the developing world, a claim that
has been echoed 
<http://freedomandprosperity.org/2015/blog/big-government/bringing-growth-to-the-developing-world-the-role-of-tax-havens-and-the-size-of-government/>
 by a US group that lobbies in favour of tax havens.

Panama Papers: Act now. Don't wait for another crisis | Thomas Piketty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/09/panama-papers-tax-havens-thomas-piketty>
But such claims have been contradicted by other research into illicit 
financial flows from Africa.According to a 2015 study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/02/africa-tax-avoidance-money-laundering-illicit-financial-flows>
 commissioned by the African Union and the United Nations Economic Commission 
for Africa, more than $50bn (£38bn) a year is stolen from countries across the 
continent via fraud and tax avoidance.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20biggest%20leak%20ever%20-%20Panama%20Papers%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20biggest%20leak%20ever%20-%20Panama%20Papers%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Fbiggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer&media=>
The biggest leak ever - Panama Papers video explainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2016/apr/06/biggest-leak-ever-panama-papers-video-explainer>
Earlier this year an investigation into the leaked files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> of Mossack Fonseca by 
about 100 media organisations exposed the role in the offshore industry of 
facilitating tax avoidance and alleged crime.

The revelations prompted the former prime minister David Cameron to announce a 
new agreement between the UK and its network of crown dependencies and overseas 
territoriesthat would allow law enforcement to access information about the 
true owner of an offshore company 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-commons-statement-on-panama-papers-11-april-2016>
.

Further rules on the automatic exchange of beneficial ownership information 
were agreed at an international summit on anti-corruption in May.




 