
The Turnbull government has confirmed it will press ahead with removing common 
medicines such as paracetamol and aspirin from the list of subsidised drugs.

Painkillers and antacids may be removed from subsidised medicines list
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/26/painkillers-and-antacids-may-be-removed-from-subsidised-medicines-list>
The health minister, Sussan Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley>, said the changes were 
motivated by concerns that concessional patients “were sometimes paying two to 
three times the retail price of common medicines when they bought them through 
a prescription rather than over the counter”.

Ley began laying the ground to make such changes earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/26/painkillers-and-antacids-may-be-removed-from-subsidised-medicines-list>
, but she confirmed on Tuesday that 17 types of common over-the-counter 
medicines for conditions such as headaches, heartburn and constipation would be 
taken off the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) from 1 January.

Citing advice from the pharmaceutical benefits advisory committee, Ley said 
patients and taxpayers were unnecessarily paying higher prices to fill 
prescriptions for medicines that could often be bought cheaper off the shelf.

“For example, we currently have concession-card holders right now paying $6.10 
for a $2 pack of paracetamol if they buy it using a PBS-subsidised 
prescription, which also attracts a taxpayer subsidy on top,” she said.

The measure would save taxpayers about $500m over five years by reducing the 
cost of subsidising medicines, while “reducing the out-of-pocket costs for many 
patients so they did not need to reach the PBS safety net as quickly or at all”.

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme becoming unsustainable, says Senate committee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/18/pharmaceutical-benefits-scheme-becoming-unsustainable-says-senate-committee>
“The market for over-the-counter medicines is also very competitive and 
therefore patients previously paying the fixed prescriptionco-payment 
<http://www.pbs.gov.au/info/healthpro/explanatory-notes/front/fee> now have the 
ability to use their consumer power and shop around for the best price,” she 
said.

It is understood 5.9m scripts for paracetamol were processed last financial 
year, costing taxpayers $68m.

A 500mg pack of 100 paracetamol tablets can be bought for as little as $1.89 
over the counter without a script at Chemist Warehouse. The government says 
that when the product is obtained with a PBS-subsidised prescription, it costs 
$12.07 in total, of which $6.10 is paid by the patient through the PBS 
concessional co-payment and the remaining $5.97 is paid by taxpayers.

Other products to be removed from the general schedule PBS list include 
aspirin tablets, folic acid tablets, glycerol suppositories for constipation, 
and hydrocortisone creams for skin inflammation.

A number of more expensive and emergency over-the-counter drugs would remain 
subsidised on the PBS for patients with a prescription, including ventolin for 
asthma, adrenalin epipens for allergies and various nutritional supplements.


The changes would not prevent patients from consulting their pharmacist or 
doctor about the use of over-the-counter medicines, and Ley encouraged them to 
continue to do so.


Ley said the committee had recommended retaining PBS access to the medicines 
for certain patient groups in particular circumstances, including Aboriginal 
and Torres Strait Islanders, paraplegic and quadriplegic patients, and 
palliative care patients, as well as alternative arrangements for veterans.


A list of the drugs to be removed and the exceptions is available on the PBS 
website (PDF) 
<http://www.pbs.gov.au/general/pbs-access-sustainability/otc-recommendations-for-1-january-2016.pdf>
.
 