
When Gordon Brown made a touchingly phrased apology to Alan Turing 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/gordon-brown/6170112/Gordon-Brown-Im-proud-to-say-sorry-to-a-real-war-hero.html>
 in 2009 – “We’re sorry, you deserved so much better” – he regretted that he 
was unable to offer more: a posthumous pardon. “While Turing was dealt with 
under the law of the time and we can’t put the clock back,” he said, “his 
treatment was of course utterly unfair.”

This view was restated, in 2012, the centenary of Turing’s birth, by the 
coalition government’s Liberal Democrat justice minister, Lord McNally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2012/feb/07/alan-turing-pardon-lord-mcnally-lord-sharkey-computers>
. He reminded 34,000 petitioners for a full pardon: “The law at that time 
required a prosecution and, as such, long-standing policy has been to accept 
that such convictions took place and, rather than trying to alter the 
historical context and to put right what cannot be put right, ensure instead 
that we never again return to those times.”

McNally, it turns out, was wrong (and not only about the strikingly 
unambitious alternative he adumbrated, of not going backwards). In 2013, to 
expressions of joy from subsequent justice minister, Chris Grayling,Turing was 
pardoned <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-25495315> by the Queen. As of 
last week, posthumously offered pardons, for people who would be innocent of 
any crime today, have gone from being out of the question, to Labour policy, to 
a Tory manifesto commitment, to an officialpledge 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/minister-unveils-plans-to-pardon-thousands-under-turings-law>
 from the current justice minister, Sam Gyimah.

Turing’s Law, an amendment to the policing and crime bill seems to mean that 
while living men must apply for “disregards” of their convictions in the 
defunct “gross indecency” category, a selected number of the dead will benefit 
from the government’s blanket, time-travelling pardon.

Selected, because the latter, while all eligible, presumably require the 
living to act for them. Unless volunteers start combing through court records 
to ensure that the innocent but obscure also get the benefit, it seems unlikely 
the dead will get to enjoy Turing’s Law on an equal basis. But since the 
pardons have only symbolic value, maybe it hardly matters if they end up 
restricted to the gloriously talented dead, the fashionable dead, dead subjects 
of successful biopics and those dead recently enough to benefit from concerned 
descendants. Assuming these various representatives can be sure about what 
their clients would have wanted.

You don’t have to read much of De Profundis 
<http://upword.com/wilde/de_profundis.html> to wonder how much an intervention 
by, say, Chris Grayling would have meant to Oscar Wilde, occupied with pitiless 
self-examination, if the former had stepped out of a Tardis into Reading Gaol, 
brandishing a copy of the 2015 Tory manifesto. “I surrounded myself with the 
smaller natures and the meaner minds,” Wilde writes. “I became the spendthrift 
of my own genius and to waste an eternal youth gave me a curious joy.”

Then again, posthumous pardons are entirely about the living and a pardon for 
Wilde, like a pardon for Turing, evidently has huge significance for many, 
though by no means all, of his admirers. If their abrupt adoption was perhaps 
less comprehensible by a Tory party whose members were, in the year of Turing’s 
pardon, still voting against same-sex marriage, perhaps it came about precisely 
because a posthumous pardon is, unlike one for the alive, an exercise in doing 
nothing.

The day after he extended, to long-dead victims of homophobia, the Tory 
party’s most tender consideration for their wellbeing,Sam Gyimah filibustered 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/10/21/tory-mp-filibusterers-the-turing-bill-pardoning-men-criminalised-for-their-sexuality-6206626/>
 – or talked out – SNP MP John Nicolson’s Turing bill, which would have 
pardoned living people with the same convictions.

Coming soon, from the Tories’ new Department of the Departed: warm homes for 
dead rough sleepers, swingeing tax rises for the decomposing rich, a second EU 
referendum for much-mourned Remainers. Jam yesterday.

Admittedly, posthumous pardons were also dear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/03/miliband-promises-turing-law-posthumous-pardons-gay-conviction>
 to Ed Miliband. Supported by petitions and our more high-minded celebrities, 
they are, for the still numerous exponents of virtue-signalling, perhaps the 
ultimate gesture, better even than theJane Austen tenner 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-23424289>. They cost legislators nothing, 
mean nothing, commit them to nothing and are designed to improve only one thing 
– their reputations. Conversely, anyone who argues against this sprucing up of 
history, while living same-sex couples are jeered at for walking hand in hand, 
is at risk of looking less enlightened than the party containing Peter Bone.

It’s not impossible, of course, that the posthumous pardoning of Turing, then 
Wilde, (Joe Orton will just have to live with his sentence forlibrary book 
defacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/11/library-books-playwright-joe-orton>
), along with thousands of the currently forgotten, will be quite the thing to 
improve life for anyone identifying as LGBT, particularly in communities where 
they are considered an abomination. That there might be more direct ways to 
address discrimination, and to alleviate the associated mental healthproblems 
outlined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/20/gay-men-hiv-homophobia-lgbt-drink-drugs>
 by Owen Jones last week, including approaches that do not exclude women (for 
whom historical persecution took less easily airbrushed forms), is no reason to 
leave Wilde’s conviction intact.

Less helpfully, if tasteful historical refurb catches on, Mr Gyimah may soon 
have to explain why representatives of individuals convicted of one particular 
no-longer-a-crime – gross indecency – should have a monopoly on posthumous 
pardons. If popular, his party’s legislative death cult may have to be extended 
to cover, say, people jailed for attempted suicide, for blasphemy and for 
witchcraft. The Labour MP Ben Bradshaw, for one,wants  
<http://www.itv.com/news/westcountry/update/2013-06-17/campaign-to-pardon-bideford-witches/>
 a pardon for the Exeter Three – the last women hanged for witchcraft in 
England, in 1682.

Should some sort of time limit seem sensible, in the light of Theresa May’s 
child sex abuse inquiry <https://www.iicsa.org.uk/>, the number of convictions 
under the 1604 statute against witchcraft does look to be relatively 
manageable. By way of a precedent, the state of Massachusetts thought it 
necessary – Arthur Miller not having made it clear enoughin his play 
<http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/salem/sal_cru.htm> – to 
establish, in 2001, that five of the women hanged as witches in Salemwere not, 
in fact, witches 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/02/us/massachusetts-clears-5-from-salem-witch-trials.html?_r=0>
.

If these pardons did have value, the relevant dead people, or at least their 
descendants, would be at an advantage, you could argue, in becoming 
identifiably of interest, over the nameless millions with no criminal records, 
whose lives were ruined or destroyed in myriad ways less susceptible to 
retrospective contrition.

Then again, the dead gross-indecency demographic, in all its variousness, is 
now reduced to a convenient method of Tory-burnishing. Maybe, likeGeorge 
Montague <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37711518>, who appeared on Newsnight 
last week, they wouldn’t even thank Mr Gyimah for one of his pardons? An 
apology, he might accept. “I was not guilty of anything,” he said. “I was only 
guilty of being in the wrong place at the wrong time.”

An apology, however lame or pointless, would have the additional benefit of 
not rewriting history. Brown’s earlier “we’re sorry” statement contained some 
sense and humility. Turing was a genius. The idea that his CV, or for that 
matter, that ofOscar Wilde <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde> – 
“I was a man who stood in symbolic relations to the art and culture of my age” 
– needed an edit by the two stupidest governments in living memory is as vain 
as it is absurd.


 * This article was amended on 26 October 2016 to correct an error. Lord 
McNally is a Liberal Democrat, not a Conservative.
 