
Hot on the heels of Nintendo’s biggest success in years – that would be 
Pokémon Go,which 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-us-holocaust-museum-asks-players-to-stay-away>
you 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/the-guardian-view-on-pokemon-go-augmented-merchandising>
may 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2016/jul/14/pokemon-go-style-from-guccis-seadra-to-vetements-pikachu-catch-em-all>
have 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/14/pokemon-go-teenagers-caught-playing-game-while-driving-near-pedestrians>
read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-review-it-may-not-be-a-good-game-but-its-a-great-experience>
about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-virtual-space-home> 
– the company is releasing a new version of its 1983 Nintendo Entertainment 
System (NES) on 11 November. Stock in the company, already on the rise from the 
Pokémon Go phenomenon, was up 15% on Thursday morning.

The new NES, called the Nintendo Classic Mini, will be smaller, lighter and 
composed of fewer parts than its 33-year-old thrice-great-grandfather. The 
company has released five subsequent home video game consoles since the NES 
broke out and, unlike other systems made byNintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/nintendo>, the new version will be a 
dedicated machine with a preset selection of 30 games from the company’s vast 
library. It will retail for $59.99.


Nintendo shares up 53% as investors try to catch ‘em all
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/nintendo-shares-investors-gotta-catch-em-all-pokemon-go>
In keeping with established tradition 
<http://kotaku.com/nintendos-ac-adapter-policy-isnt-fair-1679656730>, consumers 
will need to buy a cord to plug the device into the wall separately, though 
technology may finally have caught up with this policy, given that the Classic 
Mini will be its first unit that can run on USB power. Its controller will be 
compatible with the Wii and Wii U, through which Nintendo sells its older games 
over the internet.

Of the 713 official games for the original Nintendo, the Classic Mini will 
ship with all three of the original Mario Bros games, Metroid, Ninja Gaiden, 
both The Legend of Zelda and The Adventure of Link, and Castlevania II: Simon’s 
Quest, amongseveral others 
<https://www.nintendo.co.uk/Misc-/Nintendo-Classic-Mini/Nintendo-Classic-Mini-Nintendo-Entertainment-System-1124287.html?utm_content=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ibtimes.co.uk%2Fnintendo-re-release-nes-console-30-built-games-this-november-1570650&utm_campaign=nintendoclassicmini&utm_source=nintendoclassicmini.nintendo.co.uk&utm_medium=redirect>
.

“Plug and play” game consoles of this sort, often using pirated versions of 
Nintendo’s games, have floated around the low end of the video game market for 
years and benefited from the tech world’s dedication to increasing data storage 
capacity. When they shipped in the 1980s, Nintendo games were about the size of
a piece of toast 
<https://www.pastemagazine.com/blogs/awesome_of_the_day/2012/08/the-nes-toaster.html>
; now many consoles are simply 1980s-style joysticks that can easily store the 
data for several games inside their plastic housing.

Nintendo has succeeded most dramatically when it has opted out of the console 
wars between Sony’s PlayStation and Microsoft’s XBox series and focused on 
marketing new types of play to younger gamers. Its bestselling home video 
console is still the original Wii and its least auspicious product launch was 
the Wii U, which tried to retain fans who liked the Wii’s gimmicks while 
catering to the hobbyist market at the same time.

With an open nostalgia play, “Each title is sure to bring back fond memories” 
the company’s press release reads, Nintendo is reaching for an underserved 
market, which is traditionally what the company does best.
 