
Every fashion editor will tell you that the best places to shop are New York 
for T-shirts, jeans, basics and Kiehl's moisturiser, and Milan for Prada shoes 
at a third of their usual price. But before you go jetting off, we can let you 
into a secret: if you're sick of every high street looking the same, want to 
impress even your most fashionable friends, and want to have some fun while 
you're at it, there is nowhere quite like Antwerp, the fashion capital of 
Flanders.

Since the early Eighties, when Belgian designers turned the fashion world 
upside down with their deconstructed clothes - all raw edges and inside out 
seams - Antwerp has become the fashion equivalent of Lourdes. It's a place of 
pilgrimage, with disciples visiting the crumbling old Academy of Fine Art to 
see where Martin Margiela and Co sewed their first stitches, and then to Louis, 
the shop that was the first to sell their collections. The fashion school is 
now in temporary premises, while a brand new Fashion Institute, complete with 
fashion museum, is being built. It is expected to open next year. Louis is 
still the best starting point for any shopping tour. It's a surprisingly small 
boutique, on Lombardenvest 2, in the old town. But it's the perfect place to 
get better acquainted with the best of Belgian fashion, from Ann Demeulemeester 
to Veronique Branquinho and Raf Simons.

I tried on a huge, experimental square of black jersey by Margiela. However, 
coming out of the changing room, face to face with the two shop assistants, was 
a humbling, if not humiliating, experience. I could tell immediately by their 
faces that this was not a good look. Even my fellow shopper, Jo Adams, Observer 
fashion editor, was laughing. Something to do with my mismatched black ankle 
socks and red trainers, perhaps.

Turn right out of Louis, and a two-minute walk along Lombardenvest takes you 
past Laundry Industry, selling high-street basics, Yosho, for unusual shoes, 
and De Groene Wolk, a designer baby boutique, to Korte Gasthuisstraat. Here 
you'll find retail therapy guaranteed to add inches to your waistline. Forget 
frocks for a moment. There's Goossens, the bakery which piles its windows full 
of delicious-looking fruit breads and cakes; Philips, the charming old biscuit 
shop, where you can buy freshly baked biscuits by weight, or tins of the 
hand-shaped butter-rich biscuits which are the symbol of Antwerp (Antwerpen 
means, literally, hand throw - the story goes that a giant once controlled the 
city, levying crippling taxes, until one day a young hero pulled his hand off 
and threw it into the river); and, of course, numerous chocolate shops.

The locals buy chocolates as part of their weekly shop, along with other 
necessities such as fruit and veg. And why not? For the most delicious 
hand-made chocolates imaginable, make sure you make a detour to Del Rey, on 
Appelmansstraat 5, where the truffles and pralines are made fresh every day in 
a workshop on the premises. The smell alone is enough to satisfy most 
chocaholics. Just the thought of it was making our mouths water, and anyway, 
our feet were hurting after an hour's shopping. So we stopped for a coffee 
break at Desir de Lille, the tea shop which specialises in waffles. I ordered 
some apple fritters which arrived, groaning under their own weight in icing 
sugar. It was at this point that my thoughts began returning to the Margiela 
tent dress. If it meant I could spend my days eating waffles and beignets , 
perhaps I didn't care what the shop assistants thought after all.

One of the many great things about Antwerp (along with chocolates, diamonds, 
waffles, beer, moules, jenever , and healthy portions of the best frites and 
mayonnaise in town, from Frituur No 1, at Hoogstraat 1) is that there are shops 
here that you won't find anywhere else, and they are all within walking 
distance. Ann Demeulemeester is on the corner of Leopold de Waelplaats and 
Verlatstraat. It's next to the kitchen specialists Obumex, where you'll find 
units designed by the minimalist architect John Pawson.

More established is Dries Van Noten. The turn of the century, mosaic-tiled 
Modepaleis, as it's called, is quite a landmark, on Nationalestraat 16. The 
shop assistants are friendly and helpful and will happily convert prices into 
sterling if you ask. And do ask, because while you will want to buy handfuls of 
delicately beaded chiffon tops, floral printed dresses, fantastically cut 
trousers, and juicy-coloured knits, these clothes are not cheap. They are 
however, the sort of clothes you will wear forever, like family heirlooms.

In May, the city will exploit its trendy new status when it plays host to Mode 
2001, a major fashion festival, with designers from Belgium and abroad, taking 
over the streets and buildings until next October. There will be mapped out 
'fashion walks' designed to take you past all the hotspots. For a preview, 
click onwww.mode2001.be <http://www.mode2001.be>. The event is being organised 
by Antwerp's most colourful character, fashion designer Walter Van Beirendonck. 
His own shop, at St Antoniusstraat, 12, is a reason to visit Antwerp alone. 
With its window gallery, its sweeping counter designed by Marc Newson, its 
giant plastic sleeping teddy bear, and a rail of Van Beirendonck's own 
Aesthetic Terrorist T-shirts, it's a different sort of shopping experience. You 
can also buy clothes by Dirk Van Saene, recent Antwerp graduate Bernard 
Willhelm, and a handful of other up-and-coming designers.

A couple of days in Antwerp is all you need to shop, drink coffee, eat 
waffles, shop some more, drink beer and shop. There are clothes shops, junk and 
antique shops, shoe shops, furniture stores, and great places to eat too. And 
for every shop, there are at least two bars, serving Belgium's many hundred 
varieties of beer. Het Elfde Gebod, at Torfbrug 10, is a pub in the shadow of 
the cathedral and is packed with kitsch religious statues and iconography. 
After a few Leffes, you'll start to feel a little more saintly about the day's 
shopping and the gaping hole in your bank account.

Belgium... old and new

Beer 
 Belgium produces more than 350 brands of beer, and in Antwerp you'll find the 
famous Flemish white beers.

Smurfs 
 Remember those funny little blue people? Blame Belgian comic strip artist 
Pierre Culliford, who invented Les Schtroumpf (smurfs to you and me) in 1948.

Chocolates 
 The Belgians have been producing some of the world's finest chocolates for 
over a century. Pralines are the national speciality.

Fashion
 Graduates from Antwerp's Royal Academy of Fine Arts have made their mark on 
international catwalks.

Design 
 The streets of Antwerp are lined with shops selling furniture, trinkets and 
accessories by talented new designers.

Art 
 Surrealism is deeply embedded in Belgian culture and you don't have to go to 
an art gallery to see it.

Shop till you drop

 People say Belgian designers' clothes are as difficult to wear as their 
names are to pronounce. But all you need to know are four names: Walter, 
Martin, Dries and Ann, and you're halfway to being an expert.Those in the know 
refer to the designers by their first names anyway; it implies they are all 
good chums. Expect to pay about £48 (3,000 Belgian francs) for an Aesthetic 
Terrorist T-shirt, £73 for an oversized Margiela T-shirt, from £161 for a Dries 
Van Noten dress and from £161-£258 for Ann Demeulemeester trousers.

 Coccodrillo, at Schuttershofstraat, 9, is one of the best places to go for 
shoes by Prada, Michel Perry, as well as Antwerp's finest, including AF 
Vanderforst (boots from £400), Margiela and Demeulemeester.

 If you can't afford to buy Van Noten and Demeulemeester new, it's worth 
bargain-hunting in Francis, Steenhouwersvest 14. This shop specialises in 
modern furniture from the Fifties to the Seventies, and has great chairs and 
lights. It has vintage Hermès scarves, old handbags and a rail of vintage and 
second-hand clothes. Prices are around £60-£70 for a dress.

 Once you've bought your outfit, it's on to accessories. Antwerp is the 
diamond capital of Europe but beware of conmen. There's enough competition in 
the diamond district (centred on the station) for customers to have the 
upperhand. Remember the 3 Cs - cut, carat, and clarity. To get an idea of what 
you should be paying or to buy a diamond and have it set while you wait, visit 
Diamandland, on Appelmansstraat 33.

 Find Antwerp's independent boutiques, such as Huis A Boon, the glove shop 
that dates back to 1884. It's at Lombardenvest 2-4, and is a great place for 
window shopping, or for buying every kind of glove, from driving to 
Madonna-style lace mittens.

 For mainstream shopping - everything from Zara to Antwerp's only department 
store - head for the Meir.

 Bazar Bizar, Steenhouwersvest 18, is a real find. It sells a bright and 
exotic collection of furniture, silks, sandals, trinkets and accessories from 
Morocco, Indonesia and the Far East. (Sandals from around £38). It also has an 
apartment above the shop, decorated in Arabian Nights style, which can be 
rented for £73 pp per night. It sleeps up to four. For more details, ring 0032 
3 232 97 44 or click onwww.bazarbizar.be <http://www.bazarbizar.be>.

 Don't plan a shopping trip in Antwerp on Monday or Tuesday; a lot of the 
shops are closed. However, on Sundays, the antique and bric-a-brac shops around 
Steehhouwersvest and Kloostersstraat are open.

Fact file 

Getting there: Tamsin Blanchard flew to Antwerp from London City with VLM (tel 
020 7476 6677). Fares from £120 including tax based on a minimum two-night 
stay. She stayed at Hotel 't Sandt, (tel 0032 3 232 93 90). Weekend rates for a 
double room with breakfast start at £84.

By car: a package is available from Eurotunnel Motoring Holidays (0870 333 
2001) from £148 (1 May to 31 Oct) based on two sharing at the three-star Eden 
Hotel in the heart of the diamond district. Price includes return travel via 
Eurotunnel for a car and passengers and B&B accommodation. Antwerp is a 
two-hour drive from the Eurotunnel terminal.

By train: Eurostar to Brussels takes 2hr 40min followed by a 35min train ride 
to Antwerp.

More information: Tourism Flanders-Brussels, 31 Pepper Street, London E14 
(0900 188 7799)
 