
Phil Daniels’s “Man of the Year” appreciation of Patrick Marber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marber> in Arena magazine started with the 
line “Patrick Marber is a c***”. The playwright concedes that in the course of 
directing his 1995 debut, Dealer’s Choice, he and Daniels crossed swords. “But 
we’re great mates. He did nominate me as Man of the Year.” David Quantick, a 
writer who worked with him back in the days when he was toiling on Channel 4’s 
late, unlamented Saturday Zoo, hints that Marber “doesn’t have people skills. 
He’s not good at small talk.”


Closer and closer: Patrick Marber returns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/06/closer-patrick-marber-donmar-warehouse>
Marber demonstrates this when I ask if he’s moving to New York when Closer, 
the award-winning follow up to Dealer’s Choice, transfers there next year. 
“Well, I am directing it so I think it would be a good idea if I was in the 
general vicinity, don’t you?” It was a stupid question, but Marber has a manner 
that makes all questions seem stupid.

Certain performers from his days writing television comedy grumble about 
feeling patronised and alienated. One source recalls a meeting where, in front 
of eight other writers, Marber reprimandedSteve Coogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/coogan> for not understanding Alan 
Partridge, Coogan’s own character. “No, Alan wouldn’t say that,” Marber hissed 
sternly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423665602539%2F7ebb1c76-4275-485f-9c3d-c7e7aa6266fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20written%20a%20play%20about%20sex%20%E2%80%93%20that%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20make%20me%20Dr%20Ruth'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20written%20a%20play%20about%20sex%20%E2%80%93%20that%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20make%20me%20Dr%20Ruth%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423665602539%2F7ebb1c76-4275-485f-9c3d-c7e7aa6266fa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sally Dexter and Ciaran Hinds in Closer by Patrick Marber at the National 
Theatre in 1997. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Talking to him, one does feel somewhat alienated, primarily because he is 
smarter than most people.Patrick Marber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/marber>, like your mother, generally does 
know better. If he says “Alan Partridge wouldn’t say that”, or “Scooby Doo 
wouldn’t say that”, he’s probably right. His perceived arrogance stems from the 
fact that he is utterly focused on everything he does, so much so that there is 
simply no time for “people skills”.

Victoria Coren 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/osm/story/0,6903,377365,00.html> remembers, 
years ago, being fascinated by him purely on the basis of how he played poker. 
“He always reminded me of the opening line of The Cincinnati Kid: ‘He was a 
tight man. Everything about him was close and quiet, his gestures were short 
and cleared with no wasted movement.’” The truth is that he is paralytically 
shy. Performer and writer Beth Porter, who has known him since he was 16, 
recalls: “It used to be so bad, he couldn’t take his eyes off the floor, let 
alone look you in the eye.” Marber grew up in a middle class Jewish home in 
Wimbledon. “I consider myself a Jewish writer, like all my heroes:Tom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>, David Mamet, Philip Roth, Arthur 
Miller, Woody Allen.” At Oxford he met Guy Browning and formed a comedy double 
act before going it alone. Part of his shtick was ultra-concise impressions, 
Dustin Hoffman and Kenneth Williams in a syllable.

When he was doing standup, was he thinking: I really want to be a playwright? 
“No, I was thinking ‘I really don’t want to be a stand up.’” So it’s true that 
standup comedy is the most frightening thing in the world? “Well its not as 
frightening as being blown up in a war. But no, I didn’t like it and when I see 
standups now, I can’t believe I ever had the guts to do it. Eventually, I gave 
up on it at the same time as the love of my life gave up on me. I went to Paris 
for six months and wrote novels that no one will ever see.”

When I see standups now, I can’t believe I ever had the guts to do it

At Marber’s lowest ebb, Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>, whom he had known at 
Oxford, asked him to do Radio 4’s On the Hour. “If he hadn’t cast me I would 
have probably taught English as a foreign language and had a miserable life. 
Instead we all got this simultaneous break: me, Armando, Steve, Rebecca Front, 
Doon MacKichan. It was a really good time, the early nineties.” This is the 
first time Marber has cracked anything resembling a joke. He has an almost 
childlike seriousness, and with his neon pale skin and intense eyes, resembles 
no one so much as Bud Cort in Harold and Maude.

Scoffers say that Marber was “no actor”, but many of the best Iannucci/ Coogan 
characters were his: the Gary Oldman style actor who claims to have punched 
Jessica Tandy but ends up fixing a photocopier is a personal favourite.

“Gradually,” says Beth Porter, “his natural facility to see the absurd and 
funny things in life became enriched by his understanding of pain. That 
development is what made Dealer’s Choice such a remarkable first effort.” “It’s 
all a stab in the dark really,” mumbles Marber. “Just because I’ve written a 
play about sex that people quite like, doesn’t make me Doctor Ruth.” On Friday, 
Closer, this play about sex that doesn’t make him Doctor Ruth, was named best 
comedy of the year at the Evening Standard Drama awards. It is a strange 
category for the striking, vicious play to be even considered for. “I know,” 
giggles Liza Walker, one of its two female stars. “Yep, seems really funny 
now,” she deadpans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423665659683%2F3d4fe0e9-6b93-4301-8a42-c30aac4b4e2e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20written%20a%20play%20about%20sex%20%E2%80%93%20that%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20make%20me%20Dr%20Ruth'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20written%20a%20play%20about%20sex%20%E2%80%93%20that%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20make%20me%20Dr%20Ruth%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423665659683%2F3d4fe0e9-6b93-4301-8a42-c30aac4b4e2e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ciaran Hinds and Liza Walker in Closer at the National. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton 
Walker plays Alice Ayres, a waifish stripper who has been plucked from a road 
accident by obituarist Dan (Mark Strong) and tended by Doctor Larry (Neil 
Dudgeon). The fourth corner is Sally Dexter’s Anna, a photographer who begins 
an affair with Dan when she takes the jacket photo for his debut novel. He is 
already living with Alice and Anna is married to Larry. It sounds like the 
basis for French farce, but the approach is very chilly, very English. Titled 
with the utmost irony, Closer should really be called Further Away. The play 
opened in May to ecstatic reviews anointing Marber the new Pinter, Stoppard and 
Tennessee Williams. Like Williams, he has written uncommonly perceptive and 
sympathetic roles for women, especially young women.

Before Closer, Walker, who gives arguably the most moving performance, had 
never even been on stage and was languishing in cheesy TV roles. “You know,” 
she says cheerfully, “drug addicts, teen prostitutes. The usual rubbish. And 
Patrick gave me this part on the first reading, and has continued to give me 
total support.” She has nothing but praise for him. “There’s a lot of stuff in 
that head and if you can get any of it out you’re laughing.” David Quantick 
hasn’t seen either Dealer’s Choice or Closer, yet he still thinks Marber is a 
genius. “Not many people who worked on Saturday Zoo ended up at the National. I 
suppose he’s a poshed up Ben Elton.” That may sound like a backhanded 
compliment but Quantick is a fan. There are, however, Marber detractors. Some 
say that, stylistically, Closer is no more than a cross between Men Behaving 
Badly and Last Tango in Paris. One old acquaintance feels that Dealer’s Choice 
“wasn’t even that funny. Even when it got dramatic, it was no different from a 
Mamet play.” So? “So Mamet’s done it already. I really am surprised at how well 
regarded that play is.’ He concludes his critique by chanting ‘Stitch him up! 
Stitch him up!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423665761763%2F036ecc13-fea4-493c-be47-6d556e0863a2-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patrick%20Marber%3A%20'I%E2%80%99ve%20written%20a%20play%20about%20sex%20%E2%80%93%20that%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20make%20me%20Dr%20Ruth'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patrick%20Marber%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99ve%20written%20a%20play%20about%20sex%20%E2%80%93%20that%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20make%20me%20Dr%20Ruth%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F12%2Fpatrick-marber-standup-closer-donmar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F11%2F1423665761763%2F036ecc13-fea4-493c-be47-6d556e0863a2-680x1020.jpeg>
 Liza Walker with Neil Pearson in the West End transfer of Closer at the Lyric 
theatre in 1998. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Is Marber aware that a lot of people don’t like him now that he’s the New 
Pinter? He audibly catches his breath: “Don’t they? Well, I don’t try to be 
likeable. The worst thing people do is present versions of themselves to the 
world that aren’t real. Enough people like me. Enough to let me sleep at 
night.” There’s a line towards the end when Larry yells at Dan “You writer!” 
and it’s an insult. Is it an insult? “I think writing is a glorious and noble 
thing. Anyway, it’s a direct nick from Beckett: ‘You critic!’” Do you think 
comedy writing is glorious and noble? “I suppose I must have done.” Sniff. “At 
the time.” Now, don’t you think that Coogan and Iannucci and everyone else on 
On the Hour and The Day Today might find that response a little insulting? 
Pause. “I found it very difficult doing collaborative writing. I’m not really a 
good team player.” But you were supposed to be involved in the current series 
of Alan Partridge? “I was around for early meetings. I helped evolve what it 
was going to be. I’m very keen that Alan should become darker. I argued very 
strongly that he shouldn’t have a chat show, that it should be set in the 
hotel. If I had had time, I would have been involved.” Do you miss it? “Not 
greatly.” Do you think this series merits its rapturous reviews? Pause. “I 
suppose it makes me laugh.” Again, Marber’s curious manner does little to 
dispel rumours that there has been something of a falling out. Beth Porter 
disagrees. “That’s just Patrick’s brand of understatement. He’s not given to 
great effusion. If he said ‘I suppose it makes me laugh’ it probably means that 
he loved it.”

I know I can come across as rude. I’m just very shy. I’m especially bad at 
meeting people. It’s my curse.

He sounds suddenly nervous. “There hasn’t been a falling out. Not that I’m 
aware of. I know I can come across as rude. I’m just very shy. I’m especially 
bad at meeting people. It’s my curse. I don’t like the Groucho Club or Soho 
House, places where there are mad people who have done a lot of coke and are 
going to talk in my face. I exist in splendid isolation.” In fact he lives with 
his girlfriend and his beloved dog, Mrs Riley, although it is true, he only 
ventures out to go to the cinema or the casino. And in fairness, the 
understatement with which he appraises other people’s work is always applied to 
his own. “I’ve written two plays and been in a comedy show. I hope one day to 
be big deal. Write something that might survive.” He has already done that. 
Closer, comedy or not, articulates the politics of emotion with the same 
pitiless observation Marber had as a television writer. He conveys how love, in 
the final humiliation, destroys your sense of style. It makes you say and do 
things that you always had contempt and pity for when you witnessed them in 
other people. Closer, more than anything, is about neurotic connections and how 
people in search of peace never enjoy any kind of serenity as long as they are 
searching.

Marber’s reputation as patronising and alienating is unfair if explicable: 
people who are creative and know what they want to do get misinterpreted. 
Because most people aren’t creative and don’t know what they want, opting 
instead to spread themselves as thin as Marmite in the drinking clubs he so 
dislikes. It is the ones who aren’t good at small talk, the ones who sound like 
they hate their friends and their careers and their lives, who come out with 
such definitive works as Closer at such a young age.

 * David Leveaux’s revival of Closer is at the Donmar Warehouse in London 
until 4 April 2015 
<http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/whats-on/donmar-warehouse/coming-up/2015/closer>
 