
A man walks into a bar and, two years later, the bartender has a publishing 
deal. That’s how it went forPatrick deWitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/patrick-dewitt> and, three books later, this 
stroke of good fortune still unnerves him. “If I hadn’t gone into work that day 
or if that man had decided to drink somewhere else … There’s so much luck 
involved in anyone’s success. I’m sure I would have seen it through in some 
other way but you have to take a moment.”

That was in the middle of the last decade, since when DeWitt has become a 
successful full-time writer based in Portland, Oregon. His second novel, a 
first-person cowboy and gold rush story with a very clever title –The Sisters 
Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/15/sisters-brothers-patrick-dewitt-review>
 – was a huge hit. It was shortlisted for the2011 Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/sep/06/man-booker-prize-2011-shortlist-in-pictures>
, and next year will be made into a film directed by Palme d’Or winner Jacques 
Audiard. I meet DeWitt a few weeks before publication of the keenly anticipated 
follow-up to his bestseller, the less catchy soundingUndermajordomo Minor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/05/undermajordomo-minor-patrick-dewitt-review>
, which DeWitt says could be thought of as the second part in a loose trilogy 
of adventures.

The book tells the story of Lucien Minor, known as “Lucy”, who leaves home at 
17 and travels with a first-class train ticket to a job at the Castle Von Aux 
at the foot of a snow-covered mountain. There, as undermajordomo, he must wait 
on and assist the majordomo Mr Olderglough, do the shopping, avoid the demented 
Baron who prowls the castle at night, and start to realise his own thwarted 
personality and ambitions.

In the village he meets and falls in love with Klara, who unfortunately is 
already romantically entangled with a soldier. Between making cosy visits 
to her small family, fretting about his alarming rival, uncovering the 
mysterious fate of his predecessor, witnessing an aristocratic orgy and going 
about his daily business, Lucy becomes the hero of a grownup gothic fairytale 
that is recounted in a distinctive, mannered diction that will be familiar to 
readers of DeWitt’s previous novel – so the Baron waits for a train “on the 
appointed day and at the appointed hour”; thieves in the night are “an untoward 
happening”; Lucy’s feelings are a “cleaved combination of adoration and 
acrimony”.

If this sounds unnatural, it is. But that is the point of DeWitt’s prose, 
and particularly his dialogue, which is highly stylised for comic effect: he 
thinks the fact thatThe Sisters Brothers made readers laugh was the secret of 
its success.

He also talks in this way, using words like “avail”, “malady” and “departed” 
where others might say “help”, “illness” and “left”. While he cuts a thoroughly 
modern figure with his smart glasses, shirt, jeans and tattoos, his vocabulary 
is quaint, and this old-fashioned side of him also comes out in the way he 
writes about, or rather avoids, the subject of sex: “I am a bit prudish, I 
think. It’s hard for me to write about sex, and I don’t really care to read 
about it either. Maybe sex is more sacred to me than violence, which being 
raised in a society where violence is so prevalent I can approach in a very 
casual way.”

DeWitt, who turned 40 this year, is Canadian, born on Vancouver Island. The 
second of three brothers, he spent his childhood bouncing up and down the west 
coast of North America. He describes his father as “one of those people who 
never really recovered from having readJack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac>’s On the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/02/100-best-novels-no-76-on-the-road-jack-kerouac>
”, and the family would move down to southern California only to realise they 
missed Canada and up sticks again.
 The beat writer and poet Jack Kerouac in the 1950s. Photograph: 
Mondadori/Getty Images 
His mother didn’t go to college and his father, who did, worked as a 
carpenter. DeWitt credits his father with having instilled in him a “lifelong 
interest in literature”, which was learned by example: after long days building 
houses, his father would come home and read on the couch. Both parents loved 
and encouraged music (country <https://www.theguardian.com/music/country> for 
her,jazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> for him) and were eclectic 
readers, but their son never got on at school. His teachers, he says, were 
“embittered and disenchanted individuals who weren’t interested in the fact 
that I was reading books none of the other students were reading”. He reacted 
against the system, dropped out before graduating, and began drinking and 
taking drugs.

The Sisters Brothers by Patrick DeWitt – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/15/sisters-brothers-patrick-dewitt-review>
The faded tattoo on his forearm is a lighthouse, a relic of a time when 
a lighthouse keeper was the only job he could think of that he might like to 
do: “Looking around I saw so many unhappy adults, people who loathed their 
jobs, and I didn’t want to be one of them.” His parents gave parties, mainly 
stayed out of politics, and focused on having a good time.

But amid what DeWitt looks back on as a typical phase of adolescent 
self-destructiveness and nihilism, a plan began to take shape, and in between 
working in kitchens and on building sites, he began to read more, studying the 
novels he liked to figure out how they worked, realising he needed to keep 
regular hours if he was going to get anything done, and starting to 
take himself seriously. Working in a bar three nights a week in his 20s, and 
after abandoning at least four previous attempts, he spent around a year 
writing a first novel pieced together from character impressions recorded on 
Post-it notes he stuffed in his pockets behind the bar and studied at home 
the morning after.

One night DeWitt asked a customer he knew slightly to look at the finished 
manuscript. This man, who was a screenwriter, liked it and passed it to another 
acquaintance, a musician, who had once been in a band with another man who was 
now a literary agent. DeWitt had married his girlfriend, had a baby son, and 
moved to Bainbridge Island, Washington state, by the time the agent called him.

I am a bit prudish, I think. It’s hard for me to write about sex, and I don’t 
really care to read about it either

That was how his career as a novelist started, and “the degree of luck 
involved in that story of those three people – the screenwriter, the musician 
and the agent – lining up like that makes me uncomfortable to this day because 
it seems so tenuous,” he says.

But discovered as he was against the odds, without a formal education and 
while selling drinks part-time, DeWitt’s first run of luck ran out pretty 
quickly. Almost no one bought the novel,Ablutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/08/ablutions-patrick-dewitt-review>
, despite enthusiastic reviews, and after a week his excitement evaporated.

Given an advance for a second attempt, he decided to try something different. 
That something, in a word, was plot: “Certain writers look down their noses at 
plot and I think I might have been one of them until I tried it,” he says, “but
The Sisters Brothers changed me as a writer. I’m now operating with two goals 
in mind. One is to make a document that is beautifully constructed on a sense 
and word level, but I’m also interested in the compulsion to turn a page, to 
see what happens next. If these two things come together, that’s the ideal for 
me as a reader, so that’s what I’m shooting for.”

The English novelist Ivy Compton-Burnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/feb/20/ivycomptonburnett> is, 
unexpectedly, the first name DeWitt comes up with when asked about his literary 
influences, but his new novel’s biggest debts are to two European works of the 
1970s: German directorWerner Herzog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wernerherzog>’s film The Enigma of Kaspar 
Hauser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/05/enigma-of-kaspar-hauser-review> 
and Czech writerBohumil Hrabal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/feb/23/classics.culture>’s novel I Serve 
the King of England. DeWitt reread this strange story, about a waiter buffeted 
by the terrible events of 20th-century history and thrust up against “the 
piggish impulses of the wealthy”, just before starting his third novel: “I have 
certain totem books that I think of as an ideal – they fill you with an energy 
and propel you to sit down and begin writing.”

While many authors seek inspiration from unusual sources, and have their own 
rituals surrounding the processes of reading and writing, DeWitt’s 
autodidacticism makes him highly unusual – particularly today, when so many 
American authors have studied creative writing (an academic discipline DeWitt 
didn’t know existed before being published). “I had a bit of a belligerent 
attitude towards the establishment,” he says, and while he can now see how a 
teacher or mentor could have been useful, he is proud to have managed without. 
The carpenter’s son regarded fiction as a craft he needed to study; his 
self-employed father was a role model who showed him how to work on his own.

Undermajordomo Minor by Patrick deWitt review – a comic tale with a touching 
protagonist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/05/undermajordomo-minor-patrick-dewitt-review>
DeWitt kept his writing secret, partly because he thought people discussing 
their dreams in Los Angeles bars were a sad cliche, and only after he was 
published did he begin to meet people who shared his interest in books. Most of 
his old friends are in either Alcoholics or Narcotics Anonymous. Knowing he did 
not want to give up drinking altogether, DeWitt found another route out of 
addiction and now drinks moderately: Portland, he says, has “excellent 
cocktails”. He is separated from his wife, but they remain on good terms and 
share the care of their 10-year-old son.

As well as his commitment to plot and idiosyncratic language, DeWitt has 
developed a particular interest in how character is expressed through dialogue: 
“You can show so much about a person from what he shares and obscures,” he 
says. “I come back more and more to the rhythm of conversation, when two people 
are engaged and feeding off one other, that is relentlessly interesting to me. 
I come by writing dialogue fairly naturally, I’ve got a chatty family, I’m 
a bit of a voyeur, and if I’m ever in a public place I automatically find 
myself listening.”

Having received mixed reviews, Undermajordomo Minor looks unlikely to repeat 
the extraordinary success of its predecessor, but DeWitt is enjoying himself 
and making plans.John C Reilly <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-c-reilly>
, who acted in the 2011 independent filmTerri, based on a screenplay by DeWitt, 
bought the film rights toThe Sisters Brothers and will star in the role of Eli, 
the more charismatic brother and the novel’s narrator. Meanwhile, DeWitt is 
keen to write more scripts and his next novel is already under way.

“If I think of myself as writing in any tradition, particularly with the last 
two books, it’s maybe a tradition of people who are interested in upsetting 
tradition, usurping a genre or even kicking it in the teeth,” he says. “I’m 
making it sound meaner than I feel in my heart – it’s a very youthful, gleeful 
feeling. Like drawing a moustache on a beautiful painting, there’s a touch 
of the vandal to it.”

• Undermajordomo Minor by Patrick deWitt is published by Granta. To order a 
copy for £10.39 (RRP £12.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323668/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 