
The journalist and broadcaster Patrick Hannan, who has died aged 68 after a 
short illness, kept his finger on the pulse of public life inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> for more than 40 years. As industrial 
editor of the Western Mail and BBC Wales's political correspondent, and later 
as host of various radio programmes, he won a reputation as an incisive 
interviewer and witty commentator on Welsh affairs during a period of rapid 
economic and social change.

He also broadcast on BBC Radio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4>, 
presenting the popular discussion programmes Out of Order and Tea Junction. He 
had a well-furnished mind that was both disciplined and wide-ranging in its 
grasp of what makes contemporary culture. Last week he and fellow contestant 
Peter Stead won Round Britain Quiz, their fifth triumph in 10 years.

Pat was a journalist to his fingertips and cared passionately for the 
independence of what he called his "trade". He saw Wales not through 
rose-tinted spectacles but through the prism of his own experience, bringing 
erudition and personal commitment to the task of tracking the country's 
industrial and political transformation during a turbulent period of its 
history.

Not once did he take sides in any dispute, and if his sardonic manner 
sometimes had a touch of the sarcastic, there was never any doubt that he was 
speaking the truth as he saw it. Provocative, yes, and often striking sparks 
off those he interviewed, he nevertheless earned the respect of captains of 
industry, politicians and mandarins of public bodies. Among many tributes, 
first minister Rhodri Morgan described him as "an extraordinarily talented and 
witty journalist and broadcaster".

Despite having been born in "the posh part" of Aberaman, a mining village in 
the Cynon Valley, where he was the doctor's son, he saw at first hand how a 
working-class community holds itself together in bad times and good, even if he 
was not quite of it, especially after receiving his secondary education at 
Cowbridge grammar school, a fee-paying establishment in the Vale of Glamorgan.

From there, in 1959, he went up to the University College of Wales, 
Aberystwyth, where he read history and first tasted newsprint as a contributor 
to the Courier, the college newspaper. As a contemporary, I remember him in 
debates and in the students' union, where undergraduates intent on joining the 
fourth estate in the real world often gathered over their coffee cups and the 
morning's papers. His was the most laidback manner of them all.

Pat's first job was as a reporter with the Western Mail in Cardiff, where he 
quickly learned the rudiments of journalism and made contact with the political 
life of Wales at every level. He was particularly good at unravelling the 
tribalistLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> politics of the 
south Wales valleys, and this became one of the themes of his first book, The 
Welsh Illusion (1999), which explored the persistence of myth in the face of 
incontrovertible evidence that, with the demise of heavy industry, the social 
fabric of Wales had changed utterly.

After his move to BBC Wales in 1970 Pat fronted the daily radio news programme 
Good Evening, Wales and, more recently, the Sunday talkshow Something Else and 
the weekly political programme Called to Order. His last documentary, in 
December 2008, was about the reformist backbencher Leo Abse, who had died 
earlier that year. The same urge to examine what politicians get up to informed 
all the programmes he made, to which he brought a rigorous manner and a verbal 
dexterity that were second to none. His television work included documentaries 
produced for BBC Wales,BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Two and HTV 
Wales.

He published three more books. Wales Off Message (2000) traces the difficult 
birth of the National Assembly for Wales, in which he managed to bring out the 
comic side of things. His book 2001: A Year in Wales (2002) is a diary 
reflecting on the obsessions, feuds and ambitions of those who try to climb the 
greasy pole of politics: "In Wales we particularly resent strangers telling us 
what we already know and we are often willing to go to some lengths to prove 
them wrong, even if they're right."

When Arthur Met Maggie (2006), is about the miners' strike of 1984-85 and the 
clash of rival ideologies that have shaped our domestic world ever since. His 
last book, A Useful Fiction: Adventures in British Democracy, published this 
year, takes a wider view of the post-Thatcher years and the problems besetting 
the governments of Blair and Brown.

He leaves his wife, Menna Richards, director of BBC Cymru/Wales, and two sons 
and a daughter by his first marriage.

â€¢ Patrick Hannan, journalist, born 26 September 1941; died 10 October 2009
 