
It’s been a whirlwind year for Patsy Ferran. Her West End debut, before 
graduating from Rada in the summer, was as the hilarious, scatty maid inBlithe 
Spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/23/blithe-spirit-review-angela-lansbury-happy-medium>
: a performance many described as “scene-stealing” (no mean feat, considering 
she was acting alongside Angela Lansbury). Since then, she’s starred in James 
Graham’sThe Angry Brigade and had a bit part in a big film (a Tom Stoppard 
adaptation of Deborah Moggach’sTulip Fever 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tulip-fever.html>) due out next year. “All I 
had to do [inTulip Fever] was stare out of a window holding a dandelion,” she 
tells me, re-enacting the pose. She says her performance was “shocking”, and 
half-hopes it doesn’t make the cut.

With enormous eyes that accentuate frequent facial contortions, and her quick, 
precise hand gestures, Ferran, 25, is an effortlessly entertaining storyteller. 
She’s currently leading the cast ofTreasure Island  
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/treasure-island?cast>at the National 
Theatre as a female Jim, and has received excellent reviews – theObserver’s 
Susannah Clapp wrote last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/14/treasure-island-national-theatre-observer-review>
: “Wit comes not only out of [Ferran’s] mouth but of her elbow. She is one of 
the best young actors I have seen in the past decade.”

Ferran grew up in England, but her parents are Spanish. Acting funny, she 
explains, was a great way to communicate with her extended family. “Whenever we 
went to Spain, I found it really hard to be myself with the language, so I’d 
communicate with funny facial expressions and weird sound effects to show how 
awkward things were, or make fun of someone,” she laughs. “I could be more 
myself like that.”

When she was a teenager, drama teachers at her convent school in Weybridge, 
Surrey recognised this spark and handed Ferran some leading roles: Shylock in
The Merchant of Venice, Fagin in Oliver!, “and I noticed: both Jewish. Old. 
Men… Then they were toying with the idea of doingFiddler on the Roof and I was 
just like: ‘No, no, no; stop right there.’”

Ferran is clearly enjoying playing an androgynous Jim, though. Her favourite 
moment inTreasure Island is when a ship “grows” out of the stage. “Oh my gosh,” 
she whispers. “It’s incredible.” She confesses that less than a year ago, 
weighing up her options, she thought she probably wouldn’t get an agent.

If that’s the case, it must have been a surprise to find herself cast alongside
Angela Lansbury <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/angela-lansbury>
earlier this year? “She’s the best human being on the planet,” Ferran says, 
slamming down her mug of tea to list Lansbury’s qualities: supportive, 
positive, fun. “Believe it or not, every now and then she would break into 
song,” including a tune fromBedknobs and Broomsticks “during a tea break in 
rehearsals”.

“I just don’t recognise my life at the moment,” Ferran says, with wide-eyed 
earnestness. “I’m in constant awe, but trying to keep my cool.”

Treasure Island is at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> until 8 April. NT Live will be 
broadcasting the play to cinemas on 22 January
 