
Congress votes to cut Amtrak's funding hours after fatal train crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/13/amtrak-funding-cuts-congress-train-crash>
As the FBI continued to investigate whether a projectile hit the Amtrak 
regional train that derailed outsidePhiladelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia> on Tuesday, killing eight 
people and injuring more than 200, Congressman Paul Ryan once again rejected 
criticism of reductions in spending on the rail network which has mushroomed 
since the fatal accident.


Ryan, who chairs the House of Representatives ways and means committee and had 
alreadyfaced questions about Amtrak budget cuts 
<http://thinkprogress.org/economy/2015/05/14/3658757/paul-ryan-not-telling-truth-train-safety-funding/>
 this week, said on Sunday: “To suggest and insinuate that this tragedy could 
have been avoided or would have been avoided had Congress had some more 
spending, had Congress had a different budget, I think it’s the wrong 
suggestion and I think it should not be in this conversation.”

On Wednesday evening, barely 24 hours after the crash, the House 
appropriations committeevoted on party lines to cut $250m from Amtrak funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/13/amtrak-funding-cuts-congress-train-crash>
. Democrats had attempted to boost such funding by $1bn, including $556m for 
the Northeast Corridor, the busy artery on which the Philadelphia crash 
occurred.

The stretch of track on which the crash occurred was not fitted with with the 
Advanced Civil Speed Enforcement System (ACSES), part of the Positive Train 
Control (PTC) system, which automatically enforces speed limits by slowing down 
or stopping trains that are going too fast or heading into danger zones.

On Saturday, the Federal Railroad Administration ordered Amtrak to improve 
safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/16/amtrak-crash-improve-safety-increase-speed-limit-signage>
 by installing the system and improving warning signage for northbound trains 
on the Northeastern Corridor, which stretches from Washington DC to Boston.

On Wednesday, at a press conference at the scene of the trial, Robert Sumwalt 
of the National Transportation Safety Board said PTC would have prevented the 
accident.

“Based on what we know right now,” he said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/14/us/amtrak-train-derails-crash-philadelphia.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share&_r=0>
, “we feel that had such a system been installed on this section of track, this 
accident would not have occurred.”

Sumwalt was scheduled to appear on all five major political talkshows on 
Sunday. On ABC he repeated his point, saying: “We have seen countless accidents 
over the years that could have been prevented had Positive Train Control been 
installed.”

Sumwalt also called for inward-facing video cameras, which he said the NTSB 
had “called for for a long time”. He said such cameras on the train could have 
helped established what happened onAmtrak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/amtrak> Regional Train 188.

Amtrak train may have been struck by object before derailment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/amtrak-train-may-have-been-struck-by-object-before-derailment>
That mystery continued to fascinate the media. On CNN on Sunday, asked about 
the possibility that the Amtrak train washit by a projectile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/15/amtrak-train-may-have-been-struck-by-object-before-derailment>
 before it crashed, Sumwalt said FBI investigators would be at the site of the 
crash on Monday to continue “chasing this lead down”.

“We heard from the assistant conductor [of Amtrak Regional Train 188] and 
that’s what she believes she heard, was a conversation about that,” he said. 
“And we now see a mark on the windshield we want to look at. We’re going to 
look at everything.”

Sumwalt confirmed that an engineer on another train in the area had reported 
that his train had been “struck by something” on Tuesday, but he said there was 
“nothing at all from the Amtrak engineer to dispatch to say that his train had 
been struck”, despite what the assistant conductor said she heard.

The Amtrak train was travelling at more than 100mph in a 50mph zone when it 
left the tracks. On Sunday, Sumwalt said: “The only way that an operable train 
could accelerate would be if an engineer pushed the throttle forward and the 
event recorder does record throttle movement.”

He added that the Amtrak train’s engineer, Brandon Bostian, had been “fully 
co-operative” with the investigation. Bostian has said he remembers nothing of 
the crash.

The Associated Press, meanwhile, reported 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/cd9cf7e80814488e9170c4ddb9b0a036/amtrak-could-pay-no-more-200-million-crash-victims>
 that Amtrak could pay out no more than $200m to victims and the families of 
victims of the crash, thanks to a law passed by Congress in 1997. Amtrak has 
never been liable for that maximum amount, the AP reported, though claims 
arising from the Philadelphia crash could be much higher.


Amtrak said later on Sunday that full Northeast Corridor operations would 
resume from 5.53am on Monday.

In a statement, Amtrak president and chief executive Joe Boardman said: “The 
safety of our passengers and crew remains our No1 priority. Our infrastructure 
repairs have been made with the utmost care and emphasis on infrastructure 
integrity including complete compliance with Federal Railroad Administration 
directives.”
 