
Deep in the filth, squashed under the weight of the American dream, three men 
with crazy names (Troy, Mad Dog and Diesel) scrabble for space. Try as they 
might, the gangsters at the heart of Paul Schrader’s latest are damned. Down 
they go, still clinging to the hope of one last, redemptive job, digging on 
deep to the gates of hell.

Dog Eat Dog, which was let off the leash at last week’s Cannes film festival, 
is a hard-scrap story. Based on the book by former criminal, writer and actor 
Eddie Bunker (who playedReservoir Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/reservoir-dogs>’s Mr Blue), it’s set and shot 
among the strip malls and dive bars of post-crash Cleveland. Nicolas Cage stars 
as Troy, a once-wealthy heir whose fortunes have crumbled. Eager to rejoin the 
straight world, Troy enlists the help of two jail buddies, a soulful lunk 
called Diesel (Christopher Matthew Cook) and a garrulous psychotic known as Mad 
Dog (Willem Dafoe). The trio are going to kidnap the baby of a wealthy family 
and hold the kid to ransom.

Shot as if scenes from Godard, Cassavetes, Tarantino and Aardman had been spun 
in a tombola, Dog Eat Dog operates on a creative plain that’s as strange and 
corrupted as Mad Dog’s morality. Schrader opens with a pink-hued drug sequence 
in which Dafoe’s character, hopped up on cocaine and hearing voices, murders 
his girlfriend and her young daughter over an argument about a borrowed car.
Raising Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76365/raising.arizona> 
this is not.

“I thought it would be interesting to just really do the nasty,” says 
Schrader. He says Dog Eat Dog was inspired by “the post-rules generation”.

“You can do most anything now,” he says. “You can shoot a scene in black and 
white, one in colour, one tinted and the audience will say, ‘Hey, cool.’ 
Animation. Stop–motion. We have a generation of viewers that have been rewired 
and re-educated on multimedia technology. Their brains fire at a different 
rate. When they see those movies from the 70s they think, ‘Oh my God, that’s a 
slow movie.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fpaul-schrader-willem-dafoe-dog-eat-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa73995ef9cc8f829f7e873175d0c57a46487fe86%2F640_0_1640_984%2F1640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Schrader%20and%20Willem%20Dafoe%3A%20'We%20thought%20we%20should%20really%20do%20the%20nasty'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fpaul-schrader-willem-dafoe-dog-eat-dog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Schrader%20and%20Willem%20Dafoe%3A%20%27We%20thought%20we%20should%20really%20do%20the%20nasty%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fpaul-schrader-willem-dafoe-dog-eat-dog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa73995ef9cc8f829f7e873175d0c57a46487fe86%2F640_0_1640_984%2F1640.jpg>
 ‘We have a generation of viewers that has been re-wired and re-educated on 
multimedia technology’ … Paul Schrader. Photograph: Markus Schreiber/AP 
Among the “slow”: Taxi Driver <https://www.theguardian.com/film/taxi-driver>, 
Raging Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/film/raging-bull> and The Last 
Temptation of Christ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/mar/23/news.melgibson>, all of which 
Schrader wrote. But while vaunted as a screenwriter, the 69-year-old has had 
legendary trouble getting his directorial projects made. In 2003 he wasfired 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/director-paul-schrader-fired-from-work-on-exorcist-iv.aspx?pageID=438&n=director-paul-schrader-fired-from-work-on-exorcist-iv-2003-08-30>
 after a completing an Exorcist prequel. The studio hated it, demonised him and 
hired a new writer and director to bring about a resurrection. In 2013, a
revelatory New York Times article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/13/magazine/here-is-what-happens-when-you-cast-lindsay-lohan-in-your-movie.html?_r=0>
 from the set of the Kickstarter-funded The Canyons described Schrader’s 
exhausting efforts to coax a cohesive performance out of porn actor James Deen 
and a fresh-from-rehab Lindsay Lohan. Then, in 2014, Schrader’s thrillerDying 
of the Light, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/01/dying-of-the-light-review-paul-schrader>
 which starred Cage and Anton Yelchin, was – according toa Facebook campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/05/paul-schrader-mystery-control-dying-of-the-light-nicolas-cage>
 rallying support – “taken away” from Schrader by its producers. It was, the 
director says, “a particularly ugly experience”.

The failures and frustrations took their toll. “Some fear Lohan will end him,” 
wrote the Times in their Canyons expose. She didn’t, but someone or something 
has had a decent go. Schrader, breathless and tired, enters the room searching 
for coffee that will never show. He speaks in a croaky growl that shakes the 
tabletop. Gradually, carefully, he loosens up, peppering the conversation with 
jive talk (“cats”, “mojo”). He sheds the gruffness, revealing a well-polished 
cynic underneath. He’s down on the crime genre (“There’s a lot of tired films 
out there”), our PC culture (“If art is not allowed to be distasteful and 
vulgar, we’re in trouble”) and America (“A false promise to begin with”). But 
he cares about his films and will fight for them.

The director’s at his best in a tight spot, says Dafoe, who has appeared in 
seven of Schrader’s films. He remembers a poster that hung in the director’s 
office during the Dog Eat Dog shoot: “The price of freedom is not having enough 
stuff.”

“It’s the low-budget cheapness of the production that expresses the cheapness 
of the life,” says Dafoe. “That’s not calculated, that just happened. For 
example, Cleveland was once a very powerful, wealthy place. It’s where John 
Rockefeller came from. It fell on hard times like a lot of cities in the 
industrial midwest. It’s got such a fighter spirit to it, but it’s funky. 
There’s a texture to that world that we took advantage of.”

Nearly all of Schrader’s stories show a country that has pushed the little guy 
to breaking point. His heroes – a burned out paramedic (Bringing Out the Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bringing-out-the-dead>), a washed-up fighter (
Raging Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/film/raging-bull>), a desperate war 
vet (Taxi Driver’s Travis Bickle) – are poor and defeated. Real-life delivers 
these characters to him, he says. They are the people America has made. You 
can’t help but be inspired.

“The political environment can’t not affect how you make a film,” he says. 
“The fact that we now have a caricature running for the US presidency has to 
affect it, because it affects how people see things. The fact that a clown can 
run legitimately for the highest office in our country affects how you view 
clown-like characters in movies too.”
 A strange and corrupted film … Cage in Dog Eat Dog 
He gives a big sigh. “He’s got enough people to feed that ego,” he says. “He 
doesn’t need me.”

Trump’s on the loose. America is in freefall. Troy, Mad Dog and Diesel are 
doomed. Is there nothing that inspires even a bit hope?

“I don’t think you can be hopeful about human endeavour,” he says, allowing a 
grin. “You can only be hopeful about post-human life. Once you get into 
shedding off this carbon-based skin … maybe things will get better.”
 