
Paul Greengrass <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paulgreengrass> is to 
potentially direct a film adaptation of the memoir of Morten Storm, the Dane 
who became radicalised and joined al-Qaida, before renouncing the organisation 
and becoming an MI5 and CIA informant.

Storm's extraordinary life story is recounted in Agent Storm: My Life Inside 
al-Qaeda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/02/agent-storm-al-qaeda-morten-storm-review>
, written with CNN journalists Tim Lister and Paul Cruickshank, and published 
this month. After a childhood in Denmark characterised by petty crime, a 
violent stepfather and running with a biker gang, Storm discovered Islam, and 
moved to the Middle East where he was radicalised. But the escalating violence 
of al-Qaida triggered a loss of faith in Islam, and drove him to defect to 
intelligence agencies in the UK, Denmark and the US â€“ and eventually, he 
claims, lead them to one of their primary targets, Anwar al-Awlaki. The CIA 
disputed his claims that his involvement directly led to al-Awlaki's death, and 
denied him a $5m reward.

The film rights have been bought by Sony, with Scott Rudin, who worked with 
Greengrass on the director's previous film Captain Phillips, producing it.The 
Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/paul-greengrass-circling-islamic-radical-721111>
 andDeadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2014/07/paul-greengrass-scott-rudin-re-team-for-al-qaeda-thriller-agent-storm/>
 both cite Greengrass as being lined up to direct.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida>, and the 'war on 
terror', is familiar ground for Greengrass, who originally became known for his 
entries in the Jason Bourne saga. His film United 93 portrayed the events on 
board the hijacked plane that was downed in Pennsylvania on 9/11, while Green 
Zone was set in Baghdad during the Iraq war.

Like Green Zone, Captain Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/captain-phillips> was also based on a memoir, 
that of a container ship's captain who was taken hostage by Somali pirates. 
Starring Tom Hanks and a Bafta-winning Barkhad Abdi, it was a critical and 
commercial success, making $218m worldwide.
 