
Just in time for Christmas, another wallet-shaking mega-box set goes on sale. 
Bob Dylan 1965-1966: The Cutting Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/bob-dylans-latest-bootleg-series-release-to-cover-his-classic-196566-recordings>
 is the latest instalment in his Bootleg Series, which started in 1991 and 
proved to the catalogue divisions of record labels that there was a substantial 
appetite for what had previously been deemed by the artist or the label to be 
music unworthy of release. Arguably, the Bootleg Series has been leading up to 
this Cutting Edge release, focusing as it does on Dylan’s most mythologised 
period, the sulphuric triptych of Bringing It All Back Home, Highway 61 
Revisited and Blonde on Blonde. This was a period so creatively intense that 
Dylan had to disappear to Woodstock until the aftershock faded.

Fragments from this time have been released before, but Sony Legacy and Dylan 
have pulled out all the stops here, issuing a $600 version (limited to 5,000 
copies) that scoops up every single thing he recorded in the studio during this 
period. Dylan, as he recounts himself in Chronicles, was a hit-and-run studio 
artist, trying things a few times and dropping them if they didn’t work. That 
said, he managed to record 379 tracks during those two years. enough to fill 18 
discs.


This might be Peak Box Set, but at least there’s an argument to be made for 
its merits, given it captures an artist hurtling into light speed, second by 
second. The selling point is less about sweeping up the scraps from the studio 
floor and more about letting the listener eavesdrop on history, in real time, 
as it was being made.


Bob Dylan and the Subterranean Homesick Blues revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/13/bob-dylan-subterranean-homesick-blues-50th-anniversary>
At their best, releases like this let you ride shotgun with the artist on the 
making of an album. The problem is that it has created a reissue arms race in 
which every anniversary of an album has to unearth something that was 
previously thought lost. It is, however, a game of diminishing returns and is, 
frankly, getting preposterous.


There is an argument, attributed to Brian Eno, that the Velvet Underground’s 
debut album didn’t sell much at the time, but everyone who bought a copy in 
1967 went on to form a band. It’s probably now been reissued and expanded more 
times than the number of copies it actually sold originally. The Velvet 
Underground and Nico received a 45th anniversary reissue (they couldn’t even 
wait for the 50th – it feels like the catalogue divisions are just making up 
anniversaries now before the CD market evaporates completely) in 2012 that 
stretched what was a 48-minute album to a bewildering six discs, fudging the 
numbers with a mono version and a stereo version of the original. The same 
thing happened in 2013 toWhite Light White Heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2013/dec/13/velvet-underground-white-light-white-heat-video>
. They could only wring three discs out of it, but still managed to get away 
with the sametrompe le fan trick with the mono and stereo versions. 

They managed to get back to speed, though – last year, the third Velvet 
Underground album came out over six discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/11/velvet-underground-deluxe-edition-review>
, and later this monthLoaded is getting the 45th anniversary reissue treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/25/the-velvet-underground-loaded-six-disc-reissue>
, again yawning across six discs. Fans of mono and stereo mixes can rest easy 
as both are included. At this rate, we can expect a lavish multi-disc 45th 
anniversary reissue of Squeeze to flop on to the shelves in 2018 with extensive 
sleeve notes by Doug Yule.


Straight-talking, honest music: why I'd rather listen to a warts-and-all box 
set
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/06/music-box-set-artifact-dawn-of-creation-ork-records-new-york>
There are some acts who can, just about, justify such total studio tape 
emancipation – but often they just don’t know when to stop.Neil Young’s 
Archives – Vol 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/may/29/neil-young-archives-vol-1> came 
out in 2009, covering his recordings from 1963 to 1972, and ran to 10 discs. 
Ever the audiophile contrarian, Young issued them on DVD and Blu-Ray, 
begrudgingly issuing an eight-disc version on CD.


Most of the sets, however, turn barrel scraping into something approaching a 
fine art (or perhaps an art prank). In 2013, the Moody Blues released Timeless 
Flight with all manner of rarities and live recordings across 11 discs. That 
was nothing compared to the Grateful Dead’s new $700 boxset,30 Trips Around the 
Sun 
<http://www.dead.net/store/special-edition-shops/50th-anniversary-shop/30-trips-around-sun-box>
, which comes packed with a bluntly terrifying 80 discs (with a running time of 
three days), including a distressing 30 concerts to wade through.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fpeak-box-set-how-dylan-inspired-barrel-scraping-of-the-most-cynical-kind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a566440d55defc0d5c164fc57f2183efc3d9af4%2F0_0_3354_2015%2F3354.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peak%20box%20set%3A%20how%20Dylan%20inspired%20barrel-scraping%20of%20the%20most%20cynical%20kind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fpeak-box-set-how-dylan-inspired-barrel-scraping-of-the-most-cynical-kind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peak%20box%20set%3A%20how%20Dylan%20inspired%20barrel-scraping%20of%20the%20most%20cynical%20kind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fpeak-box-set-how-dylan-inspired-barrel-scraping-of-the-most-cynical-kind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a566440d55defc0d5c164fc57f2183efc3d9af4%2F0_0_3354_2015%2F3354.jpg>
 Gratedful Dead … Six men, 80 discs. Photograph: Glenn A. Baker/REDFERNS 
It is not just acts from half a century ago wanting a slice of the action (and 
money) here. Underworld managed to push the 20th anniversary of 
Dubnobasswithmyheadman to five discs (and are about the do the same with Second 
Toughest in the Infants). Meanwhile, Suede stretched Dog Man Star across seven 
discs (including a Pure Audio Blu-Ray mix of the album and B-sides) and, as if 
that wasn’t enough of a format overload, they tossed in a cassette for the 
three people left in the UK who still have a tape deck.


Underworld's Dubnobass ... 20 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/09/karl-hyde-rick-smith-underworld-1994-album-dubnobasswithmyheadman>
While there is an argument that these are classic acts and classic albums, 
and, as such, can justify a bells-and-whistles reissue, there are many more in 
their slipstream that defy logic.Hunting High and Low by A-ha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/15/a-ha-how-we-made-take-on-me> 
is a great album, but even Morten Harket would be bolting for the window if 
made to sit through all five discs in the “super deluxe” reissue. What about a 
three-disc issue of T’Pau’s Bridge of Spies (which includes a live version of 
Monkey House recorded at the Scottish Centre in October 1987)? Thought not. Or 
maybe Wet Wet Wet’s Picture This spluttering across four discs (including a 
cover of Le Freak from Wembley Arena in 1993)? Me neither.

How could you resist a four-disc repackage of Ocean Colour Scene’s Marchin’ 
Already. Don’t remember it? It was the album that came after the album withthe 
TFI Friday song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q1jwmqpGCIE> on it. But, look, 
it’s got Song for the Front Row (acoustic) and a demo of Expensive Chair on it. 
What do you mean you’re not interested?


There are many who regard the deification of Dylan as tantamount to the 
ossification of culture – a claim that music cannot get any better than this 
and so everyone else should just stop. He can’t sing, they argue, and, anyway, 
other people do his songs far better than he does. There’s a lot in that, but 
looking at the flotsam that has followed the Bootleg Series, his biggest 
musical crime could be permitting rapacious record companies to believe that 
any old rubbish can be reissued and rebadged as a lost classic. Someone really 
needs to stage an intervention now.

 