
Gulf states are among the most water-scarce in the world. With few freshwater 
resources and low rainfall, many countries have turned to desalination (where 
salt is removed from seawater) for their clean water needs.


Water scarcity in Yemen: the country's forgotten conflict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/02/water-scarcity-yemen-conflict>
But Gulf states are heading for “peak salt”: the more they desalinate, the 
more concentrated wastewater, brine, is pumped back into the sea; and as the 
Gulf becomes saltier, desalination becomes more expensive.

“In time, it’s going to become impossible to use desalination in a way that 
makes economic sense,” says Gökçe Günel, an anthropologist at the University of 
Arizona. “The water will become so saline that it will be too expensive to 
desalinate.”

The Middle East is home to 70% of the world’s desalination plants 
<https://thewaterproject.org/water-crisis/water-in-crisis-middle-east> – mostly 
in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, and Bahrain. Tens of 
billions of dollars,$24.3bn (£18.8bn) in Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.oxfordbusinessgroup.com/analysis/world-leader-efforts-under-way-expand-desalination-capacity>
 alone, are being invested over the next few years to expand desalination 
capacity.

The process is cost and energy intensive; it pumps seawater through special 
filters or boils it to remove the salts. The resulting brine can be nearly 
twice as salty as normal Gulf waters, according to John Burt, a biologist at 
New York University Abu Dhabi.

But the 250,000 sq km Gulf is more like a salt-water lake than a sea. It’s 
shallow, just 35 metres deep on average, and is almost entirely enclosed. The 
few rivers that feed the Gulf have been dammed or diverted and the region’s hot 
and dry climate results in high rates of evaporation. Add in a daily dose of 
around 70m cubic metres of super-salty wastewater from dozens of desalination 
plants, and it’s not surprising that the water in the Gulf is 25% saltier than 
normal seawater, says Burt, or that parts are becoming too salty to use.

Polluting the world's water – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2015/nov/13/polluting-the-worlds-water-in-pictures>
Peak salt, says Günel, mirrors the concept of peak oil, a popular concept in 
the 1970s used to describe the point in time when the maximum rate of oil 
extraction had been reached. “Peak salt describes the point at which 
desalination becomes unfeasible,” she says.

And studies have shown that the Gulf will only get saltier in the future. Raed 
Bashitialshaaer, a water resources engineer at Sweden’s Lund University, says 
that the growth of desalination plants in the region is happening far faster 
than his own2011 study 
<http://portal.research.lu.se/portal/en/publications/estimated-future-salinity-in-the-arabian-gulf-the-mediterranean-sea-and-the-red-sea-consequences-of-brine-discharge-from-desalination(5d322c02-f609-4e21-8544-19914b31f792).html>
 estimated.

With groundwater sources either exhausted or non-existent and climate change 
bringing higher temperatures and less rainfall, Gulf states plan to nearly
double the amount of desalination by 2030 
<https://www.sciencetarget.com/Journal/index.php/IJES/article/viewFile/96/25> 
(doc). This is bad news for marine life and for the cost of producing drinking 
water – unless something can be done about the brine.


Farid Benyahia, a chemical engineer at Qatar University, believes he has a 
solution. He recently patented a process that could eliminate the need for 
brine disposal by nearly 100%. The process uses pure carbon dioxide (emitted 
during the desalination process by burning fossil fuels for power) and ammonia 
to turn brine into baking soda and calcium chloride. Whether the process is 
cost-effective remains to be seen but Benyahia believes it could be, especially 
if markets are found for large volumes of the end products.

Other efforts are also under way to reduce desalination’s country-sized carbon 
footprint which globally accounts for76m tonnes of carbon dioxide per year 
<http://www.masdar.ae/en/media/detail/global-h20-minus-c02-desalination-alliance-convenes-first-meeting-at-abu-dh>
 – nearly equivalent toRomania’s emissions in 2014 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_carbon_dioxide_emissions>.

The Global Clean Water Desalination Alliance 
<https://www.wam.ae/en/news/economics/1395288855730.html> was formed in 2015 to 
tackle this problem by increasing efficiencies and shifting to renewable energy 
sources, such as solar-powered desalination. Saudi Arabia expects to have a
commercial-scale plant 
<http://cleantechnica.com/2015/01/22/worlds-largest-solar-powered-desalination-plant-under-way/>
 operational by 2017 and in California, aproposed solar-powered desalination 
plant <http://landartgenerator.org/blagi/archives/5416> combines innovation, 
efficiency and design.

Desertification: an ecological reality or a dangerous myth?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/14/desertification-an-ecological-reality-or-a-dangerous-myth>
Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> pricing, says Günel, is 
also becoming critical to improving water efficiency in the Gulf.

“Climate change policymakers in the region are pushing for water pricing and 
awareness campaigns around consumption to explain to governments and citizens 
that they can’t continue to use water in the same way.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 