
Urban environments might seem like a challenge for birdspotters. People wonder 
if there’s anything worth seeing, past a few pigeons and some foxes. The urban 
birder needs to open their mind to possibility, because in reality there aren’t 
that many differences between an urban environment and the countryside. To put 
it in context, there have been sightings of around600 different species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/quiz/2015/may/24/how-much-know-britains-favourite-birds-quiz>
 of bird across Britain since the early 1900s. Of them, around 550 have been 
spotted in a city.

A big advantage to birding in the city is that you can often get a lot closer 
to certain species, because they’re used to being surrounded by people. If you 
know what to look for, you’ll spot fascinating species right on your doorstep.

Think like a bird 

When I visit a city, I don’t see a city, I see what a bird sees: scattered 
woodland and cliffs (the buildings). That bramble patch in your park is exactly 
the same as the one in the middle of the countryside. It has food, it provides 
shelter. The kind of habitats you get in a city may be smaller and more 
fragmented, but they are still habitats. The good thing about them being 
smaller is that often the wildlife is more concentrated in one area.

Expect the unexpected 

Anything can turn up anywhere, at any time. That’s one of the mottos I live 
by. If you go out birdspotting and someone tries to be helpful and tells you 
what birds you will see, say, “Thank you very much” then politely forget about 
it. People tend to look out for the things they expect to see, and that can 
limit your chances of spotting something surprising.

Re-evaluate the familiar

I was about five when I started watching birds. No one in my family was 
interested so I didn’t have anyone to teach me. I remember being captivated by 
pigeons, the way they flew. Although to some they are the embodiment of all 
that’s dirty, there is a lot to be said for them. They are wartime heroes – 
used as message carriers during the second world war. They have been found to 
recognise the human faces that feed them in a crowd. They have even allegedly 
learned to use the underground system in London by deliberately getting on 
trains and getting off at specific stops. They come in all different hues and 
provide hours of fun forpigeon fanciers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/27/pigeon-fanciers-brotherhood-breeders-bio-artists>
. They are also amazing flyers and that’s not just when they are being chased 
by peregrine falcons.

Get to know your local patch

People often want to know about rare birds but the way to see rarer species is 
to focus on the more common ones first. Look at the usual, and you’ll sometimes 
find the unusual among them. Having a local patch is a great way of getting to 
know lots of types of birds. A garden is a great place to start. I have a 
friend who lives in Holland Park in west London. We sat in the garden one day 
and saw 15 or 16 different species in an hour, including a stock dove, which is 
a country bird (they are easily confused with feral pigeons). A nearby 
cemeteryis also a good spot, as is your local park – you don’t have to stray 
that far to see something interesting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Furban-birder-birdspotting-cities-david-lindo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435749329065%2F143a2135-ea23-4e49-9b26-d555dc03e12f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pecks%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20to%20be%20an%20urban%20birdwatcher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Furban-birder-birdspotting-cities-david-lindo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pecks%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20to%20be%20an%20urban%20birdwatcher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Furban-birder-birdspotting-cities-david-lindo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435749329065%2F143a2135-ea23-4e49-9b26-d555dc03e12f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Blue Tits on a garden fat ball feeder. Photograph: David Tipling /Alamy 
Become a regular 

If you can watch your patch on a regular basis, you’ll notice how the 
population changes across the year. You might notice how blackbirds are common 
in the spring and early summer, then it all goes quiet and you wonder if 
they’ve disappeared, but in reality they’re probably hiding away because 
they’re moulting. Then in early winter, you might notice an influx of 
blackbirds from across the continent – they tend to be a sootier brown and are 
often more skittish than local blackbirds because they’ve come all the way from 
Scandinavia and are not used to seeing as many people.

When you learn little things like that for yourself, it makes you realise 
there’s a bigger, cyclical story with these birds. That robin you see in the 
summer? It might have been born here but in the winter it might fly as far as 
Spain. You look out of your window and think you see the same robin, but it 
might be a completely different bird from the continent.

What to look for right now 

July is an interesting time to start birding. There will be a lot of 
youngsters around and some species, such as wrens, will be on their second 
brood. You should be able to spot most of the common garden birds at this time 
of year, such as greenfinches and chaffinches, and if you have a larger garden 
on the outskirts of a city you might see warblers such as blackcaps and 
chiffchaffs. Most people thinkmigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/19/migration-secrets-birds-icarus-space-station>
 starts in the autumn, but wading birds that nest in the high Arctic start 
heading down in July, so if you look up you might spot a curlew.

Cuckoos aren’t usually urban but they also migrate at this time of year so you 
might spot one in your local park. I was told when I was younger that migrant 
birds would turn up in urban places by accident, but it’s not true – they 
actually seek them out.

Don’t flock to the obvious sites

Migration occurs across a broad front, so when I’m taking a look online to 
find out what’s going on nationally or I hear that there’s been a sighting in 
Norfolk, I don’t go to Norfolk, I go straight to my local patch at Wormwood 
Scrubs. A lot of birders tend to rush off to the same spots and they neglect 
their own doorstep. It may not be as magnificent as a sighting on a remote 
headland but there’s nothing in the world that beats seeing your first green 
woodpecker somewhere familiar.

Head to the airport 

Some patches might have a lake and reed beds, or they might even be a small 
area of ancient woodland. Some just look like a scrubby part of derelict land, 
but even building sites can offer shelter to passing birds. Airports are 
another very interesting place to observe wildlife. They are often situated 
just outside major conurbations, surrounded by marshland or bordered by sea.

Crucially, the areas surrounding major airports are usually out of bounds and, 
since 9/11, security is often high with trespassing being strictly forbidden. 
Unofficial nature reserves are therefore inadvertently created. Heathrow is a 
classic example as its environs include reservoirs, balancing pools, woodland 
and grassland. How many times have you stopped to observe birds at the airports 
you have travelled through?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Furban-birder-birdspotting-cities-david-lindo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435749088781%2F7d0f5ded-a80e-44a7-ae96-7b0689beb5b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pecks%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20to%20be%20an%20urban%20birdwatcher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Furban-birder-birdspotting-cities-david-lindo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pecks%20and%20the%20city%3A%20how%20to%20be%20an%20urban%20birdwatcher&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Furban-birder-birdspotting-cities-david-lindo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435749088781%2F7d0f5ded-a80e-44a7-ae96-7b0689beb5b7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A member of a birding group organised by David Lindo in the City of London. 
Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images 
A few years ago, the RSPB were called to Stansted Airport to confirm a 
sighting of a rare bird of prey that staff affectionately named Monty.

He stayed for more than a week because of the diverse habitat nearby. So if 
you haven’t tried it before, then spare a moment to look around.

Find a local group 

If you’re just getting started, it’s good to find someone local who can take 
you out, or learn with a group of like-minded people. Volunteering at a local 
nature reserve is another way in. Then you can apply what you’ve learned when 
you go out by yourself.

You don’t need to wear camouflage

It’s not essential to have lots of kit to get started. A pair of binoculars is 
a good idea, but I didn’t have them when I started out – I just used my eyes. 
It’s worth having a decent field guide so that you can start to familiarise 
yourself with what you’re seeing, but remember that it’s not about trying to 
see 50 birds at once. And you don’t have to wear green, either.Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/birds> don’t care what you are wearing 
so just make sure that you’re comfortable.

Look up 

It sounds crazy, but people don’t look up often enough. There’s a beautiful 
sky up there, even when it’s grey.

Tales from Concrete Jungles by David Lindo is out now, published by Bloomsbury 
(£14.99)
 