
Peep Show star David Mitchell and former Tory MP Ann Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-widdecombe> are to examine the “state 
of modern manners” in a week of programming on BBC Radio 4 in the new year.

Mitchell, currently appearing in the last series of Channel 4 comedy Peep Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/07/peep-show-sam-bain-jesse-armstrong>
, will look take a light-hearted look at burning questions on etiquette, such 
as how often can you look at your phone in a meeting with colleagues, and 
whether it is acceptable to wear shorts to a restaurant in the evening.

He will explore how the British developed such complicated manners, and how in 
an attempt to be free of the “shackles of Victorian etiquette, we got lost”, in 
four episodes airing in the morning from Monday 4 January.

“Britain is a baffled country that used to have rules,” says Mitchell. “We’re 
often presented with a rather gloomy picture of a civilisation falling to bits. 
I’m going to work out whether things really are that terrible, whether there’s 
some cause for hope, or whether a future of relentless rudeness might not be 
that bad at all.”

Peep Show creators on the final series: 'We wanted Mark and Jez meditating on 
a hill in California, but Mad Men did it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/07/peep-show-sam-bain-jesse-armstrong>
Widdecombe will front a five-part series, which will air daily in the early 
afternoon from Monday 4 Janaury, looking at the way manners, mores and 
etiquette have evolved over the centuries, looking at written guides to 
behaviour “from Erasmus to internet bloggers”.

“Over the centuries, the mark of a civilised country is to know what it is to 
be civil,” she said. “Each age has defined good manners, standards of behaviour 
and etiquette in its own image. It’s not just about how best to eat an 
artichoke or address an archbishop. Manners have a real bearing on how our 
private lives, our business and our society is best organised.”

The week of programming will conclude on Friday 8 January with William Hanson, 
author and etiquette coach, explaining why there is such demand for British 
politeness around the world.

“Issues such as freedom of speech, online trolling and respecting others are 
all high on our list of concerns right now,” said Mohit Bakaya, commissioning 
editor, factual, atRadio 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio4>. “So this 
is a timely exploration of the rules, written and unwritten, that influence the 
way we behave with one another, as well as the place manners have in our modern 
world.”
 