
Late summer 2008. Barcelona lose 1–0 in Soria against little Numancia on the 
opening day of the league season. A tough baptism for the debutant coach,Pep 
Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola>, made all the 
harder when the result isn’t much better in their second game against Racing 
Santander, a 1–1 draw at the Camp Nou. Two weeks into Guardiola’s career in 
charge of Barcelona’s first team and they still haven’t won.

Barcelona’s Andrés Iniesta: ‘I was a victim of something that terrified me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/06/barcelona-andres-iniesta-need-help-look-for-it>
Pressure builds, the criticism is intense. But Guardiola remains steadfast. 
Sergio Busquets and Pedro Rodríguez, then two virtually unknown players from 
Tercera División, Spain’s fourth tier, are in the team. There are doubts, of 
course. Concerns.

In the media, it seems that only one voice defends the manager, but at least 
it isthe voice: Johan Cruyff. That softens the blow, his authority alone enough 
to challenge the doomsayers, but still they prophesise doom. “ThisBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> looks very, very good,” Cruyff 
writes in his weekly column for El Periódico de Catalunya. “I don’t know what 
game the rest of you watched; the one I watched was unlike any I have seen at 
the Camp Nou in a long time.” Cruyff, the great ideologue of the Catalan club, 
its philosopher king, had seen Guardiola coach the B team and was impressed; 
now he stands against the tide, alone in defending him. “The worst start to a 
season in many years. Just one goal scored, and that was a penalty. That’s an 
inescapable truth, numerically speaking,” he admits. “But in footballing terms, 
this must be read a different way. And Guardiola is the first to read it 
differently. He’s no novice, lacking expertise, and he is not suicidal. He 
watches, he sees, he analyses and he takes decisions.”

Guardiola himself agonised over those decisions too. He was holed up in his 
Camp Nou office, down in the basement where there was no natural light, going 
over the situation again and again, rewinding and replaying the videos, 
re-reading his notes, wondering what to change but convinced of one thing: his 
idea, Cruyff’s idea, had to be maintained. He would persevere, however hard it 
became. And support was about to come from an unexpected source.

He was still going over it, endlessly, when he heard a knock at the door. 
“Come in.”

“Hello, míster.”

A small figure poked his head around the door, and spoke calmly. “Don’t worry, 
míster. We’ll win it all. We’re on the right path. Carry on like this, OK? 
We’re playing brilliantly, we’re enjoying training. Please, don’t change 
anything,” saidAndrés Iniesta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andres-iniesta>.

Guardiola couldn’t believe it.

The request was short, but heartfelt, deep. It caught Guardiola off guard, 
barely able even to respond. If it was a surprise that anyone should seek him 
out to say that, it was even more of a surprise that it was Iniesta, usually 
the silent man. It came as a shock, even more so when Iniesta closed by saying: 
“¡Vamos de puta madre!”

“De puta madre,” roughly translated as, “We’re in fucking great shape, we’re 
playing bloody brilliantly.”

“This year we’re going to steamroller them all,” he added.

And then he closed the door and left.

That’s Andrés. He doesn’t say much, only what he really has to. It’s like 
scoring goals: he doesn’t score often, either. But when it’s needed, there he 
is.

Guardiola will never forget Cruyff defending him in print. And he will never 
forget Andrés appearing at his door. He’ll never forget that they were right, 
too. At the end of the 2008–09 season, Barcelona had won six titles. All six.

“People usually think that it is the coach who has to raise the spirits of his 
players; that it is the coach who has to convince his footballers; that it is 
his job to take the lead all the time,” says Guardiola. “But that’s not always 
the case. It wasn’t the case at the Camp Nou for me, and in my first year at 
Bayern Munich something similar happened as well. It’s not often things like 
that happen and when they do, they rarely come to light. People always think 
the coach is the strongest person at a club, the boss, but in truth he’s the 
weakest link. We’re there, vulnerable, undermined by those who don’t play, by 
the media, by the fans. They all have the same objective: to undermine the 
manager.

“You start, you lose at Numancia, you draw with Racing, you just can’t get 
going, you feel watched and you feel alone and then suddenly, there’s Andrés 
telling me not to worry,” Guardiola continues. “It’s hard to imagine, because 
it’s not the kind of thing that happens and because it’s Iniesta we’re talking 
about, someone who doesn’t find it easy to express his feelings. And after he’d 
gone, I asked myself: how can people say that coaches should be cold when they 
make decisions? Impersonal? That’s ridiculous! How can I be cold, distant, 
removed with Andrés? Sorry, no way. Eighty-six per cent of people didn’t 
believe in me [according to an online poll]. Lots of people wanted Mourinho. We 
hadn’t won, hadn’t got going. And then Andrés comes and says that! How am I 
supposed to be cold? It’s impossible. Sod that! This goes deeper. This isn’t 
cold, calculated, and nor should it be. There’s no doubt: Andrés will play with 
me, always. Because he’s the best. And because things like that don’t get 
forgotten. Why did he come to my office? I don’t know.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpep-guardiola-andres-iniesta-barcelona-tactics-book-extract%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8aa523a4fe92cee06523f39439aaf8b25f85cd3%2F538_0_2842_1706%2F2842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%3A%20my%20debt%20to%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%20and%20how%20he%20has%20shaped%20my%20tactics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpep-guardiola-andres-iniesta-barcelona-tactics-book-extract%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%3A%20my%20debt%20to%20Andr%C3%A9s%20Iniesta%20and%20how%20he%20has%20shaped%20my%20tactics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpep-guardiola-andres-iniesta-barcelona-tactics-book-extract%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8aa523a4fe92cee06523f39439aaf8b25f85cd3%2F538_0_2842_1706%2F2842.jpg>
 Andrés Iniesta, pictured here taking on Juventus in the 2015 Champions League 
final, taught Pep Guardiola the importance of attacking the opposition’s 
centre-backs. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
Lorenzo Buenaventura is a part of Guardiola’s coaching staff, in charge of 
physical preparation. He has followed Pep from Barcelona to Bayern and from 
there to Manchester City. He shares this memory with Pep now, offers up an 
answer too.

“Why? I suppose because that’s the way he felt; I suppose because it mattered 
to him,” he says. “Andrés doesn’t do anything he doesn’t truly believe in; he 
does it because it feels right to him. He’s genuine, always.” Guardiola 
concedes: “Maybe he spoke out because he could see that there was a method we 
were following, that everyone was training well, that we explained to them why 
we did things the way we did, and above all because that was the kind of 
football that he had been brought up on, ever since he was little.”

“There were other players who sent us little messages,” Buenaventura insists. 
“That’s true,” Guardiola admits. “But Andrés’ message was powerful. How could I 
forget that? I can still see him standing there at the door, looking at me. ‘De 
puta madre.’ And then he left. I thought: ‘Well, if Andrés says so …’”

Andrés and Cruyff were proven right; Guardiola’s decision to maintain that 
philosophy was vindicated. In week three Barcelona scored six against Sporting 
Gijón and never looked back; everything fell into place, it all worked so 
smoothly. Within a few months, they had become a model to aspire to. Not just 
because of the results – no one had won a treble in Spain before, still less 
six trophies from six – but because of the way they played, the way they 
treated the ball, fans, even opponents. Theirs was a different approach, a way 
of seeing and expressing football that was embodied by players like Iniesta.

“We never seem to treat Andrés the way we should; we don’t seem to recognise 
him. He’s the absolute business as a player,” Guardiola says. “He never talks 
about himself, never demands anything, but people who think he’s satisfied just 
to play are wrong. If he thought he could win the Balon d’Or one year, he’d 
want to win it. Why? Because he’d say to himself: ‘I’m the best.’

“I think Paco defined him perfectly,” Guardiola says. Paco Seirulo was 
Barcelona’s former physical coach, the man from whom Lorenzo Buenaventura 
learnt; now Guardiola makes Seirulo’s description his own. “Andrés is one of 
the greats. Why? Because of his mastery of the relationship between space and 
time. He knows where he is at every moment. Even in a midfield where he’s 
surrounded by countless players, he chooses the right path every time. He knows 
where and when, always. And then he has this very unique ability to pull away. 
He pulls out, then brakes, then pulls out again, then brakes again. There are 
very few players like him.

“There are footballers who are very good playing on the outside but don’t know 
what to do inside. Then there are players who are very good inside but don’t 
have the physique, the legs, to go outside. Andrés has the ability to do both. 
When you’re out on the touchline, like a winger, it is easier to play. You see 
everything: the mess, the crowd, the activity is all inside. When you play 
inside, you don’t see anything in there because so much is happening in such a 
small space and all around you. You don’t know where the opposition is going to 
come at you from, or how many of them. Great footballers are those who know how 
to play in both of those environments. Andrés doesn’t only have the ability to 
see everything, to know what to do, but also the talent to execute it; he’s 
able to break through those lines. He sees it and does it.

“I’ve been a coach for a few years now and I have come to the conclusion that 
a truly good player is always a good player,” Guardiola says. “It’s very hard 
to teach a bad player to be a good one. You can’t really teach someone to 
dribble. The timing needed to go past someone, that instant in which you catch 
out your opponent, when you go past him and a new scenario opens up before you 
… Dribbling is, at heart, a trick, a con. It’s not speed. It’s not physique. 
It’s an art.”

Lorenzo Buenaventura says: “What happens is that Andrés brakes. That’s the 
key, the most important thing. People say: ‘Look how quick he is!’ No, no, 
that’s not the point. It’s not about speed, about how fast he goes; what it’s 
really about is how he stops and when, then, how he gets moving again.”

Guardiola adds: “Tito Vilanova defined him very well. Tito used to say: 
‘Andrés doesn’t run, he glides. He’s like an ice hockey player, only without 
skates on. Sssswishhh, sssswishhh, sssswishhhh …’ That description is 
evocative, very graphic, and I think it’s an accurate one. He goes towards one 
side as if he was skating, watching everything that’s going on around him. 
Then, suddenly, he turns the other way with that smoothness he has. Yes, that’s 
it, Andrés doesn’t run, he glides.”

Guardiola adds: “Sometimes in life, it’s first impressions that count and the 
first impression I have of Andrés was the day my brother Pere, who was working 
for Nike at the time, told me about Iniesta. I was still playing for Barcelona 
myself and he said: ‘Pep, you’ve got to come and see this kid.’ It was before 
the final of the Nike Cup. I remember getting changed quickly after training 
and rushing there, dashing to the stadium. And yes, I saw how good he was. I 
told myself: ‘This kid will play for Barcelona, for sure … he’s going to make 
it.’ I told myself that, and I told Pere that too.

“On my way out of the ground after that final when Andrés was the best player 
on the pitch, I came across Santiago Segurola, the football writer. I said to 
him: ‘I’ve just seen something incredible.’ I had this feeling that what I’d 
just witnessed was unique. That was my first impression of Andrés.

“But later,” Guardiola admits, “I came to really value something else Andrés 
does, something that he had made me see with time: the importance of attacking 
the centre-backs. No one does it. But watch and you see it. If the central 
defender has to step out, everything opens up; the whole defence becomes 
disorganised and spaces appear that weren’t there before. It’s all about 
breaking through lines to find space behind them. Open, then find.

“For example, we set up our attack so that Leo Messi could attack the central 
defenders,” Guardiola explains. “We had to attack in such a way as to get the 
ball to Andrés and Leo so that they could attack the central defenders and that 
opened them up. When we managed that, we knew that we would win the game 
because Leo scored goals and Andrés generated everything else: dribbling, 
numerical superiority, the ability to unbalance the game, the final pass, both 
to the outside and filtered through the middle. He sees it all and he has that 
gift for dribbling that’s so unique to him. That dribbling ability is 
everything today. And it was Andrés who opened my eyes to the importance of an 
inside forward or midfielder being able to dribble too. If he dribbles, if he 
carries the ball and goes at people, everything flows. With time, I saw that.”

The Artist: Being Iniesta 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/artist-being-iniesta.html> is published by 
Headline on 8 September
 