
It is not just a brand-new Middle Earth that Peter Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/peterjackson> is creating with his latest 
fantasy trilogy, based increasingly loosely on JRR Tolkien's The Hobbit. It is 
also a shiny new promotional process that sidesteps lingering concerns over the 
bloated nature of the new project – there apparently remain a few dozen weirdos 
out there still wondering why a breezy, 350-page children's fantasy fable has 
been transformed into a triptych of three-hour big-screen epics – in favour of 
a full-scale global fan love-in.

So here we are in London's Leicester Square, linked up by the power of 
satellite technology to Jackson in Wellington, New Zealand, as well as to other 
cinemas in New York and Los Angeles, each of which has its own host, an 
audience of baying geeks in fancy dress and various cast members from The 
Desolation of Smaug. In London we getAndy Serkis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-serkis> (Gollum), Lee Pace (haughty 
wood-elf king Thranduil) and Luke Evans (Bard the Bowman). In LA they have 
Lost's Evangeline Lily, who plays wood-elf warrior Tauriel. In New York, 
there's Britain's Orlando Bloom, looking quite surprised to have been invited 
back as Legolas (whom he refers to throughout as "Leggy") from The Lord of the 
Rings. Jackson oversees proceedings from New Zealand, relaxed and seated with a 
mug of coffee in paw, hobbity bare feet on display and an unmistakable air of 
avuncular bonhomie.

"The fundamental thing people should understand is that the voice of the 
novelist can guide you through the story [in the book]," he says. "In The 
Hobbit, Tolkien is taking us on this journey. As a film-maker, you don't want 
to insert the voice of the film-maker … you convey the story through the 
characters on the screen."

Without all these new and souped-up elves and men of Laketown, the film-maker 
seems to be saying, the new trilogy would only have been as good as its source 
material. And that wouldn't do at all. I mean, who even likes The Hobbit anyway?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Flfflhfn1W-o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Flfflhfn1W-o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Flfflhfn1W-o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Lily is more openly apologetic about the existence of Tauriel 
<http://lotr.wikia.com/wiki/Tauriel>, unmentioned in Tolkien's tome but 
apparently an orphan whose parents were killed by orcs. "Once you understand 
that, you can understand how and why this girl became the lethal killing 
machine that she is … how she got taken under Thranduil's wings and why she's 
so passionate about fighting the evil that exists in Middle Earth," she says. 
"And I'm sorry, but if an orphan story doesn't win you over, then you've got a 
heart of steel."

Thankfully, soon it is on to the 20 minutes of new footage, and we are not to 
be disappointed. There's a scene in which Thranduil and Legolas interrogate an 
orc that is clearly intended to prefigure the events of The Lord of The Rings, 
but the rest is mostly genuine Tolkien meat and bones drawn straight from the 
book itself: Martin Freeman's Bilbo Baggins fighting off 'orrible giant 
Mirkwood spiders who have taken his dwarven companions by surprise; Bilbo again 
in the chambers of the wood elves, freeing the dwarves so they can travel down 
the river to Laketown and the Lonely Mountain.

Another scene hints at the "Aragornisation" of Bard, who only has one or two 
lines of dialogue in the book, but it's not nearly as irritating as some of An 
Unexpected Journey's pointless additions. Finally, there's a glimpse of Bilbo's 
journey into the Lonely Mountain itself, and the beginning of his encounter 
with the great wyrm Smaug. Jackson has played fast and loose with the narrative 
again here, with Bilbo far more clumsy and incautious than I remember him in 
the book. Yet the golden hoard of dwarf treasure and the gargantuan, slippery 
snake-like body of the dragon itself are drawn straight from the most 
magnificent childhood memories. Seeing them on the big screen in crystal-clear 
quality is a spectacular moment, and I can't wait to watch the entire film in 
48 frames per second.

Even so, I can't help thinking that The Desolation of Smaug takes us rather a 
long way into Tolkien's story. At this rate, the entirety of the third movie 
will be the Battle of Five Armies and its (limited) aftermath. In the book, 
Bilbo pretty much slept through the whole thing, so Jackson will finally have 
free rein to fill his boots without fear of criticism from Tolkien purists. 
Perhaps The Hobbit will now end with an invasion of hobbit warriors, or the 
arrival of Aragorn and his rangers. You wouldn't put it past them.

The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug opens on 13 December across the globe, the 
day after debuting in New Zealand. You'll moan a lot about Jackson's relentless 
Tolkien tinkering, but, like me, you know you're still going to see it.

• This article was amended on 5 November 2013. The original said Bilbo was 
travelling to the Misty Mountain, not the Lonely. It has been corrected.
 