
Armando Iannucci, who made Peter Capaldi a star in The Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/oct/25/thick-of-it-bbc-political-satire-ends>
, said the actor is “smart, funny and thoughtful” in Doctor Who – but “always 
hilarious” when he breaks into a run.

Iannucci said some of Capaldi’s most memorable moments in the BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> role had nothing to do with the script 
but “what he does with his pauses and his changes of tone”.

“He’ll just say, ‘Oh good’ or ‘You’d better go outside’ in this particular way 
and it sticks with you far more than the finest scripting,” Iannucci wrote in 
the latest issue of Radio Times.

“Is he a good Doctor?” asked Iannucci. “The Peter I know is the smart, funny, 
thoughtful guy – and I think he’s exactly what the Doctor should be.

“I’ll give you a tip though – watch him run 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7nAc8eG6qG4>. It’s always hilarious. Stop it, 
pause it and go back. It’ll be worth it every time.”

It’s in the nature of the Time Lord’s adventure through space and time that 
breaking into a trot and occasionally a full-on sprint is an inevitable part of 
the job.

Capaldi, who ran around a bit as Malcolm Tucker in The Thick of It 
<http://fuckyespetercapaldi.tumblr.com/post/36960847859/if-malcolm-tucker-running-isnt-the-best-thing>
, has not as much practice as his immediate predecessors, not least the 10th 
Doctor, David Tennant, whoput in enough hard yards 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BZzDvY7qXAg> to justify this entire 50-minute 
compilation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfQdyk28jTA>.

There are two episodes to go in Capaldi’s first season as the Doctor, with 
last Saturday’s instalment written by Frank Cottrell-Boyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/oct/25/doctor-who-recap-series-34-episode-10-in-the-forest-of-the-night>
 watched by an overnight audience of more than 5 million viewers.

Broadcast slightly later than the 51-year-old programme’s traditional slot to 
make way for Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/17/doctor-who-late-time-saturday-night>
, Doctor Who’s consolidated viewing, including people who watch it recorded or 
on-demand in the following seven days, typically tops 7 million.

Iannucci said Capaldi had the “air of the classic Doctor”.

“His Doctor is a completely different character – from any previous Doctor, 
but also from Malcolm,” said Iannucci.

“I’ve watched every episode with my three kids – they’re 20, 15 and 12. 
They’ve been amazed by the transformation. The eldest has seen Malcolm Tucker 
but the others just know Peter from when he’s been over to the house.”

Iannucci said he was “worried that the 12-year-old in particular wouldn’t take 
to the idea of an older guy but they’re drawn to him”. Capaldi, now 56 and the 
12th actor to take the role, is the oldest since the show’s original lead, 
William Hartnell.

“He’s funny in a bamboozled way,” said Iannucci. “And that allows Clara more 
space so they’ve become a proper, classic double act. He’s also the first 
Doctor to give off that air of the tremendous responsibility – which you never 
quite saw before … Is he a good Doctor? He’s how the Doctor should be.”

Former Doctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> star 
Tom Baker said Capaldi was a “wonderful choice. Instantly one felt: this fellow 
comes from far, far away, he’s strange. An instant frisson. And what’s the 
word? Yes, got it! Alien, he’s an alien. I salute him.”

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 