
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ), the New York-based press freedom 
body, has launched a petition today calling on President Obama's administration 
to respect journalists' right to gather and report news.

The petition, "Right to report in the digital age" 
<http://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-petition.php>, 
makes three key demands of the US government:

It should prohibit the hacking and surveillance of journalists and media 
organisations; it must limit prosecutions that ensnare journalists and 
intimidate whistleblowers; and it must halt the harassment of journalists at 
the US border.

In its preamble to the petition, the CPJ argues that incidents of 
surveillance, intimidation and exploitation of the press "have raised 
unsettling questions about whether the US and other western democracies risk 
undermining journalists' ability to report in the digital age."

These incidents have also given ammunition to "repressive governments seeking 
to tighten restrictions on media and the internet."

It points out that "the most chilling reports based on documents leaked by 
Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> are those 
suggesting US and allied intelligence agencies targeted news organisations, 
journalists, and human rights groups for surveillance." It states:

"If journalists cannot communicate in confidence with sources, they cannot do 
their jobs. The free flow of information and the right of journalists to do 
their jobs in the digital age must be protected."

I have signed, and among the signatories are Christiane Amanpour of CNN, 
Kathleen Carroll, executive editor and senior vice president of the Associated 
Press,Arianna Huffington <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington>, 
Jana Winter, a reporter with Fox News, Jacob Weisberg editor-in-chief of Slate, 
and Sarah Clarke, Pen International's London-based policy and advocacy officer.

Two others who have signed are Laura Poitras, who helped in the release of the 
NSA documents that were leaked by Snowden, and Daniel Ellsberg, responsible for 
the 1971 release of thePentagon Papers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pentagon_Papers>.

Organisations supporting the petition include Bloomberg News, Getty Images, 
Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
, Human Rights Watch and the Freedom of the Press Foundation.

Source: CPJ 
<http://cpj.org/campaigns/digital-freedom/right-to-report-sign-petition.php>
 