
The voluntary euthanasia advocate Philip Nitschke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/philip-nitschke> has launched a 
“militant” campaign to push for unrestricted adult access to a peaceful death.

Nitschke announced the launch of Exit Action on Sunday morning, describing the 
new organisation as a subgroup of Exit International, which campaigns, runs 
workshops and distributes information on voluntary euthanasia.

Exit Action said it would take “a militant pro-euthanasia position” to 
coordinate direct action strategies and force legislative change.

“Exit Action is critical of the ‘medical model’ that sees voluntary euthanasia 
as a privilege given to the very sick by the medical profession,” the 
organisation said.

New Zealand police set up roadblocks to question euthanasia group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/new-zealand-police-set-up-roadblocks-to-question-euthanasia-group-members-say>
“The standard approach for years has been to get the very sick to tell their 
stories of suffering to the public and politicians, in the hope that 
politicians might take pity and change the law.”

“Exit Action believes that a peaceful death, and access to the best euthanasia 
drugs, is a right of all competent adults, regardless of sickness or permission 
from the medical profession.”

Nitschke also said he expected Exit Action members to launch an online 
“buyers’ club” for euthanasia drugs regardless of legislation.

The organisation seeks to push far beyond what most right-to-die groups strive 
for – access to voluntary euthanasia for terminally or incurably ill people – 
and may of them have sought to distance their campaigns from Nitschke.

Last month the South Australian parliament narrowly voted down the proposed 
Death With Dignity bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/voluntary-euthanasia-laws-clear-hurdle-in-south-australian-parliament-after-15th-attempt>
, which sought to legalise voluntary euthanasia for people with a terminal 
illness and who were suffering unbearable pain that couldn’t be eased by other 
measures.

That bill had been the subject of a national campaign by Andrew Denton’s Go 
Gentle Australia advocacy group, which also targeted the Australian Medical 
Association – which recently upheld its official opposition to euthanasia 
during a policy review, claiming most of its members were opposed to voluntary 
euthanasia or unsure.

Go Gentle Australia released a video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d3ewkJv9FFM> featuring doctors speaking 
against the AMA, which represents less than a third of doctors.

Nitschke has for several years campaigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/22/philip-nitschke-choose-when-to-die-euthanasia-advocate>
 for euthanasia drugs to be available to any competent adult seeking “rational 
suicide”, not just those who are sick and have the support of a medical 
professional.

Nitschke and other members of Exit International have been subject to numerous 
police actions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/border-force-seizes-copy-of-assisted-suicide-book-written-by-philip-nitschke>
 and searches, including an 83-year-old Victorian woman whomNitschke last month 
said was visited by federal and Victorian police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/euthanasia-advocate-philip-nitschke-says-exit-international-members-targeted-by-police>
 twice in two weeks. He said the federal officers seized Nembutal, the powerful 
barbiturate often used for voluntary euthanasia.

Last year he ceremoniously burned his medical licence after the Medical Board 
of Australia said he could not be a doctor while continuing to campaign for 
voluntary euthanasia.

Nitschke, who currently lives in the Netherlands, could not be reached for 
comment.
 