
Exactly 20 years ago a 66-year-old carpenter had a ham sandwich with his wife 
and a visiting doctor, watched a footy game and then died precisely when he had 
planned to, at 2pm.


Bob Dent, who was suffering from prostate cancer, was the first person in the 
world to take his own life under a legal voluntary euthanasia scheme and the 
doctor in question –Philip Nitschke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/philip-nitschke> – facilitated it 
with his own custom-built machine.

The Northern Territory’s Rights of the Terminally Ill Act, introduced by the 
then chief minister, Marshall Perron, allowed for someone in their last months 
of life to apply for a medically assisted death.

Nitschke says he had no involvement in the cause until Perron announced the 
bill but he corralled 20 local doctors to take a full-page ad out in the NT 
News to support it and, once it was law, a number of people, including Dent, 
came to him and his patient-operated euthanasia device.

“About a week beforehand I was at their place in Tiwi and Bob said ‘I’ve 
picked a day’. [His wife] Judy said come round and have lunch and Bob said 
‘I’ll die at two o’clock’,” Nitschke tells Guardian Australia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6793a3129b6b71a768a944781dea49775a99b5c%2F0_0_959_623%2F959.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Nitschke%3A%20how%20the%20face%20of%20the%20voluntary%20euthanasia%20campaign%20became%20its%20outcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Nitschke%3A%20how%20the%20face%20of%20the%20voluntary%20euthanasia%20campaign%20became%20its%20outcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6793a3129b6b71a768a944781dea49775a99b5c%2F0_0_959_623%2F959.jpg>
 Philip Nitschke in June 1996 with his euthanasia delivery system, which 
comprised a laptop computer and a box containing a syringe, which was connected 
to the patient by an intravenous line and driven by compressed air. Photograph: 
AP 
“You don’t know what to talk about at that lunch. Everything you’re about to 
say, you think about it before you say it and then you think oh I better not 
say that, because that’s related to something more than an hour into the future 
and that seems inappropriate.

“We watched the football on television because that was sort of immediate and 
then, at 2pm, Bob sat up and, really stately and composed, said ‘Let’s do it’.”

Judy was there by Bob’s side in their Darwin home as he died. That he was able 
to go on his own terms remains of huge comfort to her.

“Naturally I didn’t want him to die but I didn’t want him to live the way he 
was having to live,” she tells Guardian Australia.

Voluntary euthanasia support grows in Victoria, but Turnbull won't back it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/16/voluntary-euthanasia-support-grows-in-victoria-but-turnbull-wont-back-it>
“When he got his paperwork signed, the palliative effect was greater than 
everything everybody else had been trying to do for him. The mental anguish was 
gone and he could put up with more of the physical problems … because he knew 
he could call Philip at any time and say ‘Let’s go’.”

Judy says her husband felt he was in the right place at the right time for his 
death: in Darwin for the nine months the law was valid before the federal 
government overturned it. At the same time Canberra also amended legislation to 
prevent the territories reintroducing it, “turning Territorians into 
second-class citizens”, says Judy bitterly.

The federal intervention on the democratically elected territory government 
was “incomprehensible”,Perron told the ABC last year 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-25/euthanasia-advocates-call-for-change-northern-territory/6493034>
, describing it as a “complete cross-party religious movement” led by the 
Coalition MP Kevin Andrews and the Labor MP Tony Burke.

“I’m disappointed we’re still here 20 years after my husband used the Rights 
of the Terminally Ill Act with no such legislation anywhere in Australia,” Judy 
says.

Bob Dent was the first of four terminally ill people to undertake voluntary 
euthanasia before the federal government stepped in. All four were assisted by 
Nitschke.

Two decades on and Nitschke’s standing as an advocate for voluntary euthanasia 
is more divisive than anyone at the time could have imagined.

Dent was not the first to try the law. Taxi driver Max Bell was forced to 
return to Broken Hill in New South Wales after medical and psychiatric 
professionals in the NT refused to provide the required assistance for his 
application for euthanasia in Darwin.

At 2pm, Bob sat up and, really stately and composed, said ‘Let’s do it’
Philip Nitschke 
The incident, and subsequent media coverage of Bell’s eventual death from 
stomach cancer, sparked greater cooperation from the profession in the case of 
Dent and the others but it also appeared to have created a grudge within 
Nitschke that he still holds today.

“Finally we had this world-first law and then to have it frustrated in the 
case of Max Bell largely because the medical professional was holding it 
ransom,” Nitschke says. “They didn’t have to cooperate, they needed one doctor 
to say he was terminally ill and a psychiatrist to say he was of sound mind. 
They didn’t have to endorse the concept.”

In recent years the medical, psychiatric and even the pro-voluntary euthanasia 
communities have distanced themselves from Nitschke’s brand of increasingly 
extreme advocacy for a person’s right to die.

The Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency sought to deregister 
Nitschke over his involvement with the death of Nigel Brayley, a depressed but 
otherwise healthy man who took his own life in 2014.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee4fcea73c36efd2584e0fe16ffe839ccafda510%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Nitschke%3A%20how%20the%20face%20of%20the%20voluntary%20euthanasia%20campaign%20became%20its%20outcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Nitschke%3A%20how%20the%20face%20of%20the%20voluntary%20euthanasia%20campaign%20became%20its%20outcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee4fcea73c36efd2584e0fe16ffe839ccafda510%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 The former Northern Territory chief minister Marshal Perron, who introduced 
the Rights of the Terminally Ill Act, which allowed for someone in their last 
months of life to apply for a medically assisted death. Photograph: Alan 
Porritt/AAP 
Last year Nitschke ceremoniously burned his medical licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/27/philip-nitschke-burns-medical-certificate-and-says-he-will-promote-euthanasia>
 after he was told he could begin practising medicine again but only if he gave 
up his position as director of Exit International andnever spoke of euthanasia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/26/philip-nitschke-banned-from-promoting-voluntary-euthanasia>
.


Prof Ian Hickie accused Nitschke of lacking empathy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/11/philip-nitschke-announces-conference-on-rational-suicide-in-melbourne>
 and said his ideas were “unacceptable”.

His views have been labelled “aberrant” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/24/philip-nitschke-should-not-be-the-sole-face-of-the-euthanasia-movement>
 by supporters of voluntary euthanasia and theYour Last Right coalition  
<http://www.yourlastright.com/about-us>specifically opposes a number of 
Nitschke’s platforms, instead calling for strict oversight and medical 
involvement.

Shayne Higson, a spokeswoman for Andrew Denton’s Go Gentle Australia 
organisation, says Nitschke advocated for a law with strict safeguards for many 
years but his current views “could not be further away from the moderate, 
responsible laws that are currently being developed in state parliaments”.

“There are, in fact, many doctors working in the mainstream of medicine who 
support voluntary euthanasia and want to see it practised in a safe, medical 
setting with strong safeguards,” she says. “Those doctors’ voices are only 
getting louder.”

Border Force seizes copy of assisted suicide book written by Philip Nitschke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/border-force-seizes-copy-of-assisted-suicide-book-written-by-philip-nitschke>
 In December Nitschke told Guardian Australia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/27/philip-nitschke-you-dont-have-to-be-sick-to-qualify-for-voluntary-euthanasia>
the elderly should be given Nembutal to use at a time of their choosing but 
also said he believed in the right for adults – of any age –to take their own 
lives in an act of “rational suicide”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/18/philip-nitschke-tribunal-hearing-is-there-such-a-thing-as-rational-suicide>

“I’m not suggesting we give out Nembutal to 20-year-olds,” he said. “But my 
philosophical position is that if we expect 20-year-olds to go over to Iraq and 
kill people, and we do … we can’t simply say ‘but you don’t have the right to 
kill yourself’. That makes no logical sense to me.

“So, if a rational person of any age decides now is the time to die for 
whatever reason they see as compelling, I think as a society – even though we 
may not like it and we might not want to encourage it – we should respect it. 
And that’s not what happens at present.”

Nitschke initially avoids answering questions about whether he believes there 
should be psychiatric evaluation of any sort in a future scheme but eventually 
says no.

“Practical reality tells me the only laws we’re going to get through 
parliaments of Australia will require some form of psychiatric assessment. I 
don’t think it’s necessary,” he says.

Nitschke says he is “annoyed” by the argument that suicidal ideation is always 
a symptom of psychiatric illness.

“I’m aware of the fact that some people who suicide are doing this as a result 
of some form of psychiatric malady,” he says.

“One of the issues which keep coming up though … is this whole concept of 
rational suicide in the sense that many people in the medical profession argue 
that anyone thinking of ending their life by definition can’t be rational.”

'Philip has always pushed the boundaries ... I can’t say I can agree with him 
but I’m not surprised at what he’s doing'
Judy Dent 
He emphasises his concerns for the elderly and says he advocates for people to 
be given information and a choice, noting the shocking statistics forsuicide 
among people aged over 80. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/24/andrew-denton-the-one-argument-stopping-australia-from-legalising-assisted-dying-is-implausible>

Nitschke will on Thursday hold Australia’s first conference <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/11/philip-nitschke-announces-conference-on-rational-suicide-in-melbourne>
 on rational suicide in Melbourne and has been given strict rules by the 
Victorian state library in return for hosting it. He concedes people believe 
his views will hinder the chance of voluntary euthanasia legislation getting up 
but he disagrees with them.

Judy Dent remains a vocal advocate for voluntary euthanasia and supports 
Nitschke – she will introduce him at the Melbourne conference – but she is 
among those who believe his aims damage the cause.

“I think Philip has always pushed the boundaries,” she says. “I’m not 
surprised. I can’t say I can agree with him but I’m not surprised at what he’s 
doing.

“Until we can get some decent legislation to start with, I don’t want to put 
the people who make those decisions offside, which Philip’s ideas will 
definitely do, I’m sure. Then again, I’m sure most of the people who make these 
laws are saying, ‘Oh ignore Philip anyway’.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73fea9a756fc6daeb2630a1902468b984c7fa33e%2F0_12_2012_1400%2F2012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Nitschke%3A%20how%20the%20face%20of%20the%20voluntary%20euthanasia%20campaign%20became%20its%20outcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Nitschke%3A%20how%20the%20face%20of%20the%20voluntary%20euthanasia%20campaign%20became%20its%20outcast&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fphilip-nitschke-how-the-face-of-the-voluntary-euthanasia-campaign-became-its-outcast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73fea9a756fc6daeb2630a1902468b984c7fa33e%2F0_12_2012_1400%2F2012.jpg>
 Dr Philip Nitschke in his office in Coolalinga, Northern Territory, in 1997. 
Photograph: Rohan Sullivan/Associated Press 
There are currently moves towards legislation in South Australia and Tasmania, 
and Victoria has launched an inquiry into state legislation on end-of-life 
choices.

Two federal bills around restoring territory rights lapsed with the 
double-dissolution election.

Bob Dent was still alive when conservative MP Kevin Andrews started “stirring 
the pot” against the NT law and Judy says her husband was “appalled”.

She remains furious at the minister and his parliamentary colleagues and says 
it’s “everybody but the public” holding back progress.

“Each new poll increases the number who approve of doctor assisted dying … but 
there are certain politicians who are afraid of losing their seat,” she says.

If Dent was still around what would he have to say? Judy laughs. “Get on with 
it.”

• In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. In the US, 
the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is1-800-273-8255 <>. In the UK, the 
Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Hotlines in other countriescan be found 
here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
 