
There is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repenteth, and so on. But why 
did it take Philip Hammond so long, and when will other Tory politicians – and 
new Labour supporters – catch up? In aninterview after the Olympics 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/philip-hammond-games-humanised-the-face-of-armed-forces-8038712.html>
, during which the army unfussily provided the bag-searching and frisking that 
the private security firm G4S failed to arrange, the defence secretary said his 
"starting prejudice" had been that "we have to look at the way the private 
sector does things to know how we should do things in government". The Olympics 
changed his mind.

The private sector, Hammond argued, tried to do a job "incredibly leanly with 
very little resilience". That didn't work for defence or security. If you 
wanted safety, you needed high levels of back-up in case anything went wrong. 
During the Olympics, he said, for every three people doing searches, the army 
provided "one watching them and … two others watching him". If you wanted a
Typhoon <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eurofighter_Typhoon> available at a 
particular point to defend the UK from attack, the armed services would say you 
needed four aircraft and 60 engineers. G4S would provide one aircraft "with two 
blokes … It's a completely different ethos and way of operating."

Hammond talks this way because he's expecting an argument with George Osborne 
over his department's budget and besides, he's an old-fashioned Tory who likes 
soldiers, aircraft and warships. But what he says could be applied to health, 
education, social services, policing and job centres.

Hospitals need "resilience" because they deal with life-threatening 
conditions, schools because a lost year's education can't be replaced, social 
services because children are at risk of abuse, policing because a murderer may 
escape and kill again, job centres because unemployment causes mental illness 
and family break-up. It just isn't the same as, say, running a restaurant. If 
you haven't kept the table booking, customers grumble then find somewhere else. 
They don't drop dead, flunk their SATs or start battering babies.

Opponents of outsourcing and marketising public services have made this 
argument for decades. Americans have long puzzled over why, after years of 
outsourcing, the federal government has more employees than ever. A book by two 
US professors, The Private Abuse of the Public Interest, gave the answer. When 
services are handed over to private firms, government has to create layers of 
monitors, regulators, inspectors, accountants, lawyers and so on to ensure they 
do the job properly and to respond to "variously vexed" consumers and 
whistleblowers who complain that they aren't doing so.

The Reaganites and Thatcherites who started outsourcing in the 1980s didn't 
understand that. They thought you signed a contract, walked away, and didn't 
bother again until the contract was up for renewal. If the cases ofA4e  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/may/15/a4e-back-work-contract-terminated>
(which was contracted to find jobs for the unemployed, but put many into 
non-jobs) andG4S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/22/private-sector-chaotic-evasive-bungling>
 are any guide, ministers still, amazingly, think the same.

They should look at the evidence. Hammond, instead of waiting for the Olympic 
security fiasco, could have read a report commissioned by US Congress which 
found that a quarter of the money spent on contractors in Iraq and Afghanistan 
was wasted and, in many instances, the work could have been done more cheaply 
by the US forces' military and civilian staff. He could have looked at the 2010 
US state department report onArmorGroup 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ArmorGroup> (acquired by G4S in 2008), which was 
supposed to guard the Kabul embassy but failed "to recruit, train or manage … 
at the staffing level or the quality required by its contract".

Hammond and other ministers could read a report by the US's non-partisan 
Project on Government Oversight, which found that over 550 outsourced services, 
the federal government paid, on average, almost twice as much to contractors as 
it would have paid its own employees and in one case, five times as much.

They could dip into reports from UK parliamentary select committees and 
auditors that repeatedly show that bringing in the private sector doesn't 
automatically give better value. Of the private finance initiative, for 
example, the public accounts committee said last year it looked "better value 
for the private sector than for the taxpayer 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news/pfi-report-publication/>
". Ministers could look at the outsourced project to computerise NHS records, 
finally abandoned last September after it cost £12bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/sep/22/nhs-it-project-abandoned>. Or 
at contracted-out cleaning services, which led to more hospital-acquired 
infections because, in a classic example of a change in what Hammond calls 
"ethos", employees' shared sense of responsibility for cleanliness was lost.

Yet despite such evidence, the government is currently negotiating £4bn of new 
tenders 
<http://www.executivecompass.co.uk/business/news/1/4bn+of+public+sector+tenders+to+be+negotiated+this+year>
 – "as exciting as outsourcing gets", according to one investment banker – with 
justice, work and pensions, and Hammond's defence department in the lead. Will 
he act on the lessons of the Olympics and announce that the private sector just 
can't perform some of the jobs earmarked for outsourcing? Will other ministers?
 