
Creation Records founder Alan McGee has been told by police what personal 
details appear on notes seized from the formerNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> private investigator Glenn 
Mulcaire.

"The information that they have on me is ridiculous," he told the Guardian. 
"The News of the World had my answer machine number, the code to break into it, 
they had my postcode, my landline, Poptones number, they even had the old 
account number on my bill. They had too much information. How the fuck did they 
get that? It's frightening."

The former Oasis and Primal Scream label boss is poised to sue News 
International, afterthe Metropolitan police uncovered evidence a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/07/phone-hacking-oasis-manager-alan-mcgee>
 that he may have been targeted in 2005.

Sitting in the foyer of a central London hotel, wearing tinted glasses and a 
gingham bowler hat, McGee said: "Do I want to take it to a civil case? I 
probably do. I'm outraged more by the whole ethos of it."

However, McGee suspects that his voicemail messages were being intercepted 
long before 2005. He says he was "obviously hackable" in the late 1990s, when 
the Gallagher brothers or other Creation Records artists were rarely out of the 
papers. Police are unable to confirm whether McGee was targeted in the 1990s, 
as Mulcaire's records only go back to 2000.

"I can remember stories breaking at the end of Creation in 1998, 1999. I'd 
speak to Noel and then the next day, 9am, someone would say it's in the Currant 
Bun. I think if I was getting turned over properly it was in the latter part of 
the 1990s. That's when I was obviously hackable," he said.

"The weirdest one for me – now it seems to make sense – was me saying to Noel 
at 11pm 'I'm going to chuck Creation in' and it arriving in the paper at 9am 
the next morning. I always thought somehow he'd told the wrong person, and he 
probably thought I had dropped it [to the paper]. I didn't tell the Sun. I 
don't think he did. I think either of us were hacked. But the police don't have 
records going back to 1999."

McGee said his voicemail in 2005 would have been full of troubled messages 
from Courtney Love, who was signed to his Poptones label at the time. In August 
2005,there were false reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/22/film.arts> that Love was pregnant 
with Steve Coogan's child. Coogan isone of a number of celebrities suing the 
News of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/05/steve-coogan-phone-hacking-interview>
 for breach of privacy.

Despite being distressed at the thought of his private messages being 
intercepted, McGee is keen to downplay his own role in the hacking saga.

"Compared to Milly Dowler and the McCanns I'm not even on the map," he said. 
"In comparison to the shit these people have had to deal with … to me it's just 
morally utterly wrong and bankrupt and I'm outraged by what they've done to 
other people."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 