
Most people think there should be stricter rules on the qualifications for 
flying a drone in urban areas, according to a new report.

A survey of more than 2,000 adults by the British Airline Pilots Association 
(Balpa) also showed that half think there should be prison sentences for those 
flying drones in a way that endangers an aircraft.

The study, which will be presented on Monday at a drone safety summit 
organised by UK pilots, revealed that about a third of those polled think no 
one should be able to fly drones over urban areas.

Jim McAuslan, Balpa general secretary, said: “Drone technology is taking off 
and we want to make sure the country can benefit from the business and leisure 
opportunities that it could offer without putting flight safety at risk. Pilots 
and the public want the UK to be a ‘safe drone zone’ and these polling results 
show that the public backs stricter laws on training for drone pilots and 
punishment for endangering aircraft.

“The UK can lead the way on safely introducing small drones and set the 
standard for the passenger aircraft of the future,” he said.

“Pilots are also calling for the British public to be informed, involved and 
consulted before companies fly large, remotely piloted aircraft over their 
homes and alongside their passenger planes.”

A man was charged in March for allegedly flying a drone over landmarks 
including the Houses of Parliament and several football stadiums. Under the Air 
Navigation Order 2009,people must get permission from the Civil Aviation 
Authority to fly drones 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2009/3015/article/167/made> – also known as 
unmanned aerial vehicles – within 150 metres of any congested area, any large 
open-air assembly or within 50 metres of any vessel, vehicle or structure not 
under the control of the person operating the drone.
 