
Trees are looking lush this summer, but appearances can be deceptive. 
Britain’s trees are being ravaged by a myriad of pests and diseases that could 
change the landscape out of all recognition.

Many horse chestnut leaves are now turning brown, due to a leaf miner 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/horsechestnutleafminer>, the larva of a moth which 
burrows through the leaf. Even more serious is acanker bacteria disease 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fr/bleedingcanker> that causes bleeding on the 
trunk of horse chestnuts, often killing younger trees within a few years. The 
disease is spreading rapidly through the UK.

Ash dieback <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ashdieback> (Chalara) is a more recent 
infection, first found in the UK at a tree nursery in 2012 and caused by a 
fungus that quickly kills young ash trees and older trees more slowly. The 
fungal spores spread so easily it could eventually wipe out the UK’s estimated 
80m ashs, one of our commonest trees.

Ash dieback and beetle attack likely to 'wipe out' ash trees in UK and Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/ash-dieback-and-beetle-attack-likely-to-wipe-out-all-ash-trees-in-uk-and-europe>
And there is an alarming host of other plagues to contend with – Asian 
longhorn beetles <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/asianlonghornbeetle> and oak 
processionary moth <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/oakprocessionarymoth>, chronic 
oak decline <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/fr/infd-7b3bu4>, Massaria fungal disease
 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/tree-diseases-and-pests/key-threats/massaria-disease/>
 of plane trees,Phytophthora ramorum 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-9cyg8x> in larch, as well as sweet 
chestnut blight and more besides.

Trees can be taken for granted quite often, but the past gives a glimpse of 
what can befall us if they succumb to infection. Elms, grand and tall, once 
dominated much of the British countryside but about 40 years ago Dutch elm 
disease devastated millions of these trees, and the landscape has still not 
recovered from that epidemic.

All these pests and diseases are foreign imports often brought in on 
ornamental and commercial trees, along with the soil they grow in. Infection 
controls for these imported plants are far too slack.



 