
Plants famous for their drugs are out in flower. Perhaps most spectacular is 
the brilliant red field poppy, making a stunning splash of colour this summer. 
This common poppy has a type of opiate that was long used for mild pain relief 
for toothache, earache and sore throats, as well as a mild sedative. But far 
better known for opiates is theopium poppy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/02/alys-fowler-opium-poppies>
, Papaver somniferum, its lilac-coloured flowers infamous from the illegal 
drugs trade in Afghanistan. But the opium poppy is also grown for 
pharmaceutical morphine in parts of southern and eastern England, where the 
soil and climate are just right. Last summer saw a record harvest and the 
quality of morphine produced now provides some 50% of all the morphine used in 
the UK. Although the poppies are grown under a Home Office licence, they are no 
good for making illicit drugs because the variety grown in England needs a good 
deal of sophisticated refining to make into morphine.

Meadowsweet <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/meadowsweet> was the source 
of another important drug. This plant grows in damp places and is now in bloom 
with frothy white flower heads with a heady sweet fragrance. Meadowsweet has an 
especially proud history because it was used for relieving headaches thanks to 
a substance called salicylic acid. In 1897 these painkiller properties inspired 
the chemical synthesis of aspirin – named after the plant’s old scientific 
name, Spiraea.

Foxgloves 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/plants-fungi/digitalis-purpurea-common-foxglove>
 are best known for their stunning bell-shaped flowers, now in bloom in tall 
spikes. But the entire plant is also highly poisonous and contains digoxin and 
digitoxin, important drugs for treating heart conditions.
 