
The “Instapoet” Rupi Kaur <https://www.instagram.com/rupikaur_/?hl=en>’s 
originally self-published collection Milk and Honey has sold more than half a 
million copies in the US and is into its 16th printing, according to its 
publisher.

Rupi Kaur: 'There was no market for poetry about trauma, abuse and healing’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/26/rupi-kaur-poetry-canada-instagram-banned-photo>
Known as an Instapoet for the traction she gains online with her poetry that 
deals with violence, abuse and femininity, the collection was first 
self-published almost two years ago, in November 2014. It went on to top charts 
in North America and was snapped up by Andrews McMeel Publishing, which 
released its own edition in October that year.

“We thought it would sell well, but the momentum of sales that took off in 
March this year was very exciting, especially when the book hit the New York 
Times bestseller list,” said publisher and president Kirsty Melville. “We have 
sold over half a million copies and are currently in our 16th printing.” 
Melville added that on average, a strong-selling poetry book would sell less 
than 30,000 copies a year.

Topping Amazon US’s poetry book charts ahead of works including Claudia 
Rankine’s award-winning Citizen and Seamus Heaney’s translation of Beowulf, 
Kaur says thatMilk and Honey <https://www.rupikaur.com/milkandhoney/> “takes 
readers through a journey of the most bitter moments in life and finds 
sweetness in them because there is sweetness everywhere if you are just willing 
to look”.

“this is the journey of
surviving through poetry
this is the blood sweat tears
of twenty-one years
this is my heart
in your hands
this is
the hurting
the loving
the breaking
the healing,” she writes in one.

Kaur, who is based in Toronto, hit the headlines in 2015 when a self-portrait 
she posted on Instagram was removed by the site 
<http://feministing.com/2015/03/27/instagram-bans-photos-for-showing-menstruation/>
 for showing a small amount of menstrual blood. Her followers swelled as she 
refused to remain silent,writing that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/30/social-media-protecting-men-periods-breast-milk-body-hair>
 “I will not apologise for not feeding the ego and pride of misogynist society 
that will have my body in underwear but not be okay with a small leak.”

Instagram poets society: selfie age breeds life into verse and has a new 
following
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/instagram-poets-society-social-media-phenomenon>
Described as one of the emerging Instapoets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/23/instapoets-instagram-twitter-poetry-lang-leav-rupi-kaur-tyler-knott-gregson>
, alongside writers including Lang Leav – also published by Andrews McMeel – 
and Tyler Knott Gregson, Kaurtold the Guardian in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/26/rupi-kaur-poetry-canada-instagram-banned-photo>
 that when she started to publish her poems online following her Instagram 
stand-off, it was “really scary”. “But they did. They stayed for the poetry and 
that was such a beautiful gift in disguise.”

Melville said the publisher had been looking to acquire North American writers 
who “spoke to a similar audience of young adult readers” following its success 
with New Zealand author Leav’s collections, Love & Misadventure and Lullabies, 
when it came across Kaur.

“The emotional intensity of Rupi’s message of self-empowerment and 
affirmation, combined with her passionate audience really resonated and we 
could see through sales of her self-published edition that her readers were 
really responding to her message,” she said. “Rupi’s honest, authentic voice 
speaks to young people who relate to her depiction of pain and struggle but 
ultimate sense of hope. Rupi is not afraid to challenge taboos, and this brave 
form of expression inspires her readers.”

Melville believes that Kaur’s collection has also been boosted by the author’s 
readings of her work. “Rupi is a spoken word performer as well as a poet and 
her dramatic and powerful performances have helped build awareness and propel 
her message,” said the publisher. “People love powerful storytelling and 
writing and if it is in the form of poetry, yes, they will buy it. I also think 
poetry, as short form writing, fits with how people are reading today.”
 