
What has technology offered us in these dark days of violence and fear? 
Silicon Valley’s technologies are more pervasive than ever, its dark and 
toneless luxury gadgets, its social media amplifying the atrocities and raw 
pain of the real world’s problems. And yet among all this was born the 
phenomenon ofPokémon Go <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, a 
pure escapism that may well be the most successful mobile game of all time.

Pokémon Go: how the overnight sensation was 20 years in the making
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/15/pokemon-go-instant-global-phenomenon-nintendo-augmented-reality-gaming>
The first time you look at a road or park through your phone camera to see a 
fictional creature standing feels like a little bit of magic that makes 
familiar spaces feel exciting again.Pokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> Go uses your smartphone’s 
camera, GPS and map functions to overlay the gentle, simple veneer of childhood 
adventure over your everyday world; as you navigate your surroundings and a 
parallel world opens up in your phone screen, one where creatures and supplies 
exist to be discovered if only you wander in their direction.

You could view it as almost too convenient, this idea we can just escape into 
a child-like community ideal presided over by a consumer culture brand, united 
under a red-cheeked, grinning Pikachu. The Pokémon Go boom stands to attract 
exploiters almost as quickly as fans – some of these are icky but inevitable, 
likeretailer events 
<http://www.polygon.com/2016/7/13/12171920/pokemon-go-businesses-pokestops-sponsored>
 orpromotional tie-ins that invite you to catch critters at McDonald’s 
<http://gizmodo.com/pokemon-go-partnership-with-mcdonalds-is-on-source-say-1783663418>
. Others are more worrying, like reports of would-be Pokémon trainerswalking 
off cliffs <http://uk.businessinsider.com/pokemon-go-men-fall-off-cliff-2016-7>,
into crime scenes or worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/10/pokemon-go-armed-robbers-dead-body>
. Wandering around with your phone out in areas you don’t exactly belong could 
be dangerous – what’s more, it can be more dangerous for some people than 
others. Writer Omari Akilhighlights the dangers faced by black Americans 
<https://medium.com/mobile-lifestyle/warning-pokemon-go-is-a-death-sentence-if-you-are-a-black-man-acacb4bdae7f#.4a9kohpyj>
 perceived to be in the wrong area or to be doing something “suspicious”.


A balm against the evils of the world?

Maybe Pokémon Go is an equalizer, a well-timed balm against the evils of the 
world. Yet arguably it changes nothing, merely overlays a soothing distraction. 
Our nation collectively cringed when Hillary Clinton awkwardly hoped aloud that 
the game could help people “Pokémon Go … to the polls 
<https://mic.com/articles/148785/hillary-clinton-s-pok-mon-go-joke-we-need-pok-mon-go-to-the-polls#.JbEPAxVOM>
”, but it’s not entirely out of line to wonder if all of this mass 
self-soothing, this collective urge toward a simpler and kinder age of tech 
community, can actually lead us somewhere, can inspire real collaboration and 
positive change. What can we learn from the success of this app? What else can 
we do with these ideas?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773a62573e68ea3a744d6d60d6056b1d184204e1%2F0_359_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3A%20why%20our%20dark%20world%20needs%20escapism%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3A%20why%20our%20dark%20world%20needs%20escapism%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773a62573e68ea3a744d6d60d6056b1d184204e1%2F0_359_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 In Hanover, Germany, some 1,200 players participated in a Pokémon Go night 
walk through the city center until midnight. Photograph: Alexander 
Koerner/Getty Images 
From its US and Australian launch on 6 July, Pokémon Go’s servers struggled to 
meet the demand of at least20 million people trying to play the game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/15/pokemon-go-businesses-sponsored-location-lure-modules>
. An influx of feelgood stories and images are proliferating across social 
media, almost like an antidotal injection against the usual order of viral 
anger and sadness. Users with mental health issues say they’vebenefited from 
the encouragement to go outside and interact 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/aliciamelvillesmith/people-say-pokemon-go-is-helping-them-with-their-mental-h>
. A childhood friend told me that she’s met at least 30 new people in her tiny 
town in the past week alone (“I didn’t even know that many people my age 
existed in this town,” she says). Countless tales of people overcoming age, 
social and racial assumptions tomake new friends or form fleeting but 
comforting bonds 
<https://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2016/07/one-night-in-pokemon.html> with 
other players abound. Away from the seedy purposefulness of hookup apps, 
Pokémon Goromances blossom <http://www.wired.com/2016/07/pokemon-go-dating-app/>
. Here a userencourages others to deposit their in-game “lures” at children’s 
hospitals <https://twitter.com/Tylerkonersman/status/753809499933204481>, so 
bed-bound kids can join the fun. Here’s an adorable entrepreneurial boy who’s
designing and selling light-up badges <https://www.gofundme.com/pokepin> so 
others can be safe playing at night. Pokémon Go could be leading young people to
rediscover their national parks 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/07/pokemon-go-national-parks-level-up/>
. The stories can bewild, shocking and wonderful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/top-five-most-outlandish-pokemon-go-stories>
, and they keep coming – a pure, almost nostalgically utopian vision of 
technology and play at a time when the world seems to need it more than ever.

The history of ‘Pocket Monsters’

Pokémon – a sort of Japanese shorthand for “Pocket Monsters” – began in 1995 
as a portable Nintendo video game series published about capturing, training 
and battling whimsical, cute little creatures. Children of the 90s furiously 
collected Pokémon trading cards, watched its TV showss and movies, and today 
there are dozens of games using the 700 Pokémon characters, making it arguably 
the most popular games franchise since Super Mario.

But while Pokémon Go may leverage the standard abilities of modern mobile 
hardware, it’s actually something of a throwback in more ways than one: it 
includes simple, nostalgic graphical representations of only the original 151 
characters from back in the 90s Pokémon heyday. Neither the technology nor the 
implementation are particularly new, either.

Augmented reality dates back to the 1990s

Augmented reality <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/augmented-reality> 
(AR) – the idea that real-world user behavior, hardware and devices could be 
implicated in fictional experiences – dates back to the mid to late 1990s. One 
early AR game called The Majestic, from Electronic Arts, promised to call, fax 
and email players with spooky real-life intrusions intended to enhance the game 
experience. It did not do well, launching just before the events of 11 
September 2001; the format was quashed by fears that it might be a bad time for 
strangers to receive unsettling pretend faxes and calls. Another was the 
marketing campaign for seminal found-footage horror film The Blair Witch 
Project, which placed materials online suggesting the events of the film could 
be real, drumming up cult theories and fan participation.

Pokémon Go is developed by San Francisco-based Niantic, a company with close 
ties to the heritage of real-world play. Before it spun off from Google in 
2016, its best-known work was a 2012 game called Ingress, a science 
fiction-themed app which aimed to get users out of the house and interact with 
real-world locations and formed the foundation of Pokémon Go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe04bc951431140a1ead81a0d6792d8b0fce8c567%2F0_42_4408_2645%2F4408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3A%20why%20our%20dark%20world%20needs%20escapism%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3A%20why%20our%20dark%20world%20needs%20escapism%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe04bc951431140a1ead81a0d6792d8b0fce8c567%2F0_42_4408_2645%2F4408.jpg>
 Spearow, a Pokémon character, appears in a London street. Photograph: Olivia 
Harris/Getty Images 
Niantic’s CEO, John Hanke, has said Ingress saw over a million installs, but 
the cultural penetration of the game remained indistinct, beloved mostly by 
eggheads and inventors who already believed in the dream of AR. The alternate 
reality space has long been attractive to designers and investors alike because 
it makes so much sense – what’s not to love about unintrusive but engaging 
overlays that make daily errands more fantastical, more social, more physical? 
Around the same period Ingress launched, prominent game designer and lecturer 
Jane McGonigal released her book Reality is Broken, wherein she argued that 
adding “gameful” elements to otherwise non-magical behaviors and tasks could 
motivate and inspire people.

Mainstream augmented reality?

Until Pokémon Go, there had been no “killer app” for mainstream AR; a few 
modest successes had been marketing efforts, including McGonigal’s I Love Bees 
which was created by a team aiming to sell Microsoft’s XBox game Halo. 
“Gamified” apps, like Foursquare and its ilk, have been successful, but have 
alsofielded criticism from major design communities 
<http://bogost.com/writing/blog/gamification_is_bullshit/> for promising that 
an endless parade of inane digital badges could be meaningful rewards, or 
substitute for tangible ones. Since the Pokémon video games have always been 
about collecting and exploring – with a dash of optimistic pro-social messaging 
often mixed in with the storylines – industry folk have long thought a Pokémon 
AR game could have the potential to cross over into the mainstream.

Pokémon Go: where does augmented reality go next?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/18/pokemon-go-uk-developers-augmented-reality>
No one ever thought Nintendo would go for it, though. The company is known for 
strictly guarding its brands, avoiding social features that might be risky for 
young players, and resisting the popularity of mobile gaming in favor of 
pushing its own devices, like the Nintendo DS. But Nintendo, which is one-third 
owner of The Pokémon Company and now also an investor in Niantic, wasreportedly 
put at ease 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/pokemon-go-will-make-you-crave-augmented-reality>
 by the vested authority of the Google infrastructure and by the success of a 
2014 April Fool’s joke whereby tiny Pokémonappeared to users during normal use 
of Google Maps 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/3/31/5566854/pokemon-google-maps-april-fools-2014>
.

The power of a beloved, longstanding cartoon and game brand was all it took, 
along with some design simplification that made Pokémon Go a little less 
“sophisticated” than Ingress, and therefore more accessible to a wider audience.

How long will the phenomenon last?

There are also plenty of legitimate reasons to be skeptical about the game. 
Pokémon Go launchedasking for a worrying range of access and permissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/pokemon-go-privacy-security-full-access-google-account>
 when it comes to users’ Google accounts – possibly interesting in light of the 
amount of Google DNA in the game’s origin stories. Hanke’s former company 
Keyhole, which developed the product that would become Google Earth, was 
indirectly funded by a government-controlled venture capital firm focused on 
geospatial intelligence, so there’splenty of hooks for surveillance anxiety to 
catch on here 
<http://blackbag.gawker.com/pokemon-go-is-a-government-surveillance-psyop-conspirac-1783461240>
. The privacy policy is also wildly liberal; you provide it with access to your 
location, your movements and any images you capture, and all of it can be given 
to law enforcement or private parties.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9bc3bb81ae500615a3d5bf04a7e090790c58d4a%2F0_69_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3A%20why%20our%20dark%20world%20needs%20escapism%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%3A%20why%20our%20dark%20world%20needs%20escapism%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fpokemon-go-success-augmented-reality-escapism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9bc3bb81ae500615a3d5bf04a7e090790c58d4a%2F0_69_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A Pokémon Go release party in Toronto, Canada. Photograph: Cole Burston/AP 
Niantic’s PR firm didn’t respond to my request for an interview, but perhaps 
pragmatically has already released a fix for the app’soverly broad permissions 
<http://www.popsci.com/pokemon-go-app-privacy-google-fix> demands. Ultimately 
thisisn’t much more access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/pokemon-go-privacy-security-full-access-google-account>
 than we’ve given Facebook or any other app in our modern data-mining dystopia, 
but it is strange timing,as musician Kool AD points out 
<https://twitter.com/veeveeveeveevee/status/752160537790648320>, for people to 
suddenly volunteer themselves for surveillance andproximity to law enforcement 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/pokemon-go-police-ask-players-to-stop-trying-to-catch-sandshrew-in-darwin-police-station-a7127616.html>
.

There’s no real way to predict how long the popularity of Pokémon Go will 
last. The game hasn’t even yet launched in Japan, where mobile gaming is 
generally a greater part of the fabric of daily life than it is in the west, 
and a more sustainable infrastructure, with special events, cross-promotion and 
even “sticker” design elements, could be in the game’s future. Yet the game is 
fundamentally very simple, and is still struggling to meet demand, so users 
casually drawn to the craze this week might be bored with it by next week.

And it’s no small feat, finally proving the viability of the AR dream. It’s 
also a sudden and fascinating contrast to all the investor interest in 
isolating, solitary and expensive virtual reality headsets. We can expect a new 
wave of AR projects and product inspired by Pokémon Go’s success.

Maybe some of them will be “for” something greater than play and fun. Or maybe 
they won’t. Maybe fun is enough in these times.
 