
The smash-hit location-based game that has led people all over the world take 
to the streets with smartphone in hand,Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, has finally launched in 
the UK for both Android phones and iPhones.


The free app made by augmented reality (AR) app developer Niantic and the 
Pokémon Company, is available to download in theGoogle Play Store 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.nianticlabs.pokemongo&hl=en_GB>
 for Android and Apple’sApp Store 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pokemon-go/id1094591345?mt=8> for the iPhone. 
It requires a mobile data connection and a smartphone with GPS, using AR to 
turn real-world locations into gaming elements.

Pokémon GO (@PokemonGoApp) 
UK Trainers, the wait is over. #PokemonGO 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash> is now officially available to 
be installed from Google Play or iTunes.
 <https://twitter.com/PokemonGoApp/status/753509144745877504> July 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PokemonGoApp/status/753509144745877504> 
The launch comes a week after the game was made available in Australia and New 
Zealand, and later the US. After a delay to the international rollout owing to 
server issues caused by the game’s popularity,Germany was the first country in 
Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-launches-germany-europe>
 to see it launched on Wednesday. The regional restriction was put in place 
after Niantic struggled to cope with the sudden volume of players, leading to 
several instances of the game’s servers becoming overloaded and locking users 
out.


The geographic restrictions caused millions of players around the world to 
resort to circumventing the region lock by either sideloading the app onAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> or downloading it on an iPhone 
using a US iTunes account. On Wednesday, the day before launch, there were 
350,000 players on mobile network EE in the UK alone.


Matt Stagg, EE’s head of video and content strategy, said: “This is the 
fastest take-up of an app or game we’ve ever seen - and that’s before it’s 
officially launched.”


New UK players now joining the craze will find they have a lot of catching up 
to do, and that many of the “Gyms”, particularly in urban centres, will already 
be occupied by strongPokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> 
from players who started a week ago.


The game puts players in the shoes of a Pokémon trainer who is tasked with 
collecting as many of the fictional animals as possible, training them up and 
entering them into battle against fellow trainers in arenas based around 
significant landmarks.


Players are given one Pokémon to start, but to find more players must walk 
streets and parks with their phone active and the app open. The game then tasks 
them with capturing the beasts with small Pokéballs, which are thrown with a 
flick of the finger and act like the Ghost traps from the iconic film 
Ghostbusters, trapping them and transferring them to a digital pen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fis-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%20good%20for%20your%20health%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fis-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Pok%C3%A9mon%20Go%20good%20for%20your%20health%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fis-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video&media=>
Is Pokémon Go good for your health? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/jul/12/is-pokemon-go-good-for-your-health-video>
Pokémon Go uses data from Google Maps and Niantic’s first augmented reality 
game Ingress, which was released in 2012. Real-world landmarks have been turned 
into virtual ones within the game, with monuments acting as battle arenas and 
so-called Pokéstops players can obtain virtual goods to help them in their 
quest.


The popularity of the game has seen South Koreans flock to a remote region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-south-koreans-remote-area-sokcho-google-maps>
 where it is active,holocaust museums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-us-holocaust-museum-asks-players-to-stay-away>
 having to discourage players, atheists driven into churches,naïve New 
Zealanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-leads-new-zealand-players-to-hells-angels-club>
 led to Hells Angels clubs and police stations filled with players.

Hundreds of people flocked to New York’s Central Park, with particular spots 
becoming overrun with players, each staring into their phones. But it has also 
acted as a new way of meeting likeminded people, as players have clubbed 
together in person to overthrow competing teams in virtual battles. That mass 
participation activity is now likely to take the UK’s streets by storm.


 * 14 essential tips to get you started in Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-14-tips-to-get-you-started-on-your-creature-collecting-adventure>








 