
From minefields in Bosnia 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/pokemon-go-players-in-bosnia-warned-to-watch-out-for-minefields-a7145691.html>
 tomilitary bases in Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/french-pokemon-go-player-arrested-on-indonesian-military-base>
, fromHolocaust museums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-us-holocaust-museum-asks-players-to-stay-away>
 toJulian Assange’s embassy 
<https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/755024652595068929>, Pokémon seem to be 
everywhere. As Pokémon Go takes over the world, Saudi clerics haverenewed a 
fatwa <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-nintendo-pokemon-saudi-idUSKCN10014S> 
against the gaming series and Japan’s authorities have releasedsafety guidelines
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/pokemon-go-japan-release-date-government-terrified-ahead-of-release-of-game-a7147711.html>
 in preparation for the official launch there. Never before has digital reality 
become so integrated into our physical world.

Why Pokémon Go really is a national health service | Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/22/pokemon-go-health-service-silly-mobile-phone-game-parenting-holy-grail>
It has even become part of the US presidential elections, with Hillary Clinton 
chiming in that she doesn’t “know who created Pokémon Go, but I’d try to figure 
out how to get them to have Pokémon go to the polls”. In truth Clinton knows 
very well who created Pokémon Go. It was her friends inSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>.

How to explain the success of Pokémon Go? One way is to follow the money, and 
it might be easier to explain.Augmented reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/augmented-reality> (AR) is not 
something new; it has been used for years in the military and for navigation 
systems. What makes Pokémon Go novel is that AR has gone mainstream for the 
first time. And it has to be understood as a historical break, which will 
profoundly change the way we perceive and experience reality. It will change 
reality itself.

AR is in a way even more interesting than virtual reality (VR), as it doesn’t 
replace the real world with a simulated one, but is rather a sophisticated 
combination of both. AR integrates the digital into the real (by using your 
smartphone camera to transfer the digitalPokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> into the physical world) and 
the real into the digital (your physical body becomes part of a simulated 
reality).

Pokémon Go wouldn’t be possible without Google

Pokémon Go was created by Niantic <https://www.nianticlabs.com/>, whose 
director John Hanke was one of the founders of Keyhole – a pioneering software 
development company specialised in geospatial data visualisation that paved the 
way for Google Maps and Google Earth. Keyhole was acquired by Google in 2004, 
as was Niantic. Pokémon Go wouldn’t be possible without Google. After Google 
Glass received massive criticism and legislative action due to privacy and 
safety concerns, it can even be seen as a first successful commercial step in 
the direction of enabling Google’s AR dream.

And this is why the faux-naivety of what Hillary Clinton says about this is 
important. She must know that it is the former CEO of Google, Eric Schmidt, who 
is running the digital component of her own campaign, using a startup known as
The Groundwork 
<http://qz.com/520652/groundwork-eric-schmidt-startup-working-for-hillary-clinton-campaign/>
. And she must know that Schmidt recently became head of the Pentagon’s 
innovation board and that between January 2009 and October 2015, Google’s top 
executives and representatives gathered at the White House on 427 separate 
occasions. Obviously there is a symbiotic relationship between the US state 
department and Silicon Valley. But why should this worry us?

I don’t want to be a wet blanket about Pokémon Go ... | Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/24/pokemon-go-ubiquity-security-safety-concerns>
We don’t have to speculate about what Silicon Valley’s ideology is, it is 
enough to read Peter Thiel’sZero to One: Notes on Startups, or How to Build the 
Future <http://zerotoonebook.com/>. Thiel, part of the so-called “Paypal mafia 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/11106473/The-PayPal-Mafia-Who-are-they-and-where-are-Silicon-Valleys-richest-group-of-men-now.html>
” and owner of Palantir, explicitly says that “competition is a relic of 
history” and that monopoly capitalism is not a pathology or an exception, but 
the condition of every successful business. Google is one of the best examples: 
almost all of Google’s “innovations” are a product of acquisition (from Google 
Maps to Youtube).

Another successful example, mentioned by Thiel himself, is Tesla Motors: 
“Tesla’s technology is so good that other car companies rely on it: Daimler 
uses Tesla’s battery packs; Mercedes Benz uses a Tesla powertrain; Toyota uses a
Tesla <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> motor. General Motors has 
even created a taskforce to track Tesla’s next moves. But Tesla’s greatest 
technological achievement isn’t one single component, but rather its ability to 
integrate many components into one superior product.”

This is the best description of monopoly capitalism. The success of Silicon 
Valley is not a result of genius, but purchase –Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>, Facebook, Apple or Palantir 
succeeded in creating such powerful and pervasive monopolies precisely because 
of such acquisitions.

Pokémon Go marks a further step, because the penetration of Silicon Valley 
into the most intimate aspects of our lives through social networks and new 
technology has reached a level in which our physical reality becomes integrated 
into the digital reality. Soon it will be impossible to distinguish the 
physical from the digital, realising the idea behindGoogle Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-glass>.

What's a Pokémon Go gym and how do I master them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/pokemon-go-what-is-a-gym-how-to-win-battles>
Pokémon Go <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> should be 
viewed as an important breakthrough that can’t be defined properly without 
taking into consideration the total colonisation undertaken by Silicon Valley 
through the “internet of things” (absolute integration of our vehicles, homes, 
tools into the network), “smart cities” (acquisition of our cities’ 
infrastructure by Silicon Valley), social networks (Facebook, Twitter, 
Instagram), Google, transport innovations (drones, Tesla Motors, etc), “big 
data”, total surveillance, AI, VR, and last but not least, immortality (Silicon 
Valley’s dream that we will upload our brains and live forever).

All these fields of massive investment and radical innovation transform our 
reality in such a profound way that every aspect of our lives will soon be 
integrated into a big global digital “network” which is already, for the first 
time in human history, enabling the creation of a constantly interconnected 
global brain.

The problem is not technology or innovation, the problem is monopoly 
capitalism: the fact that all this power is concentrated in a few companies 
from Silicon Valley, who openly want to create a brave new world in which 
technology only serves profit. While we’re all busy playing Pokémon, the 
companies are following the game’s advice – “Gotta catch ‘em all”. Only, its us 
being captured in an inescapable web of technological consumerism.
 