
Bars and restaurants across the country have been scrambling to cash in on the 
Pokémon Go phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2016/jul/11/how-pokemon-go-took-over-the-world-in-a-weekend>
 and lure budding trainers into their establishments, but the company behind 
the game is hoping to monetize it even further by introducing sponsored 
locations.

Pokémon Go: US holocaust museum asks players to stay away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-us-holocaust-museum-asks-players-to-stay-away>
Restaurateurs quickly realized the potential value in the game, as players 
often wander into businesses looking for their next catch. The luckier 
restaurants are already key locations in the game, known as Pokéstops for 
players to recharge, and gyms to train theirPokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon>, which draw more players.

However, a small investment can also go a long way. L’inizio Pizza Bar in 
Queens,New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, made headlines 
when its manager, Sean Benedetti, reported a 75% surge in sales over the 
weekend, after he spent $10 to lure a dozen Pokémon.

“The amount of people has been astonishing,” Tom Lattanzio, the store’s owner, 
told the New York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2016/07/12/pokemania-runs-wild-through-city-causing-crime-accidents/?utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_source=NYPFacebook&utm_medium=SocialFlow&sr_share=facebook>
. “All day long, from afternoon to evening this past weekend.”

The app has been downloaded 7.5m times since its release last week. The most 
effective way to attract potential customers is to use Lure Modules, which 
attract Pokémon to a specific location. One Twitter user calculated that it 
would cost a business $1.17 per hour to keep a lure active in their store 
throughout the day.
Sebastian Fung ⚡️ (@sebfung) 
Why your restaurant should consider setting up a #PokemonGO 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash> lure system / IRL trap — it's 
only $1.17 per hour.pic.twitter.com/0UaN32i2xm <https://t.co/0UaN32i2xm>
 <https://twitter.com/sebfung/status/752346058299215872> July 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sebfung/status/752346058299215872> 
Other restaurants are also working on marketing their locations without using 
Lure. Carollann Scott, marketing director of Backstreet Grill in Albuquerque, 
New Mexico, realized the local area was full of Pokémon and people were playing 
outside.


“We found out that there’s always Pokémon in our restaurants,” she said. “I’ve 
seen people walking through our parking lot almost everyday, using [the app] 
and we want to make sure they know that if they come inside they’re gonna find 
one that’s even better.”

They tweeted a picture out to entice potential members of Team Ash or Team 
Misty to come and dine at their location. It’s only been a day and results are 
unclear.
Backstreet Grill (@BackStGrill) 
Come catch all the #Pokemon <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Pokemon?src=hash> in 
our restaurant and enjoy a great meal!#PokemonGo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGo?src=hash> #PokemonGoABQ 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGoABQ?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/xL2uPdAppd 
<https://t.co/xL2uPdAppd>
 <https://twitter.com/BackStGrill/status/753303664383582208> July 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BackStGrill/status/753303664383582208> 
Multiple national chains such as Waffle House 
<https://twitter.com/WaffleHouse/status/752471783970922496> and Olive Garden 
have also hopped on the bandwagon, tweeting pictures of Pokémon at their 
franchises.

Pokémon trainer Roemello Agjmurati was delighted to find out that the 
restaurant Five Leaves in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, was a Pokéstop, while he was 
having brunch there.

“The second I walked in I immediately saw people around me playing the game. 
Even people outside waiting were catching Pokémon,” he told the Guardian. “I 
immediately placed a lure on the Pokéstop which made more Pokémon come to the 
restaurant.”

However, not all restaurants are amused. The employees at Five Leaves said 
they don’t need, “weird fake cartoon characters” to market their restaurant.

“It’s not something that I would encourage here. We’re a busy restaurant. We 
don’t necessarily need to do that,” said manager Arryan Decatur.

He has noticed people loitering outside the restaurant playing the game and 
customers pretending to examine the menu with the game open only to leave 
shortly after.

Another Greenpoint restaurant, Spritzerhaus, distanced themselves from a 
Pokémonbar crawl 
<http://nypost.com/2016/07/12/pokemania-runs-wild-through-city-causing-crime-accidents/?utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_source=NYPFacebook&utm_medium=SocialFlow&sr_share=facebook>
 – one ofmany 
<http://nypost.com/2016/07/12/pokemania-runs-wild-through-city-causing-crime-accidents/?utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_source=NYPFacebook&utm_medium=SocialFlow&sr_share=facebook>
 planned in Brooklyn in the upcoming month – that was set to begin at their 
restaurant.

“[I] have no interest in Pokémon, Pokémon-related business tactics or any 
human being on Earth that plays children’s games on their phones,” the bar 
managertold Mic 
<https://mic.com/articles/148439/pokemon-go-boosting-restaurant-sales-pokestop-lure-module#.JOdAQU8YP>
 via email.

The organizers subsequently chose a different starting point for the bar crawl.

Not having any Pokémon can also be detrimental to businesses. An Olive Garden 
in Washington state received a complaint that read: “No Pokémon in this 
restaurant was upsetting! What did the owner do to them??”
♡Erica♡ (@ericaaaburt) 
Did y'all think I was joking pic.twitter.com/uA9P2Wbb7z 
<https://t.co/uA9P2Wbb7z>
 <https://twitter.com/ericaaaburt/status/752700719568826368> July 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ericaaaburt/status/752700719568826368> 
In an interview with the Financial Times 
<http://nypost.com/2016/07/12/pokemania-runs-wild-through-city-causing-crime-accidents/?utm_campaign=SocialFlow&utm_source=NYPFacebook&utm_medium=SocialFlow&sr_share=facebook>
, Niantic CEO John Hanke said that the game may begin offering sponsored 
locations. Currently the game’s main business model is in-app purchases of 
things such as lures – a feature which allows players to attract Pokémon – but 
Hanke told FT, “there is a second component to our business model at Niantic, 
which is this concept of sponsored locations”.

He added that companies “pay us to be locations within the virtual game board 
– the premise being that it is an inducement that drives foot traffic”.

These companies would pay per customer that was drawn to their location by the 
app. Niantic has a history of using this business model with its previous game 
Ingress, where brands such as Duane Reade, and Jamba Juice paid to be locations 
on its virtual board game.
 