
It was the blockbuster hit of the summer, but as temperatures drop and the 
nights begin to draw in, wandering around with your phone on display may not be 
the best way to spend your evenings.

But Niantic, the makers of Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go>, is trying to tempt you out 
with the game’s first “event”, a Halloween special which runs from 26 October 
until 1 November.

The headline change is an increase in the chances of finding the game’s 
spookiest Pokemon: Drowzee, Hypno, Ghastly, Haunter, Gengar, Golbat and Zubat.

For returning players, there’s also a motivation to play pretty intensely for 
the next few days. Keeping with theHalloween 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> theme, there are more 
treats everywhere, and players will get double the candies for catching and 
transferring Pokémon, as well as quadruple the candies for walking with their 
buddy Pokémon.

It’s all quite nice if you’re one of the people still playing Pokémon Go. Yet 
the Halloween event is small fry compared with the sort of massively 
multiplayer scenarios Niantic hinted at in the run-up to the launch of the game.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2sj2iQyBTQs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2sj2iQyBTQs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2sj2iQyBTQs&media=>
The first trailer for Pokémon Go, released over a year ago, suggested the 
possibility of huge real-world events driven by the hunt for rare Pokémon. For 
instance, the trailer showed hundreds of players congregating in New York’s 
Times Square to defeat the legendary Pokémon Mewtwo.

In practice, the game has seen little of that scale, and what big events did 
occur – like players gathering on the LA seafront to capture the rare Pokémon 
Blastoise – have been largely a function of the sheer number of players playing 
concurrently.

Now, however, the number of players has dropped from more than 50 million to 
less than 30 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/30/pokemon-go-traffic-google> 
and in the absence of new features, it looks like the game will struggle to 
entice them back. Those who are still playing the game, likethe members of the 
Pokémon Go subreddit 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/pokemongo/comments/592kyo/look_what_youve_done_niantic_this_sub_is_the_most/>
, have one set of complaints, to do with the lack of much to do after catching 
every Pokémon and the huge escalation in experience required to level up in the 
latest stage of the game.

But for players who dropped out before those problems reared their head, it 
may take more than a Halloween event to bring them back.
 