
Just weeks after the augmented reality game Pokémon Go shot to the top of the 
app charts, millions of people are saying “Pokémon No”, according to an 
analysis from Axion Capital Management published byBloomberg News 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-22/these-charts-show-that-pokemon-go-is-already-in-decline>
.

The game’s daily active users, downloads, and engagement are all on the 
decline, according to the charts published by Bloomberg.

Niantic cracks down on Pokémon Go cheats with lifetime bans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/15/niantic-pokemon-go-cheats-lifetime-bans>
Daily active users have fallen from around 45m to around 30m since the peak in 
mid-July.

The report said the figures should “assuage” the Pokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> woes of investors concerned 
that the game was pulling users away from other popular apps, such as Facebook, 
Twitter, Instagram and Snapchat.

A spokesman for Niantic, the company behind the game, said it “has not 
released any official numbers regarding downloads or players on Pokémon Go”, a 
spokesman for the company behind the game said.

The hit game became an instant global phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-becomes-global-phenomenon-as-number-of-us-users-overtakes-twitter>
 upon its release in July 2016. The augmented reality game turns the outside 
world into a gamer’s playground, overlaying reality with the cute and cheerful 
cartoon characters. Users walk around seeking out Pokémon and capturing them by 
chucking balls at them.

The instant popularity proved challenging for the servers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-australian-users-report-server-problems-due-to-high-demand>
 of Niantic Labs andlucrative for Nintendo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/nintendo-shares-investors-gotta-catch-em-all-pokemon-go>
, which is a partial owner of the Pokémon Company. Players have already spent 
more than $250m on in-app purchases, according to a report byCNBC 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/08/12/pokemon-go-crosses-250-million-in-revenues-since-launch.html>
.

One man in New Zealand quit his job to become a full-time Pokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/15/pokemon-go-man-quits-job-to-become-full-time-pokemon-hunter>
 hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/15/pokemon-go-man-quits-job-to-become-full-time-pokemon-hunter>
, while law enforcement officials became concerned that would-be robbers might 
use the game’s features tolure unsuspecting players into danger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/10/pokemon-go-armed-robbers-dead-body>
.

The game was credited with encouraging healthy exercise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/10/pokemon-go-health-players-exercise-obesity-walking>
 by some, while others objected to its use in inappropriate locations – such as 
theUS Holocaust Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/13/pokemon-go-us-holocaust-museum-asks-players-to-stay-away>
.

On 21 July – two weeks after the 6 July release in the US – analytics company 
Survey Monkeydeclared 
<https://www.surveymonkey.com/business/intelligence/peak-pokemon-go/> that the 
game had already peaked, releasing charts showing that daily active users, 
downloads, and consumer interest were already trending down.

“Previous blockbuster titles Candy Crush and Draw Something took months to 
gain momentum, gather tens of millions of users, and hit peak usage,” Survey 
Monkey blogger Robbie Allenwrote 
<https://www.surveymonkey.com/business/intelligence/peak-pokemon-go/>. “Pokémon 
Go achieved the same thing in a single week.”

Niantic is in the process of releasing an update to the game for Android and 
iOS devices, according to apost 
<https://www.facebook.com/PokemonGO/posts/954299221383303> on its Facebook 
page. The update will include a new feature called “Pokémon Appraisal” and the 
post promises “several new and exciting features to come in the future of 
Pokémon Go”.
 