
Smash-hit augmented reality game Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> has launched in Germany, 
making its first move into Europe and outside of the US, Australia and New 
Zealand.


The app is now available to download for users in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> via Google Play and Apple App 
Store, but it is still not officially available to users in the UK and the rest 
of Europe.
Pokémon GO (@PokemonGoApp) 
We are happy to announce that #PokemonGO 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PokemonGO?src=hash> is available to Trainers in 
Germany. Follow us to receive future announcements.
 <https://twitter.com/PokemonGoApp/status/753151215630974976> July 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PokemonGoApp/status/753151215630974976> 
'I've never walked my dog so much': readers review Pokémon Go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/ive-never-walked-my-dog-so-much-readers-review-pokemon-go>
Developer Niantic released an updated version of its iPhone app to correct a 
permissions error, while the Android version of Pokémon Go was updated with 
support for smartphones with Intel x86 processors such as the Asus ZenFone line 
of devices and appears to support Google’s latest version of Android 7.0Nougat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/01/google-android-nougat-version-7>
, which is still in beta.

The Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> app update, which 
is again available via third-party file hosting services such as APK Mirror, is 
also considerably faster and appears more stable.

The smash-hit game’s popularity has left Niantic struggling to meet the server 
demands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-australian-users-report-server-problems-due-to-high-demand>
 of existing players, which put brakes on its plans for worldwide expansion. 
The limited country-by-country access has seen players across the world 
resorting tosideloading the app 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/07/how-to-get-pokemon-go-uk> 
on Android ordownloading it with a US iTunes account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/uk-rollout-of-pokemon-go-halted-heres-how-to-get-it-on-iphone-and-android-now>
 on an iPhone.

Now that Pokémon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> Go has 
officially landed in Europe and in its first non-English language, players will 
be hoping for a prompt rollout in the rest of the continent, but Niantic has 
yet to announce a timescale for such wider availability.

 * UK rollout of Pokémon Go delayed – here’s how to get it on iPhone and 
Android now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/uk-rollout-of-pokemon-go-halted-heres-how-to-get-it-on-iphone-and-android-now>
 * 14 essential tips to get you started in Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-14-tips-to-get-you-started-on-your-creature-collecting-adventure> 