
The Australian federal police has charged a 19-year-old Victorian man with 
offences related to alleged illegal radio transmissions to aircraft atMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> and Avalon airports, 
including hoax calls that forced at least one aircraft to abort its landing.

Between 5 September and 3 November, there were 16 separate unauthorised radio 
transmissions atMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>
 airport and Avalon airport causing interference with air traffic control.

Hoax radio transmission at Melbourne airport forces plane to abort landing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/hoax-radio-transmission-at-melbourne-airport-forces-plane-to-abort-landing>
During one of the calls, the hoax caller allegedly pretended to be the pilot 
of a light aircraft as he spoke to an air traffic controller.

“I can see you there now. Roger your mayday. Could you please advise what your 
situation is,” the air traffic control operator asks.

“Engine failure,” the hoax caller allegedly replies. “Descending passing 
through 4,500.”

In a separate incident, a Virgin Australia flight en route from the Gold Coast 
to Melbourne was forced to change course under the alleged instruction of the 
hoax caller transmitting from an unknown location.

A joint investigation between the AFP, Airservices Australia, the Australian 
Communications and Media Authority andVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> Police led to the arrest 
on Tuesday.

Paul Sant, from Rockbank, 29km west of Melbourne, was charged with four counts 
of endangering the safety of aircraft and one count of interference likely to 
endanger safety or cause loss or damage.

When he appeared in Melbourne magistrates court on Tuesday afternoon, his 
lawyer Pern Chaya said Sant had been diagnosed with autism and depression but 
was not on any medication.

“He’s 19, so he’s a young prisoner,” Chaya said.

It was Sant’s first time in custody. He was remanded in custody and is 
expected to apply for bail on Monday.

The AFP’s head of Crime Operations, acting assistant commissioner Chris 
Sheehan, said the offences carried a maximum penalty of up to 20 years 
imprisonment.

In a statement, the Australian Communications and Media Authority said it used 
a range of technologies and techniques to investigate and locate the sources of 
unauthorised or interfering transmissions across the radio frequency spectrum.
 