
The Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police> will 
investigate the use of political text messages sent on election day warning 
voters that Medicare would be privatised by a Coalition government.

Malcolm Turnbull raised the prospect of the investigation in his post-election 
speech on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-dramatic-losses-australian-election>
, accusing Labor of running “some of the most systematic, well-funded lies ever 
peddled in Australian politics” after the texts, which said they came from 
Medicare, were sent to “thousands” of voters.

He blamed part of his shock election result on the belief that many voters had 
been misled by the texts and had therefore not voted Liberal.

Australian election 2016: Andrew Wilkie rejects any deal with Turnbull – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jul/03/australian-election-2016-labor-says-hung-parliament-in-play-politics-live>
He made the accusation as it became clear it would be days before the outcome 
of the federal election would be known.

“There were text messages being sent to thousands of people across Australia 
saying that Medicare was about to be privatised by theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> and the message – 
and the message, the message, the SMS message, came from Medicare,” Turnbull 
said.
Monique Ross (@rossmonique) 
Anyone else get a text from Medicare today? @abcnews 
<https://twitter.com/abcnews> #ausvotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/kLv4zf5WKy 
<https://t.co/kLv4zf5WKy>
 <https://twitter.com/rossmonique/status/749048504459243520> July 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/rossmonique/status/749048504459243520> 
“It said it came from Medicare – an extraordinary act of dishonesty. No doubt 
the police will investigate. This is the scale of the challenge we faced. And 
regrettably more than a few people were misled. There’s no doubt about that.

“That is what our opponents offered – they offered it under the guise of some 
scare campaigns so dishonest – a pretty shameful episode in Australian 
political history.”

On Saturday, Labor’s Queensland branch said it had sent the messages to 
voters’ phones 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/australian-federal-election-2016-queensland-alp-sends-voters-text-messages-as-medicare-20160702-gpx41x.html>
 urging them not to vote for the Coalition.

Shorten fought on policies. Turnbull sat back waiting for the people to elect 
him | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/shorten-fought-on-policies-while-turnbull-sat-back-waiting-for-the-people-to-elect-him>
When the text messages were received they appeared under the name “Medicare”.

A Queensland Labor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> spokesman told 
Guardian Australia: “The message was not intended to indicate that it was a 
message from Medicare, rather to identify the subject of the text.

“The message was consistent with Labor’s message throughout the campaign. 
There should be no surprise that this was not a government message.”

The AFP has confirmed it has been asked to investigate the matter.

“The Australian federal police can confirm it received a referral on Saturday 
2 July 2016 in relation to the receipt of text messages allegedly sent from 
Medicare,” a statement said on Sunday.

“This matter is now being evaluated and whilst this occurs it would not be 
appropriate to provide further comment.”

Turnbull used his speech to lambast the ALP for their generally negative 
tactics during the campaign, saying despite everything he was still confident 
theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> would form 
majority government.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malcolm%20Turnbull%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20confident%20that%20we%20can%20form%20a%20majority%20government%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malcolm%20Turnbull%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99m%20confident%20that%20we%20can%20form%20a%20majority%20government%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video&media=>
Malcolm Turnbull: ‘I’m confident that we can form a majority government’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/02/malcolm-turnbull-im-confident-that-we-can-form-a-majority-government-video>
He thanked Liberal party supporters for their work during the campaign, and 
said some faced an intimidatory atmosphere from political opponents.


“I want to acknowledge the great work and leadership shown by the federal 
campaign director, Tony Nutt, and our whole campaign team, and all the Liberal 
and National party workers in every electorate and every polling booth often 
having to stand up to intimidation and threats in there,” he said.

“I want to thank every single one of them.”


The AFP has played a role already in the story of the 2016 election campaign, 
executing two search warrants in Melbourne over allegations of unauthorised 
leaking of confidential national broadband network documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/australian-federal-police-raid-labor-party-offices-in-melbourne>
.

Federal election 2016 results: every state at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/federal-election-2016-results-every-state-at-a-glance>
One office raided belonged to Labor’s communications spokesman, Stephen Conroy.

A week later, the NBN chairman, Ziggy Switkowski, wrote an opinion piece, 
published in Fairfax Media, defending his decision to ask the federal police to 
investigate the leaks of NBN documents.

He made no apologies for calling in the federal police, leading Labor to 
officially complain to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-nbn-boss-ziggy-switkowski-breached-caretaker-conventions-investigation-finds-20160614-gpj809.html#ixzz4BblwupmH>
 that Switkowski had broken the caretaker conventions by writing the opinion 
piece.
 