
Police divers are searching the river Dee in Aberdeenshire for a missing 
camper after two bags containing his belongings were washed up beside the river 
on Saturday.

Terence Kilbride, 48, from Warrington, is thought to have been camping in the 
area and was reported missing on Monday.

Meanwhile, flood-stricken communities across Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/05/scottish-minister-defends-budget-cuts-as-flood-warning-remains>
 remained on alert as river levels remained high, particularly on the Don in 
Inverurie, where homes were evacuated on Monday night, and on the South Esk in 
Brechin.


Transport disruption across Scotland continued, with some villages in 
Aberdeenshire partially cut off because of damage to roads and bridges, while 
theRest and Be Thankful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/30/storm-frank-batters-large-parts-of-uk-as-weather-misery-deepens>
 pass on the A83 in Argyll was closed on Tuesday night over concerns a 150-ton 
boulder perched on mountainside above the road could crash down on to traffic.

Answering questions from MSPs at Holyrood on Tuesday, Scotland’s finance 
minister, John Swinney, said the damage recent flooding had inflicted upon the 
Aberdeenshire town ofBallater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/dec/30/caravan-swept-away-river-dee-flood-scotland-storm-frank-video>
 in particular was “incomprehensible” and paid tribute to firefighters who 
helped others while their own homes were being flooded.

He rejected claims that cuts were threatening the efficiency of the country’s 
flood forecaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/03/scottish-flood-defence-cuts-criticised-as-sepa-warns-of-more-flooding>
, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency(Sepa). Swinney insisted Sepa’s 
resources would be “absolutely and totally protected” and that funding for 42 
newly proposed flood-protection schemes would also be made available.

Swinney also said that the £4m allocated in his December budget to assist the 
Scottish Borders, Perth and Kinross, and Dumfries and Galloway areas afterStorm 
Desmond <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-desmond> would now be 
extended following the devastation wrought by Storm Frank, in particular around 
Aberdeenshire.
 