
Jurek Biegus, Stoke

I grew up in Britain but my parents are Polish. When the draw is made and 
England come up it makes it a bit more interesting, it's always good.The number 
of Polish supporters at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/13/england-poland-polish-fans> 
will be a sign of the patriotism that we have – there was a Champions League 
qualifier in Wrexham a couple of weeks ago when Wisla Krakow came across and it 
was rammed with Polish supporters, most of them supporting Wisla purely because 
they are a Polish team. There has always been a lot of patriotism towards the 
national sports. A few years ago nobody was interested in Formula One and 
suddenly when a Polish driver comes on the scene there are thousands of people 
going to the grands prix. There is always a strong cultural identity that you 
do Polish things but people have immigrated and I'm as British as anybody. In 
any sport I'll always support Poland, but if they aren't playing then I'll 
watch England or a UK team.

I think you feel more patriotic when you are away from your own country. There 
are that many of us here and we will be concentrated in one spot this evening. 
But give it time and there will be more youngsters less enthusiastic towards 
Poland and more so towards England – I think it's inevitable. If you give it 10 
years there will be Polish players playing in theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> national side.

Lukasz Lesinski, Leicester

I moved to England in 2006 to find a job, like most Polish people! Every game 
against England is a big game for Poland, especially at Wembley, although the 
media always goes on about1973 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/12/jan-tomaszewski-poland-clown>
. For Polish people in England this is the big game, even though Poland can't 
qualify – there will be a lot of Polish fans at Wembley,much more than 18,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/14/poland-fans-england-coach> 
because I know a lot of people who will be in the England section as well. I've 
got a lot of English friends so I don't want them to be able to take the mick 
out of me.

I heard about the Adrian Chiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/12/adrian-chiles-twitter-poland-fans>
 thing, but I don't think it's important. People try and make a scandal out of 
it but it's just a joke, nobody is upset about it.

We will be supporting the Polish team even more because they are playing our 
second country. I really hope they fight hard, show our character and show that 
we are not a bad team. It is the first timePoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> have played in England during my 
time here so it is a strange feeling.

I like to read the English newspapers when they write good things about the 
Polish players – I just hope it isn't 5-0 to England or something.

I hope the team will think about how many Polish people are living in England 
and how much this means to them. It isn't really a serious game for them 
because they can't qualify but hopefully they will play 100% for us.

I've lived here seven years and am really glad to be here – I support England 
in rugby and I am really happy Poland are playing against England.

Jan Wajs, Chesterfield

I'm a 50-50 split between Poland and England so I support both teams, and 
Chesterfield. I have been brought up in an English environment for 30 years and 
in English culture as well as a Polish one. I think the Polish support is 
slightly more passionate. They see their national team with a great deal of 
pride. I think that goes back to the fact that Polish football is a lot more 
humble than the English Premier League in terms of wages and money. I take the
Adrian Chiles <https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles> comments with a 
pinch of salt, I've got used to the stereotypes over the years – the carwashing 
and plumbing etc – I suppose they've replaced the Irish jokes in a way. Polish 
fans have always been passionate sports followers, they travel all over Europe 
to watch speedway and there is a great sense of national pride wherever they 
go. I went to watch Wisla Krakow play Fulham a few years ago in the Europa 
League and there were Polish fans everywhere – not just Wisla fans. There is a 
great deal of unity and few divides when it comes to sport. For me it will be a 
mixed bag tonight, my heart lies with Poland but at this moment in time my head 
is totally with England.

Simon Ceglinski, Cheshire

I'm 25 and went to my first Poland game against Belgium in 2006. I've always 
felt passionately towards them. A lot of people think I'm crazy supporting 
Poland but it's just how I feel. I feel very passionately towards them. I've 
got no bad feeling towards the England team, I live here, but a lot of the fans 
believe they are owed something. At the end of the day I was born in this 
country so technically I'm English but I support Poland. I work in Crewe and 
there are a huge number of Poles there. It's a good thing and you can't knock 
someone for coming over here and working hard to earn a wage. I went to Old 
Trafford during the 2006 qualifying campaign and there were so many Polish fans 
in the England end, I think you will see the same tonight. The mix of people 
living in the country will just add to the atmosphere.
 