
The new vice-chancellor of Exeter University is to be Professor Steve Smith, 
senior pro-vice-chancellor and professor of international politics at 
Aberystwyth. He will succeed Sir Geoffrey Holland in October.

Professor Smith is credited with transforming Aberystwyth's department of 
international politics, taking it from a grade three in the research assessment 
exercise to a five and then a five-star in 2001.

An undergraduate at Southampton, where he took his PhD in international 
relations, Professor Smith was director of the Centre for Public Choice Studies 
at the University of East Anglia. Last year he became only the second UK 
academic to be elected president of the International Studies Association in 
the US. He was also the recipient of the ISA's Susan Strange Award in 1999 for 
the person who has most challenged the received wisdom in the profession. In 
2000, Professor Smith was elected to become an Academician of the Social 
Sciences (AcSS). Today, he said Exeter was clearly going places. "It has a very 
strong teaching and research record, combined with one of the best living and 
learning environments to be found anywhere in the world. It is not hard to see 
why undergraduate, and indeed postgraduate, applications have been rising so 
quickly over the past few years. Internationally, the university has a growing 
reputation, but it is also taking a leading role in its region as well."

Lord Alexander of Weedon, chancellor of the university, said: "We were 
impressed by his energy and vision. He will be able to put both qualities to 
good use in his new role."

Professor Smith will arrive at the 12,000-student university at the same time 
as the first student at the Peninsula Medical School, which Exeter helped to 
establish. It also has a major stake in the Combined Universities in Cornwall 
project, which will see the creation of a new Â£50m shared HE campus in Falmouth 
by 2004.
 