
Pope Francis has authorised the French church to start the preliminary 
sainthood investigation for theReverend Jean Hamel, whose throat was slit by 
Islamist militants as he celebrated Mass in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/france-shock-second-isis-attack-12-days>
.

Francis told reporters Sunday he had authorized the gathering of witness 
testimony to determine if a beatification cause is warranted.

France in shock again after Isis murder of priest in Normandy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/france-shock-second-isis-attack-12-days>
Usually the Vatican requires a five-year waiting period before such 
investigations can begin, but Francis said he authorised the start of the 
investigation now since witnesses might die or forget over time.

Hamel was killed on 26 July in his parish church in Normandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/31/police-in-jacques-hamel-case-investigate-telegram-messaging-app-link>
. Police killed the assailants, and the Isis group claimed responsibility.

In honoring Hamel as a martyr last month, Francis urged all to display the 
same courage Hamel had and denounced such slayings in the name of God as 
“satanic”.

According to the Vatican’s complicated saint-making process, people whose 
deaths are due to hatred for the faith can be declared a martyr and be 
beatified without having a miracle credited to their intercession.

The Vatican, however, must do a full-fledged investigation to determine if 
indeed Hamel’s death qualifies as martyrdom.

A miracle is needed to be declared a saint.

Police in French priest murder case investigate messaging app link
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/31/police-in-jacques-hamel-case-investigate-telegram-messaging-app-link>
The church where Hamel was killed reopened on Sunday for the first time since 
the attack, with a special cleansing ritual and call for tolerance across 
religions.

The archbishop of Rouen led a procession through the nearby town of 
Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray to the church.

Mayor Hubert Wulfrance said Hamel’s memory “prevails over this so special 
moment, split between endless emotion and hope in the future.”

“We bear the tragedy of this July 26th, 2016, as an indelible scar on our 
common history, our national history,” he said to a crowd that included local 
Muslims invited to take part in the community event.

Archbishop Dominique Lebrun said the mayor’s words “bolster us in the desire 
to participate in the common life of your city and of the world, so we will not 
repeat the tragedy of[drowned Syrian refugee boy] Alan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/alan-kurdi-turkish-court-jails-pair-syrian-toddler-death-trafficking>
 nor the tragedy of Jacques Hamel.”
 