
She won the heart of King Henry VIII, divided the church and lost her head. 
But nearly 500 years after Anne Boleyn met her death, only one uncontested 
portrait of her remains.


Pictures of the beguiling queen – who is played by a steely Claire Foy in the 
hit BBC historical drama Wolf Hall 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/2dzxsWcS4s1HPN6pthrQkg8/claire-foy> – 
were roundly destroyed after her death in 1536. The concerted effort to erase 
her from history was thorough, leaving only a battered lead disc as a 
contemporary likeness, theMoost Happi medal in the British Museum in London. 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=953013&partId=1>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fanne-boleyn-portrait-found-using-facial-recognition-software%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F15%2F1424021950808%2F36c961ce-a84d-4d15-83e7-e72db00356a8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Possible%20Anne%20Boleyn%20portrait%20found%20using%20facial%20recognition%20software&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fanne-boleyn-portrait-found-using-facial-recognition-software%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Possible%20Anne%20Boleyn%20portrait%20found%20using%20facial%20recognition%20software&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fanne-boleyn-portrait-found-using-facial-recognition-software%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F15%2F1424021950808%2F36c961ce-a84d-4d15-83e7-e72db00356a8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Claire Foy and Damian Lewis as Anne Boleyn and King Henry VIII in the BBC’s 
adaptation of Wolf Hall Photograph: Ed Miller/BBC/Company Productions Ltd 
But another portrait from the late 16th century has emerged as a likely 
painting of the queen. Researchers in California used state-of-the-art face 
recognition to compare the face on the Moost Happi medal with a number of 
paintings and found a close match with the privately ownedNidd Hall portrait, 
held at the Bradford Art Galleries and Museums 
<http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anne_Boleyn%3F_the_Nidd_Hall_portrait.jpg>
.

The Nidd Hall artwork shows a woman wearing jewellery long thought to be 
Boleyn’s. But scholars have been divided on the figure’s identity. Some claim 
the woman is Boleyn’s successor, Jane Seymour, the third wife of King Henry 
VIII.

Amit Roy-Chowdhury <http://www.ee.ucr.edu/~amitrc/>, head of the video 
computing group at the University of California in Riverside, turned his 
expertise in computer face-recognition to renaissance art after he was asked 
for help by an art historian, Conrad Rudolph, a colleague at the university. “I 
had no idea about what art history really was,” he said. “My last interaction 
with art was probably some time in middle school.”

Three years later, Roy-Chowdhury has developed a program that learns to 
identify faces from their anatomical dimensions, such as the width of their 
noses, and the distance between their eyes, and more distinctive features, such 
as whether they have one straight eyebrow and one curved. After training the 
computer on pictures of known people, it can scan images of unknown characters 
and churn out probabilities on their identities.
 The lead Moost Happi medal, believed to be a commemorative coin and the only 
undisputed image of Anne Boleyn 
Using computers to recognise faces in old paintings is more challenging than 
picking out faces in a crowd.Facial recognition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facial-recognition> struggles with 
changes in pose, illumination, facial expressions and ageing. But in works of 
art, the computer must contend with the quirks of the artists’ styles. Another 
major hurdle is that often, precious few contemporary paintings exist on which 
to train the computer.

To improve its chances of finding a match, the program works out the best 
combination of facial measurements and discriminating features with which to 
look for matches.

Speaking at the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in 
San Jose 
<http://meetings.aaas.org/?utm_source=visualurl&utm_medium=redirect&utm_campaign=opp_am15visual>
, Roy-Chowdhury described his program’s attempts to identify characters in a 
collection of 57 paintings. The program found 14 matches, and was undecided on 
the identity of 26 people. The rest were not the characters Roy-Chowdhury had 
programmed the computer to look for.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fanne-boleyn-portrait-found-using-facial-recognition-software%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F15%2F1424022097913%2Fa2c68240-61ca-4a97-8bcf-02a1d66c03ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Possible%20Anne%20Boleyn%20portrait%20found%20using%20facial%20recognition%20software&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fanne-boleyn-portrait-found-using-facial-recognition-software%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Possible%20Anne%20Boleyn%20portrait%20found%20using%20facial%20recognition%20software&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fanne-boleyn-portrait-found-using-facial-recognition-software%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F15%2F1424022097913%2Fa2c68240-61ca-4a97-8bcf-02a1d66c03ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Reproduction of a portrait of Anne Boleyn in the National Portrait Gallery. 
Photograph: Roger-Viollet/Rex Features 
The system compared the Moost Happi medal image with four paintings from Tudor 
times, and failed to find a match with two portraits, including one from Hever 
Castle in Kent andanother held at the National Portrait Gallery in London 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/collections/search/portrait/mw00142/Anne-Boleyn>. More 
intriguingly, the system found what may be the earliest portrait of the 
astronomer Galileo Galilei.

“These portraits have some importance. They probably represent someone of 
social standing, or some important event, and we often want to identify who is 
the person in the portrait,” he said. “What the computer gives at the end is 
another source of evidence for the discussions that have been going on about 
these questions.”


The system failed to resolve other debates in the world of art history though. 
The 17th-century Italian painter, Caravaggio, allegedly gave one of the figures 
in his altarpiece The Entombment of Christ the features of Michelangelo. But 
the computer found no matches when it compared the figure, Nicodemus, with 
bronze busts and a chalk drawing of Michelangelo.

Another Italian, the 15th-century artist Andrea Mantegna, painted a 
self-portrait, but may also have worked his image into some of his most famous 
works. But comparisons of his self-portrait with two prominent works found no 
evidence he had.

The system struggled to shed light on the validity of three paintings that may 
be of Shakespeare after comparing them with a sculpted bust, an engraving and a 
portrait at the National Portrait Gallery.

 