
Though the first alternative business structure (ABS) has yet to be announced 
– 92 have so far applied, with the first likely to receive its licence later 
this month – the ball isstarting to roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jan/06/alternative-business-structures-solicitors>
, and personal injury is the first area of legal practice targeted by new 
entrants to the market.

Last week AIM-listed Quindell Group agreed to acquire 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/aim-listed-company-to-buy-liverpool-law-firm-in-abs-first>
 Liverpool personal injury law firm Silverbeck Rymer for £19.3m as part of a 
move to create an integrated claims-handling operation for the insurance 
industry. This week, Australia's Slater & Gordon (S&G) – the world's first 
publicly listed law firm –announced 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/slater-gordon-to-enter-uk-market-with-54m-purchase-of-russell-jones-walker>
 it is to buy national law firm Russell Jones & Walker (RJW) for £54m as it 
enters the UK market with a bang.

Both deals are dependent on being granted ABS licences, although the S&G deal 
– while eye-opening for several reasons – is more traditional in that it is one 
law firm taking over another. I would expect them to make this a positive by 
trumpeting their independence from outside influences (not to say Silverbeck 
Rymer will act any less independently, of course); when it listed, S&G's 
prospectus made it clear to investors that its duties were first to the court, 
then to its clients and only then to shareholders.

S&G and RJW share a similar heritage, starting life before the second world 
war acting for injured trade unionists before broadening out into other areas 
of work. But they remain at heart personal injury practices (60% of its 
business in the case of RJW). They now share the ambition of becoming one of 
the dominant consumer legal brands, jostling for position with the likes of
QualitySolicitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/aug/31/legal-advice-retail-outlets>, 
Co-operative Legal Services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/nov/10/coop-move-into-family-division> 
and Irwin Mitchell.

Though RJW's name will not yet register with consumers, that of Claims Direct 
will, the once-damaged brand that the firm bought and resuscitated over recent 
years as its direct route to market.

S&G has done this before. The poster child for ABSs after groundbreaking 
liberalisation in Australia allowed it to go public in May 2007, access to 
capital has enabled it to grow very rapidly, largely through an acquisition 
spree that has seen S&G swallow up 20 practices across Australia: turnover has 
nearly tripled to A$182m (£123m), staff numbers have increased from 420 to 
1,100 and office locations have gone from 26 to 61. It now estimates that it 
has around 25% of the personal injury market and claims strong name recognition 
in the streets of Sydney, Melbourne and the rest.

RJW is similar in size to the pre-floatation S&G and it would be no surprise 
to see it grow in a similar way. These two are not put off by theJackson reforms
 <https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/feb/16/jackson-litigation-costs-reform> 
contained in the legal aid bill, implementation of which the government 
announced this week will be put back from October 2012 to April 2013. Though 
these are likely to reduce solicitors' profits from personal injury work, there 
will clearly still be a lot of cases out there. It seems likely volume will be 
key to making it work and obviously larger, well-resourced firms with rigorous 
systems will be best equipped for this.

Also, S&G comes from a different litigation world, where after-the-event 
insurance in particular is unknown and so is arguably more prepared than most 
to operate in the post-Jackson environment. Further, S&G's access to funds has 
given it the wherewithal to take on big consumer and investor class actions (it 
currently has 29 on the go); given the difficulties law firms over here face in 
bringing such cases, this is a particularly interesting prospect.

There is no doubt that the gun has been fired on the race for the consumer 
legal market, with more new entrants in the offing. Silverbeck Rymer and RJW 
may be among the first to show their hand, but they will not be the last.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 