
Mis-selling scandals cost Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> a further £1.8bn in 
the first half of the year, the bank has revealed, as it pledged to return more 
cash to shareholders in the future.

There was a £1.4bn provision for compensation for payment- protection 
insurance during the period, whichAntónio Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, boss of the 
bailed-out bank, described as disappointing. This takes the total cost for PPI 
for Lloyds to £13.4bn, and the industry’s bill to more than £26bn.

Lloyds, which employs 7,000 people just to handle PPI, admitted that if 
customer complaints did not tail off as quickly as it expected it could face 
further hefty charges in the months ahead. The PPI bill for Lloyds could rise 
by a further £10bn, according to one City estimate published on Friday.

The bank also took a £117m charge <http:// 
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/05/record-ppi-fine-for-lloyds-knocks-12-off-horta-osorio-bonus>
 to cover the fine earlier this year from the Financial Conduct Authority for 
mishandling PPI complaints, a £175m charge for packaged bank accounts – where 
products such as insurance are sold with a current account – and additional 
sums for other compensation payouts.

“Rebuilding customer trust remains a key imperative for the business. 
Regrettably, the UK banking sector is still being impacted by conduct issues, 
including litigation and PPI,” said Horta-Osório.

Despite the slew of scandals knocking the bank’s profits, Horta-Osório said it 
had made strong progress and focused on the prospects for returns to 
shareholders in the future.

The bank paid an interim dividend of 0.75p a share – some £535m – and intends 
to conduct share buybacks and hand out special dividends. The aim is to make 
the shares more attractive to prospective shareholders, particularly retail 
investors whom the government intends to target for share sale in the future.

The government’s stake now stands at below 15% – down from the 43% holding it 
built in the wake of Lloyds’s rescue of HBOS during the 2008 crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness> – 
and Horta-Osório said the remaining stake would be disposed of in the next 12 
months.

There has been speculation he will leave once the taxpayer stake is sold off, 
but he said: “I like it here, I like the management team … I like the bank. So 
unless the board or shareholders want to boot me out, I’m quite happy here.”

Profits for the first half rose 38% to £1.2bn. This includes the PPI charge 
and the £660m cost of selling off TSB, the branch network which it had to 
create as result of its £20bn taxpayer rescue in 2008. TSB was floated andthen 
sold to Spain’s Sabadell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/20/lloyds-sells-50-of-tsb-to-spains-sabadell>
.

The bank also revealed the impact of changes to the bank tax regime, 
introduced byGeorge Osborne in his July budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/biggest-banks-welcome-budget-reduction-in-bank-levy>
, to water down the bank levy and introduce an 8% surcharge, which will 
increase its effective tax rate to 30% from the low 20s now.

Lloyds shares fell 2.8% to 83p.

The PPI scandal has hit Lloyds harder than other banks and could still 
escalate. It sold 16m PPI policies since 2000 and has now contacted, settled or 
taken provisions for more than 45% of these. The current provision assumes a 
significant decrease in complaint volumes over the next 18 month. But it could 
be increased by £3bn over 18 months if the scale of complaints does not fall, 
the bank estimated. However, stockbroker Cenkos warned the cost could more than 
treble to a further £10bn.


Richard Lloyd, executive director at consumer body Which?, said: “This scandal 
will rumble on for years unless the banks pull their socks up and start making 
it much quicker and easier for people to get back the money they’re rightfully 
owed. If any bank fails to do this, the regulator must step in.”

Lloyds said two-thirds of complaints come from more than 200 claims-management 
companies, which are thought to have received around £1.7bn in fees from the 
bank as a result of bringing claims.

A court ruling last year over the way commission was paid over PPI sales – 
known asPlevin v Paragon 
<http://ukscblog.com/new-judgment-plevin-respondent-v-paragon-personal-finance-limited-appellant-2014-uksc-61/>
 – could also push up the compensation bill for Lloyds and other banks. The 
City regulator isreviewing the implications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/may/27/banks-face-bigger-ppi-mis-selling-bill-regulator-compensation-rules-fca-supreme-court>
 for the industry.

George Culmer, finance director at Lloyds, said the costs of compensation for 
packaged bank accounts would not be huge: “It will not be another PPI,” he said.


 