
Thirteen years ago, when Babalwa Mbono was eight months pregnant with her 
second child, she went to her clinic in Cape Town,South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, to have a routine HIV test.

“I went with confidence because my first child was negative and I was negative 
then,” she says. When the test came back positive, Mbono couldn’t believe it. 
“When the counsellor who tested me showed me the results I thought, ‘you’re 
joking!’ I even asked her if she was sure.”

Mbono left the clinic in a daze and went home to reflect on the news, still in 
denial. She looked healthy and well, unlike her sister who had died three years 
previously from Aids-related tuberculosis. “For me, [the result] was something 
that was not real,” Mbono adds.

Nowadays many people in South Africa know about HIV. The country has the 
biggest and most high-profile epidemic in the world, with an estimated 7 
million people living with the condition, according toUNAids figures 
<http://www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/southafrica>. But in 2003 
it was not a big topic, and discussions usually revolved around death, says 
Mbono. The fear of what having HIV might mean for her unborn child started to 
creep in, and she worried that she would not live long enough to care for a 
baby who might be infected.

When Mbono found out that she had HIV, South Africa’s government was still 
deciding whether to make antiretroviral treatment (ARVs) available to all,
despite a third of pregnant women testing positive 
<http://www.medwiser.org/hiv-aids/around-the-world/hivaids-in-south-africa/>. 
Today, 48% of infected South African adults are on ARVs.

Can WHO’s new ‘test and treat’ HIV policy reach those who need it most?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/aug/03/aids-hiv-antiretroviral-drugs-treatment-prevention>
Back at the clinic, Mbono was linked up to a mentor mother employed by 
mothers2mothers (M2M), an Africa-based NGO that is funded, in part, by Johnson 
& Johnson. The scheme started in 2001 and has helped 1.4 million HIV-positive 
mothers in nine sub-Saharan African countries. It currently operates in Kenya, 
SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Malawi, Lesotho, 
Uganda, Swaziland and Zambia – seven countries where it has virtually 
eliminated mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) among its patients, with a 2.1% 
transmission rate (the UN classifies virtual elimination as less than 5%).

Mbono’s HIV-positive mentor allayed her fears about death and her anger 
towards her husband, whom she blamed for giving her HIV after he tested 
positive with a much higher viral load. Through M2M, Mbono learned about taking 
ARVs to reduce the risk of MTCT in the womb and during breastfeeding, and about 
how to change her lifestyle to live a long and happy life with her children.

Last year, South Africa was one of six priority countries (all in sub-Saharan 
Africa) to meet aGlobal Plan <http://emtct-iatt.org/global-plan/> target of 
reducing MTCT by 90%, with 95% of pregnant women with HIV on ARVs and an 84% 
reduction in new HIV infections among children.

Over the past year, Cuba, Belarus, Armenia and Thailand – non-priority 
countries –managed to eliminate MTCT 
<http://www.avert.org/professionals/hiv-programming/prevention/prevention-mother-child>
 altogether. In South Africa, mother-to-child transmission of HIV hasfallen to 
an estimated 1.4% <http://www.mrc.ac.za/Media/2016/13press2016.htm>, putting 
the country within reach of eliminating paediatric infections, although 
maternal mortality remains high.

Comfort and support: how a radio show for people with HIV made a difference
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/13/hiv-radio-young-people-south-african-safe-space-talk>
The M2M programme “makes the person feel supported”, Mbono says. “It’s a 
sisterhood, and it makes you feel like you have a family to cry on.” Through 
counselling, which helps to breaks down the stigma still attached toHIV/Aids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/hiv-aids> 
in South Africa despite its high prevalence, Mbono also found the courage to 
confide in her parents and siblings.

And six months ago, she decided to disclose her HIV status to her daughter 
Anathi, who had just turned 13. “It really felt shocking,” says Anathi, who 
feared that there would be no one to look after her seven-year-old brother, who 
was born HIV negative. “I was afraid that she would leave us.”

Mbono reassured her daughter that she had tested negative when she was 18 
months old, but Anathi decided to go alone to the clinic and be tested anyway, 
where she also accessed free counselling from health workers.

“I was so, so scared, but eventually they just sat with me and told me to not 
freak out and to not think negative things about my mum,” Anathi says. Over the 
two days she waited for her results, she spent time with her mother and learned 
more about M2M, even reading her mentoring books.

Mbono’s experience with M2M made her give up unhealthy habits, such as not 
eating properly and drinking alcohol, and inspired her to become a mentor 
mother in 2003. “The [programme] gave me the strength to go out there and tell 
people about HIV and correct the mistakes that people are making and [that] I 
also made when I didn’t have any information.”


The South African children's Aids hospice that ran out of business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/20/south-africa-aids-hospice-johannesburg-durban-conference>
She has gone from counselling others on HIV/Aids and family planning, to 
training other mentors and seeing them become nurses, social workers and 
students.

“What makes me most happy [is] when I see a woman who had broken up in pieces 
when she was told about HIV ... and when you see her on the next visit she is 
much better than the day she left.”

Almost 99%% of babies in M2M’s South Africa programme test negative for HIV at 
18 months, and that also makes Mbono proud. “That makes me feel that I’ve done 
my job, because 18 months is a long time for the mother to be supported and to 
be educated. There are so many challenges that they come across, and we are 
there [for them].”

Anathi set up a counselling group at school to discuss HIV and sex with 18 
girls and five teachers, as well as a drama group to perform plays to parents 
and pupils that discuss staying HIV negative and breaking down stigma.

“Most people don’t talk about it ... Young people are not getting enough 
information about HIV,” she says. Anathi has a friend who she says became a 
recluse after she found out she is positive, and she knows two girls who have 
gone off the rails since their mothers recently died of Aids.


But for Anathi, dealing with her mother’s HIV has made them stronger and 
brought them closer together.

She still worries about how well her mother has slept or eaten when they are 
apart, even though learning about ARVs has lessened her fears of her mother 
falling ill and not recovering. “I just worry too much and I call,” she says. 
“She is like my daughter.”

 * This article was amended on 6 September 2016. An earlier version said that 
mother-to-child transmission of HIV in South Africa had fallen to 3.5%. That 
was based on a 2010 figure, and has been corrected to include more recent 
information, which says that it has fallen to an estimated 1.4%.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 