
Jakarta, 12 November

Departure from the Royal Australian Air Force base in Canberra. The media 
flies before the prime minister who catches up later in a faster plane. The 
uniformed chaps with the high-gloss shoes greet everyone, this time at 3am, 
with a cheery good morning. Because it happens to be 3am this greeting is 
accompanied with laughter. The “at you” kind, not the “with you” kind.

It’s a typical departure in that everyone has a stress point. You can feel the 
centres of stress pulsing around the terminal. One colleague’s dog has vomited 
profusely in the kitchen. Another frets this is the best we are going to feel 
for at least a week.

In the blink of an eye we are wheels up, then a brief panic ensues when it 
appears two passports have been left behind. No drama, the passports are 
located.

TV crews huddle in the aisles and talk logistics. Fitful sleep is had. In what 
feels a short space of time we are thudding on the tarmac in the Indonesian 
capital. The heat hits like a fan-forced oven.

Our liaison person from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, hovering 
with intent at the bottom of the stairs, is from the take-no-prisoners school, 
cheerful and practical, all precision, like the RAAF. We are blasting through 
Jakarta traffic with a police escort with a program in our hands which is 
locked down to the footnotes.

Pretty shortly it’s obvious why. Everything in Jakarta contains an element of 
mystery. The government and its apparatus does what it does. There is always 
the potential for things to slide off the rails. A fixed program must be 
reassuring in a post where mild incomprehension or outright frustration is 
occupational risk.

Having spent weeks nailing the program, DFAT (of course) thinks we are doing 
the program.Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> (of course) has a 
different idea. When he lands, he’d like to do a short press conference. One 
senses the distinct sound of silent screams from the advancers. One can only 
sense the scream because the poker face is absolute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8ebcf823855c0f1ad6535a3cfdad22f23f83699%2F527_173_4401_2994%2F4401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8ebcf823855c0f1ad6535a3cfdad22f23f83699%2F527_173_4401_2994%2F4401.jpg>
 Malcolm Turnbull and wife Lucy (right) arrive at the Fairbairn RAAF Base in 
Canberra, before nine days of travel through Asia and Europe. Photograph: Dean 
Lewins/AAP 
It’s an odd call by the prime minister. By speaking to the media before the 
events today, and with the time difference, at least for print editions and the 
TV news, he’s just made our one day in Jakarta actually about the rats-and-mice 
domestic political issues back at home. I wonder if he gets that? New boy. 
Rookie error. Given we are in Jakarta so the Australian government can reset 
one of our most important foreign policy relationships, you’d think we’d keep 
our collective line of sight on that.

We roar on to the presidential palace, which is a marvellous building in the 
grand colonial style. No-one in our media entourage is entirely sure what is 
happening because guidance is vague. The Indonesian media have been well 
briefed and swim like a school of fish in elegant formation. We visitors try to 
plug into the slipstream but lack a certain confidence. Confusion is inevitable.

There will be no remarks by Turnbull and his Indonesian host, someone tells 
us, which is awkward, given that’s actually what we came for. On the strength 
of that advice, most of the Australian press pack departs the scene. Later we 
learn there have indeed been remarks, which have to be chased.

David Bold, Turnbull’s senior media adviser, is a young man but an old soul. 
He’s from the human shock absorber school of press secretary, which in the 
combative world of Canberra in recent years, is a bit of a throwback. One 
suspects Bold could emerge from a nuclear blast, straighten his tie, and 
suggest we all go to the bar for a martini, but even he’s looking mildly 
disconcerted by Jakarta’s lack of fixed points, nothing is shared, but a little 
wrinkle forms between the eyes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93feccae763822b819b5cc24fa5f75f704d33516%2F0_242_3827_2298%2F3827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93feccae763822b819b5cc24fa5f75f704d33516%2F0_242_3827_2298%2F3827.jpg>
 Malcolm Turnbull with the Indonesian President Joko Widodo at the Tanah Abang 
retail market in Jakarta. ‘Been for a bit of shopping?’ he asked our reporter. 
Photograph: Adek Berry/AFP/Getty Images 
After the formalities at the palace, Joko Widodo and Turnbull go to a local 
textile market for a walk through – a “down with the people” opportunity the 
Indonesian president has never offered another world leader.David Cameron 
walked here, but on his own. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/david-cameron/11767386/David-Cameron-poses-for-selfie-with-Indonesian-singer.html>

Much is made of this generosity. “Wonderful. Totemic.”

Less is made of the fact the walk was actually the idea of the Australian 
ambassador, Paul Grigson, and the Indonesians have agreed, doubtless for their 
own domestic motivations.

Market forces help Turnbull to build warmer relations with Indonesia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/12/market-forces-help-turnbull-to-build-warmer-relations-with-indonesia>
Arriving at the market is a shock. Turnbull’s police detail take one look at 
the market and their profound objection to this outing is written all over 
their stony faces. You feel their attentiveness level climb by several notches.

I wait for the politicians at the bottom of a flight of steps. The crowd is 
swelling all around me, like a rising tide. It keeps coming, filling, spilling 
outwards, lapping the corners. The smart phones are out, children are being 
thrust forward.

There are too many people in this space. Too many blind corners. In theory, in 
the program, this event is a choreographed media opportunity, benign as hell. 
In reality we are right on the edge of the unknowable.

Turnbull senses the deep crazy as soon as he arrives. It’s baking hot. The 
leaders’ jackets come off. The Indonesian foreign minister grabs some paper 
towels for Turnbull, who is erupting like a drinking fountain. Jokowi of course 
is dry as a desert, and serene, executing one of his rituals.

The Indonesian security presence suddenly materialises and asserts itself, 
(where did they come from, so many of them) pushing people back, aggressively, 
particularly Australian cameras. I’m pushed back courtesy of someone being 
pushed into me and lose control of my own motion. It’s like being dumped in the 
surf.

The prime minister catches sight of me being tossed about. I can see his range 
of emotions immediately. Right now he is hovering on the edge of this sortie 
being complete insanity and the absolute best thing he’s ever experienced. Both 
feelings are there, behind his smiling sweaty face.

“Been for a bit of shopping Murpharoo?” Turnbull says, drolly.

A TV man swings in an arc to get out of the way of the people tide and clocks 
a security man with his camera. There’s a sharp collective intake of breath, we 
all freeze for a moment, but instead of getting handcuffs, the Indonesian 
extends his hand in forgiveness.

Turnbull is ebullient. Disaster or best thing ever? Well, it’s the latter of 
course

We make it out, and settle ourselves with a quick drink in the holding hotel. 
Turnbull is ebullient. Disaster or best thing ever? Well, it’s the latter of 
course. And it was an incredible experience.

He tells us he was so moved when a little boy in the crowd raised his hand to 
Jokowi to have the president hold it.

Turnbull is moved. The story is swelling within him.

Why is he moved I wonder? Probably because he’s a sentimental man. You do see 
this often. Turnbull’s emotions are pretty close to the surface.

But I wonder whether this is actually a politician and a bit of wish 
fulfilment. Hasn’t he, after all, just articulated the secret wish of every 
person in elected office, to be adored by the people? The hand of the willing 
supplicant, raised in adoration to the great man of history? It’s unknowable.

There’s no real time to wonder. We are doing what we always do on these trips. 
We are hurrying, only to wait. Out at the airport terminal, Jokowi regards us 
serenely from the wall. One of our party has fallen asleep on a coffee table. 
He is roused. Then we are flying through the night.

Berlin, 13-14 November

It’s been 53 hours since we left our beds in Australia. Our clothes from 
Jakarta wear the smell of the city and ourselves and our proximity to each 
other.

Our descent into Berlin brings a cluster of what Joe Hockey would have once 
described asoffensive wind farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/02/wind-turbines-are-utterly-offensive-joe-hockey-tells-alan-jones>
. The order of the city below us reassures after the chaos of Jakarta. Doors 
open brings a blast of late autumn cool air that feels like a tonic.

It also brings our new DFAT liaison person, who looks like he’s stepped from 
the pages of a conservative gentleman’s magazine: a caricature of a middle 
aged, cultured European. We are no longer in a hardship post. The plush mini 
vans purr on the tarmac.

Into the city, and we tumble out like a group of house bound pups at the 
Brandenburg Gate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd33668f778f1bbbc462c6a453358f2c428019c5%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd33668f778f1bbbc462c6a453358f2c428019c5%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Malcolm Turnbull and Angela Merkel in Berlin. The Australians were late for 
their meeting. The Germans were early. Photograph: Zhang Fan/Xinhua Press/Corbis
Sure there’s a monument there, but our local liaison would very much like us 
to keep moving. We are ignoring that, politely of course. He stands aloof, but 
censures us with his body, which he’s arranged in a stance suggestive of the 
hotel entrance, like a human sign.

Finally we comply. In the foyer, colleagues bump in to Tom Hanks and Steven 
Spielberg in Berlin for a press junket for Bridge of Spies 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3317718/Tom-Hanks-suits-Berlin-premiere-new-film-Bridge-Spies-wife-Rita-Wilson-shows-skin-stunning-shredded-gown.html>
. I bump into the prime minister and his wife Lucy who are in from their power 
walk. Both look pleased with the morning, and our digs, and the promise of our 
day. Neither has seen Tom Hanks.

Having refreshed, we are on the move to the chancellery to meet Angela Merkel, 
the most important figure on the continent. The Chancellery architecture is 
elegant. The Reichstag looms regally in the background.

Turnbull is slightly late. Merkel, being German, is early. She walks fast with 
a business-like gait. Turnbull lingers, taking it all in. You can see him 
commit it carefully to memory.

Malcolm Turnbull grips the zeitgeist in his Berlin whirl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/13/malcolm-turnbull-grips-the-zeitgeist-in-his-berlin-whirl>
They do their talking, all build for the G20, signing off on the work that’s 
been done for months by an advisory group intent on improving the bilateral 
relationship. One person in the room tells me that in their tete-a-tete Merkel 
reasons and explains to Turnbull with experience and emotional intelligence, 
which I find an interesting observation about leadership in general and about 
Merkel in particular given the cliche about the German chancellor being dour 
and impassive.

Turnbull talks, inside and then outside at their press conference, a bit too 
much. There has never been a more exciting time to do anything and everything.

Lucy Turnbull stands as sentry, elegant, formidable. What she’s making of the 
Aussie stump speech in the chancellery is anyone’s guess. Does she ever think: 
for God’s sake, just shut up Malcolm?

We work, then we prepare for an evening at the embassy – a standard pit stop 
on these trips. Turnbull pulls us down to the lobby first for an aperitif. He’s 
full of the discoveries of the day. Collective energy is high, but our poor 
DFAT liaison is looking as though his world is about to end. We are due to be 
at the function, and these uncouth Australians are not proceeding in orderly 
fashion to the transport. Eventually we all bow to his acute personal 
discomfort. As we depart the lobby, well-heeled Germans look up from the low 
chairs where they are dining and socialising. We are so oversized and 
performative in pack formation they probably conclude we are Americans.

The night rolls on. Business people circulate at the embassy – the suits who 
want to build our submarines, career diplomats, spooks, movers and shakers 
perverse enough to be interested in the island continent far, far away.

Turnbull is shaking hands and eating finger food and talking about excitement, 
agility and disruption. I keep an eye on his circulation around the room, the 
deliberate arcs he’s making, the habits of a lifelong networker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ba7536c3b085801e85deaa38b710d04ceb63b4%2F0_0_4267_2840%2F4267.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16ba7536c3b085801e85deaa38b710d04ceb63b4%2F0_0_4267_2840%2F4267.jpg>
 Francois Hollande addresses France after the deadly gun and bomb attacks in 
Paris. The killings cast an inevitable and appropriate pall over the G20. 
Photograph: Damien Meyer/AFP/Getty Images 
A bunch of us eventually move on to eat. We land in a pub with tall beers and 
meat off the bone and stodgy dumplings. We walk back to the digs to clear our 
heads of the day. The streets are cool and calm and full of the distant hum of 
a great European capital. The cool of the night soothes the wooze of the 
jetlag. It’s so peaceful. We break in different directions in the lobby.

In my room, and in all our rooms, the televisions would have gone on at 
roughly the same moment.

And there is Paris. Another set of streets in another great European capital 
suddenly seized with panic and carnage.

We are immediately in a different trip. Everything will be recast. It is not 
yet clear we will go to Turkey in the morning. Nothing is clear to anyone.

A photographer friend in our party promptly packs his bag and goes to Paris, 
chasing the story. His alternative is dull summit shots, so a human story wins 
every time.

The TV guys are required for live crosses and suit up and wire up. The rest of 
us watch, and wait and try to sleep.

Turnbull, jolted out of one set of imperatives and thrust into another, works 
through the night.

Turkey, 14-16 November

In a room at 5am, one of Turnbull’s senior advisers is telling us to be alert 
to the prospect of Australian casualties in Paris. No reporting yet please, 
this is not facts, this guidance is just prudent background. Very shortly 
afterwards,the injury of the young Tasmanian woman, Emma Grace Parkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/australian-woman-injured-in-paris-attacks-named-as-emma-jane-parkinson>
, is confirmed.

We are pushing on to Antalya and the G20. The only leader who is not is 
Francois Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/paris-attacks-shootings-explosions-hostages>
. Turnbull will take flowers to the French embassy in Berlin before we go. The 
prime minister records some quick reactive grabs about Paris for TV consumption 
back at home. No questions. He forgets to tell us about the trip to the 
embassy. We see the gesture later recorded in the Twitter feed of the finance 
minister.

We’ve lost Bold on our plane and have been given one of the young media 
advisers to mind shop.

Team Turnbull is battening down the hatches to deal with events. Our 
collective rhythm – the trip tempo that lists intermittently between 
collegiality and carping, harmony and hostility – has fractured by necessity. 
We are in our separate spheres. We are flying into summit land.

Malcolm Turnbull arrives in Turkey for G20 summit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/malcolm-turnbull-arrives-in-turkey-for-g20-summit>
It’s not just our trip that has been recast. All the entourages flying in to 
Antalya airport are now flying into a different G20. The airport has been 
purged of all humanity in order to provide a hermetic seal to protect the 
visitors.

It turns out Turnbull is staying at a hotel called the Titanic. We can’t help 
but laugh. Later, when we clear the elaborate security, and approach the prime 
ministerial accommodation, it proves to be a substantial five star pile with a 
waterslide bolted on the edge.

I think my eyes might be playing tricks so I ask whether anyone else sees a 
waterslide. I’m relieved they do. All the better for those spontaneous bombs 
into the pool performed by visiting world leaders. The laughter punctures the 
lingering sense of dislocation about the last few days.

When we see Turnbull again, his level of exhaustion is obvious. The angular 
planes of his face are like cliff sheers. In his first G20 bilateral withShinzo 
Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, he plays with his water 
bottle absently during a translation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd848e33ae0f395162cb7df3008f1b09cffe6a25a%2F167_0_2740_1745%2F2740.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd848e33ae0f395162cb7df3008f1b09cffe6a25a%2F167_0_2740_1745%2F2740.jpg>
 ‘When we see Turnbull again, his level of exhaustion is obvious. The angular 
planes of his face are like cliff sheers.’ Photograph: Xinhua /Landov / 
Barcroft Media 
The TV crews come back from the Abe bilateral and one cameraman tells me there 
was nothing in the conversation, except something about the awarding of a 
multibillion dollar submarine contract but he didn’t quite catch it. What, I 
shriek, sitting bolt upright on the row of chairs where I have been, two 
minutes ago, dead to the world. What the hell? The cameraman roars laughing, 
mission accomplished. Serves me right.

Turnbull is going to do a live cross to Insiders very late in the evening. We 
are waiting to file in time for Australians sitting down to their breakfast.

Presumably he wants to get his post-Paris message out at home. Presumably too 
he wants to get his words into the domestic news cycle beforeTony Abbott, who 
is doing the Bolt Report later on Sunday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/15/malcolm-turnbull-confronts-act-of-war-message-inclusion-paris-attacks>
, and could easily be spoiling for trouble.

It’s moments like this where politicians can make real mistakes: moments of 
pure fatigue

We pack up our makeshift camp and move out so the prime minister can move in 
to speak toBarrie Cassidy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/14/how-barrie-cassidy-the-ultimate-insider-charmed-his-way-to-number-one>
 in Melbourne. Turnbull sweeps down the hall and past us into the recording 
room, staff trailing him, very slightly dishevelled, pale as the boss.

It’s moments like this where politicians can make real mistakes: moments of 
pure fatigue. But he doesn’t make any slips. Turnbull has either been ordered 
by the backroom to keep relentlessly to the agreed messages, to avoid the 
digressions that are the function of how his head works – or he’s bone tired 
and intuits the risks of extemporising in a time where tiredness intersects 
with terror.


We ask for a brief press conference. In an hour the interview will be 
broadcast in Australia and we will already be in a fresh news cycle by the time 
our words fly home across the internet. Such is the relentlessness of the 
modern news cycle we have to push him past his as yet unbroadcast comments.

As we’ve waited for Turnbull a diligent wire reporter in our group has noticed 
foreign ministers in Vienna have just managed to issue a set of principles for a
political transition in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/15/paris-attacks-galvanise-international-efforts-to-end-syria-war>
. The roadmap apparently has Russia’s acquiescence.

This is precisely what the G20 summit needs. There is a big push on for a 
political transition in Syria. I read this, not from Australian background 
briefings, but in the important newspapers of the world.

Australia meanwhile has been gearing up for another summit, one about trade 
and the economy, one superseded by the existential challenge of civil war and a 
bloodthirsty terrorist movement and humans fleeing the cauldron of horrors.

We mainly ask Turnbull about Vienna, and a news line emerges: we could send 
peacekeepers in the event the Vienna accord ever translates into reality.

I want to ask whether Merkel or Cameron have asked him to lobby Vladimir 
Putin, given he is a fresh face who has never publicly threatened to shirtfront 
the Russian president, but the advisers shut the press conference down.

Turnbull’s policy people have not yet seen the report out of Vienna, which is 
mildly odd, and registers as odd, but we are tired, and racing to file, and I 
for one make an assumption the attention of the backroom has been diverted 
elsewhere. None of us are sharp enough to ask why this is news to the Turnbull 
backroom.

The “why” emerges the next day in a report from The Conversation’s Michelle 
Grattan.The Russians did not want us in the room at Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/16/australia-excluded-from-syria-peace-talks-after-russian-objection>
. Just regional powers and the big boys, thanks very much. It’s a good insight, 
which while not a snub, neatly underscores our middle power status.

Turnbull’s people won’t blab about machinations behind the scenes – no-one in 
international relations tends to speak before Washington has spoken – but 
logical deduction suggests we are using our military contribution in the Middle 
East to prise our way back in to the Syrian conversation. Or we’re trying, in 
any case.

This Turnbull office is arriving with the carpe diem tempo of the Kevin Rudd 
office in 2007

There’s a faint whiff of Kevin Rudd in that kind of Aussie audacity. A bit 
more Rudd in the arduous nature of this program.

A bit more still in Turnbull’s full tilt race for the future. Another time 
zone surfing internationalist with big ambitions for the country and his moment 
in it.

There’s a bit more Rudd in the fatigued faces of the Turnbull backroom riding 
the momentum of a leader with a cathartic sort of initial connection with the 
Australian public.

Once, years ago, I wrote a piece where I compared Kevin Rudd’s young political 
staff to the Lost Boys of Peter Pan. They rode into government with such 
energy. Not all political offices have energy. Some have stature. Some have 
dysfunction. Some have incompetence. This Turnbull office is arriving with the 
carpe diem tempo of the Rudd office in 2007.

It’s hard to shake the sense I’ve seen this before, except the Turnbull office 
has considerably more grey hair in key roles, and I suspect there’s more 
personal loyalty here among the stayers who have seen Turnbull through his 
various professional bumps in the road. The stayers in his entourage can 
anticipate his needs and translate them from across a room.

But it’s a perishable business. I think of the Rudd office, who lived through 
the miserable Rudd/Gillard divorce before scattering back out into the world. 
Only by virtue of being round long enough to see cycles repeat, you can sense 
these Turnbull people trying not to look too far ahead, yet wondering all the 
same.

The rest of the G20 is on the bus, off the bus, to the bilateral, from the 
bilateral.

I make one big sortie into the heart of the summit zone. Barack Obama’s 
“beast” is idling in the driveway and snipers prowl on on the rooftops.

Speeding though a designated meeting zone, I spot Cameron gripping and 
grinning with Abe. There’s a sudden commotion in the hallway. In sweeps Putin 
and Xi Jinping, followed by a fawning delegation so cartoonishly large it looks 
like a subway attendant may be called up to shove people into the commuter 
tram. How the door shuts is anyone’s guess.

Turnbull barely makes eye contact with our reporter’s pool as he powers 
through to meet Modi of India.

They have really disappeared into the locked box of this place. Communication 
is a bit erratic, and incipient fractiousness between the spinners and the 
scribes starts to bubble.

Bold, the human shock absorber, absorbs the angst and all the gratuitous 
advice about how he could be a better slave to our whims with his usual 
implacable calm.

I step briefly out of my transactional self to make a mental note that he’s 
strictly humouring here – he will stick with the program of the boss without 
feeling the pressure of conforming to our rituals and our demands, many of them 
petty and perishable.

Then I notice Bold is swaying, ever so slightly, his thumb twitching over his 
phones. His professional mask is fixed, the affability unshakeable, but his 
body is starting to give him feedback that this is all a bit stretched tight.

 He’s just waiting patiently, presumably in the entirely reasonable hope we 
will shut up and leave.

We leave him with the snipers standing with his two smart phones by an 
oversized water park which looks a little like Disney World on the 
Mediterranean.

I give him the dignity of not turning around to check whether he sits down 
once we are safely away.

Manila, 17-19 November
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02d3b95370cbbda88ca7ad32ea33e7578eca474d%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02d3b95370cbbda88ca7ad32ea33e7578eca474d%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau waves to members of the media and summit volunteers as he 
leaves after a press conference at the Apec summit in Manila. The new Canadian 
prime minister was the star draw. Photograph: Ted Aljibe/AFP/Getty Images 
In Berlin, the resident hotel celebrities were Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg. 
In Manila, it isthe new Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau 
<http://www.thestar.com/news/canada/2015/11/19/justin-trudeau-mobbed-by-shrieking-fans-in-manila.html>
.

Australian journalists are idling like parked cars in the foyer of the 
Peninsula Hotel, which is festooned with premature Christmas decorations. A 
small orchestral ensemble pumps out carols and pop ballads on a mezzanine 
balcony above our heads. Right now they are playing Bryan Adams.

We are waiting for Turnbull but soon learn everyone else milling about in the 
foyer is WFT: waiting for Trudeau. Soon enough the doors sweep open and the new 
man in Canada strides in to the foyer in the full expectation that a crowd will 
be waiting for his entrance. Trudeau pauses momentarily like royalty before 
lifting his arm high in salutation.

Trudeau hasn’t even scanned the room before the royal wave

Trudeau hasn’t even scanned the room before the royal wave. As far as he 
knows, he could be gesturing to no one, but here is a person entirely 
conditioned to public life, like a supermodel who knows how to work the light 
or an actor hitting his mark.

I burst out laughing at this supreme self-confidence. An Australian prime 
minister would never approach a room with such a relaxed sense of entitlement.

I remember Turnbull, back in Jakarta with that anecdote about the child’s 
spontaneous devotion to Jokowi.My people, my people. Eva Perons in their secret 
hearts, all of them.

At the other end of the spectrum is John Key. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/key-john> I miss this event but colleagues 
later report that shortly after Trudeau, a hotel guest is spotted in the foyer 
in his bathrobe.

This guest turns out to be the New Zealand prime minister, who is coming back 
barefoot, terry towelling loosely knotted, from the hotel pool.

After they recover their equanimity (prime ministers in bathrobes in public 
thoroughfares are, let’s face it, a reasonably rare sight), my colleagues 
subject Key to a quick interrogation. How do you like Turnbull, one asks? “He’s 
a bolter,” Key replies, cheerfully.

Languid in different fashion is Barack Obama, our first official port of call 
in Manila. To get to him we must enter the Apec security zone, then enter the 
American security zone, which includes an x-ray truck the Americans have flown 
in to inspect any vehicle with the temerity to enter their locked down area 
near the Soffitel.

Then we must enter the enormous purpose built tent the Americans have 
constructed on the grounds of the Sofitel to conduct their business. The 
Americans have arrived for Apec en masse like nomadic desert princes making 
camp on Manila Bay, except this is not conformance with ancient custom, my 
working assumption is they are avoiding any prospect of being bugged.

The Americans want us all to line up for the bilateral in single file, with 
cameras first, then TV journalists then print. I don’t tell them I’m digital 
for fear of any abstract unintended consequences, ranging from extraordinary 
rendition to being told to sit in the foyer until after the bilat.

Orderliness is a worthy aspiration. Problem is Australians just don’t line up. 
I ask our fresh faced American wrangler whether this is some quaint American 
custom: a daily procession of obedience. His presence in a hardship post, 
coupled with the resigned expression, suggests I’m not the first Australian 
smart arse he’s encountered. “It just looks nicer on the broadcast,” he says, 
patiently.

Naturally it is beyond our collective capacity to be orderly. A few more 
attempts are made, with added shooshing, before the process is abandoned. To be 
fair, the Americans are not obeying either. They, like us, have flown in 
overnight from Turkey. Perhaps we are all wandering around like Brown’s cows to 
stave off deep vein thrombosis. “Christ I need a shower,” one rumpled print man 
says to another.

We burst in as the door opens. Obama has that elegant looped limb position 
you’ve seen a thousand times in bilaterals from around the world. His hands 
don’t open, the long fingers rather unfurl and frame a cheekbone.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20catches%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%20off-guard%20with%20invitation%20to%20Washington%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20catches%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%20off-guard%20with%20invitation%20to%20Washington%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video&media=>
Obama catches Malcolm Turnbull off-guard with invitation to Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/nov/19/malcolm-turnbull-holds-discussions-with-barack-obama-in-manila-video>
. Source: ABC 
When we are all in position, the US president speaks very quietly, like it is 
our job to lean in in order to hear what is being said. The American president 
is always heard, with or without amplification, because the world has been 
conditioned to lean in.

Turnbull listens politely and doesn’t fidget. But as soon as the Obama spiel 
has concluded he smiles, flicking the hem of his suit coat as if he might leap 
up and deliver a closing submission to an international tribunal.

Turnbull then projects like an operatic tenor to the back of the room. This is 
the only way an Australian prime minister ever gets heard: by speaking up.

Obama, like everyone, gets the Turnbull stump speech. As usual, he speaks too 
long. The president responds with absolute poker face, and periodic nod of 
affirmation. Lecturing an American about the wonders of technological 
disruption is a little like lecturing Eskimos about the utility of ice, but 
that’s the spiel. I picture Obama and Merkel texting one another. BO: What is 
it about this new Aussie and the obsession with the relative youthfulness of 
Microsoft? AM: You tell me, Barrie. PS: Take your bugs when you leave this time.

Later that night, Turnbull is back with us at the hotel. He looks much better, 
out of the worst of that gruelling time between Berlin and Antayla. The effort 
they are making to keep in touch during the trip shouldn’t be underestimated. 
Speaking to us regularly costs him preparation time, or rest. The contact with 
him is not even really spin, for him these sessions runs like live feedback. 
What did we all think, how did it look. Rather than framing his actions, he’s 
surveilling us in a way, watching our habits. Individuals he knows, the 
valuable intelligence for him is the dynamic of the group.

The foreign minister, Julie Bishop, is by his side. They are dining together 
tonight.

Bishop is attentive and rigorously on the clock while feigning she’s 
participating in a spontaneously convivial social wind down. Politicians spend 
their lives in these social situations with everyone wanting a piece of them so 
they learn to both project and withhold, usually simultaneously. Women always 
have to be better, sharper, more guarded, more dexterous than the men in line 
before them.


A beverage slips and drenches her shoes. She doesn’t miss a beat, continuing 
the conversation while dabbing at the shoe, which comes off to dry. She 
balances on one stiletto with ease.

Turnbull talks, she regards him out of the corner of her eye while maintaining 
her own flow of conversation. I suspect this multi-channelling is a skill she’s 
acquired in her diplomatic portfolio, although it’s got a touch of the managing 
partner about it as well. Does he know she’s watching him and and talking to 
someone else at the same time? Does he feel her attention, or is this something 
only another woman would detect because a man, particularly a powerful one, 
would just assume all the attention is trained on him.

I wonder if her affable vigilance is a kind of shorthand between them, a 
constant reminder not to overshare. Standing in this room in Manila, they are a 
human check and balance.

Apec summit: Malcolm Turnbull says Syria solution hinges on power sharing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/18/apec-summit-malcolm-turnbull-says-syria-solution-hinges-on-power-sharing>
Neither over share, nothing out of school, but they set up various arguments 
they will make publicly and in some detail the next day about the political 
transition in Syria. Nothing explosive. All pretty obvious, but when surrounded 
by the great powers, it’s always best for the middle powers to mind their 
manners and let the grownups speak first. Probably best too to have journalists 
prepared if you want to launch into complex material they may or may not be 
across.

The subject of the Thucydides trap – where an existing superpower feels 
threatened by an emerging power – comes up. This might seem odd but in any 
conversation with the prime minister, the Athenian general is often not far 
away. Great power and rising power tensions is the highly specific universe we 
are inhabiting at this particular Apec, wedged between China and America, and 
the ancient Greeks knew something of that dynamic.

President Xi has made speeches referencing the phenomenon known as the 
Thucydides trap in analysing China’s place in the world. Last year Xi said “we 
all need to work together to avoid the Thucydides trap – destructive tensions 
between an emerging power and established powers”.

Xi’s public statements prompt me to wonder whether Turnbull and the Chinese 
president could, bizarrely, bond over something as random as Thucydides. It’s a 
funny universe, the highly managed and mediated universe world leaders inhabit.

We are all searching for our various connection points, managing our competing 
imperatives and friction points. Turnbull in his bilaterals. The scribes with 
the prime minister and officials – them with us. Working through these social 
rituals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897c9b252b3f12f8ed9492174fbcea7afd0655a9%2F0_326_3400_2042%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull's%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%2C%20planes%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Paris.%20Inside%20the%20whirlwind%20of%20Malcolm%20Turnbull%27s%20first%20world%20tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F20%2Fpresidents-planes-and-paris-inside-the-whirlwind-of-malcolm-turnbulls-first-world-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897c9b252b3f12f8ed9492174fbcea7afd0655a9%2F0_326_3400_2042%2F3400.jpg>
 Turnbull and China’s president Xi Jinping stand together while waiting for 
other leaders during a family photo at Apec. Photograph: Erik de Castro/Reuters 
Apec, meanwhile, rolls on. Trudeau continues with his spectacular hotel 
entrances. When I glance up from a conversation, he’s indulging a mass selfie 
in front of the hotel Christmas tree.

I get my own moment with John Key, fully clothed, in a restaurant at the 
hotel. He wanders past with his staff. As I’m bidding farewell to an Australian 
official Key knows well, the NZ PM stops and I have opportunity introduce 
myself. Culturally he’s very familiar.

He has a laugh about the internet going crazy with a comment from Obama that 
was picked up by a boom mic during the leaders meeting. “So, you, er, actually 
talk to the New Zealanders,” Obama is heard saying to Turnbull. Turnbull 
responds earnestly. Of course he does. Key is a role model. Obama cracks up, 
telling the Australian he and Key are great pals. Golfing buddies in fact.

Key thinks this is hilarious. He whips out his smart phone to show me this 
story is currently the lead on the major news website in New Zealand. A good 
day, the New Zealander thinks, quite the lark. Well fed and internet famous, 
Key moves on.

Turnbull is on his way to the final summit. Key is about the follow him. The 
Australian officials are folding their camp in Manila. Some are returning to 
Australia. It’s time to go home.
 