
Aim

"To provide for the making of 'control orders'  
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2005/en/ukpgaen_20050002_en_1>imposing 
obligations on individuals suspected of being involved in terrorism-related 
activity. These are preventative orders which are designed to restrict or 
prevent the further involvement by individuals in such activity."

Main provisions

• Creates control orders: civil orders made by the home secretary against 
individuals <http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2007/oct/31/terrorism.politics1>– 
whether a British citizen or foreign national – who the intelligence services 
suspect of "involvement in terrorism-related activity" on a domestic or an 
international level.
• Allows a range of restrictions from house arrest and electronic tagging to 
rules on whom they may contact, where they can go and where they may work. 
Other measures may prohibit controlees from using a mobile phone or the 
internet and impose limitations on their movements.
• Creates two kinds of control orders: non-derogating and derogating. The 
distinction was created so that during a public emergency the government could 
derogate fromarticle 5 <http://www.hri.org/docs/ECHR50.html#C.Art5> of the 
European convention on human rights and restrict individuals to house arrest.
• Control orders require a lower standard of proof than in a criminal case but 
breach of an order is a criminal offence that can be punished by imprisonment. 
The orders last for 12 months but can be renewed indefinitely.
• Allows control order proceedings to be held in a closed session; 
security-cleared "special advocates" represent the interests of the accused. 
The defendants and their lawyers have no right to see or rebut the evidence 
against them, that evidence may consist of secret intelligence – and may even 
include information obtained by torture, provided that the torture occurred 
outside Britain.

Background

The Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005 was created in response to a law lords 
ruling <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2004/dec/16/terrorism.humanrights> in 
December 2004 that detaining foreigners without trial under emergency 
counter-terrorism powers was unlawful. The appeal had been made on behalf of 
nine men who had been detained at Belmarsh Prison under Part IV of the
Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/13/anti-terrorism-act>
, which permitted foreign terror suspects to be indefinitely imprisoned without 
trial.

The government said the detainees represented a security threat but that they 
were unable to prosecute them because of the rules covering secret 
intelligence. The detainee's lawyers successfully argued that the men's 
imprisonment breached articles 5 and 14 of the European convention on human 
rights.

With these laws due to expire in March 2005, the government was under pressure 
to quickly create new legalisation to deal with the threat they believed the 
Belmarsh detainees presented to the public. As soon as the new law came into 
force, then-home secretary, Charles Clarke,signed control orders 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/mar/24/uk.terrorism> for 10 men.

Because of the controversial nature of the act and the need to get it through 
parliament quickly the government agreed that the sections of the act that 
relate to control orders would be subject to a weak sunset clause: they 
automatically lapse after one year unless renewed by an order subject to 
affirmative resolution in both houses of parliament. The act waslast renewed 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2008-02-21b.561.0> on 21 February 
2008.

Control orders were given broad legal backing by the law lords in October 
2007. Delivering several overlapping judgements on control orders, Britain's 
most senior judges ruled that the overall system behind control orders was 
sound but that the government must reconsider some crucial aspects.

The five-strong panel held that 18-hour home curfews were in breach of the 
right to liberty guaranteed by the European convention of human rights.

The most significant aspect of their ruling held that the special advocate 
system 
<http://www.justice.org.uk/images/pdfs/JUSTICEControlOrderAppealsBriefing.pdf> 
– the system by which defendants can appeal against control orders – was an 
inadequate protection to the right to a fair trial under article 6 of the 
European convention of human rights.

Lord Brown noted that "the special advocate procedure, highly likely though it 
is that it will in fact safeguard the suspect against significant injustice, 
cannot invariably be guaranteed to do so".

Criticism

The law lords upheld an earlier judgement by the High Court that held the home 
secretary could not impose control orders whose conditions had the cumulative 
effect of depriving individuals of their liberty.

In June 2006, Mr Justice Sullivan quashed "control orders" on six suspected 
terrorists, saying the home secretary "had no power to make them under human 
rights law". Upholding his decision in 2007, thelaw lords noted 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/jun/29/humanrights.terrorism> that the 
lives of controllees "were wholly regulated by the Home Office, as a prisoner's 
would be, although breaches were much more severely punishable", and they were 
not able to "lead a normal life".

In a report published  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt200607/jtselect/jtrights/60/6001.htm>
on 4 March 2007, the joint committee on human rights strongly criticised the 
control order regime. The committee claimed that the home secretary was asking 
parliament to renew a power that it said was beingroutinely exercised 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt200607/jtselect/jtrights/60/6009.htm>
 in breach of the right to liberty in article 5 of the European convention on 
human rights. They argued that in renewing the act on an annual basis 
"parliament is being asked to be complicit in a de facto derogation from 
article 5, without an opportunity to debate whether such a derogation is 
justified".

Liberty has said that the restrictions imposed by control orders amount to 
house arrest and that the orders themselves undermine the presumption of 
innocence: "Every aspect of control orders, whether a restriction of movement, 
association and communication or tagging, curfew or house arrest is punitive. 
European case law makes it clear that it does not matter how something is 
described; if it punishes and has serious consequences, it is part of the 
criminal process."
 