
Implementing the “national living wage” will cost Primark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> tens of millions of pounds by 
2020 but will not mean higher clothing prices, the retailer’s parent company 
has said.


John Bason, finance director of Associated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods>, said: “The extra 
cost of the national living wage is of a scale we have seen from many other 
factors that affect Primark and it is not going to prejudice our pricing 
position.”


ABF warned that group profits were likely to fall in 2016 after a 30% drop to 
£717m in the year to 12 September, when a tough 12 months for its sugar 
business combined with currency exchange issues and lower profit margins at 
Primark. Revenues at the group, which owns food brands including Kingsmill 
bread, dipped by 1% to £12.8bn.

The company blamed Primark’s lower profit margin on a return to more usual 
levels of discounting over the summer compared with the previous year, when the 
long spell of warm weather drove demand for its vest tops and light clothing.


George Weston, ABF’s chief executive, said problems with currency exchange 
rates, which affect the prices at which Primark can buy stock and the reporting 
of profits from overseas businesses, would be the main factor affecting next 
year’s bottom line.

Living wage fears sending 'shockwaves' through UK labour market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/08/living-wage-fears-sending-shockwaves-through-uk-labour-market>
Analysts said they were surprised by ABF’s cautious language after it was able 
to deliver better than expected profits in 2015, partly because of cost cutting 
within the substantial sugar business.

Weston said: “The national living wage will add costs in the UK, but that is 
only one market we are trading in. It will put money into the pockets of some 
of our customers, but is another one of the cost challenges we face.”

Sales at Primark stores open for more than a year rose by 1% in the year to 
September, but total sales were up by 13% at constant currency rates to £5.3bn 
as the company opened 1m sq ft of shop space including new stores in France, 
Germany and the Netherlands, as well as itsfirst US store in Boston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/10/primark-irish-retailer-opens-flagship-store-boston>
.

This year, Primark will press ahead with 1.5m sq ft of new space including 
more US outlets and new stores in the UK, Spain and France. Weston said the 
Primark brand was still going strong and that sales at established stores rose 
by 4% outside Germany and the Netherlands, where longstanding outlets were 
affected by a rash of new openings.

The Boston store had traded well in its first few weeks, he said, and seven 
new outlets would open in locations including Philadelphia, Connecticut, 
Massachusetts and Staten Island, New York, over the coming months.

Weston said the UK high street was set for a better autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/30/fear-global-downturn-consumer-gloom-poor-retail-sales>
 than last year, despite another warm start to November, when temperatures in 
parts of the countrytopped those in Barcelona and the Algarve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/01/uk-records-warmest-november-day-says-met-office>
 on Sunday.

Primark makes understated US debut as Boston flagship opens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/10/primark-irish-retailer-opens-flagship-store-boston>
Warm autumn weather usually prompts retailers to warn about slow sales of 
woolies and coats, but Weston said: “The whole high street is benefiting from 
better weather. Consumer confidence is supplemented by greater disposable 
income, so it’s a better environment.”

He said the cold snap at the beginning of the season meant shoppers had 
switched to thinking about coats and jumpers despite the recent warm spell. “We 
are feeling good about trade at the moment. It is better than last year across 
all our European markets,” he said.

Weston said prices of food commodities including sugar were also stabilising 
after several years of deflation. “Commodity prices have come down, but don’t 
seem to be falling further for the time being. It’s hard to be certain that 
prices have reached the bottom. Recent movements have been more up than down,” 
he added.
 