
Primark <https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> is taking on only a 
handful of former BHS stores including Reading, Llandudno and Leicester’s Fosse 
Park as it tackles falling sales and a £200m-plus leap in its pension deficit.

Sales at the cut-price fashion chain’s established stores slid 2% in the UK, 
and for the group as a whole, in the year to 17 September, as it struggled 
against a warm autumn, chilly spring and difficult July, when shoppers were put 
off by the Brexit vote.

Parent company Associated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods> (ABF) added that 
the EU referendum’s impact on bond yields would have a detrimental effect on 
its pension fund, pushing it to a year-end deficit of £200m, compared to a 
small surplus last year. The company said pension service costs next year would 
be higher and John Bason, ABF finance director, said it was likely to be one of 
a number of businesses warning on the issue.

Shares in ABF dived nearly 11% to £28.15 and were the biggest faller in the 
FTSE 100 index in the light of the poor sales at Primark and the big jump in 
the pension deficit.

Bason said shoppers had a “bit of a shock” for a couple of weeks after the EU 
referendum on 23 June but trade had bounced back with better weather from late 
July. “You can’t see from the UK consumer a [long-term] Brexit effect,” he said.

ABF said Primark’s total sales for the 53 weeks to 17 September were 9% higher 
than a year earlier, stripping out currency fluctuations. But the company 
blamed unseasonal weather for an expected fall of 2% for sales at established 
stores. It said temperatures were unusually warm before Christmas and very cold 
in early spring.

The company warned in April that trading was tough for Primark after the chain 
suffered its first half-year fall in underlying sales for 12 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/19/primark-first-fall-half-year-sales-12-years>
. In Julyit said sterling’s fall would have mixed results for its overall 
business and that Primark’s margins would be hurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/primark-owner-buoyed-by-stronger-euro>
.

The pound has fallen against the dollar for the past two years, dropping about 
20% in that time,but the decline accelerated after the vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/19/the-post-brexit-pound-how-sterlings-fall-affects-the-uk-economy>
. Sterling has dropped more than 10% since the referendum on 23 June as traders 
expected lower interest rates and a slowing economy.


In its trading update, ABF said overall trading for the group was ahead of its 
earlier expectations, helped by improved performance at its sugar business and 
rising profits at its grocery and food ingredients operations.

It added that Primark would not get a major lift from the demise of BHS, which 
closed the last of more than 160 stores in August, and planned to take on only 
a “small handful” of premises vacated by the defunct chain.

Primark has recently opened an outlet in BHS’s former Fosse Park store in 
Leicester and will open in Carlisle in October after the council bought back 
the lease. It is also moving into former BHS stores in Reading and Llandudno.

Bason said the new stores were part of ongoing expansion in the UK that formed 
part of 1.3 million sq ft of new space planned around the world in the year 
ahead. That included three more stores in the US, taking the total to eight, 
three more in Italy, where it currently has just one outlet, and three or four 
more in France, where it has eight stores.

He said Primark was “well placed” for the run-up to Christmas as it was 
determined to keep prices low despite a squeeze on profit margins caused by the 
pound’s fall since the EU referendum. He said the retailer was “committed to 
leading the value sector”.

Bason said retailers’ costs were likely to rise towards the end of 2016 as a 
result of sterling’s decline against the US dollar, which it uses to buy much 
of its products overseas, but it was too early to see what effect that might 
have on trade.

 “The UK consumer at the moment still has more money in their pocket but it 
awaits to be seen how much general inflation happens in the economy,” he said.
 