
A revival at Primark helped Associated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods> (ABF) report 
improved trading as the budget fashion chain recovered from falling 
pre-Christmas sales caused by warm weather.

Primark was a surprise loser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/14/primark-blames-freak-december-weather-for-flat-sales-figures>
 among UK retailers over Christmas as sales at core UK stores fell for the 
first time in nine years. Thewarmest December on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/20/global-warming-weather-environment-el-nino>
 gave shoppers little incentive to buy winter coats and jumpers and stores were 
unusually quiet before Christmas.

In a trading update 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/assoc-british-foods--abf-/rns/pre-close-period-trading-update/201602220700116701P/>
, Primark’s parent, ABF, said business had picked up at the chain in the new 
year and that it expected first-half sales to be level with a year earlier. 
Improved trading at ABF’s sugar business and more favourable currency movements 
also contributed to a statement that the company said would increase confidence 
in its prospects.

John Bason, ABF’s finance director, said: “I think people have found this 
[statement] very reassuring. WithPrimark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> we were talking about the 
weather back in the autumn. This now shows very clearly that trading has picked 
up in January and February.”

ABF’s results have been affected by the falling price of sugar and the 
strength of the pound against the euro. Bason said the sugar business had 
reached a turning point after prices increased in the EU and China as a glut of 
stock eased.

Sterling’s recent weakness against the euro is good for ABF, which reduced its 
estimate of currency impact for this year to £10m from £25m, he added.

ABF shares rose 1.4% to £33.02 after the trading update.

Bason declined to discuss the referendum on EU membership, announced by the 
prime minister for 23 June. He said the group, which has expansion plans in 
Europe, had kept out of the debate until now and was not going to change its 
policy.

Bason said: “Associated British Foods is a very international group and we 
operate in 48 countries so we are very, very international and we are used to 
operating in lots of jurisdictions.”

The company, which also owns Kingsmill bread, Patak’s pickles and other food 
brands, said it expected a marginal fall in earnings per share for the year 
that ends in August. It had previously said earnings would suffer a “modest” 
decline and analysts took the change in wording as a good sign.

Primark launched in the US in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/10/primark-irish-retailer-opens-flagship-store-boston>
 by opening a store in Boston that it followed with another near Philadelphia. 
Bason said six more US shops would open this calendar year and that Primark 
would open a 70,000 sq ft store in the American Dream mall in New Jersey in 
2017.

He said at the Boston store, “lunchtime, evenings and weekends are very, very 
busy. People by and large in the eastern part of the US are wearing the same 
things that people wear in Europe. People love the breadth of the range and the 
pricing. That is the key because in the US market you have to stand out.”

He said Primark would keep working on its ranges while opening new stores in 
the east of the US before expanding to other regions.
 