
Gypsy tops, skinny jeans and playsuits helped Primark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> shrug off concerns about a 
tricky summer for fashion chains to step up sales growth in the UK as it 
prepares to open its first US store this week.


Analysts said sales at Primark’s established UK stores rose by about 3% in the 
three months to 12 September, up on the 1% to 2% growth seen in the previous 
three months.

“Although the weather hasn’t been great, our spring summer ranges came through 
in the final quarter,” said John Bason, finance director or Primark’s parent 
group,Associated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods>. “Primark has a 
very strong presence in the UK but it is continuing to take market share.”


Primark hopes luck of the Irish will see it win US hearts, and dollars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/05/primark-launch-boston-united-states-retail>
Bason insisted sales growth in the UK was not driven by discounting. Although 
Primark’s profits will be down on last year, Bason said this was because of 
higher discounting last autumn and the cool spring. He added that profit 
margins were only down over the summer in comparison with last year’s hot 
season, which meant Primark was able to employ exceptionally low levels of 
discounting.

Despite strong trading at Primark, shares in ABF, which also owns food brands 
including Kingsmill and produces sugar in the EU and China, dipped 2% on Monday 
to £30 as it confirmed in a trading update that profits for the year would be 
hit by falling European sugar prices and currency issues.

Bason said sugar prices in the EU had stabilised and it expected to see some 
recovery in the year ahead.

But some analysts said they would also be downgrading their expectations for 
next year’s profits by as much as 3% because of currency problems, which could 
hit profit margins by £100m. That’s because, for example, the relative strength 
of the dollar, which Primark uses to pay suppliers in Asia, versus the pound 
will hit margins on autumn/winter clothing.

ABF said the strength of the pound and the weakness of the euro as well as 
some Asian currencies would also mean a £30m hit to profits translated into 
sterling in the year to 12 September and more than that next year.

Primark’s sales rose 13% for the full year as it opened 9% more space 
including new outlets in France, Germany and the Netherlands. This year, the 
group will open 1.5m sq ft of new space compared with just under 1m sq ft last 
year.

Nearly a third of that new space will be in the US where Primark plans seven 
stores in the next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/05/primark-launch-boston-united-states-retail>
. The first will open inBoston’s Downtown Crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/23/primark-retail-us-market-boston>
 on Thursday followed by the King of Prussia mall in Philadelphia in November.

Bason said Primark felt well-prepared for Thursday: “We have got a good 
location and a great building but the proof of the pudding will be in the 
eating. It will be good to see how the US consumer reacts.”
 