
In a flare-up of the controversy that followed a June mass shooting in South 
Carolina, hundreds of protesters waving Confederate flags gathered this weekend 
in Georgia’s Stone Mountain Park.

The park is home to the huge Confederate Memorial Carving, a southern Mount 
Rushmore that features Confederate president Jefferson Davis, General Robert E 
Lee and General Thomas “Stonewall” Jackson.

An uncomfortable tolerance of the Confederate flag in mainstream society was 
upended in June when photos circulated on the internet revealing that Dylann 
Roof, a young white racist who is charged with killing nine black churchgoers 
in Charleston, South Carolina, had posed with the Confederate symbol. Roof also 
burned a US flag.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdad5826d64a5f9abc67e698a50201cdfe934ba87%2F0_122_2816_1690%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20'south's%20Mount%20Rushmore'%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20%27south%27s%20Mount%20Rushmore%27%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdad5826d64a5f9abc67e698a50201cdfe934ba87%2F0_122_2816_1690%2F2816.jpg>
 Hundreds of pro-Confederate flag and gun supporters rally at Stone Mountain 
Park. Photograph: Curtis Compton/REX Shutterstock 
Many Americans assumed the Confederate flag was retired for good after 
governors in South Carolina and Alabama removed it from their statehouses 
following theCharleston shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/charleston-shooting>, and presidential 
candidates from both parties declared it too divisive for official display.


But John Russell Houser – who shot 11 people, two fatally, before killing 
himself in a Louisiana movie theater in July – flew a large Confederate flag 
outside his home, and hung a Nazi swastika banner outside a bar he owned in
Georgia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia>.

Many people still fly the Confederate banner, and not just in the south. Some 
who display it are motivated by pride in their ancestry or enthusiasm for 
southern history. Others see it as a symbol of their right to challenge to 
authority in general, and the federal government in particular. And some have 
hoisted Confederate flags in recent weeks precisely because the flag is 
generating controversy again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92d632c8e62e1527555ff7ff5fdca9aafdc7a865%2F0_212_5195_3118%2F5195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20'south's%20Mount%20Rushmore'%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20%27south%27s%20Mount%20Rushmore%27%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92d632c8e62e1527555ff7ff5fdca9aafdc7a865%2F0_212_5195_3118%2F5195.jpg>
 Counter-protester Aurielle Marie speaks to participants during the Confederate 
flag rally in Georgia’s Stone Mountain Park. Photograph: Steve 
Eberhardt/Demotix/Corbis 
“You can’t take it out on the flag – the flag had nothing to do with it,” said 
Ralph Chronister, who felt inspired to dig out his old Confederate flag, which 
is decorated with a bald eagle, and hang it from his weather-beaten front porch 
on a heavily travelled street in Hanover, Pennsylvania.

“I’ve got nothing against black people; I’ve got nothing against anyone else,” 
said Chronister, 46, who was raised in Maryland. “I’m just very proud of my 
southern heritage. That’s why I fly it.”

Many politicians echoed South Carolina’s Republican governor, Nikki Haley, in 
calls to remove the Confederate flag after the Charleston killings, describing 
it as a relic that belongs in museums but not on official display. Haley called 
it “a deeply offensive symbol of a brutally oppressive past”. Democratic 
presidential candidate Hillary Clinton said “it shouldn’t fly anywhere”.

But the flags aren’t hard to find in places like Hanover, Pennsylvania, a 
factory and farm community about six miles north of the Mason-Dixon Line that 
saw action during the civil war’s Gettysburg campaign.

One flies from a pole on the main road into town, by a National Rifle 
Association banner. Another was hung from a second-floor apartment, directly 
above a daycare downstairs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8447f9122f3e3dca883f1146e47424c1c1b4d662%2F0_283_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20'south's%20Mount%20Rushmore'%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20%27south%27s%20Mount%20Rushmore%27%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8447f9122f3e3dca883f1146e47424c1c1b4d662%2F0_283_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A protester burns a Confederate flag and taunts hundreds of Confederate flag 
supporters with it from outside a fence during the rally. Photograph: Curtis 
Compton/Zuma Press/Corbis 
Jeremy Gouge, a 44-year-old roofer, said family ties to the south were why he 
proudly flies a Confederate battle flag on a pole in his front yard, on a quiet 
residential street not far from Chronister’s home.

“I know there’s things that happened to slaves and things. I can’t control 
what other people have done,” Gouge said. “What’s the next flag that someone is 
going to say: ‘We don’t like that flag – let’s take that one down?’”

It’s hardly the only place where Confederate flags fly in northern states. 
Hannah Alberstadt said she was surprised to see many of them in her hometown of 
Girard in northwestern Pennsylvania.

“My town has always had sort of a hick-ish contingent, but it’s like every 
other day I see another Confederate flag, and it’s just shocking,” she said. 
“These people are definitely trying to make a statement, because people have 
them waving from their truck beds, people have them on a stick in their front 
yards, people are wearing them to the grocery store.”

The symbol still raises ire: a flag on the back of a pickup truck parked in a 
convenience store lot in the middle of Hanover was set on fire. And in Elk 
Grove, California, a Confederate flag was displayed at a gun shop until the 
owners removed it in late June after getting death threats.

But Georgia’s rally wasn’t the only protest to support the flag.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F241096e7d59e43aed06c4395a8edb33917e44aec%2F0_4_5578_3346%2F5578.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20'south's%20Mount%20Rushmore'%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20%27south%27s%20Mount%20Rushmore%27%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F241096e7d59e43aed06c4395a8edb33917e44aec%2F0_4_5578_3346%2F5578.jpg>
 An armed member of the Georgia security force militia is seen at the rally in 
Stone Mountain Park. Photograph: Steve Eberhardt/Demotix/Corbis 
In eastern Michigan, flag supporters staged a rolling rally, with more than 50 
vehicles participating. And in Florida, an estimated 2,000 vehicles adorned 
with the Confederate battle flag rallied outside a government complex in Ocala, 
with many demonstrators sporting shirts with phrases like “heritage not hate”.

In Las Vegas, Republican state assemblywoman Michelle Fiore sent out a 
campaign email comparing South Carolina’s removal of the flag to avoiding 
discussion of concentration camps and genocide. People can’t “pick and choose 
what parts of our history you want to remember,”, Fiore said.

On Thursday, surveillance cameras recorded two white men leaving Confederate 
battle flags on the grounds of the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where 
Martin Luther King Jr began his campaign for racial justice a half-century ago. 
The Rev Raphael Warnock called it a “hateful act” and an “effort to intimidate 
us in some way”.

The condemnations have been good for the business of Robert Hayes, who runs 
the Southern Patriot Shop in Abbeville, South Carolina.

A sign outside his shop warned customers he had sold out of Confederate flags 
and may be out for a month or more. Hayes figures he sold about 400 after the 
Charleston shooting, instead of the two dozen or so he typically sells. And the 
purchasers seem different to him now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbc350bd87f8d558937c873bd0aa01a00bafd477%2F0_78_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20'south's%20Mount%20Rushmore'%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pro-Confederate%20flag%20rally%20at%20%27south%27s%20Mount%20Rushmore%27%20draws%20hundreds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fconfederate-flag-protest-georgia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbc350bd87f8d558937c873bd0aa01a00bafd477%2F0_78_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A protester faces off with hundreds of pro-Confederate flag supporters during 
a flag rally. Photograph: Curtis Compton/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
Teens are buying it as a rebellious counterculture statement against political 
correctness, Hayes said, and others talk of taking a stand against big 
government and holding fast to what they hold dear.

Carson Kimsey, 23, came to Hayes’ shop hoping for a flag to fly outside his 
Elbert County, Georgia, home. Kimsey gave a few different answers about the 
Confederate flag license plate on his pickup truck, then looked down for a 
second when asked if he ever thinks about how black people feel when they see 
it.

“If they want to get offended, that’s their problem. I fly it for my own 
reasons. It’s got nothing to do with hate for anybody. My boss is black. I work 
for two black guys. I have this tag, I pull up for work every day. It doesn’t 
bother them,” Kimsey said, though he acknowledged he has never broached the 
topic with them.

The Confederate flag still flies outside two biker bars near the home that 
Angela Burns, a black woman, rents on Dixie Drive in Anderson County, South 
Carolina, where five of the six state representatives voted against removing it 
from the statehouse.

Burns, 54, shrugs off the rebel banners that have sprouted up since then.

“You ignore it after a while. I’m not letting them bother me,” she said. “But 
every one of them knows they are being mean and ugly.”
 