
Aim

"To establish the Assets Recovery Agency … to provide for confiscation orders 
in relation topersons who benefit from criminal conduct 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_1> and for restraint 
orders to prohibit dealing with property, to allow the recovery of property 
which is or represents property obtained through unlawful conduct or which is 
intended to be used in unlawful conduct, to make provision about money 
laundering."

Main provisions

• Creates the Assets Recovery Agency, now the Serious Organised Crime Agency 
(SOCA).
• Introduces a new power of civil recovery 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/plain/ukpga_20020029_en_17#pt5> to allow 
the government to recover – by a civil action in the high court – the proceeds 
of criminal activity.
• Introduces powers for the police and customs to seize cash they believe is 
crime related and to secure its forfeiture in magistrates court proceedings.
• Enables courts to freeze a suspect's assets at the start of a criminal 
investigation.
• Allows the courts to make statutory assumptions in non-drugs cases: 
assumptions, in certain cases, that all of a defendant's assets represent the
proceeds of crime 
<http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/a_to_c/confiscation_and_ancillary_orders/>.
• Simplifies requirements for convictions for money laundering by removing the 
requirement to prove what the crime was: it simply has to be proven that the 
seized money is the proceeds of crime.
• Allows investigators to seek court orders 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_25> requiring financial 
institutions and banks to identify all accounts of people under investigation 
and provide transactional information on suspect accounts for a specified 
period.
• Places greater obligation on the financial sector to disclose suspicious 
transactions 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_22#pt7-pb1-l1g330>.
• Places an onus on any professional person working in regulated industries to 
immediately report to the National Criminal Intelligence Service (now the
Serious Organised Crime Agency <http://www.soca.gov.uk>) any suspicion they 
have that anyone they talk to may have committed a criminal offence.
• Allows the government to prescribe 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/plain/ukpga_20020029_en_22#pt7-pb3-l1g339>
 the form and manner in which these disclosures are made.

Background

The act expands the law on money laundering to cover any crime rather than 
just drug-related offences. It applies a single set of guidance on money 
laundering offences and targets the proceeds of any criminal conduct that would 
be an offence in Britain.

The home office minister, Bob Ainsworth, said the act "provides wide ranging 
powers to deprive these criminals of their main motivation – their money and 
the property they have accumulated through their illegal activities".

The civil recovery scheme established by the act empowers the Asset Recovery 
Agency to sue in the high court torecover property 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_17#pt5-ch1-l1g241> 
which is or represents property obtained by unlawful conduct. Unlawful conduct 
is conduct which is a crime if committed in the UK. The Serious Crime Act 2007 
later transferred the civil recovery and taxation powers of the Assets Recovery 
Agency to the Serious Organised Crime Agency. Civil rules of evidence and 
procedure apply, meaning that to establish that a crime ("unlawful conduct") 
has taken place the government needs only prove their case on the balance of 
probabilities, not on the usual criminal law standard of beyond reasonable 
doubt.

The act introduces what amounts to a negligence test, meaning a professional 
working in a sector regulated by money laundering regulations (such as banks 
and other financial institutions) can commit a criminal offence for failing to 
report money laundering if there are "reasonable grounds for knowing or 
suspecting" that it is taking place. Failure to report can result in a 
five-year prison term. The act creates a defence to these offences in certain 
circumstances, primarily "authorised disclosure", which creates a "consent 
regime" where an individual or business reports any suspicious transaction and
waits for specific consent 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_22#pt7-pb1-l1g328> 
before completing the transaction.

These new offences caused outrage in the professional community, with 
solicitors arguing that the act would force them tobreach professional privilege
 <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_22#pt7-pb1-l1g328> and 
act against the interests of their own clients. Theyclaimed the act  
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2002/ukpga_20020029_en_22#pt7-pb1-l1g328>was 
so broadly drafted that professionals, fearful of prosecution, would send law 
agencies a flow of useless reports relating totrivial breaches of the law 
<http://www.thelawyer.com/cgi-bin/item.cgi?id=108614>. 

Professional bodies including the Law Society 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/newsandevents/news/view=newsarticle.law?NEWSID=416136>
 have lobbied over many years to restrict the reporting requirement to serious 
crimes or create a minimal reporting requirement in order to minimise the 
administrative burden and in 2007, the Home Office began a consultation process 
to examine the regime. They eventually announced they had decided to maintain 
the status quo after failing to reach a consensus on how the consent regime 
could be reformed.



Criticism

Civil liberties groups argued the bill ran the risk of undermining key 
criminal procedural protections and lacked sufficient safeguards. Liberty said, 
in relation to the civil recovery orders, that it was "wrong to give 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/pdfs/policy01/jun-proceeds-crime-draft.pdf>
 the state a power to opt for extensive confiscation of defendants' assets in 
circumstances where it does not have sufficient evidence to prosecute them in 
the criminal courts" and is an unacceptable blurring of the civil and criminal 
law. JUSTICE argued that "although the action 
<http://www.justice.org.uk/images/pdfs/Proceeds%20of%20Crime2.pdf> for civil 
recovery is not classed as criminal, and indeed is intended to circumvent the 
criminal process….its punitive nature means that, as a matter of principle, 
criminal type safeguards are warranted."
 