
The producers of a star-studded adaptation of the Martin Amis novel London 
Fields have attacked theToronto film festival’s decision to cancel its world 
premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/london-fields-director-mathew-cullen-sues-producers-fraud>
 following a legal dispute with the movie’s director.

Muse Film and Television <http://www.musefilm.org/> issued a statement 
labelling the move an “ill-considered decision made against our rights” after 
Toronto bosses pulled tonight’s red-carpet screening and said the film was no 
longer part of the festival.

“We are greatly disappointed that Tiff decided to pull the film from the 
festival,” reads the statement. “We have always loved launching our films here, 
but feel that in this particular case there has been an ill-considered decision 
made against our rights. It’s the first time we have ever heard of a festival 
removing a movie from the festival due to its imagery being deemed too 
provocative.”

London Fields review: Martin Amis gets the Guy Ritchie treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/15/london-fields-review-martin-amis-gets-the-guy-ritchie-treatment>

The producers spoke out against first-time director Mathew Cullen, who 
launched a lawsuit on the day the first reviews were published of London Fields 
earlier this week, claiming his name was being used to market the edited 
version when he had not played any part in its creation. Cullen complained that 
footage of “9/11 jumpers edited against pornography” and a juxtaposition of 
“the holiest city in Islam against mind-control” had been inserted into the 
film, which starsBilly Bob Thornton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/billy-bob-thornton>, Amber Heard and (in a 
cameo role) her husband, Johnny Depp. He is suing producers Jordan Gertner and 
Christopher Hanley – whose wife, Roberta, wrote the script – for fraud, 
misappropriation of name and likeness, material failure of consideration and 
unfair competition, and hopes to take the $1m (£640,000) case to trial.

Muse’s statement continued: “The timing and the content of the director’s 
lawsuit shows that it is a publicity stunt. The filing of Mathew Cullen’s 
complaint violates the arbitration provisions of his own guild, the DGA. Sadly, 
Mathew can’t deal with the fact that he does not control the final cut of the 
movie.

“He was given two deadlines to deliver a ‘director’s cut’ and missed both of 
them. His guild has rules for withdrawing his name from the picture and he 
missed those deadlines. The production company will vigorously oppose the 
lawsuit.”

London Fields centres on a beautiful clairvoyant, Nicola Six (Heard) who knows 
the time and place of her murder, on the eve of her 30th birthday, but isn’t 
sure whether it will be committed by posh pretty-boy Guy Clinch (Theo James) or 
darts-obsessed working-class wideboy Keith Talent (Jim Sturgess). The story is 
told from the perspective of a terminally ill unreliable narrator, Samson Young 
(Thornton), an American writer who has moved to London in a last-ditch attempt 
to cure his chronic writer’s block.

Christopher Hanley previously brought Harmony Korine’s Spring Breakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/04/spring-breakers-review> and Mary 
Harron’s much-praised Christian Bale-led adaptation ofAmerican Psycho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82514/american.psycho> to the big 
screen as a producer. Cullen is best known as a music video director and 
protege of Mexican film-makerGuillermo del Toro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guillermodeltoro>.

London Fields has received mixed reviews from critics at Toronto, but has won 
praise from Amis, who told the Telegraph: “I was relieved and pleased. I 
thought it had a lot of atmosphere, terrific performances. It keeps the darts, 
and it keeps the doomy atmosphere of mutual assured destruction.”
 