
Intel has unveiled its next evolution of virtual-reality goggles Project Alloy 
<https://newsroom.intel.com/chip-shots/intel-unveils-project-alloy/> for 
so-called mixed reality, which drags real-world objects into the virtual realm 
using 3D cameras.


The new head-mounted display consists of a set of goggles that resemble the 
likes of Facebook’s Oculus Rift or HTC’s Vive VR headsets, but they do not need 
to be connected by a series of cables to a computer. Instead, they contain the 
computing power needed to run the headset in the headset.

The headset uses Intel’s RealSense cameras, which have depth-sensing 
capabilities, to allow, without the need for additional sensors, objects such 
as the user’s hands to be tracked and entered into the virtual world displayed 
within the goggles. Most other VR headsets, including Sony’s upcoming PSVR, 
require a series of cameras, sensors and accessories to be placed about a room 
or held in the hand to enable similar functions.

Intel’s chief executive, Brian Krzanich, said 
<https://medium.com/@bkrunner/merged-reality-the-best-of-all-worlds-f6d1480b855d>
: “Merged reality delivers virtual-world experiences more dynamically and 
naturally than ever before – and makes experiences impossible in the real world 
now possible.

“Pick up your real-world tennis racket in your living room and step virtually 
on to the court at Wimbledon. Be the ultimate concert master – fully unplugged. 
Plan your virtual visit to the Sistine Chapel while never leaving the office. 
Experience a sporting event, a concert or a film scene from any point of view – 
and from any position.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fproject-alloy-intel-wireless-virtual-reality-goggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F551ec57a4d3b9972b8ae4d03e98874ed2d18a8b4%2F65_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Project%20Alloy%3A%20Intel%20unveils%20new%20generation%20of%20wireless%20virtual%20reality%20goggles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fproject-alloy-intel-wireless-virtual-reality-goggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Project%20Alloy%3A%20Intel%20unveils%20new%20generation%20of%20wireless%20virtual%20reality%20goggles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fproject-alloy-intel-wireless-virtual-reality-goggles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F551ec57a4d3b9972b8ae4d03e98874ed2d18a8b4%2F65_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
 The Project Alloy headset will not require a tether to a computer. Photograph: 
Intel 
Intel is keen to place itself at the heart of the next stage of VR technology, 
having missed out on the mobile space now dominated by designsdeveloped by 
rival ARM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/29/arm-cambridge-britain-tech-company-iphone>
. The US chip giant recently pulled out of the smartphone chip market, unable 
to gain traction after starting late and failing to meet the power efficiency 
and capability of ARM designs made by Samsung, Qualcomm, Apple and others used 
in billions of mobile devices world wide. It alsoannounced a deal 
<https://newsroom.intel.com/editorials/accelerating-foundry-innovation-smart-connected-world/>
 to manufacturer ARM designs in its plants.

While Facebook’s Oculus, HTC and Google, with its Cardboard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/12/google-cardboard-virtual-reality-vr-headset>
 smartphone-powered VR system, have a head start, Intel hopes itswork with 
companies Daqri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/06/intel-daqri-smart-helmet-realsense-ar-augmented-reality-x-ray-glasses-ces>
, its RealSense 3D cameras and processor technology will become essential to 
the next generation of VR and AR systems currently in development.

Intel has backing from Microsoft, which announced it will support Project 
Alloy with its Windows Holographic system. The software is in development with 
Microsoft’s own AR solution,Hololens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/21/microsoft-hololens-holograms-headset>
.

VR and AR systems, yet to go mainstream, are held back by capability, cost and 
the social stigma displayed towards devices such asGoogle’s Glass smartglasses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/16/my-week-in-google-glass>. 
This year should see more affordable yet capable systems, includingSony’s PSVR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/15/sony-october-playstation-vr-virtual-reality-headset>
 andGoogle’s Daydream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/19/google-io-2016-what-you-need-to-know-from-allo-to-daydream>
, enter the market, attracting users put off by the high price of theOculus Rift
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/06/oculus-rift-virtual-reality-headset-finally-available-for-pre-order-at-600>
 andHTC Vive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/29/htc-vive-vr-headset-price>, 
which both require a plethora of sensors and a very powerful Windows PC to 
power them.

But given the failure of technology with similar burdens of having to wear 
glasses or apparatus, such as 3D TV, whether VR and AR systems will become a 
mass-market item remains to be seen.

 * Google’s vision for VR: YouTube, smartphones and a ‘virtual hand’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/19/google-virtual-reality-headset-smartphone-youtube>
 