
Discovery of potentially Earth-like planet Proxima b raises hopes for life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/earth-like-planet-found-orbiting-our-suns-nearest-star-raises-hopes-for-life-proxima-b>
What’s all the excitement about?

Scientists have discovered a planet, called Proxima b 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/earth-like-planet-found-orbiting-our-suns-nearest-star-raises-hopes-for-life-proxima-b>
, orbiting the closest star to our sun – a red dwarf known as Proxima Centauri, 
which lies 4.2 light years away. What’s more, there are clues that it could, 
potentially, have some similarities to Earth.

Does this mean we’ve found a second home/alien civilisation?

No. We don’t even know for sure that Proxima b is a rocky planet, although 
researchers think this is likely, judging by other planets orbiting small 
stars. What we do know is that it is within the so-called “habitable zone”, 
meaning that if water is present on the planet, it could be in liquid form. But 
many important questions are as yet unanswered. We don’t know if the planet has 
water, or an atmosphere, or a magnetic field to shield it from the high-energy 
radiation emitted by its star. What is likely is that the newly discovered 
planet is “tidally locked” to its star, meaning that only one side receives 
sunlight. Proxima b might be within the habitable zone, but whether it could 
host life is quite a different matter.

How do we know it’s there?

Astronomers have not seen the planet directly, but have detected it from its 
influence on its star, using instruments at theEuropean Southern Observatory 
<http://www.eso.org/public/> in Chile. While a star exerts a gravitational tug 
on a nearby planet, the planet also exerts a smaller tug on the star, meaning 
that the star “wobbles” a little as the planet travels around it. This wobble 
can be spotted in the light emitted by the star – as the star moves towards us, 
its light appears slightly bluer, and as it moves away, it appears redder. By 
looking at the timing of this wobble, scientists can work out how long it takes 
for the planet to orbit the star, and its distance from the star, while the 
mass of the planet affects just how big the wobble is. In the case of Proxima 
b, the planet takes 11.2 days to travel around Proxima Centauri at a distance 
of around 7.5m km (4.5m miles) from it – that’s about 5% of the distance 
between the Earth and our sun. The mass of the newly discovered planet is 
thought to be at least 1.3 times that of the Earth.

How many other similar planets could be out there?

Thousands of exoplanets – planets outside our solar system – have been found 
to date. The first confirmed discoveries were in 1992, when astronomers found 
planets orbiting a type of neutron star known as a pulsar. The first planet 
orbiting a sun-like starwas discovered in 1995 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/science/space/universe/key_places/51_pegasi>. Since then, 
missions such as theKepler space observatory <http://kepler.nasa.gov/>, as well 
as ground-based observations, have found many more, including a number of 
Earth-sized worlds within the habitable zone of their stars. But that’s just 
the tip of the iceberg. Based on Kepler’s results, astronomers have suggested 
there could be as many as 40bn habitable, Earth-sized planets in our galaxy, 
travelling around red dwarfs or stars similar to our sun (yellow dwarfs). But 
with Proxima Centauri our nearest stellar neighbour, none of these planets 
would be as close as Proxima b.

When will we know more about it?

That depends. That Proxima b is, relatively, so close makes it an exciting 
prospect for scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/proxima-b-will-be-our-prime-laboratory-in-the-search-for-extraterrestrial-life>
 trying to probe the nature of other planets. But there’s a hitch: scientists 
are trying to figure out if it is possible to see Proxima b pass across the 
face of its star – a process known as a transit. If it does, it will help to 
pin down many details of the planet’s makeup, including its size, atmosphere 
and density, which will shed light on whether the planet is indeed rocky. 
Unfortunately, the chances of being able to see such a transit are rather 
small. But there are other ways of probing the Proxima b. Using theEuropean 
Extremely Large Telescope 
<http://www.eso.org/public/unitedkingdom/teles-instr/e-elt/>, which is 
currently under construction, it might be possible to capture a direct image of 
the planet. TheJames Webb space telescope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/james-webb-space-telescope>, set to launch 
in 2018, might be able to shed light on whether or not the planet has an 
atmosphere, and if it does, what it is made of.

Luminous beauty of Jupiter's auroras revealed by Hubble telescope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/02/luminous-beauty-of-jupiters-auroras-revealed-by-hubble-telescope>
Will anyone from Earth ever get near it?

That’s unlikely, to say the least. Using current technology, it would take 
around 70,000 years for a probe to reach the planet, although emerging 
technology could halve that. Further, ambitious projects, such asYuri Milner’s 
$100m Breakthrough Starshot initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/12/stephen-hawking-and-yuri-milner-launch-100m-star-voyage>
, plan to create miniature space probes that would be propelled by light beams 
and travel at speeds of up to 100m mph, meaning that it could reach Proxima 
Centauri within a matter of decades.

Is the newly discovered planet part of a solar system like ours, with a group 
of other planets?

We don’t yet know. Scientists say they have also spotted a second, weaker 
signal, but it is too early to say whether that could be another orbiting body.

Do astrophysicists think there is life elsewhere in the universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/seti-search-extraterrestrial-intelligence>?

Most seem sanguine – but whether or not there is, has been, or ever will be 
life on Proxima b remains a mystery, for now at least.
 