
Has life gained a foothold on a planet that orbits our nearest star? The 
question, a variation on one of the greatest mysteries humans have pondered, is 
now front and centre in astronomers’ minds. The short answer, of course, is 
nobody knows. But over the coming months, years and decades, scientists will 
throw every instrument and clever technique they have at Proxima b, an 
Earth-sized planet warmed by a small, cool star in Centaurus, to find out.

Discovery of potentially Earth-like planet Proxima b raises hopes for life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/earth-like-planet-found-orbiting-our-suns-nearest-star-raises-hopes-for-life-proxima-b>
The newfound world has the compelling label of lurking in the “habitable 
zone”. But planets in this Goldilocks region of space where the heat from their 
host star makes them neither too hot nor too cold to sustain liquid water, are 
not necessarily habitable or inhabited. Proxima b may have no flowing water, a 
prerequisite for life as we know it. On Earth, life flourished with help from 
an atmosphere and a magnetic field, the latter of which shields us from the 
worst of space radiation. No one knows if Proxima b has either of these.


And so begins the effort to learn more. Ignas Snellen, a professor of 
astronomy at the Leiden Observatory calls Proxima b the most important planet 
found beyond the solar system since the first, 51 Pegasi b, was spotted by 
Didier Queloz and Michel Mayor in 1995. “This is the discovery of the year and 
possibly of the decade,” Snellen says. Not only does it mean an Earth-sized 
planet orbits our nearest star, it implies that other such worlds are common. 
“It will be our prime laboratory for the search for extraterrestrial life for 
the decades ahead. We have no idea whether life could exist on this planet, but 
the circumstances are likely to be much more favourable than on Mars,” he says.

Proxima b - Earth’s new neighbour 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/proxima-b/giv-31075LRHMg1Sz6tup>
The most immediate task is to check whether Proxima b crosses the face of its 
star as viewed from Earth. Since Proxima Centauri is comparatively small and 
dim, and thus far less dazzling than sun-like stars, such a transit would allow 
the HubbleSpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Telescope to look 
for the telltale dip in starlight that the planet’s atmosphere would produce. 
But the chances are more than 95% that Proxima b orbits in an unhelpful plane.


Without a transit, hopes of finding and studying the planet’s atmosphere fall 
to future instruments. Hubble’s successor, the James Webb Space Telescope, 
which is due to launch in 2018, may be the first to peer at Proxima b’s 
atmosphere. Next in line could be the European Extremely Large Telescope being 
readied for action in 2024. The goal then will be to spot telltale imbalances 
in the chemical composition of the atmosphere which are are the calling cards 
of life.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Discovery%20of%20Earth-like%20exoplanet%20Proxima%20b%20close%20to%20our%20solar%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Discovery%20of%20Earth-like%20exoplanet%20Proxima%20b%20close%20to%20our%20solar%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report&media=>
Discovery of Earth-like exoplanet Proxima b close to our solar system – video 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/aug/24/discovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report>
“People will use Proxima b as a test case. It’s a gift,” says Queloz. “The 
search for life is not a dream, it’s a serious research topic. There is nothing 
about magic about life. It is just chemistry and in a way it must happen. 
Whether it survives and develops is another question,but I really do expect it 
to be everywhere. Life should not be so special.”


In the language of astronomers, Proxima b is nearby. But 4.2 light years away 
is 40 trillion kilometres. At the speed of Voyager 1, the only human-made 
object in the space between the stars, a spacecraft would take 80,000 years to 
reach Proxima Centauri. With new technology, that could potentially be halved.


Proxima Centauri planet could tell us about alien life in the universe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2016/aug/24/proxima-centauri-planet-could-tell-us-about-alien-life-in-the-universe-exoplanet-proxima-b>
This year, the Silicon Valley philanthropist Yuri Milner announced $100m for 
research into a 20 year journey to Earth’s nearest stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/12/stephen-hawking-and-yuri-milner-launch-100m-star-voyage>
. In reality, such a mission will take billions. But Proxima b gives the 
project clear focus.


“The importance of this system is as an inspiration,” says Chris Lintott, 
presenter of The Sky at Night and a professor of astrophysics at Oxford 
University. “There’s much work to be done to find out what this planet is 
really like, but the existence of a potentially habitable world just next door 
should inspire us to explore beyond our solar system. There are existing plans 
for small, fast-moving probes that could reach Proxima in a couple of decades, 
and I think just having a target to aim for will inspire more. Now we know it’s 
there, surely we have to go?”
 