
Nature could hardly have been kinder to us. The discovery of a potentially 
habitable planet on our astronomical doorstep is nothing short of astronomers’ 
wildest dreams coming true.

In a world where discoveries seem to be coming thick and fast (think water on 
Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/live/2015/sep/28/water-on-mars-buildup-to-nasa-mystery-solved-announcement-live>
,gravitational waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/live/2016/feb/11/gravitational-wave-announcement-latest-physics-einstein-ligo-black-holes-live>
,Higgs boson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/jul/04/higgs-boson-cern-scientists-discover>
) it is vitally important that we now focus our efforts on learning all we can 
about this tantalising world because of its potential to tell us something 
about life elsewhere in the universe.

One thousand exoplanets but still no twin for Earth | Stuart Clark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2013/oct/17/exoplanet-twin-earth-habitable-planets>
Proxima Centauri b is about 1.3 times the mass of the Earth. Its year lasts 
just 11.2 days, and it lies in the so-called ‘habitable zone’ of its parent 
star, the dim red dwarf known as Proxima Centauri.

Humans have speculated about life elsewhere in the universe for millennia. 
This planet gives us a real chance of pursuing answers because although similar 
worlds have been discovered before, none have been this close to us.

The parent star, Proxima Centauri, is the closest star to the Sun at just 4.24 
light years away. This means that the planet could not be more ideally placed 
for follow-up investigations – maybe even a visit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Discovery%20of%20Earth-like%20exoplanet%20Proxima%20b%20close%20to%20our%20solar%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Discovery%20of%20Earth-like%20exoplanet%20Proxima%20b%20close%20to%20our%20solar%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report&media=>
Discovery of Earth-like exoplanet Proxima b close to our solar system – video 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/aug/24/discovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report>
As luck would have it, in April this year, a group called Breakthrough 
Initiatives <https://breakthroughinitiatives.org/About>, whose board consists 
of Stephen Hawking and Mark Zuckerberg, announced Breakthrough Starshot.

Travelling to the stars is incredibly difficult because of the distances 
involved. The aim of Breakthrough Starshot is to invest $100 million to 
demonstrate that a spacecraft could be built to reach Proxima Centauri’s 
distance in a journey time of ‘only’ 20 years.

‘Alien megastructure’ could explain mysterious new Kepler results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/2015/oct/16/alien-megastructure-could-explain-mysterious-new-kepler-results>
Now that we know of the planet at Proxima Centauri, it becomes Breakthrough 
Starshot’s most obvious target. Were we to go – and were there to be life – 
there is so much this newly discovered world could potentially tell us about 
ourselves.

We do not know how life began on Earth. We do not know if life has to be based 
on DNA. We do not know whether life can only exist in a narrow range of 
conditions or is resilient to a wide range of extreme environments. If – and it 
is still a big if – there is even the simplest microbial life on Proxima 
Centauri b, it would be a real chance to look for these answers.

The next few years are going to see an intense period of activity using 
ground-based telescopes to learn more about Proxima Centauri b.

So far astronomers have only inferred its presence because of the wobble its 
gravity induces on its parent star. If they can isolate its light, they can 
search for clues to the composition of its atmosphere.

This is no easy task. It is akin to seeing a fire-fly crawl around the rim of 
a searchlight that is pointing right at you. But it is possible and the rewards 
are extraordinary because the planet’s atmosphere could betray whether it is 
inhabited or not.

On Earth, oxygen built up because cyanobacteria evolved metabolisms based on 
photosynthesis. This releases oxygen as a waste gas and throws the atmosphere 
out of ‘chemical equilibrium’.

Proxima b will be our prime laboratory in the search for extraterrestrial life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/proxima-b-will-be-our-prime-laboratory-in-the-search-for-extraterrestrial-life>
Measuring the gases in the atmosphere of Proxima Centauri b could therefore 
show us whether it too was out of chemical equilibrium or not. If it were, the 
chances are that it is indeed a living world, and that would surely spur the 
desire for a space mission to go there despite the high technological hurdles.

The parent star itself needs more study too. We know that it occasionally 
undergoes huge outbursts of X-rays, which could damage any life that has gained 
a foothold on the world.

Nevertheless, the discovery of Proxima Centauri b is a clarion call to the 
world’s astronomers, physicists, chemists and biologists. It is a natural 
laboratory ripe for exploration and the work is far bigger than any one country 
can achieve alone.

Whether we find life there or not, in exploring this nearby world, we could 
help bring our own closer together.

Stuart Clark <http://www.stuartclark.com/> is the author of The Search for 
Earth’s Twin 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Search-Earths-Twin-Stuart-Clark/dp/1848665822> 
(Quercus), and co-host of the podcastThe Stuniverse 
<https://www.acast.com/stuniverse> (Bingo Productions).
 