
Pressure to impeach Jacob Zuma 
<http://mgafrica.com/article/2016-04-05-zuma-faces-impeachment-in-parliament-but-with-anc-majority-and-no-secret-ballot-hes-seen-surviving>
, South Africa’s much criticised president, reflects broader, rising public 
discontent with the ruling African National Congress’s senior leadership, a 
widening democratic deficit and steadily deteriorating economic conditions.

The Nkandla scandal, for which Zuma was belatedly forced to apologise last 
week, has been under investigation since 2012, when it was revealed that the 
cost of taxpayer-funded luxury improvements to the president’s rural home had 
risen nearly tenfold. The row has dragged on, poisoning public debate and 
undermining confidence in government.

An official inquiry in 2013 cleared Zuma of any wrongdoing, saying the work, 
which included a new swimming pool and cattle ranch pens, was needed for 
security reasons. But the following year Thuli Madonsela, South Africa’s public 
protector,accused Zuma of misuse of public money 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-26645400> and unethical conduct. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f151b15ac31cae0af0d556b6785a67713baf17f%2F0_0_3000_1797%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20discontent%20rises%20as%20Jacob%20Zuma's%20ship%20sinks%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20discontent%20rises%20as%20Jacob%20Zuma%27s%20ship%20sinks%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f151b15ac31cae0af0d556b6785a67713baf17f%2F0_0_3000_1797%2F3000.jpg>
 Jacob Zuma had repeatedly claimed to have used his own money for luxury 
improvements to his Nkandla home. Photograph: Rogan Ward/Reuters 
Her report, waspishly entitled Secure in Comfort, noted that the estimated 
$23m cost was eight times what was spent on securing two private homes for 
former president Nelson Mandela, and more than 1,000 times what was spent on 
South Africa’s last apartheid-era president, FW de Klerk.

Zuma repeatedly claimed he had used his own money to pay for building work. 
And even as the row intensified, the national assembly, where the ANC controls 
more than 60% of the seats, continued to protect him, passing a resolution 
whose apparent purpose was to nullify Madonsela’s findings.

Nelson Mandela’s fellow ANC activist breaks silence to demand Jacob Zuma’s 
resignation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/02/anc-veteran-ahmed-kathrada-calls-for-jacob-zuma-resignation>
Zuma finally changed his tune last week after South Africa’s highest court 
ruled unanimously that he had violated the constitution. Baleka Mbete, the 
assembly speaker, who is overseeing the impeachment debate, is facing 
opposition demands that she, too, resign over her alleged efforts to cover 
Zuma’s tracks. Like Zuma,she has refused to go. 
<http://en.starafrica.com/news/safrica-under-fire-zuma-apologises-over-nkandla-debacle.html>


Zuma’s survival may be short lived. Expectations are growing that, like former 
president Thabo Mbeki, forced out prematurely in 2008, he will not last until 
the end of his second term in 2019. He is under fire from all sides, including 
the main opposition Democratic Alliance (DA), church leaders, Mandela era 
veterans, the media and online petitioners.

“Jacob Zuma is the cancer at the heart of South African politics. He is not 
capable of honourable conduct, and cannot continue to be president of our 
country,” the DA said before the impeachment debate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9e88ad1e5c76acdda4b291a0a3e50fc521d655%2F52_2_3161_1895%2F3161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20discontent%20rises%20as%20Jacob%20Zuma's%20ship%20sinks%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20discontent%20rises%20as%20Jacob%20Zuma%27s%20ship%20sinks%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9e88ad1e5c76acdda4b291a0a3e50fc521d655%2F52_2_3161_1895%2F3161.jpg>
 Jacob Zuma has been called ‘the cancer at the heart ofSouth African politics’ 
by the opposition Democratic Alliance. Photograph: Mike Hutchings/Reuters 
“The president can no longer be considered a fit and proper person to remain 
the commander-in-chief of the South African nationaldefenceforce, nor can any 
of the parliamentary members who so stubbornly protected him be considered fit 
and proper persons to hold office as members of parliament,” said JG “Pikkie” 
Greeff, national secretary of South Africa’s national defence union.

More significant, perhaps, is the way Nkandla is being used by Zuma’s internal 
party rivals 
<http://www.rdm.co.za/politics/2016/04/03/military-union-calls-on-commander-in-chief-to-resign>
, political allies and breakaway factions to press for a more wide-ranging 
governance shake-up. Chief among the latter is party renegade Julius Malema’s 
Economic Freedom Fighters. Malema regularly abuses Zuma, but his main beef is 
with the ANC’s elitist old guard as a whole.

These critics point to persistent, deeprooted problems 
<http://city-press.news24.com/News/julius-malema-tells-anc-to-remove-zuma-or-face-the-people-20160331>
 including the failure to care for the poorest in society, high-level 
corruption, a crumbling education system, influence-peddling by wealthy 
businessmen and chronic economic mismanagement.

South Africa’s economy is set to grow at its slowest pace this year since the 
2009 recession and faces a possible credit rating downgrade. The rand has 
fallen in value amid a sharp decline in foreign investor confidence. 
Unemployment is at 34%,according to the World Bank 
<http://ewn.co.za/2016/02/02/World-Bank-SA-economy-on-brink-of-recession>. The 
Communist party, a long-time ANC ally, revealed the nervousness at the heart of 
South Africa’s ruling apparatus.It congratulated Zuma 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-safrica-zuma-idUSKCN0X11A0> on his apology 
but wondered why the corrosive effect of the Nkandla scandal had not been 
neutralised earlier.

Much more was now needed, the SACP said. The court’s ruling amounted to a 
warning that “decisive action is now imperative, otherwise the continuing loss 
of moral authority, political paralysis and fragmentation of our movement will 
continue”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5bc1722273a07ce7cb1fa8bb0b4ff7aac44eb57%2F0_390_3458_2074%2F3458.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20discontent%20rises%20as%20Jacob%20Zuma's%20ship%20sinks%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20discontent%20rises%20as%20Jacob%20Zuma%27s%20ship%20sinks%20in%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fjacob-zuma-impeachment-nkandla-scandal-african-national-congress-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5bc1722273a07ce7cb1fa8bb0b4ff7aac44eb57%2F0_390_3458_2074%2F3458.jpg>
 Julius Malema, leader of the Economic Freedom Fighters, is a fierce critic of 
Zuma and the ANC’s elitist old guard. Photograph: Kim Ludbrook/EPA 
A widespread sense of disappointment and disillusionment over the ANC’s 
perceived failure to significantly correct the economic injustices of the 
apartheid era is the biggest challenge facing those in the party’s top echelons 
currently clinging to Zuma’s sinking ship. They may yet decide to cast him off 
before all are dragged down. The next big test may be local elections, due by 
August, in key cities such as Pretoria and Johannesburg. Any change would be 
hard won.

“The veterans have sway within the ANC,” Somadoda Fikeni, a politics professor 
at the University of South Africa,told Bloomberg News 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-04/wounded-zuma-weathers-calls-to-quit-after-constitutional-breach>
. “It’s an indictment against the current leadership, which says despite any 
logical argument ‘we are going ahead defending our leader’.”

Gwede Mantashe, the ANC’s secretary general, said the party’s top leaders saw 
no reason to remove Zuma. And the president’s powers of patronage are 
considerable. More than 70% of the national executive committee’s members 
elected in 2012 were part of a bloc that backed him for the presidency. Many 
were directly appointed to government posts by him.

Max Sisulu, son of the ANC legend Walter Sisulu and a former national assembly 
speaker, said parliament’s failure to hold Zuma to account was painful and 
lessons should be learned. “Parliament must put its house in order and do the 
right thing,” he said. “It was quite clear from the start what was needed. If 
there is something wrong, you fix it. Our people were able to change the whole 
system of apartheid and establish democracy.This is fixable.” 
<http://city-press.news24.com/News/max-sisulu-breaks-silence-on-nkandla-parliament-must-get-house-in-order-20160401>
 