
Wonder Showzen

Wonder Showzen is a decade-old MTV show that should still be shown daily on 
terrestrial television. It should be shown in cinemas when films end. People 
should be forced to stand up during it. Wonder Showzen, to this day, is my 
favourite ever television programme. If you like it, we can be friends.


A gruesome pastiche of Sesame Street earnestness, Wonder Showzen revelled in 
discomfort. There were puppets, but they’d beso abusive that members of the 
public would attack them 
<http://www.funnyordie.com/videos/fe4086c5f4/clarence-explores-freedom-of-speech-from-wondershowzenfan?_cc=__d___&_ccid=c4747cb6-e9fb-4107-9988-8cbab7f6a8eb>
. There were children, but they weredressed up as dead popes 
<http://videosift.com/video/Little-Dead-Pope>. There were songs, but they were 
about the benefits of slavery. There were narrated field trips,almost always to 
abattoirs <https://vimeo.com/4394789>. And there were lessons, too. One episode 
taught the viewer patience, by spending the second half of the episode playing 
the first half in reverse. It wasn’t an easy watch by any standard.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7e35afd8d9e8b47185c854b95466512927709a6%2F293_73_1345_1001%2F1345.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7e35afd8d9e8b47185c854b95466512927709a6%2F293_73_1345_1001%2F1345.jpg>
 If you like it, we can be friends … Wonder Showzen. Photograph: MTV 
The greatest parts were its Beat Kids segments 
<http://www.funnyordie.com/videos/4ae728ce5d/beat-kids-at-the-horse-races-from-wondershowzenfan?_cc=__d___&_ccid=c4747cb6-e9fb-4107-9988-8cbab7f6a8eb>
, where a roving child reporter mouthed memorised lines to appalled bystanders. 
“Who pays for this meat? I mean, spiritually?” they’d ask butchers. In one 
episode, a boy in a Hitler outfit walked up to a man in a 10-gallon hat and 
asked him which headgear represented the greatest form of oppression.

Traces of Wonder Showzen can still be found in web series like Don’t Hug Me 
I’m Scared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/27/dont-hug-me-im-scared-youtube-viral-puppet-show-interview>
 – and co-creator Vernon Chapman has gone on to work on South Park, Jackass and 
Louis CK’sHorace and Pete 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/01/louis-ck-horace-pete-top-secret-tv-event-of-the-year>
 – but it’s not the same. Wonder Showzen was always doomed to flame out early. 
But, god, it was like nothing else that’s ever been made. Daddy!Stuart Heritage

Due South 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/13/your-next-boxset-due-south>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7abed4d5540ff3296d8a735634b67114e2ff181d%2F0_121_1274_1335%2F1274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7abed4d5540ff3296d8a735634b67114e2ff181d%2F0_121_1274_1335%2F1274.jpg>
 Should be spoken on with the same reverence as Twin Peaks … Due South. 
Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Alliance.com 
Due South had everything: immaculate writing, flawless acting and an ability 
to shift seamlessly from daft gags to high seriousness via moments of 
heartbreak and back again.

Creator Paul Haggis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/dec/04/guardianinterviewsatbfisouthbank> 
led us all on a joyous journey through the charming, funny, moving, deft and 
subtle world of hypercorrect Mountie Benton Fraser (Paul Gross, whose 
ridiculous handsomeness plus full set of both comedy and dramatic chops 
basically make him the ur-Jon Hamm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/jon-hamm>). Fraser comes to Chicago 
on the trail of his father’s killers and stays – an innocent, honourable, 
compulsively honest fish-out-of-water – to partner for four seasons with 
cynical city police officer Ray Vecchio (David Marciano) and fight further 
crime.

It’s a roiling gallimaufry of styles, genres and moods; full of surreal 
moments. It shouldn’t work, but because of the talent involved, it does. It 
works like Twin Peaks works and should be spoken of with the same reverence and 
passion asDavid Lynch’s televisual masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/twin-peaks>. Lucy Mangan

Top Gear

There are many good reasons for having a bad opinion of Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/organgrinder/2006/jul/26/topgearnoughttooffensivei>
. In the Clarkson version you could point tothe casual xenophobia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/06/bbc-tv-chief-top-gear-jeremy-clarkson>
, the sexism, the climate scepticism, the stonewash denim and so on. In the 
aborted Chris Evans version, there was Chris Evans. And in both, producers had 
to struggle with the fact that talking about driving is like driving about 
architecture.


But to be hypnotised by the liberal-baiting and leather waistcoats would be to 
miss how well constructed Top Gear was – and still is. Super producer Andy 
Wilman may have left with his presenters forThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/jeremy-clarksons-amazon-show-grand-tour-top-gear>
, but enough of the muscle memory remains on the TG team to keep making hour 
after hour of effortlessly entertaining TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff20c8e59d8337f4443269f0612799acbcc3b16b3%2F0_76_1818_1090%2F1818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff20c8e59d8337f4443269f0612799acbcc3b16b3%2F0_76_1818_1090%2F1818.jpg>
 The show that never drags … Top Gear. Photograph: BBC 
Yes, you spot the formula after a while: lingering pan across beautiful vista, 
nature’s domain disrupted by loud engine noise, brash middle-aged bloke 
appears, chuntering about 0-60 in 3.2 seconds, helicopter shot. So there’s the 
comfort of knowing what’s coming next, the trance-like state it can induce. But 
I also want to see how they’ve tweaked the formula this week, how Jeremy might 
be in the lead now but is guaranteed to lose, or quite how Eddie Jordan will 
cheat.

Beyond the star in the rallycross car segment which will surely not return 
next season,Top Gear <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> 
doesn’t drag. That is no small feat for a programme heading into its 24th 
season.Paul MacInnes

Don’t Tell the Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/25/dont-tell-the-bride-comforting-perennial-like-cheese-toastie>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c25d549847d8fb4d89ef30917716aefec0eeadb%2F0_116_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c25d549847d8fb4d89ef30917716aefec0eeadb%2F0_116_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 ‘But you said you loved boats!’ … Don’t Tell The Bride. Photograph: Adam 
Neal/BBC/Renegade 
The conceit of Don’t Tell the Bride, where grooms are given a budget to plan 
their forthcoming wedding with no input from the bride, is, admittedly, pretty 
cliched – ooh, men and women, aren’t they different? Venus and Mars etc. But 
the show is far better than that, mainly because it approaches its subjects 
with genuine affection. It reminds me – like My Girl by Madness or Arctic 
Monkeys’ Mardy Bum –about the differences and frustrations any couple has to 
tolerate.

Mad Men to Seinfeld – TV's most criminally overrated shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/26/most-overrated-tv-shows-friends-seinfeld-west-wing-lost-mad-men-downton-abbey>
Most episodes follow a familiar storyline – the bride wants a meringue dress 
and a stately home. The groom takes all of the budget normally set aside for 
stately home hire and basic catering and spends it on hiring out Silverstone 
racing track with Formula 1 driver costumes for all the guests. (“But we met 
near Silverstone! You like to drive fast!”)

Rarely is there an episode in which the groom is not exposed as a complete 
buffoon at some point (the show doesn’t focus exclusively on straight couples, 
and if the gay marriage episodes prove anything, it’s that couples really don’t 
seem to know each other very well in any relationship).

Compared to its reality peers DTTB is the superior show because the stories 
that run parallel to the wedding blunders can be so poignant: blossoming 
relationships with step-parents; fall-outs with controlling friends; grooms 
sobbing on their best man’s shoulder when they realise they’ve ballsed it all 
up. These moments give emotional ballast to what would otherwise be an exercise 
in wackiness. Now if you’ll excuse me, I’ve got an anniversary to plan, and 
need to see if I can hire Anfield for the day …Tim Jonze

Treme
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f918d183737c6548ddf94fd8ce643f48c2c12c3%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f918d183737c6548ddf94fd8ce643f48c2c12c3%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 As good as The Wire … Treme. Photograph: HBO/Paul Schiraldi 
The Wire was never going to be an easy act to follow. David Simon’s move from 
the streets of Baltimore toNew Orleans in the wake of Hurricane Katrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/hurricane-katrina-10-years-on> did 
not come without criticism. Some found it too plodding, some too preachy, 
others said it patronisedthe city abandoned by America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/22/hurricane-katrina-recovery-lower-ninth-ward>
. I found it slow-burn rather than slow, full of life that felt true and a 
stellar cast who made the script sing. I read it as a love letter to a place 
I’d always longed to go, a world of second line parades, icing-sugar-sprinkled 
beignets, po’ boys and gumbo.

True, a few of the leads grated, namely DJ Davis, the joker who starts a band 
called The Brassy Knoll <https://vimeo.com/25198655> and runs for public 
office, promising to fix his hometown with marijuana (slogan: Pot for 
Potholes). But they were outnumbered by perfectly drawn characters who seemed 
to embody the city’s pain and pride: LaDonna, the badass bar-owner; her 
musician ex-husband Antoine, who never leaves home without his ’bone; and Toni, 
the tenacious attorney who tries to track down all the people lost in the 
system after the storm. And then there was Albert Lambreaux (played byClarke 
Peters <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/clarke-peters>, The Wire’s Lester 
Freamon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/nov/05/the-wires-lester-freamon-tv-detectives>
), aMardi Gras Indian chief <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dmgXIMbT3cU> who 
spends his last days sewing thousands of beads on to his intricate costume so 
he can be the purdiest of them all come parade day.

A couple of years ago, I finally found myself in New Orleans, dancing down the 
streets with a brass band beside a percussionist expertly playing a frying pan. 
To me, Treme told the truth. It captured the city in all its rich beauty – that 
vibrant, urgent place let down terribly by President Bush.Kate Abbott

Pulling <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/07/pulling-box-set>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69b5c5f5daa211ca93dbde2f5623788161dc9339%2F0_108_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69b5c5f5daa211ca93dbde2f5623788161dc9339%2F0_108_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Sharon Horgan’s magnum opus … Pulling. Photograph: BBC/Steve Brown/Silver River
This year’s strange online mourning of BBC3’s network presence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/30/bbc3-set-to-go-online-only-as-trust-backs-plans-to-scrap-tv-channel>
 meant that Britain, as a nation, pretended to squeeze out tears for the loss 
of a channel devoted to endless repeats ofFamily Guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/family-guy> and the rise of 
documentarian-for-dumdumsStacey Dooley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/07/catch-up-tv-guide>.

But it also felt like a revenge of sorts as the channel was high up on my 
global shit-list for cancelling Pulling,Sharon Horgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sharonhorgan>’s brutal alternative to boys 
night out gross-outs. While the 2000s had seen a small rise in 
women-behaving-badly comedies, they had mostly been crass and reductive. But 
pre-Bridesmaids, Horgan tapped into a darkness that’s rarely explored within 
female friendships.

The three leads were all flawed, morally questionable and, at times, genuinely 
disturbed but, in two under-seen seasons and a special finale, they always 
managed to keep us onside, even when they were bludgeoning a cat to death with 
a brick. Few sitcoms since have come close to matching its brazen, often 
shockingly grim, humour and while Horgan might have gone on to find greater 
success with the slick, less depraved,Catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/14/best-of-tv-2015-no-4-catastrophe>
, this remains her magnum opus.Benjamin Lee


Terriers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13c584fd28a23c0454f79398823da268aef33852%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13c584fd28a23c0454f79398823da268aef33852%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Before True Detective there was … Terriers. 
Created by Ted Griffin, the screenwriter of Ocean’s Eleven, and Shawn “The 
Shield” Ryan, Terriers was a sunlit slice of neo-noir whose influence can be 
seen in everything from theFargo remakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/fargo> to True Detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/21/true-detective-cary-fukunaga-interview>
. Prematurely cancelled after one 13-episode season it subsequently achieved 
notoriety as FX’s lowest ever rated series. All those people who didn’t tune in 
missed a laidback delight.

Terriers – which follows unlicensed private detectives Hank (Donal Logue), an 
easy-going former cop and recovering alcoholic, and Britt (Michael 
Raymond-James), a charming career criminal – is a shaggy dog story in the best 
sense. Sure Hank and Britt solve crimes (everything from missing rings to 
corporate coverups) but the appeal lies in the time they spend together in 
their battered van, shooting the breeze, winding each other up, humming songs 
and meditating on what might have been.

Like a distant cousin to The Big Lebowski, Terriers is all about the detour, 
even if its darker moments – Britt’s struggle with his violent side, Hank’s 
loneliness – recalls the hardboiled classics of Charles Willeford. As for the 
show’s title: Griffin later admitted it was his biggest misstep. Meant to 
suggest that our heroes were scrappy battlers getting by against the odds, it 
instead made people think it was about dog shows or, worse, dog-fighting.Sarah 
Hughes

Survivor (US)

Whenever I bring up Survivor <http://www.cbs.com/shows/survivor/> at a dinner 
party, someone invariably says, “Oh, that show is still on?” It’s an 
infuriating response crafted to make them seem above reality television, like 
they have moved on topolitical podcasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/series/politicsweekly> while the rest of 
us are still watching real people fight for $1m in a tropical paradise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a55bb25d353f8668750d0634c25a2a9394070d%2F37_0_687_412%2F687.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV's%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pulling%20to%20Time%20Trumpet%20%E2%80%93%20TV%27s%20most%20underrated%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F27%2Ftvs-most-underrated-shows-pulling-top-gear-time-trumpet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a55bb25d353f8668750d0634c25a2a9394070d%2F37_0_687_412%2F687.jpg>
 32 seasons in, it’s still a vital show … Survivor. 
Not only is Survivor still around, it’s still a vital show. Of course it 
couldn’t sustain the 52 million viewers who tuned into the final of the first 
season finale in 2000, but this year’s 32nd season finale still clocked almost 
10 million, much higher than most shows littering critics Best Of lists at the 
end of the year.

With that many seasons, of course there have been some duds, but Blood v 
Water, the show’s 27th season, which pitted family members against one another, 
was one of its finest. Even at its most humdrum, Survivor is a surprisingly 
intelligent look at how intricate game design can bring out the best and worst 
in people, leading to surprising acts of loyalty as well as staggeringly harsh 
group dynamics.

Were it not for Survivor, we wouldn’t have had American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, The Voice, Keeping Up 
with the Kardashians. If it weren’t for Survivor we wouldn’t have had The 
Apprentice and Donald Trump might not be a stone’s throw from the presidency. 
So yes, the show that permanently changed the television landscape is still on, 
and you’re an idiot if you think you can ignore it.Brian Moylan

Clone High
 From the people who brought you The Lego Movie … Clone High. Photograph: MTV 
These days Phil Lord and Chris Miller are two of the most in-demand people in 
Hollywood, the screenwriting duo responsible for the reboot of 21 Jump Street 
and The Lego Movie. In the early 2000s though, they were merely the creators of 
Clone High, an anarchic cartoon on MTV that few watched, and fewer remember.

That’s a shame because Clone High was brilliant. Its premise – a shadowy group 
of government agents make genetic copies of famous historical figures (JFK, 
Cleopatra, Abe Lincoln) and send them off to high school – should have been too 
high-concept to work. And yet they managed to turn it into an absurdist send-up 
of teen dramas, with characters delivering garbled versions of the solemn 
speeches seen on the likes of The OC and Smallville.

The show had enormous fun too in undermining its famous faces: Lincoln is a 
perpetual ditherer, Joan of Arc an overly earnest clicktivist type, JFK a 
lunkheaded jock and Gandhi a party-bro desperately seeking the validation of 
his peers.

That last gag proved to be Clone High’s undoing. The depiction of Gandhi was 
deemed offensive by some in India, prompting a mass hunger strike outside MTV’s 
Delhi offices. Ultimately, it’s hard not to feel that those doing the striking 
either hadn’t seen the show or had wilfully missed the point – the character 
isn’t ridiculing Gandhi so much as sending up high-school archetypes – but MTV 
decided they didn’t need the hassle for a series that wasn’t exactly raking in 
the viewers, and promptly cancelled it.

Fifteen years on, Clone High exists only via region one DVDs and fuzzy YouTube 
videos. But Lord and Miller have talked about making a film version, so perhaps 
this neglected classic may yet have its day in the sun.Gwilym Mumford

Time Trumpet
 Hilarious and scarily prescient … Time Trumpet. 
A talking heads nostalgia show set in 2031, Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/armando-iannucci>’s political parody saw 
comedians including Stewart Lee, Richard Ayoade and Adam Buxton pretend to 
reminisce about the year 2007 onwards (the series was broadcast in 2006) 
alongside actors playing future versions of celebrities such as David Beckham, 
Anne Robinson, Jamie Oliver and Charlotte Church.

In between lampooning TV trends – contributors look back on programmes like 
June Sarpong’s Donkey Monkey Question Time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gyYFeHOvAv4> and Make Me Look Like David 
Willetts, while Sebastian Coe remembers murdering Justin Lee Collins after 
finding out the London Olympics were a prank by the Friday Night Project – 
Iannucci goes in on the political issues of the day.

David Miliband and Charles Clarke remember one unfortunate incident in which 
the police shot a completely naked man because “they thought he looked like a 
van packed with explosives”. Tony Blair – still prime minister when Time 
Trumpet was broadcast – is a “madman” wandering round bins in Baghdad.David 
Cameron becomes prime minister for 20 days 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4eTmA8glsm4>, and is forced to abandon his 
post after engaging in an unspeakably grotesque act. He leaves parliament in 
such disarray that the BNP, who have successfully rebranded as an acceptable 
political party, are able to take power.

Back then, Iannucci was not the comedy behemoth he is now, and the series went 
largely unreviewed. But, a decade on, it remains one of the most inventive, 
hilarious and breathtakingly dark television shows of all time, not to mention 
one of the few satires that has managed to stay stranger than reality – for the 
time being, at least. Rachel Aroesti
 