
A primary school near Neath is going completely chocolate free after a pupil’s 
allergy led the school’s leadership to ban the confectionery from the premises 
– including the staff room.

The pupil’s intolerance was so severe that being in the same room as someone 
eating chocolate was dangerous, parents atAlltwen primary school 
<http://www.npted.org/schools/primary/alltwen/Pages/school%20Information.aspx> 
in Pontardawe were told in a letter asking them to remove all traces of 
chocolate from children’s bags.

“Unfortunately, one of our pupils has been diagnosed with a chocolate 
intolerance and can become very ill if in contact with chocolate,” Owain Hyett, 
the school’s headteacher, told parents.

Wave of support for school's ban on parents wearing pyjamas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/27/wave-support-schools-ban-parents-wearing-pyjamas-skerne-park-darlington>
“All areas of the school will be chocolate-free, including the staff room and 
office. Sadly the pupil is also highly sensitive to chocolate if it is airborne 
or being eaten by another pupil.

“To maintain the safety of this pupil our school will be adopting a 
no-chocolate policy for all pupils and staff. All areas of the school will be 
chocolate-free including the staff room and office.

“The catering department are working with the school to amend our dinner menu 
by replacing any chocolate products. We also ask that you ensure that there are 
no traces of chocolate in our pupils’ packed lunches or school bags.”

News of the chocolate ban left a sour taste with some parents, who complained 
that they had not been consulted.

“I feel sorry for pupils with allergies but banning chocolate for all children 
is not right, whatever next?” one parenttold the South Wales Evening Post 
<http://www.southwales-eveningpost.co.uk/Parents-anger-Swansea-valley-primary-school-bans/story-28601130-detail/story.html>
.

Lancashire school bans birthday cakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/15/lancashire-school-bans-birthday-cakes>
“What if I have chocolate in my pocket in the yard at pick-up time? Will we 
have ‘chocolate police’ at the gate? Will this lead to staff wasting their time 
inspecting all the lunch boxes?”

Similar school-wide bans have become more common because of rising awareness 
of the effects of allergies. A school in Lancashire recently banned pupils from
bringing birthday cakes to school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/15/lancashire-school-bans-birthday-cakes>
 because teachers were unable to check for ingredients that could trigger 
allergies.

Many primary schools and nurseries routinely ban nuts such as peanuts and 
almonds following the rapid growth in nut intolerance among children.

National regulations in England have led to schools banning crisps and 
chocolate from lunch boxes for health reasons, while a primary school in Kent 
is among those to bar children from bringing in fruit juice because of the high 
sugar content.
 