
One of art’s great themes is ... art. Just as novelists have been writing 
about novels ever since Cervantes invented Don Quixote, artists have been 
depicting art itself ever since... well, perhaps you know the first example. In 
his famously complex masterpieceLas Meninas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/26/velazquez-las-meninas-everything-is-happening-extract-michael-jacobs>
, the 17th-century artist Velázquez portrays himself at the easel in the act of 
portraying the king and queen who can be seen in a mirror. Vermeer similarly 
tries to represent the nature of art itself of his pictureThe Art of Painting 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/5e/Jan_Vermeer_-_The_Art_of_Painting_-_Google_Art_Project.jpg>
.

The A to Z of Readers' Art: our new project for you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/01/a-to-z-of-readers-art-new-project-share-your-art>
Picasso too explores the mysteries of art in a series of paintings on the 
theme ofThe Studio (L’Atelier) 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/artwork/3443>
. This is actually a very old subject indeed.Renaissance artists often painted 
Saint Luke portraying the Virgin 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/upload/img/event-quinten-massys-saint-luke-painting-virgin-child-ng3902-c-wide.jpg>
, taking it as an opportunity to record the painter’s craft.

More recently, Jasper Johns made a sculpture of his own brushes in a can 
<http://payload120.cargocollective.com/1/9/310875/4711308/J-JOHNS-SAVARIN-CAN-WITH-BRUSHES-1960.jpg>
 andDamien Hirst has sealed an entire studio in a vitrine 
<http://www.damienhirst.com/contemplating-a-self-portrait>. 

In these postmodern times, a lot of art is all about art. Turner prize winner 
Mark Leckey comments on the work of Jeff Koon 
<http://i.ytimg.com/vi/2rH5Ew_fOTk/hqdefault.jpg>s in his own works. Mordant 
artist David Shrigley 
<http://assets.itsnicethat.com/system/files/112013/5285f8045c3e3c49b900033d/images_slice_large/05866973.jpg?1438258499>
 also chews away at the idea of art.

Are works of art that portray art mere navel-gazing? Not at all. Creativity is 
always self-conscious. Picasso and Velazquez alike were fascinated by the 
strange thing that is “art” and created masterpieces out of that introspective 
meditation.

So this month’s challenge, to kick off our new project The A to Z of Reader’s 
Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, is to create your own 
self-referential work of art about art. It might be a painting of the word art 
or a cast of your pencil or ... surprise us. That’s what art is for, surely.

How to share your artwork

Share an image of your artwork via GuardianWitness 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC0QFjAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwitness.guardian.co.uk%2F&ei=aCD6Ub-BOYTY0QXfo4CYCg&usg=AFQjCNExLL0b8-w97kDOG255cFwccvrrJQ&sig2=cqgHLUCzLdan0HyToN2Ggw&bvm=bv.50165853,d.d2k>
, by clicking the blue “contribute” button on this page, or via theAndroid or 
iPhone app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>. If you have any problems, 
email us at userhelp@theguardian.com.

We’ll feature some of our favourite submissions on the Art and Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign> site. By sending us your pictures 
you: a) acknowledge that you have created the pictures or have permission to do 
so; and b) grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, free licence to publish your 
pictures as described. Copyright resides with you, and you may reuse your 
pictures however you wish. Read ourfull terms and conditions 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/terms> here.

Don’t worry if they don’t appear straight away – everything has to be approved 
before it can be “hung” in our online gallery. Do tell us in the comments if 
there are any improvements we could make to the series.
 