
The busy, working person's weekday lunch is rarely a soulful affair taken at 
leisure on a park bench in the sunshine. More often than not, it's purchased in 
haste and gobbled in even less time than it took to buy.
 Avocados: full of vitamins, good fats – and tasty too. Illustration by Hennie 
Haworth. 
As you gaze mournfully at the crumb debris and packaging detritus on your 
desk, that "artisan" sandwich now a distant memory, ask yourself, does it 
always have to be like this? While we're unlikely to be able to get back our 
lost lunch hours, one thingis clear: there's still a need for quick and easy 
lunch recipes. This is where the mighty avocado comes in.

Arguably our favourite standby lunch item, avocados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/26/avocado-recipes-10-best> 
are both a treat and incredibly good for you. They are packed with vitamins and 
healthy fats, plus you can shove them in a handbag without prior refrigeration. 
What's not to love about these wonderful fruit? Here are some of our favourite 
ways to lunch on them:

• Slice in half, de-stone, and pour some French dressing into the convenient 
little hole. Enjoy with a teaspoon – and the waste is biodegradable.

• Guacamole is an obvious choice: delicious on sourdough (toasted at home 
before work) or dolloped on top of bean salads. We make ours with plenty of 
lime, salt, chilli, coriander, and red onion.

• Chop some avocado, cucumber, tomato and lettuce into chunks, sprinkle with 
salt and stuff into a pitta, along with some mint or basil leaves. A simple 
creamy dressing made from creme fraiche or yoghurt with lemon juice and salt 
adds a nice tang.

• Do as chef Margot Henderson suggests in her book You're All Invited 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781905490608>
 and top mashed avocado with salt, lemon juice and smoked paprika: delicious on 
rye bread or in wraps with leftover chicken. If you don't have paprika, dried 
chilli is just as good.

• Have yourself a prawn mocktail by chopping up a medium-ripe avocado and 
mixing with some largeprawns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
, a little garlic, a squeeze of lemon and sweet chilli sauce.
 