
The federal court has thrown out a lawsuit brought under the Racial 
Discrimination Act against threeQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> University of 
Technology students under section 18C.

The federal circuit court judge Michael Jarrett has ruled that the lawsuit by 
Indigenous staff member Cindy Prior should not proceed against Alex Wood, Calum 
Thwaites and Jackson Powell.

Prior was suing for $250,000 in damages but the three students had applied not 
to have the case proceed.

Coalition conservatives flex muscle over marriage equality and 18C
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/conservatives-flex-muscle-over-marriage-equality-and-18c>
“For the reasons I have expressed above, in my view Ms Prior does not enjoy 
reasonable prospects of successfully prosecuting her proceedings against each 
of Mr Wood, Mr Powell and Mr Thwaites,” Jarrett wrote in conclusion. “Her 
proceedings against each of them must be dismissed.”

Outside the court Thwaites’ lawyer Tony Morris said that Prior and the three 
students were victims in a case which should not have been allowed to get so 
far.


He criticised the president of the Human Rights Commission, Gillian Triggs. 
The commission administers the Racial Discrimination Act.

The commission put out a statement saying it accepted the court’s decision.

Thwaites said he was relieved at the outcome and “happy to be able to get on 
with my life”.

The case relates to an encounter in 2013 when Wood was asked to leave a 
computer lab known as the Oodgeroo Unit, reserved for Indigenous students.


Wood complained on a Facebook group page that he had been kicked out of the 
room.

“Just got kicked out of the unsigned ­indigenous computer room. QUT stopping 
segregation with segregation?” Woods wrote.

Two other students commented on the post. Powell, wrote: “I wonder where the 
white supremacist lab is” while Thwaites allegedly wrote “ITT Niggers”. 
Thwaites denies this claim.

Section 18C has been a totemic issue for conservatives in the Coalition since 
before the 2013 election, when the former prime minister Tony Abbott promised 
to amend it after afederal court judge in 2011 found 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/cases/cth/FCA/2011/1103.html?stem=0&synonyms=0&query=andrew%20bolt>
 that the conservative columnist Andrew Bolt had breached the section of the 
act.

But Abbott said he dumped the planned changes to preserve “national unity” and 
engage more closely with Muslim communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/05/tony-abbott-dumps-race-act-changes-terrorism>
 as his government moved to introduce a raft of anti-terrorism bills.

While conservatives did not openly protest Abbott’s decision, since Turnbull’s 
promotion to leadership, section 18C has been more publicly argued by Abbott 
supporters.

After the ruling, conservative Coalition members in favour of changing the act 
immediately used the judgment to argue that Jarrett’s ruling showed that it 
needed to change.

Senator James Patterson said while he was relieved at the judgment, it should 
never have gone that far. “Defenders of the law will no doubt argue that the 
dismissal of the case proves there is no need to change 18C,” Paterson said.

“This shows callous disregard for the welfare of three innocent students whose 
lives have been damaged by a tortuous three and a half-year case.


“This judgment doesn’t give them back that time, or their reputations, or the 
stress of having to endure these false allegations and defend themselves.”

Earlier in the day Turnbull said a proposal by the Liberal senator Dean Smith 
to hold a joint parliamentary committee inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/28/broaden-free-speech-debate-beyond-racial-discrimination-act-says-liberal-senator>
 on free speech including section 18C was a good way to examine the issues.


The prime minister, who has previously played down the issue since the Abbott 
government first tried to change the act, said on Friday that it was a matter 
of getting the balance right.

“Getting the balance right is always an issue, it’s an issue in many other 
areas too,” Turnbull said.

“And in this area many people feel that the provisions of 18C impose 
unreasonable restraints on free speech, or impose restraints on free speech 
over and above what it needed to prevent hate speech.

 “Parliamentary committees are a good way to examine issues of this kind 
because of course everybody with an interest can come and make a submission.”

Section 18C explainer: what is it, and why do some politicians want it changed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/section-18c-explainer-what-is-it-and-why-do-some-politicians-want-it-changed>
Section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act says 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18c.html> it is 
unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, which is 
“reasonably likely, in all the circumstances to offend, insult, humiliate or 
intimidate” another person or a group of people.

Section 18D makes 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18d.html> 
exceptions for artistic works, discussions, debates, event reports in the 
public interest and fair comment if it is in “expression of a genuine belief” 
held by the person making the comment.

The Human Rights Commission, which is the first point for complaints under the 
act, has also been under fire from the conservative right in the Coalition.

If conciliation fails at the commission, a complaint can proceed to the 
federal court or federal circuit court. In 2015-16, the commission finalised 86 
complaints about racial hatred. One complaint about racial hatred proceeded to 
court.

with Australian Associated Press
 