
Aim

"To make  
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2006/ukpga_20060001_en_1#Legislation-Preamble>
provision about offences involving stirring up hatred against persons on racial 
or religious grounds."

Main provisions

• Creates new offences  
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2006/ukpga_20060001_en_1#l1g1>of stirring up 
hatred against persons on religious grounds.
• Requires that the words, behaviour, written material, recordings or 
programmes must be threatening and intended to stir up religious hatred.
• Defines religious hatred as hatred against a group of persons on the basis 
of their religious belief or lack of religious belief.
• Amends the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 so that the powers of 
citizen's arrest do not apply to the offences of stirring up religious and 
racial hatred.

Background

The Racial and Religious Hatred Act was the government's third attempt 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=5&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.parliament.uk%2Fcommons%2Flib%2Fresearch%2Frp2005%2Frp05-048.pdf&ei=odFHScSNGIOgwgGNpYFQ&usg=AFQjCNEknE5MF6NgsgG8ipDFAQQiH4uh5A&sig2=DPabAHA5QdJVwSaTUhXO9w>
 to make a new offence of inciting hatred against a person on the grounds of 
their religious or racial background. Similar measures were included in the
Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security bill in 2001 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/13/anti-terrorism-act>
, but were scuppered after objections from the House of Lords. The government 
again attempted to pass the provisions in theSerious Organised Crime and 
Policing bill 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2008/dec/16/serious-organised-crime-act>
, then dropped them in April 2005 to guarantee the passage of the bill before 
the dissolution of parliament in the run-up to the 2005 general election.

A bill outlawing incitement to religious hatred was one of the Labour party's 
manifesto promises during the 2005 general election. Muslim groups, including 
the Muslim Council of Britain, wanted the same kind oflegal protection 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4359982.stm> for their faith that was 
offered to Jews and Sikhs who were already covered by existing race hatred laws.

A high-profile campaign including writers, actors and comedians lobbied 
parliament to reject the bill. The movement's figurehead was comedian Rowan 
Atkinson who claimed the bill would restrict the right to make light of 
religious sensibilities. Atkinson said: "To criticise a person for their race 
is manifestly irrational and ridiculous but to criticise their religion, that 
is a right. That is a freedom."

Even on its third endeavour the government failed to secure some key elements 
of the act. It lost a key vote to overturn two amendments introduced by the 
House of Lords after Labour whipsmiscalculated 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/feb/01/religion.immigrationpolicy> 
voting numbers and failed to recall a team of MPs campaigning in a local 
by-election. The Lords amendments limited the legislation to "A person who uses 
threatening words or behaviour, or displays any written material which is 
threatening...if he intends thereby to stir up religious hatred", thereby 
restricting the offences to intentional acts of stirring up religious hatred. 
These changes also ensured that an individual charged with an offence must be 
shown to have used "threatening" language – rather than the broader government 
clause of "threatening, insulting and abusive" language.

Criticism

The most controversial aspect of the bill was the offence of using insulting 
language (later dropped), which writers and comedians felt would barr them from 
joking about or criticising religion.

Shami Chakrabarti, director of Liberty, said: "This offence is capable of 
catching attacks on ideas as well as people. At best this is an empty sop to a 
community sorely let down by government. At worst it is a dangerous new 
blasphemy law out of step with our best traditions."

However, Liberty later described the act that passed both houses as "a great 
improvement on the bill proposed by the government. Criminalising even the most 
unpalatable, illiberal and offensive speech should be approached with grave 
caution in a democracy. Free speech is far more precious than protection from 
being offended."
 