
It was hailed as the most habitable planet ever found beyond the solar system. 
But now the distant world of Kepler 438b has started to look decidedly less 
inviting.

Astronomers at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics unveiled the 
small, rocky world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/06/earth-like-planet-alien-life-kepler-438b>
 circling the star Kepler 438 in January this year. A touch larger than Earth, 
in an orbit that keeps it warm enough for liquid water, but not too warm, the 
planet looked ripe for life.


But astronomers at the University of Warwick have found a fly in the ointment 
that might have been disastrous for any alien organisms looking to gain a 
foothold. Their measurements show that the surface of Kepler 438b is regularly 
blasted with radiation, enough to strip away its atmosphere and leave it bare 
and lifeless.


Kepler 438b isn’t Earth’s twin – there are more habitable planets out there | 
Stuart Clark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jan/07/kepler-438b-earth-twin-habitable-planets-alien-life>
“Unlike the Earth’s relatively quiet sun, Kepler 438 emits strong flares every 
few hundred days, each one stronger than the most powerful recorded flare on 
the sun. It is likely that these flares are associated with coronal mass 
ejections, which could have serious damaging effects on the habitability of the 
planet,” saidDavid Armstrong 
<https://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/physics/research/astro/people/armstrong/>, 
an astrophysicist who studied the world.


“If the planet, Kepler 438b, has a magnetic field like the Earth, it may be 
shielded from some of the effects. However, if it does not, or the flares are 
strong enough, it could have lost its atmosphere, be irradiated by 
extra-dangerous radiation and be a much harsher place for life to exist”.


The superflares that erupt from Kepler 438, a red dwarf star, release as much 
energy as 100bn megatons of TNT every few hundred days. But the coronal mass 
ejections associated with the flares are more damaging for the prospects of 
life on the world.


“The likelihood of a coronal mass ejection occurring increases with the 
occurrence of powerful flares, and large coronal mass ejections have the 
potential to strip away any atmosphere that a close-in planet like Kepler 438b 
might have, rendering it uninhabitable,” saidChloe Pugh 
<https://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/physics/research/cfsa/people/pugh/>, a 
researcher on the study which appears inMonthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society <https://www.ras.org.uk/publications/journals>.


“With little atmosphere, the planet would also be subject to harsh UV and 
X-ray radiation from the superflares, along with charged particle radiation, 
all of which are damaging to life,” she added. If the atmosphere survived, it 
could keep temperatures on Kepler 438b averaging about 60 Celsius.


Kepler 438b completes an orbit around its star every 35 days, making a year on 
the the surface pass 10 times faster than on Earth. It was discovered alongside 
a handful of other planets by Nasa’sKepler space telescope 
<http://kepler.nasa.gov/> which detects alien worlds as they move across the 
faces of their stars.
 