
Juande Ramos might have been caught between laughter and tears. For 45 minutes 
the manager smouldered on the touchline as Tottenham offered a passable 
impersonation of a pub team, to move to within touching distance of humiliation.

They fell two goals behind to well-organised opposition from Denmark but the 
deficit could conceivably have been greater. Following the debacle against 
Getafe, in the last game for Ramos's predecessor Martin Jol, the club's 
prospects of escaping Uefa Cup Group G looked bleak. Defensively, they were 
shambolic.

Tottenham, however, are nothing if not unpredictable and in the second half, 
prompted by a Ramos tactical rethink, they discovered their rhythm and hauled 
themselves back up off the canvas.

Rapid responses from Dimitar Berbatov and Steed Malbranque announced their 
arrival into the contest and Darren Bent, on as a half-time substitute, 
converted what proved to be the winner from close-range, his third goal in five 
matches. From the ridiculous to the sublime; Tottenham's final group tie with 
Anderlecht next Thursday promises to be less fraught.

"The first half was disastrous, we made a lot of mistakes, it was painful at 
times," admitted Ramos. "We have a lot of injuries [to defenders] - Ledley 
King, Ricardo Rocha, Anthony Gardner, Younes Kaboul, Beno√Æt Assou-Ekotto - and 
the team is going to suffer. We have to work hard with the defenders we have 
got."

When Ramos was last at White Hart Lane for a Uefa Cup tie, it was last 
season's quarter-final second-leg and he was in charge of Sevilla. On that 
occasion Spurs conceded twice early on and Ramos and Sevilla emerged 
victorious. There was a sense of deja vu last night as Aalborg made a mockery 
of their scripted role as wide-eyed tourists, present simply to enjoy their 
first venture beyond the Uefa Cup first round. They stunned Tottenham with the 
fluency of their first-half display, and took the lead when Thomas Enevoldsen 
curled a right-footed shot past Paul Robinson from the edge of the area.

Spurs exhibited all the old failings of recent times. Ramos has tried to 
stabilise at the back and before last night he had largely succeeded in 
stemming the flow of goals conceded. But the jitters remain, particularly in 
central defence, where Michael Dawson and Pascal Chimbonda, the latest starting 
pair, endured torrid evenings. Lee Young-Pyo was similarly tortured at 
right-back.

Rade Prica, the lone Aalborg striker, caused alarm every time he chased in 
behind the backline and, on 24 minutes, he appealed in vain for a penalty, when 
he went down under Lee's challenge. Spurs' reprieve was temporary. With Aalborg 
in control and Ramos overheating on the touchline, Andreas Johansson and Prica 
combined for Kasper Risgaard to bundle home from close range.

Ramos is as yet unacquainted with the English for "riot act" and instead of 
reading it at half-time he calmly reshaped his team and enjoyed a startling 
dividend. Tom Huddlestone and Bent bounded off the substitutes' bench and with 
Keane withdrawn to the tip of a midfield diamond and Didier Zokora moved to sit 
in front of central defence, Tottenham were level inside six minutes. First 
Berbatov prodded past the advancing Karim Zaza, following Huddlestone's 
through-ball, and then Malbranque lashed high into the net after Keane had laid 
off Berbatov's cross.

With Huddlestone providing balance to the midfield in the holding role, and 
some semblance of security returning at the back, Tottenham completed their 
comeback when Bent turned in Aaron Lennon's centre after Gareth Bale's 
free-kick had been parried by Zaza.

"The team lacks a little balance and we have to find a solution," said Ramos. 
"We can't rely on scoring three goals to get away with it."
 