
Rangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> followed Celtic out of 
Europe as events here at Ibrox and in Austria last night conspired to leave the 
Old Firm with only domestic duties for the rest of the season.

Defeat at the hands of Auxerre <https://www.theguardian.com/football/auxerre>, 
coupled with Grazer AK's victory over AZ Alkmaar, ensured the Glasgow rivals 
have suffered the same fate.

Alex McLeish and his players went into this tie with high hopes -they needed 
just a point to qualify - only to have them cruelly dashed by the latest 
Auxerre team fashioned by the wily Guy Roux.

It was a desperate night for the Ibrox club, who suffered the same fate last 
season when only a home point was needed against Panathinaikos to keep them in 
Europe.

Last night a downcast McLeish was clearly unhappy with his side's defending 
for both the goals scored by Bonaventure Kalou.

"I'm very disappointed," he said. "We had a corner but 15 seconds later it was 
a goal for Auxerre. It's amateur. They were pure gifts. It is difficult to take 
positives from tonight.

"We have got to move on. We have got to pick ourselves up. We let the Rangers 
fans down."

If it was the home team's intention to settle for that one point, their plans 
were ripped up after only 10 minutes when the French side went ahead.

It was a classic counter- attack. Benjani Mwaruwari sped down the right, after 
Rangers had made a meal of a corner, and sent in a cross which was missed by 
Zurab Khizanishvili but not by Kalou. Although the striker's first effort hit 
the bar, it fell kindly for him to tap home the rebound.

Yet Rangers had started brightly and after three minutes saw a penalty claim 
for handball against Rene Bolf dismissed. That initial good work counted for 
nothing, though, when Kalou struck and for a spell the home play ers lost their 
way entirely. They even made an early tactical change as Fernando Ricksen moved 
to right-back with the hapless Khizanishvili pushed into midfield.

Although Benoit Cheyrou tested Stefan Klos with a fierce low drive, there were 
signs that Rangers were sorting themselves out. Hamed Namouchi went close with 
a header from a Gr√©gory Vignal free-kick.

Namouchi also just failed to get on the end of a Dado Prso cross as the Ibrox 
team stepped up the pressure.

Yet Auxerre remained dangerous on the break and the home team were nearly 
caught out again after 32 minutes when Kalou crossed and Mwaruwari mishit his 
shot to allow a grateful Klos to collect.

Rangers needed something to get the home crowd going again and it should have 
arrived when Nacho Novo gave Prso time and space to shoot. But the Croatian 
dragged his effort wide and then headed a Ricksen cross wide just before 
half-time.

Ricksen, a driving force in midfield all season, was back there on the 
restart. But soon Auxerre doubled their lead. Khizanishvili's unhappy night 
continued with a poor header seized by Kanga Akale, who supplied Kalou. 
Although the striker's shot was weak it crept beyond Klos into the corner.

Rangers' desperation was amply illustrated when Vignal went down in the area 
under a challenge from Bakari Sagna and was promptly booked for diving.

Auxerre were playing with aplomb and there was little Rangers seemed able to 
do about it.

Fabian Cool did well to stop a Novo effort and Shota Arveladze failed to force 
home the rebound. But Rangers' slackness was always a problem and Jean-Alain 
Boumsong almost handed Auxerre a third goal with a slack pass intercepted by 
Teemu Tainio. Marvin Andrews rescued a tricky situation.

Then Prso forced Cool into a good save as Rangers became increasingly frantic. 
 