
A “very scarce” signed novel by A Clockwork Orange’s author Anthony Burgess, 
which was pulped following libel action – from a school secretary who 
recognised herself in the book – is set to be sold at one of the world’s 
largest gatherings of antiquarian booksellerslater this month 
<http://www.olympiabookfair.com/>.

Burgess’s The Worm and the Ring was published in 1961 by Heinemann, but was 
pulled from circulation after Gwendoline Bustin, who was the secretary of 
Banbury Grammar School and later mayor of Banbury, brought a libel action 
against it. Burgess had taught at the school in the early 1950s, and Bustin was 
not the only recognisable character in the book, but she was the only one to 
sue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Frare-copy-anthony-burgess-novel-lawsuit-the-worm-and-the-ring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4306710f07a203e12b1c7e72a65c3a7641c755%2F0_0_914_1322%2F914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rare%20copy%20of%20Anthony%20Burgess%20novel%20that%20prompted%20lawsuit%20up%20for%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Frare-copy-anthony-burgess-novel-lawsuit-the-worm-and-the-ring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rare%20copy%20of%20Anthony%20Burgess%20novel%20that%20prompted%20lawsuit%20up%20for%20sale&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Frare-copy-anthony-burgess-novel-lawsuit-the-worm-and-the-ring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4306710f07a203e12b1c7e72a65c3a7641c755%2F0_0_914_1322%2F914.jpg>
 The signed copy of The Worm and the Ring by Anthony Burgess. Photograph: 
Ashton Rare Books 
Heinemann ended up pulping its unsold copies of the book, according to Les 
Ashton of Ashton Rare Books, who will be selling a 1961 first edition of the 
book, signed by the author, at theLondon international antiquarian book fair 
this month <http://www.olympiabookfair.com/>. Heinemann republished The Worm 
and the Ring in a revised edition in 1970­, but Ashton said it was “very 
scarce” to find a copy of the unrevised edition for sale, and “ultra rare” to 
find a signed copy.

“Burgess just based it on his time at the school, and people clearly 
recognised themselves, but she [Bustin] complained to the publishers and 
Heinemann got scared off. She must have been a bit of a forceful character,” 
said Ashton.

Roger Lewis’s biography of Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/nov/09/biography.highereducation> 
reveals that the lines complained of in the libel writ describe the secretary, 
Alice in the book, as an “incubus” who is “a bit deranged … the sort of woman 
who should have got married ages ago”. She’s “just pitiable”, she “seemed to be 
suppressing an old maid’s excitement”, and “seems definitely unbalanced, the 
sort who might shout out dirty words under an anaesthetic”.

“Though Burgess made the pathetic excuse that it was a complete coincidence if 
his school secretary bore any resemblance to the actual school secretary, 
everybody in Banbury at once saw the accuracy of the portrait – and Gwen Bustin 
rather proved that she was indeed a hysterical dried-up old duenna by reacting 
in the way she did – ie by hiring Colin Duncan QC to express her outrage in 
open court that she’d been portrayed in a book as a hysterical dried-up old 
duenna,” writes Lewis. “One can only feel sorry for her.”

Ashton, one of more than 180 antiquarian book dealers at the London fair 
between 26 and 28 May, has priced the book at £2,750. It will be jostling for 
place with a host of rare titles. The fair this year takes as its theme The 
Birth of the Gothic, and dealers are bringing first editions of titles from 
Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein to Victor Hugo’s The Hunchback of Notre Dame.
 One of a collection of Jane Austen editions owned by her close friend, Martha 
Lloyd. Photograph: Jonathan Frost 
There will also be a copy of Jane Austen’s gothic parody Northanger Abbey, 
which its seller is promising will allow “a tantalisingly close brush with one 
of this country’s greatest novelists”. The novel, along with copies of Pride 
and Prejudice and Sense and Sensibility, is signed by Austen’s close friend 
Martha Lloyd, the woman to whom Austen dedicated her early work Frederic and 
Elfrida, and with whom she lived for a period. Lloyd was a collector of recipes 
and a writer, and went on to marry Austen’s brother Frank.

“They were very close from an early age,” said Jonathan Frost of J&M Books. 
“These books give that electric feeling– they were in the room, in the house, 
withJane Austen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/janeausten>. It’s just 
conjecture, but we know their connection, and it’s just one magic step to the 
fact that Austen handled them, and looked at them. It’s quite extraordinary.”

The signed Pride and Prejudice is being sold for £20,000, Sense and 
Sensibility for £28,000 and Northanger Abbey for £19,500.

“They come directly from the Austen family and this is the first time they’ve 
been up for sale,” said Frost, who speculated that Lloyd would have written her 
name into the books when moving house. “These days, it’s expected that authors 
will inscribe their books, but that’s a fairly modern phenomenon. It would have 
been fairly peculiar if Jane Austen had written her name in these, but if she 
had inscribed them, I would have added another zero to the price,” said Frost. 
According to J&M Books, “very few books inscribed by Austen exist and tend to 
command vast sums when they appear”.
 