
Chaos. Where isn’t it? The world is a mess of entropy, energy, waste, 
injustice, and emotion. Chaos thrives equally in war, in corruption, in our 
hearts, in a pencil case, in ideas mangled or cables tangled. “I accept chaos, 
I’m not sure whether it accepts me,” said Bob Dylan, with a shrug. “Darling – 
in chaos there is fertility,” retorted writer Anaïs Nin, flirtily. But is there 
also opportunity in chaos? Game of Thrones authorGeorge RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin>, with the imminent return 
of his adapted books to screens this spring, cuts to the heart of it: “Chaos 
isn’t a pit. Chaos is a ladder. Many who try to climb it fail, and never get to 
try again … the climb is all there is. But they’ll never know this. Not until 
it’s too late.”


So how to deal with chaos? Climb that ladder and try and take control. One way 
is to try and frame the mayhem in a format that helps us understand the world, 
which is precisely where writers, particularly songwriters, have sought to 
express and control what their perceptions throw at them. Joy Division’s Ian 
Curtis fought and lost a war with a frightening chaos he perceived, struggling 
with bipolar disorder and epilepsy, but his all-too-brief career won a few 
battles, leaving behind some timeless songs and poems, including one inspired 
by a disabled women, with whom he had worked in his civil service job, and who 
died after an epileptic fit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQMRZROGtm1Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQMRZROGtm1Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQMRZROGtm1Q&media=>
 Uniquely moving performer … Ian Curtis with Joy Division on Something Else, 
1979 
Some perceive taking control in more of political and cultural context. 
“Whoever controls the media, controls the mind,” said the Doors’ Jim Morrison, 
whose cocktail of drugs and insights thrived, for a time, in utter chaos. 
Musical control can also be a more practical challenge. Heavy rock’s Richie 
Blackmore said, rather comically, “learning to play guitar with a big amplifier 
is like trying to control an elephant”. Especially when youturn it up to 11 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KOO5S4vxi0o>.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAirAT7gN6A0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAirAT7gN6A0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAirAT7gN6A0&media=>
 Ho hum. Glenn Gould controls the fugue 
The eccentrically humming but brilliant Canadian pianist Glenn Gould, whose 
recordings, particularly of Bach, showed extraordinarily gifted control, also 
wrote much about the theory and future of music. Obsessed until his death in 
1982 that home hi-fi equipment would change how listeners perceive and consume 
music, he predicted that “the electronic age 
<http://www.pennuto.com/music/gould.htm> … will forever change the values that 
we attach to art”. In many ways he was right. The consumer’s array of control 
in listening and playback has developed multiple options, and every amateur 
bedroom musician now can mix, loop, sample and compose with a host of 
affordable controllers and apps.Bjork’s 2011-14 Biophilia project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/jul/20/bjork-biophilia-app> 
included applications allowing listeners to remix her work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do8AELvVUFLw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do8AELvVUFLw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do8AELvVUFLw&media=>
 Introducation to Bjork’s Biophilia app - handing control to the listener 
Beyond the actual music, we are all seeking some form of control in our lives, 
and your nominated songs on this subject can be as much as about losing control 
as gaining it, having it imposed upon us as trying to put in on others, 
physically or emotionally. Every song is perhaps, explicitly or otherwise, a 
cry for control, and plays a note against or into chaos. And chaos can also 
come from many sources – often those designed to aid control. Who hasn’t at 
some point had their lives turned upside down by the thoughtless machinations 
of red tape, banking error, or work bureaucracy? In a world where it is hard to 
know how stands for what in politics, and austerity measures co-exist alongside 
quantitative easing, control can often about trying to find meaning where 
things seem to make even less sense.


But there is a way out. One way is to give in to chaos, allow yourself to be 
tossed on its stormy winds, just as the painterWilliam Turner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tn4zSR_5ioI> enjoyed being strapped to the 
mast of a ship in a storm to drink in the full force of nature’s elements.

Another is to find patterns in the chaos. The universe is full of beautiful 
examples on every scale.Morphogenesis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morphogenesis> is the biological process that 
causes an organism to develop its shape, andAlan Turing 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Turing>, after his better known war-time 
work on artificial intelligence and computing with the Enigma machine, wrote a 
paper predicting chemical shapes in a mathematical context. At a similar time 
in the 1950s Russia’s Boris Belousov analysed how the oscillating chemicals of 
sugars self-organised into shapes. In the 60s, US mathematician Edward Lorenz 
was a pioneer ofchaos theory <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorenz_system>, and 
first described the butterfly effect. And Polish-born mathematicianBenoit 
Mandelbrot <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandelbrot_set> popularised the 
wondrous never-ending fractal shapes that mimick much in nature and are 
deliciously musical in their visual intricacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425500100433%2F02a2d6a9-5247-4dd7-8ee3-85a4d9dec2f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20control%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20control%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425500100433%2F02a2d6a9-5247-4dd7-8ee3-85a4d9dec2f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fractal shapes expressing elements of chaos theory Photograph: Stocktrek/Corbis
So then, welcome all, back to the chaotic, but always fertile world of RR, 
where after a month’s hiatus, it is time to defiantly return with a flurry of 
song nominations. This week’s guru is the sagaciousseverin 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/severin/public>, who will take a benign but 
firm control on proceedings, and help the glorious chaos take shape. Please put 
forward your control-themed song nominations by last orders (11pm GMT) onMonday 
9 March in comments below and optionally in the Spotify list before the results 
are published at lunchtime onThursday 12 March.

As author and poet Maya Angelou <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mayaangelou>
 put it: “You may not control all the events that happen to you, but you can 
decide not to be reduced by them.”

To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify, 
SoundCloud or Grooveshark are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 