
Reading borough council is to develop an app to help young people find jobs.

The authority's plan is part of its "from handset to mindset" project that 
aims to address the Not in Education, Employment or Training (NEETs) issue 
across Reading and West Berkshire.

By developing the app, with the benefit of £125,000 of funding from O2's The 
Future Fund, the council aims to help young people aged 16 to 25 gain 
employment by tapping into social media.

Reading's lead councillor for ICT and service improvement, Jan Gavin, said: "I 
would like to thank O2 for giving us this opportunity to work in partnership 
with them on our innovative project bid. We want to develop an app that 
utilises the technology found in almost every young person's pocket to maximise 
their chances of finding a job or training."

According to O2, the Future Fund, launched in April, is intended to help local 
councils drive technology innovation, reduce costs and build closer social 
engagement within their local communities. About 40 councils submitted bids to 
win one of three funding packages worth up to the values of £125,000, £75,000 
and £50,000.

The council's lead councillor for education and children's service, John 
Ennis, said: "This is an excellent opportunity to give young people in Reading 
more tools in their job search in these difficult economic circumstances. I 
want to thank council officers for submitting this winning bid which will make 
a positive impact in Reading."

This article is published by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Join the Guardian 
Government Computing Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network> free to receive 
regular emails on the issues at the top of the professional agenda.
 