
Wow. The very idea of orchestras and pop musicians sharing a stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/dec/01/when-pop-meets-classical-prokofiev>
 is enough to reduce some people to apoplexy. TakeJohnBorstlap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13568365>'s response 
to Maddy Costa's article last week on that very subject: "[The critic]Alex Ross 
<http://www.therestisnoise.com/> was devastatingly at fault when he advocated a 
fusion of pop and serious: it betrays a fundamental incapacity of making 
distinctions between what is and what is not important or valuable. It looks as 
a typical product of 'democracy in taste', this disastrous American heritage 
which, as a fungus, undermines everything that is of value in the arts. In a 
world drenched in pop, the islands of serious art and serious music have to be 
protected from this teenage inability of living-up to the achievements of our 
past." But what do you really think? "Embarrassing nonsense." Oh, right.

There was no more enthusiasm from sprocketboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13562458>. "There is 
a redundant idea, currently being peddled by a self-destructing Radio 3, that 
presenting 'classical' music – whatever that means – in a frightened, 
apologetic way will somehow generate a new audience." To be fair, I don't think 
the people Maddy spoke to were either frightened or apologetic, but sorry for 
interrupting. "Alternatively, there is the idea that you can persuade people to 
listen to Stockhausen if it is programmed alongside Jonny Greenwood. I just 
don't buy it: it is patronising to both audiences. You don't put Schoenberg on 
as background music; you can't have user-friendly snippets of Morton Feldman, 
just as you can't play Napalm Death as Muzak."

On the bright side, no one mentioned Deep Purple's Concerto for Group and 
Orchestra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ph1JsoCHGB0>, which must be a first 
for a piece of this kind.

Peter Bradshaw delved deep in his pocket and came up with five of his bright, 
shiny stars for Kenneth Lonergan's filmMargaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/01/margaret-film-review>. This 
prompted, first, the observation fromHoratioAlgar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13549540> that it 
appeared to playing at only one screen in the whole country, then complaints 
from those who actually made it to the Odeon Panton Street in London.

"The whole cinema was sighing and talking through the slow ponderous pace of 
this tough-watch film," saidCynicalOptimistic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13586531>. "I didn't 
even bother to ask the people in front to be quiet as so many others were 
chatting through it, and frankly I empathised with them."

"It does seem strange to give a five-star review to such a flawed film," agreed
SoundBoy42 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13588137>. 
"Even if the work that is trying to get out from the wrangling between studio 
and director is some kind of masterpiece, a film that loses its way quite as 
much as this does can't be considered top-drawer."

And, finally, to David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/dec/01/david-bowie-scuppers-o2-musical>
. Tom Ewing's column pondered the great man's dismissal of the idea of a 
jukebox musical based on his work, and the wider notion of jukebox musicals in 
general. "The main problem is that narrative and pop don't always mix," 
suggested Tom. To whichZodKneelsFirst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13548100> had a quick 
reponse: "No. The main problem is that producers of Juke Box musicals take 
cherished memories from your most important years, hand them to writers who 
don't really give a toss, who then gather a bunch of stage-school graduates 
who've never heard them before and promptly proceed to shit all over them. Then 
they get made into films that you can't fucking avoid! That's the main problem. 
Deep breaths. Deep breaths."

But would a Bowie musical work? "For a full portrait of his work you'd need 
quite a lot of genre jumping, some big shifts in tone, very 80s synths, 
terrible hair, the Jared the Goblin King outfit, the Ashes to Ashes clown 
clobber, China Girl, an act where they refuse to play the hits, a drum and bass 
section near the end and an audience armed with catapults and lollipops," 
reckonedStephanoBentos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13566536>. "Sounds 
quite a good night out actually." See you there, if Bowie changes his mind.
 