
Chris Allen, Buckingham 


Burial Rites 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447233169>
 by Hannah Kent (Picador) was my favourite of the 11 books recently shortlisted 
for theGuardian first book award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/15/guardian-first-book-award-2013-shortlist>
. It is based on the story of Agnes Magnúsdóttir, the last person to be 
executed in Iceland – for murdering her lover in 1828. Agnes is 
a well-developed character who you really feel for: you end up wanting her to 
escape her inevitable end. The book transmits a sense of the sparse difficult 
conditions in Iceland at the time, and the unfairness of a society that 
discriminated against both women and the servant class. It is an impressive 
first novel.

Kate Anderson, Sheffield 


Grace McCleen's The Professor of Poetry 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444769951>
 (Sceptre) is a book about writing and love. What could be a rather hackneyed 
situation when a successful academic meets her old tutor and the flame is 
rekindled, is transformed into a moving story about ageing, alongside sensible 
advice about writing and prose to die for. Claire Messud'sThe Woman Upstairs 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781844087310>
 (Virago) is a very cross book but the reader is enthralled by constantly 
wondering whether this most unreliable of narrators is unhinged. In a year full 
of Jane Austen revisited Jo Baker'sLongbourn 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857522016>
 (Doubleday) offers a different take onPride and Prejudice. Modern in its 
sensibilities I doubt if I will ever be able to read Austen again in quite the 
same way.

Jane Ayres, Chelmsford, Essex


As a keen swimmer I enjoyed Pondlife 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408841006>
 by Al Alvarez (Bloomsbury). This meditation on the pleasures of year-round 
outdoor swimming, combined with reflections on the increasing limitations of 
age was inspirational. I also enjoyedThe Marrying of Chani Kaufman 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908737434>
by Eve Harris (Sandstone Press). This book is a story of relationships defined 
by the ultra-orthodox Jewish faith and set in north-west London. Finally, I 
would recommend HHhH 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099555643>
 by Laurent Binet (Vintage). This gripping story of the assassination of 
Reinhard Heydrich in Prague in 1942 has a highly original narrative, in which 
the author seems to share with the reader his cogitations on what to include in 
the story.

Sam Banik, London

 The Lowland by Jhumpa Lahiri 
Booker-shortlisted The Lowland 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408828113>
 (Bloomsbury) by Jhumpa Lahiri is an elegantly written novel about two brothers 
growing up in a lowland suburb of south Calcutta in the 1950s and 60s; the 
younger becomes involved in the Naxalite movement and is killed by the police. 
The story shifts to the US and centres on the surviving brother, who has 
married his brother's wife, each living fractured lives within impermeable 
carapaces. Jesse Norman'sEdmund Burke: Philosopher, Politician, Prophet 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007489626>
 (William Collins) is an excellent political biography of a towering Whig 
parliamentarian who conferred an ideological definition on the creed of 
conservatism. Burke appeared inconsistent in his support for the Indians, Irish 
Catholics and American colonists, although he denounced the French revolution. 
He was an apostle of liberty and a champion of authority, but abhorred any 
abuse of power.

Patricia Bentley


Anthony Marra's debut novel A Constellation of Vital Phenomena 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781781090053>
 (Hogarth) is set in war-torn Chechnya. A dystopian hinterland where terror 
reigns, and everyone is a potential suspect and afraid of ending up in the 
"Landfill" – a place of unspeakable horror. After eight-year-old Havaa sees her 
father abducted by the Russians, their neighbour Akhmed is determined to save 
her from the same fate. This is a beautifully crafted novel. The intricate 
narrative manifests how the fates of the characters are bound together and how 
Havaa comes to symbolise all that is good in a chaotic world.

Chris Birch, London


As the father of two children and a grandfather of four, I can imagine nothing 
more heartbreaking than having a child with severe cerebral palsy. But that is 
what happened to my friend Saira Shah, and her experience is the basis of an 
amazing novel,The Mouseproof Kitchen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846556630>
 (Harvill Secker). The early part of the book, describing the birth and the 
following few days, in which she and her partner talk about abandoning the 
child, flying to Brazil and not leaving a forwarding address, is clearly 
autobiographical.However, the subsequent chapters describing the family's 
adventures in a mouse-infested farmhouse in the south of France are fictional, 
amusing and deeply moving. What shines forth from the book is that the author 
and her partner have learned a profound lesson in love from their disabled 
daughter, now five years old. When Jon Snow read the novel, he cried. So did I.

Tim Blackburn, London


Two books that have gripped me this year share the same translator: the 
excellent Philip Boehm. InChasing the King of Hearts 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908670106>
 by Hanna Krall (Peirene Press) Izolda escapes from the Warsaw ghetto and sets 
off to search for her missing husband. Her adventures read like a novel but are 
based on a real-life Izolda. A miracle of compression, the pared-down, 
matter-of-fact sentences are set against the horrors she meets along the way. 
Herta Müller drew on her mother's experiences as an ethnic German in a Romania 
overrun by the Red Army in 1945. InThe Hunger Angel 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846272783>
 (Portobello Books) the teenaged Leo is sent to a labour camp where if the cold 
and disease doesn't kill you, the angel that personifies hunger just might. We 
know Leo will survive, but what will be his place in the new world he returns 
to?

Charles Boardman, Nottingham


Sebastian Faulks has passed the test. His homage to Wodehouse, Jeeves and the 
Wedding Bells 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091954048>
(Hutchinson Books) had me laughing aloud. I was also charmed by Antoine 
Laurain'sThe President's Hat 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908313478>
(Gallic Books) in the final six pages of which the author has his own little 
joke. But my book of the year is Jonathan Buckley's breathtakingly clever novel,
Nostalgia 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908745316>
(Sort of Books). Set in a small Tuscan town it puts before us not only the 
expatriate protagonists but also the town itself, its history, its local 
residents and their life histories, all interspersed with scholarly 
digressions. Wonderful. Finally,Disraeli: or the Two Lives 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297860976>
by Douglas Hurd and Edward Young (Weidenfeld & Nicolson) is half the length of 
the usual political biography, and twice as entertaining.

Stephen Booth, Sheffield

 Maggie O'Farrell … her novel Instructions for a Heatwave captures the mood of 
1976's sweltering summer. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
I thoroughly enjoyed Alan Johnson's This Boy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552167017>
(Bantam Press), which vividly conveys the grinding poverty he endured growing 
up in London. Maggie O'Farrell'sInstructions for a Heatwave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/21/instructions-for-a-heatwave> 
(Tinder Press) is as good as any of her previous books and evokes the mood 
created by the heatwave of 1976.

Vidya Borooah, Belfast


Hermione Lee's Penelope Fitzgerald: A Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701184957>
(Chatto & Windus) is the biography Fitzgerald's small but devoted band of 
admirers have been waiting for since the novelist's death. Penelope Fitzgerald 
gained little recognition while she lived, was often overlooked, even regarded 
condescendingly, in her life and in her writing. In these times of relentless 
self-promotion, she had, as Rochefoucauld puts it, "a great ability to conceal 
her ability" – both her intelligence as a person and her talent as a writer. 
The biography sensitively uncovers the facts of an unusual life that Fitzgerald 
was reticent about and reveals the voluminous research she undertook, then used 
economically in novels that appear simple on the surface but are complex 
masterpieces.

Phelim Brady, Normandy, Surrey


With the dark humour of Nemirovsky and the humanity of a Camus, Constance 
Miles (Mrs Miles's Diary 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781471125584>
 - Simon & Schuster) records the familiar stoicism of civilians in WWII but 
also the panic, financial ruin and the "Blitz Shock". Dazed, bombed-out 
Londoners arrive on foot in her Surrey village not knowing where they are. 
Miles gives a new perspective on how the war changed women: "This war is 
…particularly hard on women, who loathe it all." Instead of the liberation of 
women into men's work she records the press-ganging of women into seven day 
factory shifts and the toll that is taking on their health."

Jerard Bretts, Milton Keynes


The book I most enjoyed reading this year was The New York Stories 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-York-Stories-Penguin-Classics/dp/0143107097> by 
John O'Hara (Penguin Classics), a selection of the many superb short stories by 
this neglected American master. O'Hara's command of dialogue is incredible, as 
is his understanding of American social class. The best poetry collection I 
read wasPoetry of the First World War 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780199581443.do> (OUP Oxford), brilliantly 
edited, with illuminating notes, by Tim Kendall. As well as more well-known 
poets such as Owen and Sassoon it includes moving works by civilian and women 
poets, plus music hall and trench songs.

Peter Brown, London


Peter Hughes's Allotment Architecture 
<http://www.realitystreet.co.uk/peter-hughes.php> (Reality Street) is deft and 
wryly observed, it abounds in "Ha!" moments. Try "Site Guide" written "for 
Heine, and the Caravan Club" with a tunnel to hell plunging through each pitch. 
Mei-Mei Berssenbrugge'sHello, the Roses 
<http://ndbooks.com/book/hello-the-roses> (New Directions) forms a synergy with 
her husband Richard Tuttle's postminimalist art. Her long lines teem with 
shapes and colour in an eastern/karmic approach to our place in nature and the 
universe. Simon Jarvis'sNight Office 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781907587337>
 (Enitharmon) is the first of five volumes, each containing 7,000 lines in 
eight-line stanzas. Although profound and sometimes difficult, reading, 
discussion and definition are available online.

Cornelius Browne, Dungloe, County Donegal, Ireland

 Harvest by Jim Crace 
Three novels grew wings this year, ascending to the upper skies. The first 
begins with smoke rising, though it's the earthliness ofHarvest 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330445665>
 (Picador) that renders Jim Crace's swan song unearthly. At 1,000-odd pages, 
Richard House'sThe Kills 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447237860>
 (Picador) seems an unlikely bird to fly, yet the pages flap so quickly that 
it's gone before you realise. Finest, however, is Evie Wyld'sAll the Birds, 
Singing 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224096683>
 (Jonathan Cape), a book so beautifully written, so alive, so nail-bitingly 
suspenseful, that at points this reader felt as if the oxygen might be thinning.

Sue Brooks, Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire


You don't have to be a fisherman to get caught by Charles Rangeley-Wilson's 
river inSilt Road 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701186432>
 (Chatto and Windus). I was enthralled by this ghost story, which is, 
ultimately, a lament so heart-wrenching I had to delay the ending. Tim Dee's
Four Fields 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224090728>
(Jonathan Cape) is a highly charged and provocative lesson in how to look at 
the world we have created. But the greatest joy of it lies in the language: 
playful, resonant and surprising on every page.

Daniel Burbidge, London


Homecoming 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571297191>
 by Susie Steiner (Faber) is a quiet compelling novel that focuses on the 
ordinary losses of life and takes the reader on a realistic journey into the 
emotional lives of the key characters. It will make you laugh and cry.

Rosemary Burnett,Minehead, Somerset


The title of Diana Souhami's book, Murder at Wrotham Hill 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857382856>
(Quercus) is underwhelming until one discovers it is not on the crime shelves, 
but is classified as history. It charts the violent death, in 1946 rural Kent, 
of a middle-aged reclusive woman, at a time when Britain's celebratory mood is 
muted by privation and rationing. The author delves into patronising government 
propaganda, domestic minutiae and statistics, including shocking figures of 
illegitimate wartime births. A profile of the official hangman, Albert 
Pierrepoint, who not only carried out death penalties on home ground, but was 
also responsible for the double-figure "drops" after the Nuremberg trials, 
makes for an appropriate conclusion.

Michael Callanan, Birmingham


My reading year has been full of false starts and stalling so I was thankful 
to Patrick Ness forMore Than This 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781406331158>
 (Walker). It's moving, exciting, inventive and intelligent. Pitched as a novel 
for young adults, it not only proves positive for the future of writing but 
also for the future of reading. For pure sentence-by-sentence writing, bothAll 
That Is 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447238249>
 by James Salter (Picador) andThe Collected Stories of Lydia Davis 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241950036>
(Penguin) constantly hit the mark with every sparing word and have a style all 
of their own.

Keith Carabine, Canterbury


Michael Irwin's The Skull and the Nightingale 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007476312>
(HarperCollins) is a bold and witty appropriation of the conventions, style, 
and idiom of the 18th-century epistolary novel that brilliantly recreates the 
manners, modes of thought and conduct of the teeming world of London. The novel 
explores the "comical see-saw" of the flesh and the spirit through the sinister 
Gilbert who is a controlling rationalist, prudently afraid of "the Passions", 
and Fenwick who pursues his desires while struggling to avert the threats to 
his identity occasioned by his strange pact with his godfather.

Pier Angelo Cavallina, Edinburgh


Road to Valour 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Road-Valour-Bartali-France-Legend/dp/0753828146/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1386691510&sr=1-1&keywords=road+to+valour+gino+bartali>
 by Aili and Andres McConnon (Anchor Canada) is the best read of the year. Its 
subject is the cycling legend Gino Bartali who risked everything to save the 
life of strangers in Nazi-occupied Italy, using his popularity as cover. It 
also shows a remarkable contrast with what cycling (and most sports) has become 
today in the light of doping scandals and other excesses. It is not about the 
bike, it is about what is just.

Morag Charlwood, Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex


Magda 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781907773402>
 by Meike Ziervogel (Salt Publishing), tells a tale of abusive mother-daughter 
relationships down three generations, culminating in Magda's murderous act in 
Hitler's bunker in the final days of Nazi Germany.The Puppet Boy of Warsaw 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780297868279>
 by Eva Weaver (Weidenfeld & Nicolson), has two people caught up in the tide of 
events, whose inter-relationship over time unravels the position forced on them 
by historic circumstance.Tinder 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780621494>
 by Sally Gardner (Indigo), looks at the folly of war through a reworking of 
Hans Christian Andersen's fable of the Tinderbox.

Dawn Churchill, Belper, Derbyshire


I loved two new fiction books; The Man Who Rained 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857890344>
 by Ali Shaw (Atlantic Books), a surreal, yet real, love story set in rural 
America about an unusual girl who falls in love with a man who is half 
thunderstorm, andVarious Pets Alive and Dead 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141044941>
 (Penguin) by Marina Lewycka, which concerns a 1980s leftwing commune in 
Yorkshire and what has happened to the characters since. My favourite 
non-fiction book wasStrands 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099532439>
 by Jean Sprackland (Vintage), a lovely natural history book about the author's 
discoveries along one section of seashore and my favourite poetry book was
Ovid's Heroines 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781852249762>
 by Clare Pollard, a fascinating translation of Ovid's less-known work from the 
point of view of the women abandoned by Greek heroes.

John Irving Clarke, Wakefield


A Family Behind Glass 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908853202>
by Matthew Hedley Stoppard (Valley Press), uses inventive language and striking 
imagery, and is one of the most arresting poetry collections of the year. Time 
and time again the reader is halted and forced to ask the question, what did he 
just say? "Afternoons cartwheel, flashing midnight's knickers at me." Stoppard 
charts the perilous path that lies between childhood and the responsibilities 
of parenthood and some tragic narratives that lie along the way. Of Kimberley 
who placed her licked finger on a lightbulb socket with the result that "bingo 
balls halted and the whole hall gasped/ in silence." Of the unnamed toddler in 
the park who watched her grandfather clatter to the grass "like a tired ironing 
board".

Marge Clouts, Longborough, Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire


Leaving Alexandria 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857860743>
 (Canongate) implies Cavafy, but the title mainly refers to Richard Holloway's 
Alexandria, near Glasgow, where this former bishop of Edinburgh grew up. His 
lucid memoir moves from his youthful Christian dedication to a fearlessly 
honest reappraisal.Bad Machine 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781852249571>
 (Bloodaxe) is George Szirtes' latest poetry collection, containing several 
canzones, that intimate lyrical form with only five end-of-the-line words 
throughout, of which the title poem is one of the most striking.Paekakariki 
Press <http://paekakarikipress.com/?content=publications.php> has found a 
deeply sensitive poet, Ann Allen, whose first collection,Michelangelo Can Paint 
an Angel brings original reflections on significant lines of poetry, as well as 
finely tuned personal observations.
 Sebastian Faulks … his homage to PG Wodehouse, Jeeves and the Wedding Bells, 
had at least one reader laughing in 2013. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the 
Guardian 
Felicity Cobley, Swansea


Far from the Tree 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701188764>
 by Andrew Solomon (Simon and Schuster) is an astonishing, moving, sometimes 
harrowing account of many different kinds of families and many different kinds 
of love. Donna Tartt may only write a book once every 10 years or so butThe 
Goldfinch (Little, Brown) 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408704943>
 has been well worth waiting for.

Julian Conway, Cambridge


I enjoyed The Explorer 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007456765>
 by James Smythe (HarperCollins), a science-fiction nightmare that is short on 
physics, but strong on tension and metaphysics.The Dune's Twisted Edge, 
Journeys in the Levant 
<http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/D/bo14238919.html> (The 
University of Chicago Press) is by Gabriel Levin, better known as a poet. In 
these journeys to obscure corners of the Middle East in search of poetics 
ancient and modern, he cites sources in Hebrew, Arabic, Greek and French that 
make you realise you are not as well read as you thought. For poetry I choose
The Mining Road 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781852249687>
 by Leanne O'Sullivan (Bloodaxe Books). This third collection by the Irish poet 
is full of luminous imagery and sometimes a gentle, almost wistful, touch, as 
in "Brigie": "When you smile in your sleep / I think of the seal's tail / 
whispering above the waves, / slipping back again into the deep." A joy.

Michael Copp, Sudbury, Suffolk 


The Ancient Amber Routes: Travels from Riga to Byzantium 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/ANCIENT-AMBER-ROUTES-TRAVELS-BYZANTIUM/dp/9984333582> 
by Mara Kalnins (Petergailis) charts the quest of an intrepid traveller, a 
dedicated and scholarly researcher into numerous fields, as she traces the 
origins and development of the trade in the much sought after treasure of 
amber. It is also travel writing of a high order. She not only succeeds in 
making us see and share her experiences of the places she visits, but also 
achieves the more elusive goal of conveying the spirit of these places. 
Underpinning the book is a subtext: a love-letter to Latvia, its people, 
culture and traditions.

Jane Crozier, Queen Camel, Somerset


Jacquetta Hawkes's A Land 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007457465>
(HarperCollins) tells the story of Britain from four billion years ago to 
present times. The narrative spirals outwards and backwards to evoke, first, a 
world without seasons or colour, then the emergence of plant and animal life, 
then the time of human habitation, ending with a series of "prospects" of 
Britain which I think are among the best 20th-century nature writing.

Chris Culpin, Castle Cary, Somerset


As a history teacher, I have taught the Holocaust many times, but it is 
literature that deepens and convinces in a way that textbooks don't.Chasing the 
King of Hearts 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781908670106>
, by Hanna Krall, translated from the Polish by Philip Boehm (Peirene), is a 
quest story. Izolda and her new husband Shayek are Jews in Nazi-occupied 
Warsaw. When he is suddenly arrested by the Gestapo and disappears, Izolda sets 
out to find him. She dyes her hair, tries to lose her "Jewish" mannerisms and 
changes her name. Although she is often brought near to the edge of survival 
and is deported to Auschwitz, occasional acts of kindness and her own quick 
wits support her on her journey. The power of the writing, in short, present 
tense bursts gives a surprising lightness to this compelling narrative.

Adam Czerniawski, Monmouth


Friedrich Reck's Diary of a Man in Despair 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781590175866>
 (New York Review Books), begins in 1937 when this German novelist and scholar 
foresees the catastrophe to be inflicted by Hitler, that nonentity who "wears 
his cap like a Berlin tram-driver". Reck concentrates his fury on German 
industrialists for supporting Hitler and, tantalisingly, gives special 
attention to IG Farben, that complex that drew its workforce from the 
neighbouring Auschwitz,. Many pages are devoted to grim and humorous accounts 
of the deteriorating physical and moral situation, brought about by the vulgar 
Prussians invading Reck's beloved Bavaria. Reck captures antisemitism in a 
story of a Jewish woman forced out of her apartment by an SS officer; savagery 
in the east is recorded mercilessly and ecstatically by a Wehrmacht observer of 
air-raids in Poland. Uncompromising to the end, Reck died in Dachau for 
refusing to join the Volkssturm militia.

Catherine Davies, Belfast

 The Mill for Grinding Old People Young by Glenn Patterson 
Glenn Patterson's Mill for Grinding Old People Young 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571281855>
(Faber) comes as an antidote to 2012 when Belfast was Titanicked out. It is a 
powerful novel about a city in the mid-19th century caught up in the excitement 
of prosperity. The story might have been set in Glasgow or Liverpool, other 
Victorian centres of industrialisation, but Patterson captures the deadpan 
rhythms and acerbity of Belfast dialogue. The novel explores the dilemmas 
facing locals consorting with migrants. In essence, it considers what made 
those great Victorian cities great.

Alison Doig, Burwash Weald, East Sussex 


Far from the Tree 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701188764>
(Chatto & Windus), Andrew Solomon's exceptional study of what it is like to 
have a child who is "different", illuminates the essence of parenthood, and is 
profound and moving. I also loved Kate Atkinson'sLife After Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780385618670>
 (Doubleday), an exploration of the sheer randomness of how we are who we are. 
Finally, Jo Walton'sAmong Others 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781472106537>
 (Corsair) is for anyone who has ever wanted to "climb into a book and pull it 
up over your head". A wonderful tribute to the value of reading – and libraries.

Paul Eastwood, Stamford, Lincolnshire


I rarely feel comfortable reading a book after seeing the film, but on three 
occasions this year my fears were confounded; perhaps because the books' first 
person narratives get inside the characters in a way film never can.Broken 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007506088>
 by Daniel Clay (Fourth Estate), has a most indignant narrator, an 11-year-old 
girl called Skunk, trying to come to terms with violence and cruelty in her 
suburban neighbourhood.The Secret in Their Eyes 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Secret-Their-Eyes-Eduardo-Sacheri/dp/1590514505> by 
Eduardo Sacheri (Other Press), with a fine translation by John Cullen, takes us 
to Argentina at the time of state terror. The voice is of a retired deputy 
clerk in the judiciary.Paperboy 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/search.do> by Pete Dexter 
(Delta) is set in 1960s Moat County, Florida, a time and place when civil 
rights were hard to find. A college drop-out, Jack James, is our narrator in 
this harrowing story of a search for justice.

Gareth Evans, London


The emergence of new small presses committed to the book as artefact has 
generated an excitement this year. The activities ofCorbel Stone Press 
<http://www.corbelstonepress.com> and Test Centre <http://www.testcentre.org.uk>
 across all forms (journal, book, chapbook, pamphlet, vinyl, cd, cassette … ) 
have provided a particular pleasure; the former passionate about the arts and 
ethics of place, the latter re-energising the countercultural nexus around Iain 
Sinclair, Chris Petit and Stewart Home (it has put out many of the 18 
publications Sinclair has released this year). A delight also to find Ken 
Worpole and Jason Orton's important text and image essayThe New English 
Landscape 
<http://thenewenglishlandscape.wordpress.com/tag/field-station-london/> (Field 
Station);Vagabond Witness 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781780993270>
 (Zero Books), Paul Gordon's beautifully written advocacy of the great Victor 
Serge; and the wondrous book-length concertina poem/portrait collaboration
Correspondences 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408836026>
 by Anne Michaels and painter Bernice Eisenstein (Bloomsbury).

David Finch

Lukas Erne's Shakespeare and the Book Trade 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780521765664>
 (Cambridge University Press) is a welcome follow-up to his admirable
Shakespeare as Literary Dramatist (2003). Meticulously researched it offers 
perceptive insights into the reception of printed Shakespeare, his publishers 
and the early owners of Shakespeare's quarto playbooks.

Caroline Ford, Worcester


By chance I read back-to-back two of the saddest stories imaginable: both 
about losing children and forbidden love. At times they were so moving that it 
physically hurt to read and I cried. Julie Myerson'sThen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099554721>
 (Vintage) tells post-apocalyptic breakdown where nothing is safe and no one to 
be trusted. I think I have always underrated Myerson – this novel seems to me a 
great achievement. She takes the ordinary and translates it into something 
stark and dangerous. Cormac McCarthy'sOuter Dark 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330511223>
(Picador) explores a landscape of such darkness it takes your breath away. Acts 
of random violence and kindness co-exist in both novels as the characters 
criss-cross each other's lives and the bleak landscapes.

Chris Ford, Manchester


The Letters of Arthur Schlesinger, Jr 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Letters-Arthur-Schlesinger-Jr/dp/0812993098> 
edited by Andrew Schlesinger and Stephen Schlesinger (Random House) are a great 
complement to hisJournals: 1952-2000 (Penguin Press). They also offer an 
insight into how traumatising the Kennedy assassinations were at the time – 
something we can almost obscure with hindsight, revisionism, and conspiracy 
theories. For further eloquent and moving testimony read the entry for 25 
November 1963 inThe Leonard Bernstein Letters 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780300179095>
 edited by Nigel Simeone (Yale University Press), the contents of which give 
another overview of a liberal American century. For another revealing 
epistolary American journey from the Great Plains and beyondThe Selected 
Letters of Willa Cather 
<http://www.randomhouse.com/book/217597/the-selected-letters-of-willa-cather-by-willa-cather>
 edited by Andrew Jewell and Janis Stout (Knopf) will take you there.

David Fothergill, Pocklington, East Riding of Yorkshire


It's been a privilege to have read consecutively two exceptionally well 
crafted novels – Jim Crace'sHarvest 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330445665>
 (Picador) and Colum McCann'sTransatlantic 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408829370>
 (Bloomsbury). Crace's unidentified medieval village inHarvest is the setting 
for a timeless story of fear, cruelty and compassion. InTransatlantic McCann 
cunningly conceals from readers the true intent behind various factually based 
incidents linking North America and Ireland over three centuries.

Andy Freeman, Grimsby


Helen Mort's first poetry collection, Division Street 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780701186845>
 (Chatto & Windus) was youthful, surprising, sustaining and quietly haunted me. 
The restlessness of youth, the landscape of the north, parents, class, the 1984 
miners' strike (over long before she was born), and peripheral glimpses of the 
animal world are some of the poetic concerns of a collection that never becomes 
parochial or narrowly autobiographical.

Barbara Fry, Street, Somerset


May We Be Forgiven 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781847083234>
 by AM Homes (Granta), is a sharply observant, if slightly fantastical, satire 
on modern family life that made me laugh out loud.Canada 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408831007>
 by Richard Ford (Bloomsbury) makes us reflect on how we react to life-changing 
events and whether we can influence the outcomes.Irma Voth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571273560>
 by Miriam Toews (Faber) depicts life in a Mexican Mennonite community and 
tells of 19-year-old Irma who sews words such as "lust" and "agony" into her 
dress.Questions of Travel 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781743311776>
 by Michelle de Kretser (Allen and Unwin) deals with travel as tourism against 
travel to escape persecution but ultimately asks the question about what 
belonging means, increasingly relevant in a world where large numbers of people 
are being displaced.
 