
Britain’s billionaires have seen their net worth more than double since the 
recession, with the richest 1,000 families now controlling a total of £547bn.

While average UK incomes have yet to recover from the worst economic crisis 
since the Great Depression, with thousands still flocking to food banks, the 
financial elite have emerged not only with their fortunes intact, but holding a 
larger than ever slice of the cake.

Their assets have increased from £258bn in 2009, a rise of more than 112%, 
according to the 2015 Sunday Times Rich List 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/26/crisis-what-crisis-britains-richest-double-their-wealth-in-10-years>
. The past 12 months saw the biggest bounce for the UK super-rich in six years, 
and London now has 80 billionaires, up from 72 last year – more than any other 
world city.

Leading the pack for the first time is Ukrainian born petro-billionaire Len 
Blavatnik <https://www.theguardian.com/business/len-blavatnik>, whose London 
address is a £41m residence in Kensington Palace Gardens. Now a US citizen, 
Blavatnik gambled a third of his fortune on acquiring the ailing Warner Music 
empire four years ago, at a time when piracy was demolishing recorded music 
revenues.

Sunday Times Rich List: Britain's richest double their wealth in 10 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/26/crisis-what-crisis-britains-richest-double-their-wealth-in-10-years>
The venture is beginning to pay off. Warner’s revenues have bounced back, 
thanks to the burgeoning popularity of music streaming services. The overall 
estimate of Blavatnik’s holdings, including stakes in aluminium and chemicals 
companies, property and cash, increased by £3bn to a net £13.17bn. His rise has 
pushed Indian automotive kings the Hinduja brothers into second place, despite 
a £1.1bn increase in their reported wealth.


In contrast to the soaring incomes of the richest, the Institute for Fiscal 
Studies thinktank says average household incomes have only recently recovered 
from the banking crash, leaving them no better off than in 2008. Median 
household income in the most recent financial year was at around the same level 
as it was in 2007–08 before the recession, though still more than 2% below its 
2009–10 peak.

The richest 1,000 families have more money than the poorest 40% of British 
households combined,according to the Equality Trust 
<http://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/news/equality-trust-wealth-tracker-richest-1000-have-more-wealth-poorest-40-cent>
. Last year they saw their wealth increase by £28bn, the equivalent of £77m a 
day.

The annual increase is enough to foot the nation’s council tax bills for a 
year, provide nearly 2m living-wage jobs for a year or 1m jobs paid at the 
average full-time wage of £27,195, said the trust.

The director, Duncan Exley, commented: “Inequality at this scale is hugely 
damaging for society. Multiple studies show that living in a more unequal 
country means you’re more likely to have poorer education, suffer from poor 
mental health, trust people less, be the victim of violent crime and even die 
earlier.”

Not all the rich are getting richer. The fall in demand for natural resources 
saw Indian steel magnate Lakshmi Mittal drop down to seventh place. Worth an 
estimated £1bn less than last year, he was among 2015’s biggest fallers, as was 
Chealsea FC ownerRoman Abramovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/roman-abramovich>, whose fortune reportedly 
fell by £1.23bn.

Two UK business families were among the year’s biggest gainers. Galen and 
George Weston, the British born Anglo-Canadians who own Selfridges department 
store andAssociated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods>, makers of 
Twinings and Ovaltine, shot into third place with a £3.7bn rise. Meanwhile, 
Denise Coates and family, who control bookmakers Bet365, are thought to have 
doubled their holdings to £2.35bn.

Sir James Dyson <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/james-dyson> and 
family jumped from 29th to joint 22nd place, with a £500m lift pushing their 
reported wealth to £3.5bn. Dyson now holds 25,000 acres of land, having 
recently bought a 1,200-hectare (3,000-acre) estate in Lincolnshire, making him 
a bigger landlord than the Queen.

Richard Branson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> 
returned to the top 20 with a reported £500m increase to £4.1bn, thanks in part 
to rail: Virgin Trains won an extension on its west coast franchise and jointly 
secured the right to operate the east coast line.

While homegrown fortunes are faring well, the Rich List remains dominated by 
entrepreneurs from outside the UK – just five of the top 20 fortunes are in the 
hands of British-born individuals. Attracted by ever increasing property prices 
and the non-dom laws which allow UK residents with foreign passports to shelter 
their offshore assets from tax, the world’s super-rich are still flocking to 
London. Of the 117 billionaires who feature in the list, only 62 are British, 
and the Queen herself has now dropped out of the richest 300 for the first time.
 