
I read an article earlier this year in an American newspaper that said “a 
revolt” was beginning on the red carpet among female celebrities 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/05/movies/awardsseason/on-the-red-carpet-a-revolt-builds-over-the-pageantry.html?_r=0>
. Did this revolt happen?
Caroline, by email

Oh my God, Caroline, how could you have missed it? It was veritable bloodshed 
at the Oscars, I tell you – bloodshed!Julianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/julianne-moore-oscar-best-actress>
 decapitatedE! <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E!>’s Giuliana Rancic for asking 
“Who are you wearing?”; Reese Witherspoon stabbed Ryan Seacrest when he tried 
to put her hand in the mani-cam, andPatricia Arquette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/26/patricia-arquette-hollywood-pay-gap-hillary-clinton>
 turned up in a burlap sack, flummoxing fashion editors who weren’t sure if she 
was making a statement or was this made-to-order Balenciaga? Behind all the 
carnage, the rest of the female celebrities marched down waving banners and 
chanting slogans: “No, no, we won’t go, the red carpet is a load of bull!”

I jest. Nothing of the sort happened. There has been talk for some time of an 
imminent red-carpet revolution, including, I’m proud to say, in this very 
column, which last yearpromised a full-on massacre of entertainment journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2014/feb/04/red-carpet-predictions-emma-thompson-jennifer-lawrence-awards-season>
. The New York Times, whichalways takes its editorial direction from this 
column, followed a year later (try to keep up, New York Times!),promising that 
“On the red carpet, a revolt builds over pageantry.” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/05/movies/awardsseason/on-the-red-carpet-a-revolt-builds-over-the-pageantry.html>

Red carpet revolution! Savvy female celebs are fighting back | Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2014/feb/04/red-carpet-predictions-emma-thompson-jennifer-lawrence-awards-season>
And did this revolt happen? In all honesty, it did not. There were some 
half-hearted changes from the Oscars red-carpet coverage this year – E! ditched 
the mani-cam and there was a vague attempt on the part of some entertainment 
journalists to ask female celebrities about something other than their dresses. 
#askhermore, urged the social media hashtag 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/askhermore> (and you just knew there’d be a 
hashtag behind this, didn’t you? It’s a wonder how the suffragettes got off the 
ground without one). Unfortunately, no one remembered until it was too late 
that the only subjects most US actresses like to talk to journalists about, 
when notshilling <http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=shill> 
clothes, are their amazing charitable contributions, how wonderful and amazing 
everyone they work with is and what an incredible calling the acting profession 
truly is. Great TV this does not make, and while watching women being commanded 
to flaunt their manicures wasn’t much fun either, I don’t think anyone watching 
the Oscars was convinced we’d arrived at a long-term solution.

It is, clearly, ridiculous that actors are expected to gussy themselves up 
like My Little Ponies to go to what is essentially an industry event, and that 
careers can be made and broken by the choosing of a dress. But that is the 
nature of the beast that has been built by the media, fashion designers and, 
yes, female celebrities working in cahoots, and not one of them is willing to 
break this bond. After all, celebrities have long since crossed over into being 
fashion models, as a glance at the covers of fashion magazines, which are now 
dominated by actors, not models, proves.

'Let's hear their stories!' said Reese Witherspoon, then posed in her Oscars 
outfit and tweeted what she was wearing

Reese Witherspoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/23/reese-witherspoon-talks-up-askhermore-on-the-oscars-red-carpet>
 was especially outspoken this year about the need for actresses to be asked 
about more than their clothes: “Let’s hear their stories!” she battlecried 
before the Oscars. As she finished battlecrying, she put down her megaphone and 
posed for a photo in her Oscars outfit,which she tweeted,  
<https://twitter.com/rwitherspoon/status/569665857372033024>detailing the 
source of everything she was wearing, from her dress to her jewels to something 
she referred to as her “glow”. The other female celebrities were similarly keen 
to give shout-outs to their designers. Perhaps those are their stories?

And just to prove that nothing’s really changed, E!’s indefatigable Rancic was 
so characteristically tenacious in her fashion criticism about the Oscars that
one particular opinion verged on racist 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/zendaya-coleman-giuliana-rancic-issues-second-apology-over-dreadlocks-racism-controversy-10068623.html>
 when she snarked that US actorZendaya’s dreadlocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/25/giuliana-rancic-zendaya-hair>
 looked like they smelled of marijuana. Rancic later apologised, although in 
today’s social media climate I’m not sure if she felt bad about the racism or 
the failure to #askhermore.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Foscars-red-carpet-revolt-will-never-happen-its-all-about-the-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425302802036%2Fce0816a3-1ab3-4fda-87d4-c000b1d922c3-1209x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Red-carpet%20revolt%3F%20No%2C%20the%20Oscars%20will%20always%20be%20about%20the%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Foscars-red-carpet-revolt-will-never-happen-its-all-about-the-dress%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Red-carpet%20revolt%3F%20No%2C%20the%20Oscars%20will%20always%20be%20about%20the%20dress&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2Foscars-red-carpet-revolt-will-never-happen-its-all-about-the-dress%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F2%2F1425302802036%2Fce0816a3-1ab3-4fda-87d4-c000b1d922c3-1209x2040.jpeg>
 To the barricades? Reese Witherspoon at the Oscars. Photograph: Broadimage/Rex 
No one looks to the Oscars for guidance about movies. If your innocence wasn’t 
destroyed when Crash won best film, then it must have been whenBoyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/feb/09/boyhood-should-win-best-picture-oscars-2015-video>
 didn’t. For heaven’s sake, have you seen the people of the academy who vote 
for this? They make the Republican party look demographically diverse. No, the 
Oscars has become completely about the clothes, and this is because the media 
cover the event, female celebrities know they can get extra publicity by 
looking good and designers will take any free advertising they can get. The 
morning after, I turned on the TV in Los Angeles and, while reading analysis of 
the dresses in the New York Times, the LA Times and the British press, I was 
able to flick between – no exaggeration –five TV programmes debating the merits 
of the dresses. No one, it seemed, was too interested in the actors’ “stories”, 
but they were all fascinated by Julianne Moore’s gown: some of them liked it 
and – waddyaknow! – some of them didn’t, suggesting fashion analysis is not the 
objective scientific study it is sometimes portrayed as being.

I recently interviewed the wonderful Angela Lansbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ng-interactive/2015/feb/07/starry-starry-night-oscar-winners-on-hollywoods-biggest-prize>
. She recalled that, the first time she went to the Oscars, in 1945, there was 
no press on the red carpet. She wore a simple dress she’d bought, took her 
mother as her date and got on with her night. No matter how many social media 
hashtags are coined, the media still values female celebrities by their looks, 
and so do the vast majority of people who consume the media (notyou. You’re far 
more intellectual). So, until the media stop covering the red carpet, it will 
always about the dress. And when will the media stop covering the red carpet, 
obsessing over actress’s looks and reducing them to show ponies? I can 
exclusively reveal that it will be at 10 past never.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<http://mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com/>
 