
The prolific anonymous Reddit <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit> 
user who was exposed by a Gawker article as the troll 'Violentacrez' has issued 
an apology of sorts for his involvement in posts that included racist and 
misogynistic images, comments and links.

Gawker's Adrian Chen exposed 49-year-old Texas programmer Michael Brutsch in 
an investigation of the frequent Redditor contributor on Friday 
<http://gawker.com/5950981/unmasking-reddits-violentacrez-the-biggest-troll-on-the-web>
.

Violentacrez was also attached to hundreds of sub-forums with names including 
Chokeabitch, Hitler and Rapebait.

In an interview with CNN for Anderson Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anderson-cooper> 360 to be broadcast on 
Thursday night, Brutsch described his activities as "gallows humor" which he 
claimed had been a way of unwinding from his job.

Asked by reporter Drew Griffin if he was stopping because he has been 
identified. Brutsch replied:

Yes. I mean that is, you know, Violentacrez is what I did in my spare time to 
unwind from my 10-hour-a-day job. That's how I relaxed in the evening. I no 
longer need to relax in the evening, because I no longer have a job. That and 
the fact that the curtain's pulled back and everyone can see the puppeteer … 
that and the fact that I have, as with the rape and pregnant Reddits, I have 
come around over the last few months to understand that some of these things 
can be harmful to other people.

In the interview, Griffin asked: "Are you apologizing for what you did or 
trying to make an excuse for what you did?"

"Well, I am to some degree apologizing for what I did. Again, I was playing to 
an audience of college kids. Two years ago, when all of this was at its height, 
the audience was appreciative and supportive of the sort of gallows humor that 
I put out there," Brutsch said.

Brutsch also said Reddit admins instructed him to make sure there was no overt 
or real child porn on the site. He said the Jailbait forum was mature teenagers 
with clothes on or "their naughty bits covered". According to Brutsch: "They 
[Reddit administrators] depended on me to make sure things were within the 
rules and things were with the lines."

Brutsch deleted his Violentacrez account after Chen told him he knew his 
identity but returned to Reddit under usernamembrutsch 
<http://www.reddit.com/user/mbrutsch>. He said on the site Tuesday that he was 
fired from his job over the weekend 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2012/oct/16/reddit-violentacrez-gawker-expose>
 and that he would be appearing on CNN. He declined an interview with the 
Guardian to prepare for the interview.

Violentacrez also created Reddit's Jailbait forum which hosted images of 
underage girls, usually pulled without consent from their Facebook accounts. It 
included the phrase "keep a teen off the streets – put her in your van" in the 
group's description.

Anderson Cooper reported on Reddit last year 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VuMdQRRLoYg> and called out Violentacrez for 
creating the site, without identifying Brutsch.

The full interview will air Thursday on CNN's Anderson Cooper 360 at 8pm and 
10pm ET.
 