
The winner

We’re still waiting for Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>’s first-day 
totals from China, where it opened at midnight on 12 May. Its global box office 
stands at $875.4m after the weekend, and there’s no doubt it will join the $1bn 
club. But given a pretty hefty 60% drop in the States this frame, there’s still 
speculation about whether the Marvel film has the legs to pass the original’s 
$1.51bn total and become thethird-highest grosser of all time 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/alltime/world/>. The optimistic take: 
post-Furious 7, the Chinese are Hollywood-drunk, and Ultron benefits with 
another $400m sweep. The US total winds up around $500m, and adding the $562.4m 
already taken overseas, the sequel is within spitting distance of a new Marvel 
high. The pessimistic: most developed markets seem a touch cooler than first 
time around; and noticeably, Ultron is clocking in lower than Furious 7, this 
year’s film to beat, at the same third-weekend stage, even with the latter’s 
Chinese figures removed (it was a fraction below $1bn). We await the news from 
Beijing …


Mismatched buddies

Hot Pursuit review – Sofia Vergara and Reese Witherspoon’s winning chemistry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/06/hot-pursuit-review-sofia-vergara-reese-witherspoon-buddy-movie>
Same stereotypes, fresh occupants: in Warner Bros’ new $35m comedy Hot Pursuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hot-pursuit>, Reese Witherspoon is the 
uptight cop, Sofia Vergara the hot-tamale druglord’s wife. It’s the latest 
attempt to forge a duo to capitalise on female-fronted comedy’s post-Bridesmaids
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/bridesmaids> viability. US reviewers, 
though, deemed the pairing a failure – “cautious and tentative in pursuit of 
laughs”, reckoned theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/08/movies/review-in-hot-pursuit-sofia-vergara-and-reese-witherspoon-on-the-run.html>
 – and the $13.3m opening there suggests that audiences did, too. That’s well 
below the $39.1m for 2013’sThe Heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156167/heat>, which hooked up Sandra 
Bullock and Melissa McCarthy for something comparable, and disappointing for 
proven comic actor Witherspoon, whoseLegally Blonde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/89407/legally.blonde> opened in the 
$20m range over a decade ago. With 82% of the US punters over 25 and 46% over 
50, the PG-13 Hot Pursuit seems to have played it too safe, and doesn’t have 
the R-rated edginess of the McCarthy comedies that pulled in a younger crowd. 
The $35m budget, a typical, generous mainstream spend on a comedy, is going to 
be tough to claw back, but some of the small overseas markets that opened this 
week offer a glimmer of hope. The UAE take ($429k) was above that of The Heat 
($295K), while Singapore was about level ($121K to The Heat’s $120K). 
Witherspoon’s 20-year comedy pedigree should count for something globally, when 
the film expands in the coming weeks, while you’d expect the Colombian-American 
Vergara – not a big-screen draw, but with massive recognition factor from ABC 
seriesModern Family <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_Family> – to have some 
Latin American impact. But with New Line, MGM and others contributing to the 
costs, Warner is fortunate that it hasn’t got too much riding on the untested 
duo.


Rebel yell
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20'We're%20performing%20oral%20magic'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebel%20Wilson%20and%20Elizabeth%20Banks%20on%20Pitch%20Perfect%202%3A%20%27We%27re%20performing%20oral%20magic%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F12%2Frebel-wilson-elizabeth-banks-pitch-perfect-2-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F7%2F1431005063001%2FKP_216378_crop_640x360.jpg>
Rebel Wilson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rebel_Wilson> isn’t top-lining 
movies yet, like fellow plus-size Bridesmaids graduate Melissa McCarthy. But 
she clearly has powerful localised star pull in her native Australia, where a 
cappella girl-group comedyPitch Perfect 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pitch-perfect-2> has just opened in full 
voice with $7.6m – surpassed only by the more blockblustery Age of Ultron, 
Furious 7 and Fifty Shades of Grey this year, and three times better thefirst 
film <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/123284/pitch-perfect>. Oz was the 
top oversea territory then, too, so it’s easy to attribute the success to 
Wilson: her character, Fat Amy, is given as much prominence in the trailer as 
the more conventionally ditzy Beca, played by the film’s nominal star Anna 
Kendrick. Maybe it’s time for Wilson’s trademark flat-keyed insolence to be 
given a bigger remit outside of an ensemble? With another $1.2m from the New 
Zealand debut, the second Pitch Perfect is off to a much more promising start 
than Hot Pursuit, ahead of its global bow proper next weekend: 27 territories, 
as well as the US. The sequel takes the time-honoured route of sending its 
likely lasses abroad, to a Copenhagen a cappella competition, where the Barden 
Bellas learn the true depths of anti-American feeling; presumably, Universal 
are not only expecting progress on the original’s $113m worldwide, but also a 
shift away from its 57.5% US split towards the overseas side.


Home … and away
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Fhome-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426778094690%2Fcrop_KP_124753_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Home%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Fhome-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Home%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F19%2Fhome-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F3%2F19%2F1426778094690%2Fcrop_KP_124753_640x360.jpeg>
We noted right from the off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/02/home-get-hard-insurgent-global-box-office>
 that Dreamworks’ cuddly alien-invasion animationHome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/home> lived up to its name, box office-wise, 
by performing well in the US. But how, after a so-so start, has it developed 
abroad? It’s proved a steady little performer, sticking in the top 10 since its 
late-March release and creeping up to $180m overseas gross; enough, with its 
$342m overall haul, to put the $135m animation well into profit. It’s not an 
earth-shattering performance, compared to the likes of Disney’s $652.1m-earning
Big Hero 6 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/big-hero-6> last year, which was 
far more overtly streamlined for international appeal. But it is a steadying 
tick on the “hits” side of the ledger for Dreamworks Animation, which hasn’t 
had too many of late, having kept pace with Big Hero 6 in the UK ($33.9m and 
counting) and Russia ($17.2m), and playing respectably in most big territories. 
Now creeping into the chart of thetop 50 CGI animations of all time 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_highest-grossing_animated_films#Computer_animation>
, it’s notable not only for being the first with a black protagonist, but also 
for being a rare original offering in a 20-year-old medium increasingly staffed 
by sequels and spinoffs. Universal’s Despicable Me offshootMinions 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P9-FCC6I7u0> joins Penguins of Madagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/penguins-of-madagascar> in the latter 
category, in something of a lull year, before a flood of sequels to the big 
digi-franchises in 2016 and 2017. After Home, only Pixar – with both June’s 
inner-emotion-anthropomorphisingInside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out> and November’s alternative 
prehistoryThe Good Dinosaur <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCVzj4f38_Q> – is 
attempting the tricky business of starting from scratch this year.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRPLcI7ajjn0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRPLcI7ajjn0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRPLcI7ajjn0&media=>
The rest of the world

The Chinese May Day hits outlined last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/may/07/global-box-office-avengers-age-of-ultron-unfriended-gabbar-is-back>
 – campus romance Silent Separation and Hong Kong thriller Helios – plus the 
Korean crime drama China Town were still hanging around as the non-Hollywood 
representatives on the global chart this frame. Not listed but also worth 
flagging up is Bollywood dramaPiku <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RPLcI7ajjn0>
, which built impressively throughout the weekend to pull in $3.9m in India 
alone, enough to have put it at least 13th worldwide. A big-hitting 
intergenerational trio of actors – Deepika Padukone as an architect on a road 
trip with her crotchety father (Amitabh Bachchan), and Irrfan Khan as the 
taxi-company owner caught between them – was eye-catching enough. But the film 
didn’t bother with the usual Bollywood promotional star-jumps, and let an 
unusually sharp and plain-spoken family drama, directed by Shoojit Sircar (who 
made 2012 sperm-bank comedyVicky Donor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147051/vicky-donor>), do the talking. 
Job done.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAmMIQZ1TAig&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAmMIQZ1TAig>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAmMIQZ1TAig&media=>
The future

Next up in the summer-blockbuster convoy is Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>; George Miller’s 1970s and 
80s post-apocalyptic outbursts now transmogrified, after 30 years’ absence, to 
full global-franchise proportions, withTom Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy> replacing Mel Gibson on 
brooding-and-intense duties. It will be hitting the asphalt in 70 markets, 
reserving just Brazil and Japan for later in the year, but will Miller’s 
jacked-up operatic chutzpah – currently receivingrapturous notices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/11/mad-max-fury-road-review-tom-hardy>
 – strike a chord with a new generation of fans? Or is this, budgeted at $150m 
and with the not-yet-bankable Hardy behind the wheel, actually a risky 
undertaking? Elsewhere, as mentioned above, China should be contributing 
heartily to the Ultron coffers by next weekend, and Pitch Perfect 2 is 
expanding into the US, UK, India, Russia and much of Europe. And on the 
Bollywood front, one of India’s most interesting directors,Anurag Kashyap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/28/anurag-kashyap-gangs-of-wasseypur>
, releasesBombay Velvet <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AmMIQZ1TAig>, his 
60s-set, noir-mythologising attempt to do for the city what James Ellroy has 
done for Los Angeles. This is the man who managed to make Jharkhand coal-mining 
sexy in 2012’s awesomeGangs of Wasseypur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147919/gangs-of-wasseypur>, so 
expectations are high.


Top 10 global box office, 8-10 May

1. Avengers: Age of Ultron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/avengers-the-age-of-ultron>, $145.5m from 91 
territories. $875.3m cumulative – 64.3% international; 35.7% US
2. Furious 7, $24.9m from 68 territories. $1.47bn cum – 76.9% int; 23.1% US
3. (New) Hot Pursuit, $14.7m from 22 territories – 9.5% int; 90.5% US
4. Chappie, $9.8m from 11 territories. $94.8m cum – 66.6% int; 33.4% US
5. Home, $9m from 36 territories. $342.1m cum – 52.6% int; 47.4% US
6. (New) Pitch Perfect 2, $8.8m from 2 territories – 100% int
7. The Age of Adaline, $8.2m from 15 territories. $39m cum – 19.2% int; 80.8% 
US
8. Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2, $8.2m from 54 territories. $87m cum – 33.2% int; 
66.8% US
9. Cinderella, $5.6m from 31 territories. $513.1m cum – 61.8% int; 38.2% US
10. Silent Separation, $5.5m from 1 territory. $50m cum – 100% int 


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. Some of this week’s figures are 
based on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

 