

Reese Witherspoon is set to star as one of the first female American soldiers 
to risk their lives on the battlefield in the military biopic Ashley’s War,
reports Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2015/03/ashleys-war-reese-witherspoon-fox-2000-ashley-white-bruna-papandrea-1201390496/>
.

As Hollywood continues to scout for patriotic material in the wake of huge 
box-office success for Clint Eastwood’s American Sniper, Witherspoon’s 
production company Pacific Standard has teamed with20th Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/20th-century-fox> offshoot Fox 2000 to option 
the book Ashley’s War: The Untold Story of a Team of Women Soldiers on the 
Special Ops Battlefield, by Gayle Tzemach Lemmon. The 38-year-old star of Wild 
and Legally Blonde also appears keen to take the lead role.

Lemmon’s book details the tale of pioneering 1st Lieutenant Ashley White, who 
became one of anelite group of women soldiers 
<http://news.yahoo.com/death-highlights-womens-role-special-ops-teams-195034667.html>
 on the battlefields of Afghanistan in 2010. White, whose unit supported Green 
Berets and Army Rangers, was killed in Kandahar province, Afghanistan on 22 
October 2011 when the assault force she was supporting triggered an improvised 
explosive device. She was the first soldier in her team to die in action and 
was posthumously awarded the Bronze Star, the Purple Heart, the Meritorious 
Service Medal, the Afghanistan Campaign Medal and the Combat Action Badge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwild-reese-witherspoon-nick-hornby-cheryl-strayed-video1&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421238385627%2Fcrop_KP-68035_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wild%20star%20Reese%20Witherspoon%3A%20'This%20was%20one%20of%20the%20most%20important%20experiences%20of%20my%20life'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwild-reese-witherspoon-nick-hornby-cheryl-strayed-video1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wild%20star%20Reese%20Witherspoon%3A%20%27This%20was%20one%20of%20the%20most%20important%20experiences%20of%20my%20life%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F14%2Fwild-reese-witherspoon-nick-hornby-cheryl-strayed-video1&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F14%2F1421238385627%2Fcrop_KP-68035_640.jpeg>
 Wild star Reese Witherspoon: ‘This was one of the most important experiences 
of my life’ 
Witherspoon, recently Oscar-nominated for her lead role in true life drama Wild
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/wild>, will look to put herself in pole 
position for another awards season-friendly role following the acquisition. 
It’s a part which might otherwise have gone to a younger actor, suggests 
Deadline, because White was just 24 when she was killed.

Earlier this month studio Warner Bros announced plans to shoot another 
stirring military-themed project after picking up rights to war photographer 
Lynsey Addario’s memoir It’s What I Do: A Photographer’s Life of Love and War. 
Jennifer Lawrence is set to take the lead role,with Steven Spielberg in line to 
direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/03/steven-spielberg-jennifer-lawrence-war-photographer-lynsey-addario-its-what-i-do>
.

Eastwood’s American Sniper recently became the highest-grossing film released 
in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/10/american-sniper-biggest-film-of-2014-us-box-office>
 at the North American box office, with a haul of $337.8m. The biopic, which 
stars Bradley Cooper as the late Chris Kyle, also passed the $500m mark 
globally over the weekend and was nominated for six Oscars.
 