
In the days before Sudanese refugee Faysal Ishak Ahmed collapsed and died, he 
pleaded with doctors inside theManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> detention centre to 
treat him, having been “more than 20 times” to see medical staff, who had been 
unable to arrest his worsening condition.

Sudanese refugees inside the detention centre were so worried by his repeated 
seizures and collapsesthat they wrote a letter outlining months of escalating 
health complaints that, they said, had been ignored by medical staff.


Ahmed, 27, collapsed inside the detention centre on Thursday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/sudanese-refugee-dies-in-brisbane-hospital-after-medivac-from-manus>
. The Department of Immigration said in a statement he had suffered a seizure 
and fall.

According to a witness, Ahmed had been removed to the voluntary supported rest 
area – usually used to protect people suffering mental health episodes – 
complaining of chest pains.

Manus Island detainees rebel against guards after death of refugee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/25/manus-island-detainees-rebel-against-guards-after-death-of-refugee>
“Another patient heard him saying, ‘I cannot breathe, my heart has stopped’, 
and shortly afterwards he fell down on his forehead with thick liquid and water 
came out through his nose and mouth,” the witness said.

Ahmed was taken by air ambulance to Brisbane on Friday, but died in hospital 
on Saturday.


On 15 December, exactly a week before he collapsed, Ahmed had written to 
International Medical Health Services, the multinational company with the 
contract to provide health services inside Australia’s detention regime, 
complaining his health concerns were being ignored.

In faltering English, Ahmed said he had chest and heart problems, and high 
blood pressure.
 Sudanese refugee Faysal Ishak Ahmed’s letter of complaint to IHMS 
Ahmed had written a similar letter two months earlier, following a collapse.

After he collapsed last week, but while he was still alive, Ahmed’s compatriot 
refugees and asylum seekers wrote a four-page letter to IHMS pleading with 
doctors to “give him the kind of treatment his problem need[s] ... before its 
too late ... instead of hiding the facts from him”.

They detailed seizures and breathing difficulties Ahmed had suffered since 
September.

The letter alleged:

He saw a GP on the 21st of December 2016, and he was told by the GP there was 
nothing wrong was told that he was not going to be seen by any doctor again in 
the future and IHMS cannot help him anymore with that problem.

When he came back from his appointment he was very much affected by the reply 
of the IHMS that they would be assisting him in the future. He kept saying ‘I 
swear, I am not pretending that this disease would kill me’. His condition got 
worse and worse on that day.

The letter-writers asked that Ahmed be treated immediately.

“We have got nothing in our power to help him, but we are kindly and humbly 
giving you this piece of adivce so as to take it into consideration immediately 
before it’s too late,” they wrote.

An IHMS spokeswoman told Guardian Australia: “As this matter will be referred 
to the Queensland coroner, IHMS is not in a position to respond to your 
questions. IHMS expresses its sympathies to his family and friends.”

Behrouz Boochani, an Iranian journalist and refugee held in detention on Manus 
Island, said aprotest led by detainees following Ahmed’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/25/manus-island-detainees-rebel-against-guards-after-death-of-refugee>
 – in which guards were forced to withdraw from the two compounds and some 
windows were broken – was “a message to the government that it cannot hide the 
truth”.

He said detainees had no other way to resist their detention, which was ruled 
illegal by Papua New Guinea’s supreme court eight months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
. The PNG and Australian governments have agreed to close the centre, but 
neither has committed to a time frame.

Boochani said: “We are victims in this prison and Australia is killing us one 
by one, and I would like to ask people to put themselves in our shoes: ‘what 
could we do at that moment?’ I, as a person who lived under a dictatorship, 
found out that a different version of dictatorship and a new version of fascism 
exists in this prison. How many times should I write in a peaceful way and how 
many years should I fight in a peaceful way?”

Inside Manus: life in detention – a photo essay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/sep/10/inside-manus-life-in-detention-a-photo-essay>
Healthcare in immigration detention centres is under acute scrutiny, with a 
coronial inquest under way into the death ofHamid Kehazaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/delay-to-treatment-of-hamid-kehazaei-before-he-died-revealed-in-leaked-files>
, an Iranian asylum seeker who died in a Brisbane hospital in September 2014 
after delays in moving him from Manus.


Kehazaei, 24, had originally presented with a small infection in his leg that 
developed into sepsis and eventually caused a series of heart attacks.

The Queensland state coroner has heard that the Manus Island medical 
facilities were inadequate, doctors’ clinical instructions were ignored and 
critical medical equipment was not working. Requests to urgently transfer 
Kehazaei from the island were ignored, then refused, before he was finally 
flown in an air ambulance, first to Port Moresby and then to Brisbane.


Several other asylum seekers and refugees have died in immigration detention 
or on detention islands.Reza Barati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reza-barati> was murdered by guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/19/reza-barati-men-convicted-of-asylum-seekers-to-be-free-in-less-than-four-years>
 inside the Manus detention centre in 2014, and in 2016,Omid Masoumali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 died after dousing himself in lighter fluid and setting himself alight on 
Nauru, in protest at being held indefinitely on the island.

Other refugees suffering serious medical complaints – including pregnant woman 
facing complex births 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/06/doctors-plead-for-pregnant-refugee-to-be-sent-from-nauru-to-australia-for-caesarean>
, orsuspected cancerous growths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/06/refugee-with-growing-breast-lump-has-medical-transfer-from-nauru-cancelled>
 – have been denied medical transfers from detention islands.



 