
A Yorkshire coal mine in 1838. When a storm caused a river by the Huskar 
colliery to burst its banks, 26 children who were working in the mine drowned. 
With a nation in shock, Queen Victoria ordered an inquiry. Four years later, the
Mines Act <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mines_and_Collieries_Act_1842> 
prohibited women and boys under ten from working underground in mines. In a 
past with little visibility – literally in the pitch blackness of the mines – 
regulation worked slowly but surely to protect society’s most vulnerable.


These days, however, it is a common gripe among entrepreneurs that regulation 
has departed from its original purpose of protecting the vulnerable. Instead, 
they argue, it has become a blunt weapon that lobbyists use to thump down any 
innovation threatening their powerful paymasters. This is perhaps nowhere more 
the case than for those working in thesharing economy whose startups empower 
people to share assets like homes, cars and parking spaces. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/jun/05/sharing-economy-critics-airbnb-uber>

Around the world, regulators are fining and firing off cease and desist 
letters to these startups. In US cities likeMiami and Austin 
<http://gigaom.com/2014/06/04/what-ban-uber-officially-opens-in-austin-and-miami-entering-competition-with-lyft-and-city-regulators/>
 and European ones likeBerlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/14/uber-taxi-service-banned-berlin-safety-grounds>
 andHamburg 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/germany/10991089/Hamburg-breaks-ranks-and-bans-Uber-app.html>
, local regulators are clamping down on ride-sharing apps like Lyft and Uber. 
Regulators are also giving Airbnb heat in its own backyard of San Francisco. 
Well they might act, for the startups promote activities that clash with 
legislation and permitting and insurance requirements.

But in the UK, reform is being ushered in to allow these new business models. 
In London, renting out a home for under three months through a website like 
HouseTrip, onefinestay or Airbnb still requires planning permission under a 
1973 law. But if thederegulation bill 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/end-to-outdated-laws-will-allow-londoners-to-let-homes-for-extra-cash>
, now in the House of Lords, is passed in full, it will remove these 
limitations.

JustPark provides parking to half a million people at homes and churches for 
around half the price of on-street parking. Councils used to demand homeowners 
get planning permission to rent out their driveways. Again, the government 
stepped in to protect the rights of property owners, especially when it meant 
the creation of parking ticket-free spaces around high streets.In March, the 
government issued guidance clarifying that homeowners can rent out their 
driveways. 
<http://planningguidance.planningportal.gov.uk/blog/guidance/when-is-permission-required/what-is-development/#paragraph_015>

Why are the UK regulators lightening up? eBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay> was the first business to show 
that peer-to-peer models exhibit an extraordinary capacity to self-regulate. On 
these new platforms, users often log in via social media accounts so they have 
no aliases to hide behind. They then self-regulate via an online reputation 
system of reviewing and commenting that rewards good behaviour and flags up and 
punishes bad behaviour. By contrast to the opaque world of finance, this 
transparency keeps people in line.

What about those who the system does not keep in line? On top of the 
incentives for marketplace participants, the platforms themselves are 
incentivised to kick off the bad actors. If a diner gets ill on a peer-to-peer 
dining platform like EatWith, their negative review is likely to lead to more 
decisive action than if it were reported to a government agency – if it were 
reported. Hitting one star on an app is easier than filing complaints.

Regulation will not go away, nor should it. Consumers should not always be 
able to try cheaper, less-regulated services if they do not understand the 
risks. The photos on a home swapping site like Knok do not reveal if the home 
is safely wired. Nor can we always rely on startups to self-regulate when they 
pursue growth at all costs.

Still, compared to five years ago – let alone a 19th century coal mine – the 
world is lighter than ever. The world’s regulators should follow the UK’s lead 
and lighten up too.

Alex Stephany is the CEO of JustPark <https://www.justpark.com/> and the 
author of a forthcoming book on the sharing economy. You can follow him on 
Twitter@alexmstephany <https://twitter.com/alexmstephany>

Read more stories like this:

• Airbnb co-founder on the future of the sharing economy and self-sufficiency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/feb/05/airbnb-nathan-blecharczyk-sharing-economy>

• Nathan Blecharczyk, CTO of Airbnb on the future of the sharing economy – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/video/2014/mar/19/changing-media-summit-2014-nathan-blecharczyk-sharing-economy>

• Critics of the sharing economy are missing the point altogether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/jun/05/sharing-economy-critics-airbnb-uber>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 