
The 14 bodies were found during work on water pipes, each of them aligned to 
the east. They were the remains of a man, six women, five children and two 
infants, and they were near land once owned by the father-in-law of Alexander 
Hamilton, a hero of the US revolutionary war. They were the family’s slaves.

Captain Cook's ship Endeavour claimed by Rhode Island as search goes on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/31/captain-cooks-ship-endeavour-claimed-by-rhode-island-as-search-goes-on>
On Saturday the community that survived them in Albany, New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, will see them buried again in a 
cemetery first dedicated in the run-up to the civil war for Irish Catholics, 
the unwanted immigrants of the 1860s.

The remains were recovered in 2005, but it was not until years later that DNA 
and bone analysis showed African ancestry and the telltale marks of slavery.

“They could tell that they were small in stature but muscular,” said Kelly 
Grimaldi, historian for St Agnes, the church near which the bones where found 
and where they will be buried.

“They didn’t appear to have been abused, no gunshot wounds, no knifed bones, a 
few broken bones. But overall the conclusion was that they definitely had a 
hard life.”


She added that the bones show the effects of severe arthritis and stress, and 
most have “signs of very, very hard labor”.

In the late 1700s, the land on which the bodies were found was owned by Philip 
Schuyler, a veteran of the French and Indian war who built a sizable farming 
estate along the Hudson river. He became a general in the Continental Army and 
suffered a blow to his reputation when Fort Ticonderoga fell, butregained 
standing <https://dmna.ny.gov/historic/articles/victorySchuyler.htm> alongside 
Benedict Arnold <http://www.pbs.org/ktca/liberty/popup_arnoldsleg.html> at the 
Battle of Saratoga, the first major victory over the British in the 
revolutionary war.

During the war, Schuyler’s daughter Elizabeth found a match in another rising 
hero of the revolution: Alexander Hamilton, the young aide to George Washington 
who later became treasury secretary. Schuyler himself joined the government 
after the war, serving in the Senate until Aaron Burrwon his seat 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/duel/peopleevents/pande11.html>.

The bitter election was one of the first conflicts between Burr and Hamilton, 
who wanted his father-in-law in Congress to support his ideas of a national 
bank and debt. Schuyler lived to defeat Burr in a later election, and to see 
his rival become vice-president and the killer of his son-in-law in a duel in 
1804.

Behind all this drama, slaves worked many farms and mills of upstate New York, 
the Schuylers’ included. In 1790, there were21,000 slaves in New York 
<https://www2.census.gov/prod2/decennial/documents/00165897ch14.pdf> alone, and 
nearly 850,000 in the south.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fphilip-schuyler-family-slaves-buried-again-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8934f5478d82dbf3d8e05d0a73309b44678a268%2F0_26_5435_3261%2F5435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Remains%20of%20slaves%20owned%20by%20Hamilton's%20father-in-law%20reburied%20in%20New%20York%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fphilip-schuyler-family-slaves-buried-again-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Remains%20of%20slaves%20owned%20by%20Hamilton%27s%20father-in-law%20reburied%20in%20New%20York%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fphilip-schuyler-family-slaves-buried-again-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8934f5478d82dbf3d8e05d0a73309b44678a268%2F0_26_5435_3261%2F5435.jpg>
 Alexander Hamilton dying after his pistol duel with Aaron Burr, 1804.
 Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
“That was a time when people who were wealthy and had some design of something 
to do, they didn’t go out and rent a backhoe,” said Paul Stewart, a local 
historian and one of the re-interment’s organizers. “They rented or borrowed or 
bought enslaved people and had them do the backbreaking work.”

The Schuylers moved in circles far removed from the working class, indentured 
servants and enslaved people who “had their own stories, and kind of operated 
in their own networks”, Stewart said.

About 50 years after Hamilton and his father-in-law died in 1804, slavery had 
been abolished in New York but become the existential crisis of the nation. The 
men who founded the United States had compromised and argued over it, their 
successors did the same, and in 1861 the union could no longer bear the weight 
of its original sin. By then, Albany was a long-established waypoint on the 
Underground Railroad for men and women who escaped slavery in the south.

Around this time, a crisis of the next century was starting to build: 
immigration. Irish immigrantsfled from famine to the US 
<http://www.pbs.org/destinationamerica/usim_wn_noflash.html> en masse in the 
1840s and 50s, and their desperate straits and unwelcome religion made them the 
enemy of many in the north-east states. In the 1860s a prominent Albany family 
dedicated the St Agnes cemetery to the Irish so that they could at least have a 
place to bury their dead.

Organizers of Saturday’s ceremony hoped the re-interment could set an example 
for how other Americans might cope with the traumas that still dominate 
politics: racism with its roots in slavery, xenophobia born of immigration and 
economic change, bias against religious minorities. On Saturday the Catholic 
church there will hold a procession and ceremony for the slaves’ remains, 
interring them near the graves of wealthy families.

Sinkhole discovery suggests humans were in Florida 14,500 years ago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/14/archaeology-florida-sinkhole-ancient-humans-mastodon-knife-bones-bering-strait>
“We were bound together by a common purpose to bury these people with a common 
respect and dignity,” said diocese spokesman Jonathan Cohen. “It’s a corporal 
work of mercy to bury the dead. It says something about us as a community and 
as a nation that we can come together.”

Leaders of several faiths, including a Baptist minister and a Ghanaian Vodun 
priestess, will speak at the ceremony, Cohen said, and a gravestone with a 
Ghanaian Sankofa symbol will be placed over the site, with an inscription: “The 
wholeness of the living is diminished when the ancestors are not honored.”

Stewart hoped that Albany’s quiet example might resonate outside the city.

“There is a path that is respectful that we can take,” he said, when asked 
about how Americans might confront their knotted, painful history. “There’s a 
way to do it that gives the people honor and acknowledges who they were. 
Basically, give them the honor they deserve.”
 