
After David Mahler’s company won a New Orleans city contract to move four 
civil war monuments from their places of public honor, some of his clients
reportedly threatened 
<https://www.businessreport.com/article/baton-rouge-contractor-hired-remove-confederate-monuments-new-orleans-backs-amidst-death-threats>
 to discontinue business with him. Local groups filed alawsuit 
<http://www.nola.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/01/lee_circle_lawsuit_primer_what.html#incart_most-comments>
 to keep the monuments where they stood. Still, Mahler’s team went ahead and 
measured thememorial to Jefferson Davis 
<http://www.wdsu.com/news/local-news/new-orleans/new-orleans-pastor-wants-to-see-jefferson-davis-monument-removed/33737486>
 – the “president of the Confederate States of America” – for what seemed its 
inevitable removal.


But death threats followed, until Mahler finally decided to take his team off 
the job. Then, a week after he backed out, hisLamborghini was found burned 
<http://nypost.com/2016/01/21/contractor-hired-to-remove-confederate-monuments-finds-lamborghini-torched/>
 to cinder in the parking lot of his company.
 Photograph: Tannie Guidry/Facebook 
The renewed fight over confederate monuments began last summer when Dylann 
Roof killed nine African Americans at a revered black church in Charleston, 
South Carolina, andcloaked his reasoning 
<http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-BBqpiu6ROYE/VY0k41u5sjI/AAAAAAAAaBU/rQLohUxJ0BY/s640/roof.jpg>
 in the Confederate flag. When the state of South Carolina lowered its American 
flag to half-mast alongside its continuously flying Confederate flag at the 
Statehouse,activist Bree Newsome 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2015/7/3/this_flag_comes_down_today_bree> climbed 
up and took the “rebel flag” down herself. Governor Nikki Haley later signed 
the papers and made it official.


Following South Carolina’s lead, other cities began liquidating their 
confederate symbols. Baltimorecommissioned the removal 
<https://www.baltimorebrew.com/2016/01/14/ta-ta-to-two-of-baltimores-confederate-monuments/>
 of monuments to Roger B Taney, Robert E Lee and Thomas J “Stonewall” Jackson. 
Memphis, Tennessee, isremoving a bust 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2015/06/23/law-change-needed-to-remove-nathan-bedford-forrest-bust/29155821/>
 of KKK founder Gen Nathan Bedford Forrest. North Carolina, Texas, Florida and 
Kentucky have publicly debated what to move where, and even Alabama, whose
police uniforms feature the stars and bars 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2015/12/17/1461104/-Wait-Alabama-State-Troopers-have-the-Confederate-flag-on-their-uniforms>
, are ripping down rebel flags and statues.

New Orleans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans> city government 
came to the battle this June, when mayor Mitch Landrieu assigned the city 
council to debate and vote on removing four specific confederate monuments.

There is the Battle of Liberty Place monument 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Liberty_Place>, which commemorates the 
1874 insurrection wherein around 5,000 members of the Crescent City White 
League killed roughly 100 of the 3,500 black and white federal officers sent to 
New Orleans oversee the Reconstruction. In 1932 an inscription was added to it, 
celebrating the League’s role in preserving “white supremacy in the south”. In 
1974, the city tacked on an odd plaque essentially walking back its support of 
the monument before, in 1989, it was moved to a more out-of-the-way local and 
its inscription drastically softened. In 1993, America’s favorite klansman 
David Duke held a re-dedication ceremony for the Liberty Place statue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fconfederate-monument-flag-removals-new-orleans-david-mahler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15754d01e8e750722922a8a9dd666236d3498f53%2F79_0_4092_2459%2F4092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Removing%20confederate%20monuments%20gets%20your%20Lamborghini%20burned%20to%20the%20ground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fconfederate-monument-flag-removals-new-orleans-david-mahler%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Removing%20confederate%20monuments%20gets%20your%20Lamborghini%20burned%20to%20the%20ground&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fconfederate-monument-flag-removals-new-orleans-david-mahler%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15754d01e8e750722922a8a9dd666236d3498f53%2F79_0_4092_2459%2F4092.jpg>
 A statue of Confederate president Jefferson Davis is moved from its location 
in front of the school’s main tower the University of Texas campus. Photograph: 
Eric Gay/AP 
Less cut and dried are New Orleans’s Jefferson Davis monument on the street 
bearing his name, and the memorial outside of beautiful City Park to PGT 
Beauregard, who commanded Davis’s confederate troops. Lastly, we have the 
monument to Robert E Lee, whom most historians agree never even stepped foot in 
New Orleans. In 1884, at the height of Jim Crow, the city changed the name of 
Trivoli Circle to Lee Circle, adding a statue of General Lee facing north, 
supposedly staring down his eternal enemies. But as jazz musicianWynton 
Marsalis wrote 
<http://www.nola.com/politics/index.ssf/2015/12/confederate_monuments_new_orle_6.html>
 in a December op-ed:

“What did Robert E. Lee do to merit his distinguished position? He fought for 
the enslavement of a people against our national army … killed more Americans 
than any opposing general in history; made no attempt to defend or protect this 
city… In the heart of the most progressive and creative cultural city in 
America, why should we continue to commemorate this legacy?”

Similar passion permeated the packed New Orleans city council chambers during 
December’s city council vote. One woman handed out “Kiss White Supremacy 
Goodbye” cookies. Another man gave away T-shirts featuring a black man 
urinating on a confederate flag. The mayor gave a surprisingly eloquent 
race-focused speech. Over a dozen people were led out at various points by 
security for shouting.

The event ended with city council voting six-to-one to remove New Orleans’s 
four monuments to the losers of America’s civil war.

Some New Orleanians, mostly white ones, call the issue a political 
distraction. And that’s true to some degree: if the mayor really wanted to help 
New Orleans’ black community, he would aggressivelyregulate Airbnb 
<http://www.nola.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/01/airbnb_short-term_rentals_rule.html>
 which has exacerbated housing issues caused by Hurricane Katrina insome of the 
city’s 
<http://www.antigravitymagazine.com/2014/03/unfairbnb-what-unlicensed-short-term-rentals-mean-for-new-orleans/>
 most important black neighborhoods. What the mayor has recently mentioned more 
than once is how he hopes the statues are gone for the city’s upcoming 300th 
anniversary celebration – presumably so they don’t pique the interest of Yankee 
journalists visiting for our tri-centennial.

Landrieu may have timed the issue to distract from his failure to fight crime 
and poverty in more concrete ways, but this monument vote was inevitable and 
long awaited. Councilman James Gray told everyone assembled at the vote: “Black 
leaders have been talking to me about this issue since I joined city government 
in 1977.” The man giving away the provocative T-shirts in city hall, Anthony 
Straughter, first came up with his “black man peeing on rebel flag” design in 
2001.

Another small minority calls this decision a whitewashing of history. “Those 
are US veteran monuments. They are historical,” says Andrew Duncomb, a 
20-year-old African American Oklahoma resident who calls himself “The Real 
Black Rebel” as he travels around the south protesting the removal of 
Confederate symbols. Duncomb staged the widely loathed Confederate flag protest
when Obama was in Oklahoma 
<http://kfor.com/2015/07/15/we-dont-believe-its-a-symbol-of-racism-confederate-flags-fly-downtown-as-president-drives-in/>
 to visit a federal prison. “The flag’s not about slavery,” Duncomb believes, 
“it’s about freedom from oppression, from government – and that’s what they 
fear. If they can imprint in your mind that the flag represents racism, they’ll 
get you to forget that you can stand up … they’re trying to erase that people 
have the right to fight against tyranny.”

At city hall on the day of the vote, those from the pro-monument crowd 
continually reiterated that “you cannot erase history” – even though Landrieu’s 
legislation stipulated that the monuments must eventually end up in a museum, 
or a newly created civil war park. Rick McGregor, from the pro-monument 
Monumental Task Force even said, “You can’t just hide them in a museum.”

All this to say: Nothing’s really being whitewashed. Nothing’s being erased. 
On the surface, the controversy is simply overwhere to place the monuments for 
public view.

Why would that make one angry enough to torch a guy’s Lambo?
 