
“A sound strategic idea, but marred in the execution” was the Manchester 
Guardian’s view in 1916 of the tragic events at Gallipoli the previous year, 
now widely regarded as one of the allies’ greatest defeats of thefirst world war
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/firstworldwar>. 


Conceived in early 1915 by Winston Churchill in order to overcome stalemate on 
the western front, the allies’ intention was to capture the Dardanelles straits 
from the Ottoman Empire which had recently entered the war on the side of 
Germany, thereby facilitating the safe passage of Russian warships from the 
Black Sea. An unsuccessful naval attack was followed by a land campaign headed 
by general Ian Hamilton. The first ill-fatedlandings on the Gallipoli peninsula 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/FWWgallipoli.htm> by British, French, 
Australian and New Zealand forces occurred on 25th April 1915.


In the early stages of the war the government had banned reporting 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/media/2014/jul/27/first-world-war-state-press-reporting>
 from the front line. Some journalists defied the ban but they could face 
severe penalties if their writing was perceived to undermine morale or assist 
the enemy. Newspapers therefore relied significantly on official reports 
provided by the military.

Informed by an official dispatch the Manchester Guardian summarised 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427472739673/Troops-landed-at-Dardanelle.pdf> on 
27 April that the allied troops had “despite a stout resistance from the 
entrenched enemy, made good their footing” on the peninsula. Yet the allied 
forces had underestimated the preparations of the Ottoman forces and their 
unfamiliarity with the harsh terrain also worked against them. Both sides 
suffered significant casualties and the allies retreated to their landing 
beaches at Helles and Gaba Tepe where they became involved in prolonged trench 
warfare. However at the time the truth of the situation remained largely hidden 
from the public.

By summer 1915 political pressure had led to small number of accredited 
journalists being permitted to report directly from the battlefront. 
Experienced war journalistHenry Nevinson  
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427385940291/Henry-Nevinson-Obituary_Man.pdf>
travelled to the Dardenelles to cover the unfolding events on behalf of the 
Manchester Guardian and several regional newspapers.


How often I have imagined this scene, now it lies before me full of immemorial 
history and history now being daily made.
Henry Nevinson, Manchester Guardian, 30 July 1915 
Arriving on the island of Imbros in July 1915, Nevinson joined a number of 
other newspaper correspondents at a camp near the military’s headquarters 
includingEllis Ashmead-Bartlett 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427470882304/Ellis-Ashmead-Bartlett-Obit.pdf> who 
was representing Fleet Street andCharles Bean 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/FWWbean.htm>, the official correspondent of 
the Australian Journalists’ Association. In hisfirst letter  
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427376538652/Allies-task-in-Gallipoli_Ma.pdf>to 
the Manchester Guardian, Nevinson wrote poignantly of his initial impressions 
of Helles. “How often I have imagined this scene, and now it lies stretched 
before me full of immemorial history and of history now being daily made.”

War correspondents were still forbidden from mentioning strategy or negatively 
affecting the mood at home by reporting casualty figures or the poor conditions 
encountered by troops. Strict censorship could also hold up their letters for 
months. Nevinson’s biographerAngela John <http://www.angelavjohn.com/> notes 
that Nevinson thus primarily relayed to readers the human stories of the 
ongoing conflict and the daily life of troops at Helles and Gaba Tepe, which 
became better known as Anzac Cove after the Australian and New Zealand Army 
Corps stationed there.

Nevinson was present at the August Offensive in which the allies, bolstered by 
new troops, sought to break the deadlock at Anzac Cove though a series of 
coordinated actions including additional landings at nearby Sulva Bay. A 
combination of inexperienced troops, poor planning, extreme heat and illness 
led to a further failure with casualties in excess of 12,000 men. Yet in order 
to keep reader’s hopes afloat, Nevinson’sreports 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427473320767/The-New-Army-in-Gallipoli_M.pdf> 
were more encouraging, detailing the ‘Australians’ reckless courage’ and 
‘Brilliant charge of the Irishmen at Sulva Bay.’


Suddenly a shell burst close above my head with a frightful crash and I felt a 
blow just like an iron mallet.
Henry Nevinson, Manchester Guardian, 7 September 1915 
Nevinson was himself injured during the August Offensive. In an article 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427377048987/Mr-Nevinson's-wound_Manches.pdf> 
published on 7 September he relayed the experience to Manchester Guardian 
readers. “I was upfront, in the midst of a tremendous bombardment with which 
the fighting began. Suddenly a shell burst close above my head with a frightful 
crash and I felt a blow just like an iron mallet.” After receiving basic first 
aid he returned to the front and over the next few days carried on as usual 
“for fear of losing nerve.”

Despite the restrictions imposed by censorship, the correspondents had 
significant opportunity to influence public understanding of events during the 
war. Charles Bean for example is credited with helping to bring about the 
feelings of national pride felt in Australia and New Zealand about the Anzacs’ 
actions during the campaign.

Yet each correspondent inevitably developed their own personal view of the 
operation. Ashmead-Bartlett had become increasingly critical of Hamilton’s 
actions, particularly after the events at Sulva Bay. After attempting to 
smuggle an unauthorised letter containing his views to the prime minister back 
in London, Bartlett was dismissed from the peninsula. He made his opinions 
clear however on his return to the UK which contributed to the recall of 
Hamilton to London in October and a chain of events which culminated in the end 
of the campaign.


Having left the Gallipoli peninsula in October to cover events in Salonika, 
Nevinson returned in December 1915. Preparations for a Christmas magazine and 
exchanges of fruit and cigarettes across the trenches were the focus of an
article 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427383328206/December-Days-in-Gallipoli_.pdf> 
published on 28 December rather than the undercover evacuation of troops and 
equipment which was actually by then almost complete.


First world war history and the Manchester Guardian: teaching resource from 
the GNM Archive September 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/first-world-war-history-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
By the time the last allied soldier left the Dardanelles on 9 January 2016, 
over 100,000 men on both sides had perished. Nevinson was later called as a 
witness in an official investigation into the campaign during which Angela John 
notes that Nevinson refused to criticise Hamilton who he believed had been made 
a scapegoat by the government for the failure.


The Manchester Guardian also defended Hamilton it its own detailed analysis of 
the operation in Volume III of itsHistory of the War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/first-world-war-history-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 series, published in early 1916. Illustrated with numerous photographs and 
maps, the four chapters concerning Gallipoli draw upon Nevinson’s reports and 
include Hamilton’s official dispatches. Yet the brutality of the events at 
Gallipoli and elsewhere were still not fully revealed until after the end of 
the war.


Nevinson’s own book The Dardanelles Campaign was published in 1918. He 
undertook several other commissions for the Manchester Guardian and in 1933 
married regular contributor and fellow suffragist Evelyn Sharp.


The GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> holds a complete set 
of the nine volumes of the Manchester Guardian History of the War which can be 
viewed by appointment in the GNM Archive reading room in King’s Cross, London. 
Past articles from the Guardian and the Observer can be accessed online via the
Digital Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/info/2012/jul/25/digital-archive-notice>. 

Further reading

First world war history and the Manchester Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/first-world-war-history-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>

First world war: how state and press kept truth off the front page 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/27/first-world-war-state-press-reporting>

Foreign news coverage in the 1930s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2015/jan/02/foreign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014>

War, Journalism and the Shaping of the Twentieth Century 
<http://www.angelavjohn.com/publications.php>

Henry Nevinson Obituary
 <http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1427385940291/Henry-Nevinson-Obituary_Man.pdf>
 