
It was all a joke.

That’s the message from a Montana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/montana>
 House representative who said he was making a wisecrack when a reporter asked 
about his efforts to expand a state decency law.

“Yoga pants should be illegal in public anyway,” Republican David Moore told 
an Associated Press reporter, whose story appeared in theBillings Gazette 
<http://billingsgazette.com/news/government-and-politics/missoula-lawmaker-yoga-pants-speedos-should-be-illegal-in-public/article_71538ba2-d529-5ec3-a289-108de20e9398.html>
 and was picked up by publications as disparate asFox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2015/02/11/montana-lawmaker-yoga-pants-speedos-should-be-illegal-in-public/>
 andJezebel 
<http://jezebel.com/montana-representative-fails-in-his-push-to-ban-yoga-pa-1685391256>
.

The decency law, which was couched in language that was vague and even bizarre 
when it made its way into the judiciary committee, was unanimouslytabled on 
Wednesday evening, the Gazette reported 
<http://billingsgazette.com/news/government-and-politics/amid-giggles-house-kills-missoula-legislator-s-ban-on-provocative/article_4bb16307-51ef-524f-8039-def2883fad93.html>
. But that didn’t save Moore from a media lashing.

“There’s a man in Montana imbued with more power than he should have,” said 
Jezebel’s Kate Dries 
<http://jezebel.com/montana-representative-fails-in-his-push-to-ban-yoga-pa-1685391256>
. It was a sentiment that echoed across the internet.

“They just need to stop trying to legislate what women wear,” Marian Bradley, 
past president of the National Organization for Women in Montana and the 
current north-west regional director, told the Guardian. “And they need to be 
mindful of the fact that we are in control of what we wear.”

Moore’s bill, while deeply flawed, would have also repealed a draconian law 
already on the books in Montana that provides for three-time indecent exposure 
offenders to be thrown in prison for life, be fined $10,000 or both. Moore’s 
bill would have reduced that penalty to five years or $5,000.

Stories on his yoga pants remark also obscured the nuanced voting history of 
the Montanan – he is the only Republican in the state to be endorsed by the
National Association to Repeal Abortion Laws 
<http://mediatrackers.org/montana/2014/05/06/montana-republican-gets-100-percent-naral-abortion-rating>
 (Naral) and is carrying the state house’s annual attempt to repeal the death 
penalty.

Montana has earned a reputation for meddling – it was the subject of recent 
mockery when legislators attempted to issue a strict, one-page dress code that 
seemed tofocus on women’s necklines and skirt-lengths 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/14/us/politics/montana-dress-code-has-female-legislators-sporting-new-look-clenched-jaws.html>
.

“Leggings are not considered dress pants,” the one-page policy said, firmly. 
That policy was also dropped after media criticism.

Moore told the Guardian: “At no time during the hearing of that bill was yoga 
pants brought up.”

He said: “The whole was a off-the-cuff remark in the hallway, and the whole 
thing just exploded.”

The Associated Press <https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press>, 
however, disputes that characterization.

“Our reporter spoke to him at length,” Associated Press media director Paul 
Colford said about the interview, which took place on Tuesday. “She asked him 
about that statement twice. After the story appeared, Mr Moore told associates 
he was making a joke. Our staffer did not report that the bill would go so far 
as to outlaw yoga pants. Or that he intended to, we stand by our coverage.”

Moore’s bill, HB 365, would have banned people from exposing “genitals, pubic 
hair, or anus of exposes the areola or nipple of the person’s breast with 
anything less than a fully opaque covering while in a public place.”

The passage Moore said could have applied to beige yoga pants 
<http://billingsgazette.com/news/government-and-politics/missoula-lawmaker-yoga-pants-speedos-should-be-illegal-in-public/article_71538ba2-d529-5ec3-a289-108de20e9398.html>
, according to the Associated Press, would have banned “any device, costume, or 
covering that gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, 
anus region, or pubic hair region or exposes any device worn as a cover over 
the nipple or areola of the female breast that simulates and gives the 
realistic appearance of a nipple or areola while in a public place”.

Moore said the legislation was modeled on decency laws in 14 other states. The 
US supreme court ruled that state laws barring nudity were constitutional in 
1991, in Barnes v Glen Theatre, an Indiana case in which the state sought to 
stop a club from allowing totally nude dancing.

Public nudity laws vary from state to state – many consider the act a 
misdemeanor. Repeat offenses can be considered a felony. But the laws are often 
scoffed at by skinny dippers and sunbathers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DetNUB04GDjo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DetNUB04GDjo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DetNUB04GDjo&media=>
Moore’s bill stemmed from a naked bike ride through the center of Missoula, 
Montana. Some residents were angered when dozens of naked cyclists were 
permitted by local authorities to pedal down thestreet completely nude 
<http://mtpr.org/post/naked-bike-ride-inspires-bill-montana-legislature>, 
several outlets reported.


“If I’m going to take my children to a movie out in public and it’s not rated 
for their age category, I have to be there with them, I have to OK it,” one 
resident, John Quandt, toldMontana Public Radio 
<http://mtpr.org/post/naked-bike-ride-inspires-bill-montana-legislature>, when 
asked about his objection to the bike ride. “I assume that if I’m walking down 
the street I would have the same rights.”

“I want Montana to be known as a decent state where people can live within the 
security of laws and protect their children and associates from degrading and 
indecent practices,” retired professor and Missoula residentWalt Hill told the 
Associated Press 
<http://billingsgazette.com/news/government-and-politics/missoula-lawmaker-yoga-pants-speedos-should-be-illegal-in-public/article_71538ba2-d529-5ec3-a289-108de20e9398.html>
. “I believe this bill is written preserving that reputation.”

“I‘m a lifelong Lutheran, I kind of believe in live and let live,” said Moore. 
“But the problem we had in Missoula was – where do your rights interfere with 
mine?”
 