
Researchers and teachers have warned against introducing additional phonics 
testing for Australian primary school students, saying it would duplicate 
existing tests and waste education funding.

Phonics testing assesses a student’s ability for fluent word identification 
and proper language comprehension.

It was introduced in 2012 in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/25/phonics-method-helps-close-attainment-gap-study-finds>
, where year one students are shown 40 words – 20 real words, and 20 
“pseudo-words” – which are then read aloud to the teacher.

The federal government announced its own plans for a phonics test 
<http://www.afr.com/leadership/innovation/simon-birminghams-excellent-proposal-a-phonics-test-for-year-1-students-20160501-goj8ps>
 in the May budget, and the Centre for Independent Studies thinktank released a 
paper on Thursday, which found the English model could “easily be adapted for 
use in Australian schools”.

Phonics method helps close attainment gap, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/25/phonics-method-helps-close-attainment-gap-study-finds>
Jennifer Buckingham, education research fellow at the centre, found England’s 
experience had proven successful, simultaneously boosting literacy standards 
and narrowing the attainment gap associated with socioeconomic disadvantage. 
“Literacy policies and programs in use in Australian schools do not 
consistently reflect the evidence on effective reading instruction, especially 
phonics,” she said.

“The only way to accurately determine whether children are learning the 
fundamental phonics skills needed for early acquisition of reading – before 
achievement gaps become difficult to close – is to assess what they know at a 
critical early point in their schooling.”


But the University of Canberra language and literacy expert Dr Misty Adoniou 
cast doubt on the plan on Thursday, describing phonics testing as unproven and 
the proposal as a “distraction”.

Adoniou said states and territories already had phonic testing in year one, 
making any new test an unnecessary duplication. “My first reaction is, instead 
of piling more tests on, why don’t we do more with the data we already have 
from the first year?” she said.

“If the government wanted to panic and put its money somewhere, I’d suggest 
they put it into year four and put it into deep comprehension.”


She said there was little evidence phonics testing was effective, citing the 
ACT as an example.

ACT schools achieved by far the highest scores in the country in the 2011 
progress in international reading literacy study 
<https://www.acer.edu.au/files/TIMSS-PIRLS_Australian-Highlights.pdf> (Pirls), 
an international comparative assessment of year four students.

The territory’s median score was equal highest in the world, matching the 
world-leading scores achieved in Northern Ireland. But the ACT had no 
structured phonics testing in the years leading up to 2011.

“So we can’t correlate phonics program instruction with high scores in a 
reading comprehension test in year four,” Adoniou said.

The Australian Education Union has also voiced concern about the proposal. 
Correna Haythorpe, AEU president, said early testing of literacy was already in 
place in primary schools, and called for resources to instead be re-directed.

“An extra test is not necessary and will not make a difference to a child’s 
learning without the extra resources to help students who are behind,” she 
said. “This is simply a distraction to cover up the fact that minister 
Birmingham’s plan to cut Gonski funding after 2017 will make it less likely 
that students who are identified as struggling with literacy will get the 
support they need.”
 