
Science <http://www.guardian.co.uk/science> and technology 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology>
 Photograph: Marc Mueller/EPA 
• Cambridge scientists 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/new-research-suggests-animal-to-human-transmission-of-mrsa>
 have linked two human cases of infection with the antibiotic– resistant 
superbug MRSA to farms in Denmark. The results of the study suggest the MRSA 
bacteria was transmitted from the livestock to the farmers. The study also 
raises questions about whether cows could be a reservoir for new strains of 
MRSA.

• A new treatment combining two hormones can reduce appetite, according to 
research atImperial College London 
<http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/newsandeventspggrp/imperialcollege/newssummary/news_18-3-2013-17-37-33#fni-2>
. The study provides 'first in man' evidence that a combined therapy using the 
hormones glucagon and glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) may form the basis for a 
new treatment for obesity and diabetes in the future. "The hormones glucagon 
and GLP-1 are both used by the body to control blood sugar and metabolism, so 
there is great interest in utilising them to find new treatments for obesity 
and type 2 diabetes," said professor Stephen Bloom from Imperial.

Arts and humanities <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/artsandhumanities>
 Photograph: Leo La Valle/EPA 
• The rise of the Argentine dance, the tango, in Japan stems from the music's 
nostalgic sentiments which help the Japanese connect to their own history, 
researchers atRoyal Holloway university 
<http://www.rhul.ac.uk/research/home.aspx> say. Lead researcher Yuiko Asaba 
from the Royal Holloway, said: "The wave of immigrants who arrived in Argentina 
at the end of the 19th century, whose different cultures contributed to the 
evolution of tango, had a profound sense of longing for the places they left 
behind.

• Shakespeare was a tax-evading food hoarder, according to a study by 
Aberystwyth University 
<http://asle.org.uk/winner-announcement-2013-inspire-lecture-on-literature-and-sustainability/>
. Academics from the university have claimed that William Shakespeare evaded 
tax and illegally stockpiled food during times of shortage so he could sell it 
at high prices.

Social science <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/socialsciences>
 Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
• Research by the University of Southampton has found half of those doing 
voluntary work expressed a negative view of the Government's Big Society 
project, with only one in eight in favour of it. AcademicRose Lindsey 
<http://www.tsrc.ac.uk/Research/QuantitativeAnalysis/WhatthepublicthinkoftheBigSociety/tabid/996/Default.aspx>
 who was involved in the study, said: "The primary ground on which the Big 
Society agenda is criticised is that is it a political stunt. Some of these 
observers argued that the agenda is meaningless and lacking in clarity, or a 
guise for shifting responsibilities away from government."

• Academics from the University of Manchester 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/research/news/> have revealed their findings from 
the most in-depth study to take place in the UK into the tragic instances of 
child killing by parents, known as filicide. The research found 37% of parents 
and step-parents who killed their children were suffering from some form of 
mental illness and 12% had been in contact with mental health services within a 
year of the offence.

And finally
 Photograph: /Getty 
• Findings of an Open University 
<http://www3.open.ac.uk/media/fullstory.aspx?id=25357> report into poverty and 
social exclusion reveal the extent of deprivation and financial difficulties 
faced by people in the UK. Joanna Mack, learning and teaching producer at the 
OU, said: "Levels of deprivation today are worse in a number of vital areas – 
from basic housing to key social activities - than at any point in the past 
thirty years. These trends are a deeply shocking indictment of 30 years of 
economic and social policy and reflect a rapid growth in inequality. This has 
meant that, though the economy has doubled in size during this period, those at 
the bottom have been increasingly left behind."

Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email 
claire.shaw@guardian.co.uk <mailto:claire.shaw@guardian.co.uk> with your latest 
news

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 