
Science <http://www.guardian.co.uk/science> and technology 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology>
 Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
• Researchers at Bolton and Warwick universities have made a molecular-level 
discovery in plants that could lead to thedevelopment of crops that are more 
resilient to climate change 
<http://www.bolton.ac.uk/MediaCentre/Articles/2013/Apr2013-04.aspx>. The 
research shows why, at a molecular level, plants are unable to flower during 
the juvenile phase of plant development. Ianis Matsoukas, a molecular 
physiologist and biology lecturer at the University of Bolton, says: "Being 
able to understand and ultimately control juvenility will enable more 
predictable flowering, better scheduling and reduced wastage of crops. Knowing 
the mechanism gives us the tools to increase crop yield by accelerating or 
delaying time to flowering. This might also lead to higher yields of plants 
grown for biofuels and pulp production."

• Research shows girls with learning and physical disabilities are more likely 
to suffer period problems 
<http://news.lancs.ac.uk/Web/News/Pages/Managing-menstrual-problems-of-girls-with-disabilities-presents-medical-dilemma.aspx>
 compared to the general population. Menstrual problems in girls with 
disabilities are often unique to the population and can cause significant 
disruption to their lives, the review states. The Obstetrician & 
Gynaecologist's editor-in-chief, Jason Waugh, says: "Research on managing the 
menstrual problems of adolescents with disabilities is limited. Consequently 
there is a lack of evidence of best practice to guide healthcare professionals 
in this area. This review emphasises the need for further guidance for 
practitioners, as well as highlighting that care needs to be individualised."

Arts and humanities <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/artsandhumanities>
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
• The 40–year friendship of Charles Darwin and Joseph Hooker, the most 
significant and scientifically important of Darwin's life, can now be explored 
by anyone in the world with access to the Internet. Their decades of 
correspondence include Darwin's most famous letter, where he first reveals that 
he has worked out a new theory for how species change. The 1,200 letters 
between Darwin and Hooker, 300 of which have not been published before, are 
being made available in more than 5,000 images byCambridge's Digital Library 
<http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/>. Alison Pearn of the Darwin Correspondence Project 
says: "No single set of letters was more important to Darwin, or is more 
important now, than those exchanged with Hooker over 40 years – a period that 
encompasses almost the entirety of Darwin's mature working life. It is unusual 
for a single repository to hold both sides of any correspondence, so this is a 
rare opportunity to see one of the longest running and most wide-ranging 
conversations of the nineteenth-century unfold."

• The private letters of composer Charles Wesley 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/news/display/?id=9914>, who wrote some of 
the world's most popular hymns have been published, providing a rare glimpse 
into the birth of Methodism. The Oxford University Press edition is the first 
of two volumes containing all 700 surviving letters of the preacher. Wesley's 
"Hark the Herald" has been recorded by artists as diverse as Frank Sinatra and 
The Fall and has featured in TV programmes like "South Park" and the classic 
movie "It's a Wonderful Life". Gareth Lloyd of the University of Manchester's 
John Rylands Library, who took ten years to complete volume 1 of the project 
with his co-editor, says: "The publication of this collection will shine a 
light on a remarkable man living in one of the most significant periods in 
British history. Charles Wesley was more than just a hymn writer. As co-founder 
of the Methodist movement, he established a family of Churches with an 
estimated 75 million members and one which is still growing in many countries."

Social science <http://www.guardian.co.uk/education/socialsciences>
 Photograph: Lee Jae-Won/Reuters 
• Too much social media activity may damage strong relationships, according to 
a study by theOxford Internet Institute 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/media/news_stories/2013/130411_1.html>. Researchers tested 
the theory of 'media multiplexity' (the ability to communicate via several 
communications channels), which suggests that there is a clear link between the 
number of media channels used to communicate, the frequency with which they are 
used and the strength of relationship ties. Over 24,000 people in marital 
relationships took part in the new research, using 10 media channels. Bernie 
Hogan, who led the study, says: "We found that those using more media tend to 
report no greater relationship satisfaction and some even reported decreasing 
satisfaction. This work suggests that media, which now includes online social 
media, still operates as a signal of ties of strength in relationships. However 
there may be a cut-off point after which the increasing complexity of 
maintaining so many separate communications threads starts to undermine 
relationship ties."

• The cost implications of the UK government's recent plans to reform the 
funding system for care and support in England areanalysed in a research paper 
by LSE 
<http://www2.lse.ac.uk/newsAndMedia/news/archives/2013/04/funding-of-long%20term%20care-research.aspx>
 and University of East Anglia, which considers the effects of options to give 
more help to lower income care home residents. Raphael Wittenberg, principal 
research fellow at LSE's personal social services research unit, says: "The 
government's reforms will, we estimate, directly help over 100,000 care home 
residents at any time. They will tend to provide greater benefit to relatively 
better off older people, primarily because they currently have to pay the most 
for their care. Our research highlights two possible ways to modify the 
reforms, if resources permitted, in order to provide more help for those on 
relatively low to modest means." The research shows that lower income care home 
residents would gain since they are more likely than those with higher incomes 
to have assets in the range affected by these options.

And finally
 Photograph: Alamy 
• The rediscovery of a mystery animal in a museum's underground storeroom 
<https://www.dur.ac.uk/news/newsitem/?itemno=17454> proves that a non-native 
'big cat' prowled the British countryside at the turn of the last century. The 
animal's skeleton and mounted skin was analysed by a multi-disciplinary team of 
scientists and researchers at Southampton, Durham, Bristol, and Aberystwyth 
universities and found to be a Canadian lynx – a carnivorous predator more than 
twice the size of a domestic cat. Co-author of the paper Darren Naish from the 
University of Southampton, says: "There have been enough sightings of exotic 
big cats which substantially pre-date 1976 to cast doubt on the idea that one 
piece of legislation made in 1976 explains all releases of these animals in the 
UK. It seems more likely that escapes and releases have occurred throughout 
history, and that this continual presence of aliens explains the 'British big 
cat' phenomenon."

Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email 
claire.shaw@guardian.co.uk <mailto:claire.shaw@guardian.co.uk> with your latest 
news

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, become a member ofthe Higher Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 