
Residents in Adamsdown <https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/adamsdown> are 
dismayed by a planning application to build a block of students flats outside 
their homes as they feel the area is already over developed.

The application for 247 student clusters, 602 rooms in total, is proposed to 
be built on the site of the Cardiff Central fire and rescue station along with 
a new wing for the service.

But the local community feel they will be dwarfed by the development, and have 
been building a campaign against the proposals including a petition and letters 
of objection submitted to Cardiff Council's planning committee. A public 
meeting will be held on Thursday, at 7pm at the Resource Centre at 10g Moira 
Terrace to discuss future action.

Su West, communities first co-ordinator for Adamsdown says this application is 
the latest in a string of developments in the area. See her comments in the 
video below.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJyUVjiItxZE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJyUVjiItxZE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJyUVjiItxZE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
West said there had been a "deluge" of planning applications in Adamsdown in 
recent months, and it was the hot topic at the latest partnerships and 
community meeting. She said:

"It's an inner city area with a high density of people already so more flats 
has a knock on affect for the services and the character of the area. People 
know there needs to be development but are feeling at the moment it's just too 
much."

Adamsdown councillors John Dixon and Nigel Howells have been gathering names 
for a petition to put to the planning committee on 11 August and are in support 
of the residents' campaign.

Howells said: 

"Since the letters have gone out we've had quite a big response by concerned 
residents. It appears to be a complete over development of the site which would 
cause a loss of privacy and light to existing residents, as well as noise and 
waste issues.

"Most residents are not against developmentfull stop, but it's the scale of 
it. It's a really imposing building which will dominate this part of Adamsdown 
and residents who have lived here for years won't be able to enjoy it. It will 
completely transform the area."
 Residents worry the park on the estate behind the fire station could be used 
by students Photograph: Hannah Waldram/guardian.co.uk 
Fiona Lewis, 42, who lives on Tharsis Close on the small estate behind where 
the flats would be built, said if application was granted residents would be 
forgotten. She said:

"I can't see any benefit this development would have for the community. This 
is estate is mainly young families with children - if there are 600 students 
you can imagine the park will be an attraction.

"When the building goes up, how much light will be locked off from the estate? 
It does feel like we're a dumping ground for new developments. Adamsdown is the 
last thought in people's minds. We're in the middle of an industrial estate and 
if that is added we will be forgotten altogether."

Lewis asked why empty domestic properties in the city, of which there are some 
7,000, could not be brought back to life to be used as student accomodation 
instead. Figuresreleased by the South Wales Echo today 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/cardiffonline/cardiff-news/2010/08/03/student-housing-increasing-in-cardiff-91466-26983452/>
 show the number of student accomodation in the city has risen by 50% in the 
last 10 years.

Neighbour Leanne Mecer, 26, who has two young children also opposed the 
application. She said:

"It's going to ruin our estate. If there's no garden for the students then 
they'll use this park which will get ruined too."
 Planning notices went up in the last week Photograph: Hannah 
Waldram/guardian.co.uk 
But the develpoment is seen as a positive for workers at the fire station, 
since the building they say, is no longer usable and delapidated. The station 
used to be the South Glamorgan Headquarters, but has since been functioning as 
a branch station as Cardiff Central. Richie Higson, Crew manager said a new 
building was needed. He said:

"This is in a poor state of repair and it needs to be refurbished but none of 
the vehicles here will go. The space here is the legacy of the headquarters and 
it's not being used â€“ so something better could be done with the space."

Howells said: 

"The station used to be the headquarters but this has long since not been the 
case. I understand the need to develop the site and improve the conditions of 
the existing service there, but a far more sensitive development is called for."

Howells said he would be calling on the chair of the fire service to back the 
campaign.

Residents have until 18 of August to respond to the application 
<http://www.cardiff.gov.uk/dc/content.asp?nav=2870,3139,3153,3943&parent_directory_id=2865&id=9856>
 by writing to:developmentcontrol@cardiff.gov.uk 
<mailto:developmentcontrol@cardiff.gov.uk>. 
 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/35285945/Planning-application-for-Fire-Station-flats>
Applicant Cambrian Holst were unavailable for comment. 

What do you think about the number of developments in Cardiff? Are they 
increasing? Leave your comments below.
 