
An Indian restaurant owner with a “cavalier attitude” to safety has been 
jailed for six years for the manslaughter of a customer with a peanut allergy, 
after he supplied him with a curry containing peanuts.


Paul Wilson, 38, was meticulous about his condition and asked for no nuts when 
staff at the Indian Garden, Easingwold, North Yorkshire, cooked his chicken 
tikka masala takeaway in January 2014.

Wilson, a bar manager, died from a severe anaphylactic shock. He was found 
slumped in the toilet at his home in Helperby.

Mohammed Zaman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/07/trial-date-restaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-peanut-allergy-death>
, the restaurant’s owner, was convicted of gross negligence manslaughter and 
sentenced to six years in jail after the jury at Teesside crown court was told 
he swapped almond powder in recipes for cheaper groundnut mix, containing 
peanuts, despite warnings.

The prosecution alleged Zaman, who owned six restaurants in York and North 
Yorkshire, was almost £300,000 in debt and cut costs by using the cheaper 
ingredient and by employing untrained, illegal workers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Frestaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-guilty-of-manslaughter-of-peanut-allergy-customer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53685c678cd81761040ae0feed58c8d6806d5b5e%2F0_505_2481_1488%2F2481.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Restaurant%20owner%20jailed%20for%20six%20years%20over%20death%20of%20peanut%20allergy%20customer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Frestaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-guilty-of-manslaughter-of-peanut-allergy-customer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Restaurant%20owner%20jailed%20for%20six%20years%20over%20death%20of%20peanut%20allergy%20customer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Frestaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-guilty-of-manslaughter-of-peanut-allergy-customer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53685c678cd81761040ae0feed58c8d6806d5b5e%2F0_505_2481_1488%2F2481.jpg>
 Paul Wilson had asked the restaurant not to include nuts in his dish. 
Photograph: North Yorkshire police/PA 
Wilson died three weeks after a teenage customer at another of Zaman’s 
restaurants had an allergic reaction that required hospital treatment. She had 
been assured her meal would not contain nuts. The prosecution said the owner 
had “put profit before safety”.

Zaman, from Huntington, York, denied manslaughter by gross negligence, 
perverting the course of justice and six food safety offences. He was found 
guilty of all charges except perverting the course of justice.

He claimed he left managers to run his restaurants and that included ordering 
stock and hiring staff. He was not on the premises when the curry was sold.

Richard Wright QC, prosecuting, said Wilson had told staff that his meal must 
be nut-free. He said the restaurant had written “no nuts” on his order and on 
the lid of his curry.

Wright said: “Mohammed Zaman received numerous warnings that he was putting 
his customers’ health, and potentially their lives, at risk. Tragically for 
Paul Wilson, Mohammed Zaman took none of those opportunities and ignored all of 
the warnings he was given.

“His was a reckless and cavalier attitude to risk and one that we, the 
prosecution, would describe as grossly negligent.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Frestaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-guilty-of-manslaughter-of-peanut-allergy-customer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadbeb9e4907608403b6c632c94fd3bd5674cb260%2F432_278_2379_1428%2F2379.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Restaurant%20owner%20jailed%20for%20six%20years%20over%20death%20of%20peanut%20allergy%20customer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Frestaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-guilty-of-manslaughter-of-peanut-allergy-customer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Restaurant%20owner%20jailed%20for%20six%20years%20over%20death%20of%20peanut%20allergy%20customer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Frestaurant-owner-mohammed-zaman-guilty-of-manslaughter-of-peanut-allergy-customer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadbeb9e4907608403b6c632c94fd3bd5674cb260%2F432_278_2379_1428%2F2379.jpg>
 Wilson’s parents, Keith and Margaret. Photograph: Tom Wilkinson/PA 
Wright added: “Time and again he ignored the danger and did not protect his 
customers. The evidence will establish that Mohammed Zaman put profit before 
safety and that he cut corners at every turn.”

Police and trading standards launched an investigation following Wilson’s 
death. Groundnut powder was found in the kitchen of the Indian Garden and had 
contaminated other ingredients. A test purchaser went to the Indian Garden the 
day after Wilson’s death and was assured by a staff member that they could buy 
a nut-free curry.

Wilson’s parents, Keith and Margaret, from Sheffield, said their son had 
carefully managed his condition since he was seven when he had a reaction to a 
Marathon (Snickers) chocolate bar.

He loved curry but was always clear when ordering that his food must not 
contain nuts, she said. Outside court, DI Shaun Page said Wilson’s death was 
totally avoidable.

Zaman did not visibly react when the guilty verdicts were returned. Family 
members sobbed and hugged him as he left court and went into a consultation 
room before he was later sentenced.
 