
Richard Curtis <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>, the 
British writer-director behind some of the most successful romcoms of all time, 
is considering retirement.

Curtis, who is only 56, said science-fiction project About Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155249/about-time> felt like "a summing 
up" for a career which has taken in the legendary TV comedyBlackadder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/oct/04/television.blackadder.anniversary>
, writing work on 1994'sFour Weddings and a Funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/54602/four.weddings.and.a.funeral> and 
1999'sNotting Hill <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77241/notting.hill>, 
as well as the directing of 2003'sLove Actually 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96863/love.actually>. He told Empire 
magazine <http://www.empireonline.com/>: "I waited a while in order to write 
[About Time]. This probably will be the last film I will direct."

Asked to expand on that bombshell, he responded: "I don't know. Just a feeling 
â€¦ just a feeling. It feels like a summing up to me. We'll see how things turn 
out."

About Time, which stars Rachel McAdams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rachel-mcadams> and Domhnall Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/16/domhnall-gleeson-handsome-is-not-really>
, is only Curtis's third film as a director. Prior to Love Actually, he 
confessed, he did not have the confidence to take charge of the cameras. "Many 
of the comedies I like the most, from Woody Allen's films to Monty Python's 
films, have been directed by the people who write them," he said. "So it was 
quite a logical thing, but I wasn't ready to do it at that point. And when I 
reached that point, I was ready to do it."

Curtis did not discuss whether he would stop writing after the release of 
About Time <https://www.theguardian.com/film/about-time>, which centres on a 
young man (Gleeson) who discovers he can travel through time and uses his gift 
to change history and woo McAdams's character. It is due out on 8 August in the 
UK, 1 November in the US and does not yet have an official Australian release 
date.
 