
He is known as the populist creator of Brit rom-com box-office hits such as 
Four Weddings and a Funeral, Notting Hill and Love Actually, so it may come as 
some surprise thatRichard Curtis's next project is to be a low-budget 
science-fiction film about time travel 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/war-horse-writer-richard-curtis-282961>.

Curtis will direct About Time from his own screenplay, his third turn behind 
the cameras following 2009's pirate radio paeanThe Boat That Rocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128972/boat-that-rocked>, which 
received mixed reviews and sunk at the box office. The film is being produced 
by Working Title, the British production company behind many of Curtis's 
best-known films and is said to be a mix of comedy and drama. Producer Tim 
Bevan told the Hollywood Reporter that casting was under way and the film was 
aiming to shoot in the summer.

Curtis appears to have something of a longstanding interest in time travel. He 
wrote an episode for the BBC's Doctor Who in 2010 during which the Doctor (Matt 
Smith) travelled back in time to meet Vincent Van Gogh, and also penned the 
Blackadder: Back & Forth special, a short film commissioned for the Millennium 
Dome, which saw the BBC TV series' Blackadder and his gormless servant Baldrick 
embark on a time-travel adventure that brought them into contact with several 
significant figures in British history.

Curtis most recently wrote the screenplay for War Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142607/war-horse>, Steven Spielberg's 
Oscar-tipped adaptation of Michael Morpurgo's 1982 novel about a Devon farmhand 
who travels to the first world war trenches in an effort to bring his beloved 
colt Joey safely home. The New Zealand-born film-maker is also said to be
planning a fresh collaboration with Blackadder co-writer Ben Elton 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/8998677/Blackadder-duo-Richard-Curtis-and-Ben-Elton-reunite-to-write-new-material.html>
 and has written thescreenplay for Stephen Daldry's upcoming film Trash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/06/stephen-daldry-richard-curtis-trash>
, billed as a contemporary thriller set in an unnamed developing-world city.
 