
Think back to when you saw your first avocado. If you were born before the 
advent of Instagram, perhaps it was in the supermarket, exotic and dark and 
knobbly as a dragon’s egg. Maybe you, or your parents, attempted a chi-chi 
dinner party some time in the 1980s, and served up halves so hard that, once 
you had eaten the flaccid prawn cocktail filling, you needed to saw through 
them with a steak knife. It seems impossible, now that you can’t go on 
Instagram without seeing someone’s mushy brunch, but there was a time before 
everyone was eating avocados. Now, avocado toast is so ubiquitous you can get 
it in some McDonald’s; so mainstream is the green fruit thatthe fashion world 
has declared it “overcado” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/05/the-avocado-is-overcado-how-culture-caught-up-with-fashion>
. But the rest of us, the ones who haven’t heard that the avocado is newly 
uncool, are only just getting started.

This could become a problem. An article in the Grocer 
<http://www.thegrocer.co.uk/buying-and-supplying/fmcg-prices-and-promotions/avocado-fans-face-higher-prices-as-global-demand-keeps-rising/526861.article>
 warns that demand is outstripping supply, which has been made worse because of 
poor harvests in avocado-producing countries. Reynolds, a leading fruit and 
vegetable supplier, has seen about 30% growth in demand for avocado in the past 
year (before, it was growing by about 10% a year). “We have almost 
unprecedented demand,” says Steve Rudge, the head of procurement. “Normally 
that wouldn’t be a problem. But we’re coming off the back end of the Peruvian 
season, and it’s not been a classic season.”

The avocado is overcado: how #eatclean turned it into a cliche
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/oct/05/the-avocado-is-overcado-how-culture-caught-up-with-fashion>
The effect of the El Niño weather pattern has had an impact on the harvest in 
Peru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>. The avocados we buy in the UK 
are now starting to come from Israel and Spain, but production from those 
countries “is 30% down”, Rudge says, caused by the very high temperatures 
across Europe this summer, which put avocado trees under a lot of stress. “So 
we’ve got a double whammy – there is terrific demand coupled with what looks 
like a relatively restricted supply over the next four or five months.” He 
doesn’t think we’ll necessarily see fewer in the shops, but price could well be 
affected. “Over the past three or four years, everywhere around the world that 
can grow avocados, people are looking to produce them, so we’ve had a lot of 
new countries come in relatively recently.” Zimbabwe is one example, he says, 
but “even with new countries coming on board, we’re not catching up quickly 
enough”.

It could get far worse. In June, Peru was given a licence to export avocados 
to China. “The Chinese market has only just discovered avocados,” Rudge says. 
“And Chinese consumption will put even more pressure on world demand.”

The rise and rise of the avocado has been extraordinary. In part, it is down 
to improved deliciousness – a key development has been the improvements 
suppliers and retailers have made.Avocados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/avocados> arrive in the UK hard, 
unripe and inedible. Like bananas, they reach maturity in ripening facilities 
(big heated units with ethylene gas) – hence the more expensive “ripe and 
ready” varieties. “The skill is to get it to a perfect level of ripeness, and I 
think we’ve done a much better job over the past two or three years in getting 
that,” Rudge says. “This speeds up consumption because you’re more likely to 
buy it again if it is perfect. And you may end up buying more because you’re 
not leaving it to ripen in the fruit bowl for days.”

Anne Murcott, a professorial research associate at the food studies centre of 
Soas, University of London, suggests the avocado’s success owes quite a lot to 
clever marketing. “If the ideas of [something being a] superfood are repeated 
sufficiently frequently, and it is talked about from posh dinner parties to 
Weight Watchers, you see how things swirl around.” She has started noticing 
most supermarkets now include bags of avocados in their value ranges. “That 
implies that they can sell them to a wide range [of people].” She points out 
that high-street chain restaurants usually have a “superfood salad” option with 
avocado; sandwich shops stuff it between bread. In one small fruit, you can see 
a glimpse of how the modern food industry works – year-round availability, 
improved retailing, the elevated status of so-called “superfoods”, the 
influence of social media and millions spent on marketing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5ebadd9447578e6a80ccbcfbed36e0984b17d1%2F0_265_4000_2402%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5ebadd9447578e6a80ccbcfbed36e0984b17d1%2F0_265_4000_2402%2F4000.jpg>
 The avocado harvest in California. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
The avocado has a long history of being rebranded and marketed. In the early 
20th century,as NPR reports 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=5563805>, a group of 
Californian farmers got together to work out how to take advantage of the 
blossoming popularity of a new crop they were growing. People in Central and 
South America had been eating theahuacate since at least 500BC, but Americans 
wouldn’t be able to pronounce that. Its translation – testicle – wasn’t too 
appetising. Nor was the name alligator pear, which it had become known by. They 
adopted “avocado”. Californian growers have been funding large advertising 
campaigns since the early 1960s (the US market is huge, thanks to clever 
marketing, the large Hispanic population and growth of “lifestyle” bloggers).

In the UK in the 1970s and 1980s, avocados were thought of as a “winter 
fruit”, sold by Israeli producers. Then South African growers worked together 
to change perceptions so we would think of the avocado as a year-round food, 
and to establish a new market. In 1995, they engaged a British PR firm to start 
a campaign.

“Initially, a lot of it was around fairly basic consumer education – what is 
this and how do you eat it?” says Rob Metcalfe, the chief executive of the 
communications agency Richmond Towers, which ran the campaign. He was getting 
reports of people biting into the tough, green skin and saying it didn’t taste 
like a pear – they were known as “avocado pears” then. They produced leaflets 
and recipe booklets and took journalists to South Africa to visit growers. “We 
gradually started talking more and more about the health benefits.” He was also 
working with retailers to encourage them to display the produce better. “All 
those things worked pretty well in combination to build the market over the 
years.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08366a25fc86ee99a0e78c9c4a35dbfea358e287%2F0_0_3200_3200%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08366a25fc86ee99a0e78c9c4a35dbfea358e287%2F0_0_3200_3200%2F3200.jpg>
 Avo-toast. Photograph: Hisham Ibrahim/Getty Images 
The campaign was wound up in 2013 (although other countries have their own 
campaigns and PR agents, including ProHass, Peru’s hass avocado producers’ 
association). “We didn’t need to do any more, really. Avocados were selling 
about £13m [worth] in 1995 when we began, and by 2013 it was about £50m.” Is he 
some kind of evil genius? He laughs. “It’s one of those really nice 
opportunities to work on a really good product, with fantastic farmers and 
growers, that was ripe” – he pauses to apologise for the pun – “for finding a 
market over here.”

Millions have been spent on marketing avocados to us (Metcalfe thinks the 
total cost of the campaign was around £2m), and even if we’re not talking about 
fizzy drinks here, it’s worth keeping in mind the nudges that make us choose to 
buy what we do. “We usually say most fruit and vegetables are ‘super’, and we 
shouldn’t paint anything in one light because it can lead consumers to overeat 
certain food,” says Anna Daniels, a spokeswoman for the British Dietetic 
Association. Avocados are nutritious – they contain vitamins E and B, folate, 
potassium, fibre and some protein. They are, though, quite high in calories, 
about 190 calories/100g, because of their high fat content – even though most 
of that is monounsaturated fat, “one of the fats that is supposed to lower 
cholesterol and raise our ‘good’ cholesterol level”, says Daniels. Some large 
avocados, she says, “weigh about 200g, so that’s almost 400 calories and 40g of 
fat.”

The avocado industry has benefited from the decline in the idea that all fat 
is bad for us, although Daniels points out “saturated fat is still known to 
raise cholesterol. Avocado still contains some saturated fat – about 4g per 
100g.” Avocados are good for us, she says, “but what you should always be 
looking at is balance. With the rise of wellness bloggers and Instagram, 
everyone is adding avocado to their Nutribullet with their tablespoon of 
coconut oil.” Adding half an avocado to a smoothie adds about 140 calories. “If 
you are also adding milk and other fruits, the calories soon add up. It’s not a 
bad thing for people to be interested in their health, and a bit of avocado on 
wholegrain toast is a healthy snack, but it’s about making sure it doesn’t 
become an obsession.”

• This article was amended on 5 November 2015. An earlier version said a group 
of Californian farmers came up with the name “avocado” in the early 20th 
century. They adopted the name, but did not coin it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9405b8338f4b6f207b6bfbd52fbad49cacb4ab6%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9405b8338f4b6f207b6bfbd52fbad49cacb4ab6%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 An avocado, ripe for the picking. Photograph: Phil Klein/Corbis 
Chef Martin Morales’ view: ‘What took you so long?’

Britain has finally woken up to the creamy, nutty joy that is avocado. I’ve 
seen snap after snap of friends’ avo-toast popping up on my phone. I’ve watched 
avocado dishes fly out of the door of my Peruvian restaurants, Ceviche and 
Andina, in London. I just wonder: what took you so long?


I grew in the suburbs of Lima with an avocado tree in my garden. As a kid, I 
would take the rich pickings from our garden to my auntie Carmela’s house and 
she would show me what to do with them. I learned to use them in everything, 
sweet or savoury. Stuffed avocados, mashed avocados in a fried egg sandwich – 
actually, mashed avocado with anything. Avocado and chicken stew, avocado soup, 
avocado ceviche – even avocado ice-cream.

Our 10 best avocado recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/26/avocado-recipes-10-best> 
I’m not alone; most Peruvians are crazy about avocados – we grow the best in 
the world. We call thempaltas; when we say a person is palteado, we mean that 
person is bewildered, drunk with avo love. I took my passion forpaltas to my 
restaurants, where they are valued for their nutritional content as well as 
their deliciousness. Peruvian avocado provides nearly 20 important vitamins and 
minerals, plus monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats – the good fats. Which 
means almost guilt-free ice-cream, right?

How to buy and store

Look for an avocado that feels heavy for its size and that has not been bumped 
or bruised (Peruvian hass avocados have rough skins and a dark green colour 
that is almost black when ripe). Hold it in the palm of your hand and squeeze 
it gently. If it yields just a little, it’s ready to eat. If you’re still not 
sure, flick the stem with your finger and it should come off easily. Store 
avocados at room temperature or in a paper bag to help ripen, and check them 
daily. For quicker ripening, place in a paper bag of rice. Never refrigerate.

Avocado ice-cream
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd612d3a5611c4af0d1f9c02b4a1cbad4f31184f5%2F0_17_1242_745%2F1242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ripe%20and%20ready%3A%20how%20%E2%80%98evil%20geniuses%E2%80%99%20got%20us%20hooked%20on%20avocados&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Fnov%2F02%2Favocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd612d3a5611c4af0d1f9c02b4a1cbad4f31184f5%2F0_17_1242_745%2F1242.jpg>
 Avocado ice-cream(far right). Photograph: Paul Winch-Furness 
(Makes ½ litre)


250ml full-fat milk
100g caster sugar
1 vanilla pod, split lengthways, or 1 tsp vanilla extract
3 egg yolks
2 ripe avocados, diced
Juice of 2 limes
250ml double cream

Put the milk and half the sugar in a saucepan with the vanilla. Stir over low 
heat until the sugar has dissolved, then allow the milk to come almost to the 
boil. Take off the heat and leave to infuse until cooled.

Meanwhile, put the egg yolks in a bowl with the rest of the sugar and whisk 
until thick and mousse-like. Reheat the milk over a medium heat until it again 
almost comes to the boil, then pour over the whisked eggs and sugar. Stir, then 
pour the mixture back into the saucepan. Stir over a very gentle heat until it 
has thickened – it is the right consistency when you can draw a line with your 
finger across the back of a coated wooden spoon. Leave the vanilla pod in and 
chill the custard thoroughly.

Puree the avocado flesh and lime juice in a blender and stir into the custard. 
Strain the mixture and add the cream. Taste, add more sugar if necessary, pour 
into an ice-cream machine and churn until thick and frozen. If you don’t have 
an ice-cream machine, freeze in a large, shallow container, whisking every 30 
minutes until it is the right consistency. Garnish with chocolate and caramel 
shards and fresh mint.

Martin Morales is a global brand ambassador for avocadosfromperu.com 
<http://avocadosfromperu.com/>
 