
If technology companies have their way, the buzz of a drone will soon be as 
ubiquitous as the glint of a smartphone screen. Facebook aims to deliver 
internet access fromdrones high in the stratosphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/21/facebook-solar-powered-internet-plane-test-flight-aquila>
, Google wants to drop piping hot food at your door via quadcopter, and Amazon 
has just patented a shoulder-mounted drone to help police officers.


Today’s commercial drones carry lightweight radios and cameras, and pack 
powerful lithium ion batteries whose flight times last minutes rather than 
seconds.

But that is nothing compared to what could be coming soon. The change that 
Silicon Valley is working towards, and that many people fear, is drones 
harnessing the growing power of automation and artificial intelligence. When 
drones no longer need humans to control them, their usefulness will improve 
exponentially.

How drones are sparking a transport revolution – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/jun/25/drones-transport-revolution-dominos-amazon-deliveries-aid-drops>
Deliveries of small packages, medicines and takeaway food, all of which have 
already happened, are only the tip of the iceberg. Why put up scaffolding to 
paint your house when an intelligent drone could do it in a flash? Drones could 
swarm into agriculture, industry and sports. They could hunt for missing 
hikers, respond to burglar alarms, and act as mobile speed cameras. Uber thinks 
that autonomous drones will one day even transport people around cities.

What’s holding drones back?

Such is the hype. But for every tech company with its head in the clouds, 
there are problems to bring them back down to earth. “There are big technical 
challenges,” says Ryan Calo, a law professor at the University of Washington. 
“There’s a bunch of PhD theses that need to be completed before you can build a 
drone to autonomously police an area, find intruders, and use facial 
recognition to know who is meant to be there. Plus, having these things stay 
aloft beyond a few minutes is non-trivial.”

The problems get larger still when you think of a drone having to avoid 
obstacles: weather, birds, manned aircraft and all the other drones zipping 
around. Nasa isdeveloping 
<http://www.nasa.gov/feature/ames/first-steps-toward-drone-traffic-management> 
an automatic low altitude air traffic control system called UTM but is not due 
to complete its research until 2019. Any real-world deployment of such a 
network is still many years off.

In the meantime, there is growing tension between drone enthusiasts who want 
flying robots filling our skies, and some regulators, pilots, politicians and 
the public who are less than excited at the prospect. New rules this summer 
from America’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), calledPart 107 
<https://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.cfm?newsId=20516>, made it 
easier for commercial drone users to get airborne but stopped short of giving 
comprehensive guidance.

“Privacy is the biggest unanswered question,” says Arthur Holland Michel, 
director of the Centre for the Study of the Drone at Bard College, in New York. 
“The FAA has no hard rules relating to privacy or data collection and use, nor 
does it have any rules regarding overflights of private property.” While the 
federal government dithers, some American states and cities have passed their 
own laws, creating a patchwork of legislation that could frustrate future 
commercial services.

Drones and the transport revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/ng-interactive/2016/nov/16/drones-and-the-transport-revolution>
There is also uncertainty about when or even whether hi-tech operations, 
including flights without human operators, will be allowed. “At the end of the 
day, I just don’t know whether or not the FAA has the internal expertise to 
sign off on some of the more interesting uses,” says Calo.


Which country is leading on drones?

Little surprise, then, that some of the world’s biggest tech companies are 
testing their drones elsewhere. Last month, Amazon founder Jeff Bezos told a 
conference in Seattle: “We’re getting really good cooperation from the British 
equivalent of the FAA, the CAA [Civil Aviation Authority]. It’s incredible. 
It’s really cool.” Amazon isdeveloping and testing its Prime Air delivery drones
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/amazon-to-test-drone-delivery-uk-government>
 in the fields around Cambridge.

Despite the UK’s enthusiasm for Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>, and similarly permissive test 
flights elsewhere in Europe, Canada and Australia, “no single country stands 
out as being aeons ahead of everyone else,” says Holland Michel. “Though they 
may vary on the details, all countries are grappling with the same concerns. 
The deciding factor will be how flexible and responsive their regulations are.”

Public opinion will also play a role, especially in the use of controversial 
devices like police drones. Drones are already used by fire services and police 
forces to carry out aerial surveillance, but Amazon imagines a small personal 
drone acting as an all-seeing body-cam for the police.

Even armed drones are possible. “We are very likely to see drones equipped 
with less-than-lethal weapons, like sound cannons or tear gas canisters,” says 
Holland Michel. “The idea of weaponised drones will make a lot of people 
uncomfortable but if one of these drones saves lives, say by resolving an 
active shooter situation, that could change minds at both the regulatory and 
the popular level.”
 