
The popularity of the avocado in the US and rising prices for the “superfood” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/02/avocados-ripe-ready-evil-geniuses-hooked>
 are fuelling deforestation in central Mexico.

Mexican farmers can make much higher profits growing avocados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/avocados> than from most other crops 
and so are thinning out pine forests to plant young avocado trees.

Such is the size of the market that it has become a lucrative business for 
Mexico’s drug gangs, with extortion money paid to criminal organisations such as
Los Caballeros Templarios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/30/mexico-drug-war-tierra-caliente-calderon#cartel>
 (The Knights Templar) in Michoacán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/30/mexico-drug-war-tierra-caliente-calderon>
 – the state that produces most of Mexico’s avocados – estimated at 2bn pesos 
($109m) a year.

Avocado shortage fuels crime wave in New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/15/avocado-thieves-shortage-crime-fruit-black-market-new-zealand>
Mario Tapia Vargas, a researcher at Mexico’s National Institute for Forestry, 
Farming and Fisheries Research, told the Associated Press: “Even where they 
[the farmers] aren’t visibly cutting down forest, there are avocados growing 
underneath [the pine boughs], and sooner or later they’ll cut down the pines 
completely.”

Farmers in the mountains of Michoacán are engaged in a cat-and-mouse campaign 
to avoid authorities trying to prevent illegal deforestation.

There is also an impact on wildlife as the state’s forests contain much of the 
wintering grounds of themonarch butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/monarch-butterflies-migration-mexico-declines>
. A mature avocado orchard uses almost twice as much water as fairly dense 
forest, meaning less water reaches Michoacán’s crystalline mountain streams on 
which the forests and animals depend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Favocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6f06792b0a4c5f256ae7ea78f9b79faa51bcc4a%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20avocado%20prices%20fuelling%20illegal%20deforestation%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Favocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20avocado%20prices%20fuelling%20illegal%20deforestation%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Favocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6f06792b0a4c5f256ae7ea78f9b79faa51bcc4a%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
 A monarch butterfly sits on a branch at the Sierra Chincua Sanctuary, in the 
mountains of Michoacán. Photograph: Marco Ugarte/AP 
Greenpeace Mexico <http://www.greenpeace.org/mexico/es/> said people were 
likely to suffer too. “Beyond the displacement of forests and the effects on 
water retention, the high use of agricultural chemicals and the large volumes 
of wood needed to pack and ship avocados are other factors that could have 
negative effects on the area’s environment and the wellbeing of its 
inhabitants,” it said.

Between 2001 and 2010, avocado production in Michoacán tripled and exports 
rose tenfold, according to a report published in 2012 by Tapia Vargas’s 
institute. The report suggested the expansion caused loss of forest land of 
about 690 hectares (1,700 acres) a year between 2000 and 2010.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Favocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf58d9d911dd1d1a5a859529c62d55018081ee9%2F0_0_3763_2422%2F3763.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20avocado%20prices%20fuelling%20illegal%20deforestation%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Favocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20avocado%20prices%20fuelling%20illegal%20deforestation%20in%20Mexico&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Favocado-illegal-deforestation-mexico-pine-forests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cf58d9d911dd1d1a5a859529c62d55018081ee9%2F0_0_3763_2422%2F3763.jpg>
 Workers with crates of avocados at a market in Mexico City. Photograph: Nick 
Wagner/AP 
While trees take seven years to reach maturity, if each bears 100 avocados a 
year – a fairly low yield – farmers can make as much as $500,000 (£383,000) 
annually from the plot. Avocado prices jumped from about 86 cents in January to 
about $1.10 in July, partly because of weak seasonal supply fromMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>.

Farmers who refuse to cut gangs into the profits face retribution – two had 
theiravocado packing plants burned to the ground 
<http://www.latintimes.com/are-avocados-new-blood-diamond-learn-violent-secret-behind-michoacans-mexican-avocado-market-149408>
 last April for refusing to pay.

On 31 July, federal police in Morelia, the Michoacán state capital, detained 
13 people and seized two avocado plants and two vehicles that were being used 
to turn a recently deforested plot into an orchard. Police said 260 pine trees 
and 87 firs had been cut down on a 4.7-hectare plot to make room for 1,320 
avocado saplings.

Associated Press contributed to this report
 