
At least 10 people have died in roadside bombings in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> as the US secretary of state, 
John Kerry, is due to meet the country's presidential candidates for a second 
day in an effort to resolve the crisis surrounding its elections.

Eight people, including five women, were killed in the southern Kandahar 
province when a bomb destroyed their vehicle. A spokesman for the provincial 
governor blamed theTaliban <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taliban> for the 
blast, which also injured two children.

Another bomb struck a car in Jalalabad in the eastern Nangarhar province, 
killing a police officer and a civilian.

The Taliban have increased their activities in a bid to undermine the 
western-backed government as foreign troops prepare to leave Afghanistan by the 
end of the year.

Kerry is in Kabul to try to defuse the crisis over the runoff election that 
will select a successor to President Hamid Karzai. He is trying to strike an 
agreement that is acceptable to both candidates that would allow the United 
Nations to audit last month's vote, which has been plagued by fraud allegations.

The US fears the Taliban could be empowered if no process is found to declare 
either the former finance minister Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai or the former foreign 
ministerAbdullah Abdullah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdullah-abdullah> 
as the winner.

Preliminary results of the runoff election, released earlier this week against 
US wishes, suggested strong backing by voters for Ghani, a former World Bank 
economist, who trailed significantly behind Abdullah in first-round voting.

Abdullah, a top leader of the Northern Alliance that battled the Taliban 
before the US-led invasion in 2001, has claimed there was major vote-rigging. 
He was runner-up to Karzai in a fraud-riddled 2009 presidential vote before he 
pulled out of that runoff, and many of his supporters fear he will be cheated 
for a second time.

Kerry's hastily arranged visit appears to have prevented both candidates from 
declaring victory and dampened calls from Abdullah's supporters, who include 
powerful warlords, to form a "parallel government".

In a series of meetings on Friday that continued into the night, Kerry said 
Washington was not taking sides but wanted to create a process that ensured 
Afghanistan's next leader was viewed as legitimate. "But I can't tell you 
that's an automatic at this point," he said.

The talks are focused on the details of a UN audit and stressing that the new 
president must bridge Afghanistan's many ethnic and regional divides. However, 
one US official said only the "beginnings of conversations" had taken place and 
Ghani and Abdullah differed privately on the fine points of the audit proposal.

Both candidates have said they would sign a bilateral security pact with 
Washington, which says it needs the legal guarantees in order to keep about 
10,000 troops in Afghanistan after most US forces withdraw over the next five 
months.

If no clear leader emerges, the US may have to pull out all its troops â€“ a 
move it opposes after the chaos that resulted after doing just that in Iraq 
only three years ago.

Karzai has refused to sign a US-Afghan agreement, leaving the matter to the 
new president.
 