
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/video/2012/jul/15/beach-volleyball-critics-view-olympics-video?mobile-redirect=false>

It is 9am on a Thursday morning, pouring with rain and unseasonably cold, and 
I'm standing outside at the University of Bath'ssports training village 
<http://www.teambath.com/facilities/our-facilities/sports-training-village/>, 
watching theBritish women's Olympic beach volleyball team 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2012/jul/02/london-2012-beach-volleyball>. 
What they're doing looks as relentless and numbing as the rain: the same shots 
practised over and over again.

Up close, it's hard not to be struck by the speed with which Shauna Mullin and 
Zara Dampney move; by the weird, almost telepathic communication that seems to 
exist between them – and by the ferocity with which they hit the ball, which 
seems at odds with the game's reputation as the kind of wafty sport people play 
on holiday.

If you're me, indeed, it's hard not to be struck by the ball itself, which at 
one juncture is mis-hit in my direction. I see it coming at high speed and – 
displaying once more the natural athleticism that made me so popular at school 
when teams were being picked – shout "Jesus Christ!" before running in the 
opposite direction. Mullin and Dampney take time out of their punishing 
pre-Olympic schedule to exchange a glance that seems to say: "What's that berk 
doing here?"

It's a good question. The short answer is I'm a rock critic and, on some 
levels,beach volleyball 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/interactive/2012/mar/01/london-2012-olympics-beach-volleyball-interactive>
 is considered to have a few things in common with rock'n'roll. It's widely 
thought of as glamorous, a kind of lifestyle accessory as much as a sport: the 
website ofBeach Volleyball UK Ltd <http://www.beach-volleyball.co.uk/> loads up 
under the banner headline: "Fun! Music! Party! Glamour! Lifestyle!"

I can't see the relevance of any of those things in the pouring rain in Bath – 
unless by "lifestyle" you mean the team's relentless dedication to their sport, 
which (in combination with a lack of indoor training facilities in Britain) 
means they get, at Mullin's estimation, about "two or three weeks off a year". 
The rest of the time they're travelling around together, "in the same hotel 
room, on the court together, in the gym together … it's like a marriage. Our 
psychologist helps us with it."

I suppose if you were looking for parallels with rock music, their life sounds 
not unlike that of a mid-level touring band, endlessly slogging around the 
globe, albeit without the distractions of drugs and booze and groupies – the 
very things I've always suspected make life in a mid-level touring band 
something other than misery incarnate.

But there's another sense in which Britain's women's beach volleyball team 
reminds me of the world of music: like one of those hyped firework bands, 
they've had an enormous amount of publicity, yet nevertheless feel 
misunderstood by the press and public.

In the 21st century, you would have thought humanity might have got over the 
novelty value of seeing women in swimsuits, but apparently not. At one 
juncture, Dampney and Mullin gave up doing interviews altogether, so fed up 
were they of being asked about bikinis and buttocks.

In Britain, a weird kind of leering licentiousness has attached itself to the 
sport: telling people you're going to meet a women's beach volleyball team has 
the same effect that telling them you were going to meet a deputation of 
Swedish au-pairs or French maids would once have done: it brings out their inner
Sid James <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kBUMCasGC5c&feature=related>.

In Brazil or the US, Mullin says, they don't go in for all the phwoooar-ing 
over women's beach volleyball. It's more established, so no one thinks of it as 
the punchline of a joke, or an unmissable opportunity for men to ogle women's 
bums masquerading as a sport.

"But we can't really let it aggravate us," says Mullin. "What we're doing is 
trying to show people it's more than just bikinis. We work really hard, so 
we're trying to get people to see that side of it as well."

I leave them to it. They have another session with their psychologist, then 
weight training. But a few weeks later I see them again, on the front cover of 
a Sunday newspaper's style magazine. The headline is "Bottoms up", and the 
focus of the photo is Dampney's buttocks, clad in a £185 bikini. I sigh on 
their behalf, then think, well, you posed for the photos. Perhaps they felt 
they deserved a quick injection of glamour after all.

Shauna Mullin's cultural life

Film: Twister ("Don't laugh ...")

Book: Sundowners by Leslie Loko

Music: Florence and the Machine, the Goo-Goo Dolls

Musical: Wicked
 