
Adele <https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> – 25

There’s still no firm release date for the follow-up to the biggest-selling 
album of the 21st century, but rumours persist that it’s arriving in November – 
although, according to producer Naughty Boy, some record labels cleared their 
schedules for September in the belief that the album was due then, not wanting 
their own releases to be overshadowed. Depending on which story you believe, it 
may or may not launch a new, country-influenced direction, and its supporting 
cast may or may not include producer Dangermouse, songwriter Max Martin, Phil 
Collins – yes, that Phil Collins – Ryan Tedder of One Republic, Pharrell and 
acclaimed Canadian singer-songwriter Tobias Jesso Jr.

Florence + the Machine <http://florenceandthemachine.net/#home>

Looking to sustain the momentum of her career-defining summer is Florence 
Welch, who performs her first full UK headline tour in three years. In spite of 
her defaultbump up the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/25/florence-and-the-machine-i-funned-myself-out>
 as a result of Dave Grohl’s broken leg, the singer’s Glastonbury headline 
debut was met with huge acclaim, while her third album, How Big, How Blue, How 
Beautiful, scored both Billboard and UK No 1s. Beginning in Belfast, the tour 
culminates with four dates at Alexandra Palace, one of London’s most 
resplendent venues, but a 10th of the size of the festival stages she’s been 
headlining this summer.

 * SSE Arena <http://www.ssearena.co.uk/>, Belfast, 9 September (0844 815 
0815),then touring <http://florenceandthemachine.net/#live>.

David Gilmour <http://www.davidgilmour.com/rattlethatlock/> – Rattle That Lock/
Roger Waters The Wall <http://rogerwatersthewall.com/>

With all but the most dementedly optimistic Pink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd> fan disabused of the idea that 
the band are still a going concern, or that some kind of cheery rapprochement 
between its former main protagonists is on the cards, attention shifts to their 
solo careers. David Gilmour’s follow-up to 2006’s chart-topping On an Island 
sees the guitarist branching out in some fairly unexpected musical directions – 
not least jazz on The Girl in the Yellow Dress and ruminations on the death of 
Floyd keyboard player Richard Wright. Roger Waters’ fourth attempt at 
committing The Wall to celluloid, meanwhile, intercuts footage from his 
record-breaking 2010-13 tour with a road movie following Waters as he visits 
the Italian war memorial that bears his late father’s name.

 * Rattle That Lock is released on 18 September; Roger Waters The Wall 
<http://rogerwatersthewall.com/>, 25 September Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoPU8XJcA__k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoPU8XJcA__k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoPU8XJcA__k&media=>

Lana del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/14/lana-del-rey-releases-honeymoon-new-song>
–Honeymoon



Back at the start of the year, Lana del Rey told Billboard her next album 
would be “very different” to 2014’s doomy Ultraviolence. The evidence, from 
what we’ve heard so far, doesn’t entirely back that up: the title track is a 
six-minute piece of string-drenched noir, whereas Terrence Loves You luxuriates 
in a stylish, jazz-tinged backdrop. The woozy High by the Beach does glide 
along over a trap-influenced beat, but sounds as drugged and disorientated as 
the title implies. Whether or not this is the record to return Lana to her 
chart-owning peak remains to be seen, but whatever journey she takes is likely 
to be a beguiling one.


 * Honeymoon, 18 September.

One Direction <https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction>

From March 2016, pop phenomenon One Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> are officially on a break; 
taking a year-long hiatus, a solo career-geared stopgap, a brief breather. To 
the more cynical purveyor, however, this 12-month absence signals something a 
little more permanent: the end of Simon Cowell’s most globally adored and 
fiscally rewarding product to date. The band, who are currently working on 
their fifth studio album, have denied rumours that their On the Road stadium 
tour is their last hurrah, but it’s probably worth a watch while you still can. 
At least to stock up on the soon-to-be-profitable merch.

 * O2 Arena <http://www.theo2.co.uk/>, London, 24 September (0844 824 4824), 
then touring <http://onedirectionmusic.com/tour>.

Fetty Wap – Fetty Wap
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441730896704%2F98ec5d76-aade-42e4-80b5-e0629ef90d1f-895x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441730896704%2F98ec5d76-aade-42e4-80b5-e0629ef90d1f-895x1020.jpeg>
 Fetty Wap … rap’s most revered Photograph: PR 
At the start of 2015, no one could have predicted that Fetty Wap’s Trap Queen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_kF4zLNKio>, an oddly touching tale of a 
couple cooking up crack, would become the crossover track of the summer. Thanks 
to his burgeoning online fanbase, the New Jersey MC-turned-singer, with his 
fluctuating, robotic vocals and striking appearance (he was born with glaucoma 
in his left eye) has gone from relative unknown to rap’s most revered – finding 
fans in Kanye, who called Trap Queen his “favourite song” and Taylor Swift, who 
invited him on stage during her 1989 tour. All that’s left to do is follow up 
the frenzied hype and multi-platinum-selling single with his self-titled 
full-length debut.

 * Fetty Wap, 25 September. 
Deafheaven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/25/deafheaven-review-roaring-love-for-us-black-metal-populists>
– New Bermuda

The San Franciscans’ last album, Sunbather, became the crossover metal album 
of 2013, satisfying the metalheads with blastbeats and the kind of guttural 
vocals that made it sound like singer George Clarke was in urgent need of 
hernia surgery, but winning acclaim from outside metal’s hermetically sealed 
world because its guitars harked back to shoegaze and beyond that to My Bloody 
Valentine and the Cocteau Twins. Their third album, New Bermuda, will see 
whether they can expand further, or whether it’s back to the fanbase.

 * New Bermuda, 2 October. 
John Grant <https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-grant> – Grey Tickles, 
Black Pressure

The title of John Grant’s third solo album requires linguistic talent to 
translate. The first half is apparently a direct Icelandic translation of 
“midlife crisis”, whereas the latter means “nightmare” in Turkish. All of which 
means we can expect more of the same cheery stuff from the 48-year-old. Indeed, 
Grey Tickles, Black Pressure – written in Iceland, recorded in Texas with St 
Vincent producer John Congleton – sees Grant dissecting once more his tortured 
attitudes towards relationships and his own self-esteem. The title track even 
deals with the HIV diagnosis he revealed in 2012, with typically dark humour: 
“There are children who have cancer/And so all bets are off/’cause I can’t 
compete with that.”According to a recent interview with the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/30/how-iceland-save-john-grant>, 
though, the singer has recently found love, so that must surely be in there 
somewhere, too.


 * Grey Tickles, Black Pressure, 2 October. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fwiz-khalifa%2Fsee-you-again-feat-charlie-puth-music-video%2F2386635%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fwiz-khalifa%2Fsee-you-again-feat-charlie-puth-music-video%2F2386635%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fwiz-khalifa%2Fsee-you-again-feat-charlie-puth-music-video%2F2386635%2F&media=>
A$AP Rocky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/02/asap-rocky-hanging-out-with-rod-stewart-interview>
 andWiz Khalifa <https://www.theguardian.com/music/wiz-khalifa>

The two rappers have both had big years: A$AP’s second album, At. Long. Last. 
A$AP, was released in May to critical acclaim, whereasKhalifa’s song with 
Charlie Puth, See You Again <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RgKAFK5djSk>, was 
a massive global hit, smashing streaming records on Spotify. Will their 
combined magic, as they set out together for five UK dates, produce one of 
2015’s best hip-hop shows?

 * Capital FM Arena, Nottingham <https://capitalfmarena.com/Online/>, 13 
October (0843 373 3000),then touring <http://www.asapmob.com/tour/>.

Miguel <http://www.migueltour.com/>

What can you expect from a Miguel show when he arrives for three dates in 
October? The self-styled R&B outsider has won critical plaudits for doing 
things differently on record – latest album Wildheart sees him throwing rock 
and psychedelia into the mix, Prince-style – and he takes a similarly unique 
approach with his live shows. The last time he was in the UK, the audience were 
treated to a 10-minute list of sex metaphors that would make R Kelly blush and, 
er, a van outside serving free Miguel-branded coffee. Not your average soul 
showman then.


 * O2 Academy Brixton <http://www.o2academybrixton.co.uk/>, London, 13 October 
(0844 477 2000),then touring <http://www.migueltour.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441730828483%2F6645fb9a-7987-4917-95a6-d5667ebb18b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441730828483%2F6645fb9a-7987-4917-95a6-d5667ebb18b3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Deerhunter … return to lo-fi Photograph: PR 
Deerhunter <https://www.theguardian.com/music/deerhunter> – Fading Frontier

Following 2013’s awkward and abrasive Monomania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/09/deerhunter-monomania-review> 
release, the influential Atlantan alt-rock group return to the lo-fi ambience 
of their former records. It’s been a tumultuous time for the band’s frontman 
Bradford Cox, who in the intervening years made his acting debut in Dallas 
Buyers Club and was hospitalised after a debilitating car crash. Yet Fading 
Frontier remains a lush, textured collection of expansive compositions, 
recorded in their hometown of Georgia with long-time producer Ben Allen. The 
dream-like soundscapes are further enhanced by the handiwork of Broadcast’s 
James Cargill and Stereolab’s Tim Gane, who both contribute to the record’s 
psychedelic bliss.

 * Fading Frontier, 16 October. 
Jean-Michel Jarre – Electronica 1: The Time Machine

Understatement is an alien concept to the French electronic-music pioneer, 
this being a man who doesn’t play venues so much as entire geographical 
locations – the Pyramids, Docklands, and so on. His first album for eight years 
doesn’t skimp on the grandiosity, with a list of special guests that sounds 
like he set his iTunes to shuffle and picked the first names to come up – 
Tangerine Dream, Little Boots, Pete Townshend, M83, Lang Lang, Fuck Buttons, 
Boys Noize. And if that’s not enough, Electronica 1: The Time Machine will be 
followed by a second volume next year. God only knows who’s going to be on that 
one.

 * Electronica 1: The Time Machine, 16 October. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dky9Ro9pP2gc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dky9Ro9pP2gc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dky9Ro9pP2gc&media=>
Joanna Newsom <https://www.theguardian.com/music/joanna-newsom> – Divers

Five years on from her acclaimed triple album Have One on Me, Joanna Newsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joanna-newsom> has trailed its Steve 
Albini-co-produced follow-up with a video of herself skipping through the 
winter streets of New York, miming to single Sapokanikan: nearly six minutes of 
music named after the Native American land that eventually became Greenwich 
Village. It shifts in style from vaudevillian to ethereal, taking in references 
to Shelley’s Ozymandias and John Purroy Mitchel, mayor of New York between 1914 
and 1917. The rest of the album, she has suggested, is “different from anything 
I’ve done before”. 

 * Divers, 23 October. 
U2 <http://www.u2.com/tour>

It’s less than a year since Bono was involved in a pretty brutal cycling 
accident that left him needing surgery for a spinal injury. He was lucky to be 
able to walk again, and recently said that he doubts he’ll ever play guitar 
again – all of which makes it something of a minor miracle thatU2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/u2> are back on the road. The Irish band 
arrive in the UK for six nights at London’s O2 Arena and a couple more in 
Glasgow, with their iNNOCENCE + eXPERIENCE show billed as being more “intimate” 
than their previous 360° Tour – although it still includes three stages and a 
96ft-long video screen that the band can perform inside.

 * O2 Arena <http://www.theo2.co.uk/>, London, 25 October-3 November (0844 824 
4824);SSE Hydro <http://www.thessehydro.com/>, Glasgow, 6-7 November (0844 395 
4000).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441702189215%2Fb8dac60c-09af-4b18-bc29-605fa6041a64-2060x1399.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441702189215%2Fb8dac60c-09af-4b18-bc29-605fa6041a64-2060x1399.jpeg>
 Susanne Sundfør: superstar in Norway. Photograph: Sofia Fredricks Sprung 
Susanne Sundfør <http://susannesundfor.com/>

Five “proper” albums into her career and Susanne Sundfør finds herself a 
superstar at home in Norway and fighting for traction elsewhere. That seems to 
be slowly changing. This year’s Ten Love Songs was a delicious record: richly 
melodic, but also cunningly experimental and with songcraft to die for. Each 
time she returns to the UK, the venues get a little bigger. At this rate, 
she’ll be filling the O2 Arena by 2034.

 * The Haunt <http://www.thehauntbrighton.co.uk/>, Brighton, 26 October, then 
touring <http://susannesundfor.com/>. 
Giorgio Moroder
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441730764210%2Fea70288c-4066-4331-9829-e6cd4bbbd615-917x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rock%20and%20pop%3A%20the%20biggest%20albums%20and%20tours%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Frock-pop-albums-tours-autumn-arts-preview-2015-adele-one-direction-lana-del-rey-asap-rocky-wiz-khalifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441730764210%2Fea70288c-4066-4331-9829-e6cd4bbbd615-917x1020.jpeg>
 DJ Giorgio Moroder. Photograph: EPA 
Given his influence over latter-day dance music, it was to be expected that 
Giorgio Moroder would eventually return to making records after years of 
near-silence: his comeback album, Déjà Vu, featured Kylie Minogue and Britney 
Spears among its cast, although its contents never threatened to overshadow the 
groundbreaking music he’d made in the 70s and 80s. But perhaps the most 
improbable aspect of Moroder’s indian summer has been his adoption of the role 
of DJ, aged 75. What started out as a one-off performance for the Red Bull 
Music Academy has turned into an ongoing career: expect his old hits and more 
recent remixes. 

 * Koko <http://www.koko.uk.com/>, London, 6 November. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fthe-1975%2Fthe-city-music-video%2F1872156%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fthe-1975%2Fthe-city-music-video%2F1872156%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Fthe-1975%2Fthe-city-music-video%2F1872156%2F&media=>
The 1975

So big have the 1975 become that a series of shows that sees them playing 
4,500-capacity venues like the Brighton Centre and the Hammersmith Apollo is 
being presented as a back-to-the-clubs outing. These shows will be the first 
chance for their fervent fanbase to hear whether songs from their forthcoming 
second album will maintain the upward trajectory.

 * Liverpool Su Mountford Hall 
<http://www.ticketmaster.co.uk/Liverpool-Su-Mountford-Hall-tickets-Liverpool/venue/255931>
, 9 November,then touring <http://the1975.com/tour>. 
Bellowhead <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bellowhead>

It’s testament to the success of the self-styled “greatest live act in 
Britain” that their farewell tour – occasioned by singer Jon Boden’s decision 
to quit the band – takes place in two stages: the second takes place in April 
and May of next year, culminating in a performance at the Oxford Town Hall, the 
venue where the folk collective staged their first gig. The initial run of 
farewell shows stretches through the second half of November. 

 * Princess theatre 
<http://www.atgtickets.com/venues/princess-theatre-torquay/>, Torquay, 14 
November,then touring <http://www.bellowhead.co.uk/live.html>.  