
Two enduring loves span the life of French choreographer Roland Petit, who 
died yesterday at the age of 87: one was dance, the other was a dancer,Renée 
("Zizi") Jeanmaire <http://www.ballerinagallery.com/jeanmaire.htm>. He 
encountered them both at the age of nine, when he entered the Paris Opera 
Ballet School in 1933; Jeanmaire, also nine, was a student there.

Petit joined the Paris Opera Ballet at the age of 16, but found the company 
"musty" and left in 1944. The rest of the decade was decisive for him. In 1945, 
just 21 years old, he formedLes Ballets des Champs-Elysées 
<http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ballets_des_Champs-%C3%89lys%C3%A9es> with Boris 
Kochno 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/12/11/arts/boris-kochno-86-a-ballet-director-and-scenarist.html>
 – the former secretary and artistic associate ofSerge Diaghilev 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2009/dec/09/dance-diaghilev-ballets-russes> – 
and created some of the works for which he is still remembered today, including
Les Forains <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uhJjFdmFn8c> (1945) and especially 
Le Jeune Homme et La Mort <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0ND-ByStgM> (1946), 
a piece of postwar existential angst with a libretto byJean Cocteau 
<http://www.netcomuk.co.uk/~lenin/JeanCocteau.html> about a suicidal artist and 
the fatally beautiful woman who is both love and death. First performed by the 
exceptional dancer Jean Babilée, it was Petit's first international hit, and 
later danced by bothRudolf Nureyev <http://www.nureyev.org/> and Mikhail 
Baryshnikov <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000864/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfH4FXiSbK7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfH4FXiSbK7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfH4FXiSbK7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The company's 1946 visit to London caused a sensation, and was a moment of 
inspiration for such lifelong dance critics as Clement Crisp and Clive Barnes 
(who remembers the revelation of seeing the chic, bracing French company 
sandwiched between "two helpings of well-meaning British stodge 
<http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m1083/is_n5_v69/ai_16885353/>"). 
Britain's foremost ballerina,Margot Fonteyn 
<http://www.ballet.co.uk/old/legend_js_margot_fonteyn.htm>, went to France in 
1948 to perform with Petit's newly founded company Les Ballets de Paris, and 
they had a brief but romantic affair. (In Paris, they swam naked across the 
Seine, and later, when his company was stranded in London, she secretly paid 
for their return home; he, meanwhile, persuaded her to have a nose job). But 
the liaison ended and Petit stayed with his first love, Jeanmaire (they married 
in 1954). "It was because of [the Fonteyn affair]," recalled Jeanmaire later, 
"that afterwards I told him: 'We go to London, and I want a big creation for 
me. Otherwise, I will leave.'"

That creation turned out to be Petit's biggest success, Carmen 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/4715779/Not-Giselle-but-Carmen.html> 
(1949), which introduced a new kind of ballet heroine. In Carmen, Jeanmaire was 
fierce, sexual, wilful – hair cropped boyishly close, hips jutting, legs 
lengthened by the shortness of her tunic – and Petit's choreography was charged 
with eroticised combat. Its London premiere caused an even bigger sensation 
than Petit's first visit, audiences finding it thrillingly risqué. You can see 
in this laterrecording of Petit and Jeanmaire 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I3tXfWMvM-U> why British choreographer 
Frederick Ashton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2010/mar/02/dance-frederick-ashton>, fresh 
from staging The Sleeping Beauty for the Royal Ballet, worried he might be out 
of date.

Despite his reception, Petit was rarely invited to Britain again. He was, 
perhaps, too un-British. In any case, worldwide success beckoned. Invited to 
America, he worked on several musical films in the 1950s, includingHans 
Christian Andersen <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0044685/> (1952), Anything Goes 
<http://www.dvdtalk.com/dvdsavant/s1760goes.html> (1955) – both featuring 
Jeanmaire – and also onDaddy Long Legs <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0047969/> 
andThe Glass Slipper <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048124/>, both from 1955 and 
featuring another chic, gamine French dancer,Leslie Caron 
<http://www.lesliecaron.com/>, who had danced with Petit in Les Ballets des 
Champs-Elysées.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFtFIF4zncuE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFtFIF4zncuE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FFtFIF4zncuE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Influenced by the Hollywood musical, on his return to France Petit began to 
choreograph in commercial theatre alongside his work on the ballet stage, 
melding ballet, jazz and popular song, American pizzazz with French chic and 
sophistry. He showcased Jeanmaire's stockinged pins and insouciant charm in 
shows such as La Revue (1961), with its famousMon Truc en Plumes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xtIrhTpxhog> number.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGu_uVOBq17Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGu_uVOBq17Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGu_uVOBq17Y%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Petit continued to span high and popular culture. On one hand, he created 
ballets for his own and other international companies, and was briefly director 
of the Paris Opera Ballet in 1970. On the other, he staged revues, and in 1970 
bought the Casino de Paris. ("We're theatre people,"he explained to Time 
magazine <http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,909465,00.html>, "so 
instead of hunting up an ordinary gift, I decided to offer my wife the Casino 
de Paris.") There, he produced classy cabarets with costumes by the likes ofErté
 <http://www.artexpertswebsite.com/pages/artists/erte.php> and Yves Saint 
Laurent, and music byMichel Legrand 
<http://www.michellegrandofficial.com/biography>, Serge Gainsbourg 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2006/apr/14/7> and others – and with Zizi, 
as ever, the star attraction.

The Casino de Paris venture didn't break even, and closed in 1975. But by 
1972, Petit was already heading theBallet de Marseille 
<http://www.ballet-de-marseille.com/> – again mixing avant-garde experiment, 
classical choreography and commercial nous, for example with his 1972Pink Floyd 
Ballet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WVEa9dapJvM>, a spaced-out hybrid 
between a ballet and a live rock concert, featuring the Floyd themselves.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fux_ZfsNjcOg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fux_ZfsNjcOg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fux_ZfsNjcOg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Petit remained with Ballet de Marseille until 1998, creating numerous ballets 
includingMa Pavlova 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x1k3l1_ma-pavlova-meditation-de-thais_creation>
 (1986), Le Guépard (1995) andLe Lac des Cygnes et Ses Maléfices 
<http://www.kirov.com/hstories/altyroland/newswabsynop.html> (1998, a Swan Lake 
with male swans), as well as making works for other companies such as the Paris 
Opera Ballet andAmerican Ballet Theatre <http://www.abt.org/>, and special 
vehicles for star dancers such as Maya Plisetskaya (La Rose Malade 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ku_rFPKm5ao&feature=related>, 1973) and Natalia 
Makarova <http://www.ballerinagallery.com/makarova.htm> (The Blue Angel, 1985).

After Marseille, Petit moved to Geneva, but continued to create and restage 
works across the world – Europe, America, Russia, Japan, China – until the end 
of his life. Even Britain, which has seen scarcely any of his works for 
decades, is finally to see an all-Petit programme, presented byEnglish National 
Ballet <http://www.ballet.org.uk/> later this month at the London Coliseum – 
just too late, it now turns out, to welcome him back to the city where he first 
met international success.

• English National Ballet perform Roland Petit's Carmen, Le Jeune Homme et la 
Mort and L'Arlésienne 
<http://www.eno.org/see-whats-on/productions/production-page.php?&itemid=1300> 
at the London Coliseum, 21-24 July 2011.
 