
“Noel Gallagher says there’s no feeling in the world like throwing a TV out of 
a hotel window.” As he says these words, Royal Blood’s singer and bassist, Mike 
Kerr, is reclining on a bed in a Manchester hotel room. He doesn’t get up to 
defenestrate the television, though. For a start, there isn’t space. He’s 
joined by his bandmate, drummer Ben Thatcher. I’m sitting at the side of the 
bed, and their tour manager is crouched in a corner of the small room, which is 
serving as their dressing room before they support the Pixies at a big 
city-centre outdoor show.

There’s also the fact that Kerr simply isn’t that way inclined. “I think it’s 
important to have fun,” he explains, “but you don’t want to be a dickhead. You 
don’t want to be a pain in the arse when some poor woman’s going to have to 
come in and clean up your room. There’s a moral aspect to it as well. I think 
the most badass thing you can do is write great songs and put on a great show.” 
He pauses, aware of how Pollyannaish he is sounding. “That’svery Jack Black 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_lK4cX5xGiQ>, isn’t it? ‘A true rock show 
changed the world!’”

Royal Blood aren’t very rock’n’roll off the stage, then. So it’s a good job 
they compensate on it, even if there are only two of them. Inevitably, given 
their lineup, they play bluesy hard rock, Kerr’s bass configured through pedals 
and amps to sound more like a guitar, and Thatcher drumming brutally but with 
surprising suppleness. Even in the early evening, at someone else’s gig, they 
have fans in their T-shirts singing along at the front, and they’re 
invigoratingly powerful, presenting a show that has been honed by scores of 
support slots – so many, in fact, that they’ve barely headlined any shows of 
their own.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ56o4DrYRWU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ56o4DrYRWU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ56o4DrYRWU&media=>
 Royal Blood’s Figure it Out for Guardian Sessions. 
The pair have known each other since their teens, playing in bands together 
and separately on the south coast. One of Kerr’s bands,Hunting the Minotaur 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t_wKhMX6P_M>, “felt like it was getting serious 
at one point”, but nothing truly serious ever happened until Kerr returned home 
from nine months living in Australia in 2013, and was met at the airport by 
Thatcher. “I had the bass sound, and I had a few song ideas,” he says. “So when 
I came back and Ben picked me up, it wasn’t a big deal for me to ask him to 
start a band with me. It was just a naive, normal thing. ‘Do you want to start 
a band?’ ‘All right.’”

They arranged a rehearsal for the next day, and a day later they played their 
first gig. “It was just in a local bar, to our friends, so it was an 
environment where there was no pressure, and I think after that show it was 
very clear people were enjoying what was going on as much as we were,” Kerr 
says.

And then they disappeared, off to rehearse properly, to write more songs, 
before emerging seemingly fully formed in the summer of 2013, whenArctic Monkeys
 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcticmonkeys> drummer Matt Helders wore a 
Royal Blood T-shirt during the Monkeys’ headlining slot at Glastonbury. Their 
songs started getting played on Radio 1, bands began taking them on tour, the 
major label deal was signed, and now their debut album is due for release. And 
they didn’t even play headline sets to fans who had definitely come to see 
Royal Blood until February. “That was the weirdest feeling,” Kerr says. “Going 
to places you’ve never been to or played, and there’s 200 people there. That 
concept is pretty mindblowing. Seeing that develop over this year has been 
wild. Especially when you’re in Australia or LA. That’s even more freaky. 
Places I’ve always wanted to go, and it’s almost like there’s this party 
waiting for you at the other end.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Froyal-blood%2Fcome-on-over-music-video%2F2211127%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Froyal-blood%2Fcome-on-over-music-video%2F2211127%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Froyal-blood%2Fcome-on-over-music-video%2F2211127%2F&media=>
 Little Monster by Royal Blood. 
It should be said at this point that the rapidity of their rise, and the 
wholehearted support they’ve received from Arctic Monkeys may have something to 
do with their sharing management with the band. But, equally, they’ve worked 
incessantly to take advantage of their opportunities. “We don’t often get a day 
off,” Thatcher says. “When we do, we wash our clothes.”

“I looked at our new diary this morning,” Kerr adds, “and I had to physically 
clench my bum to stop myself from defecating.”

Perhaps the oddest thing, though, about Thatcher and Kerr comprising such a 
hotly tipped British rock band is that the lack of rock’n’roll doesn’t just 
extend to their refusal to demolish hotel rooms. Look at theRoyal Blood Twitter 
feed <https://twitter.com/royalblooduk> and you’ll see shoutouts to all sorts 
of artists they love, none of whom have very much to do with rock. And many of 
their early loves were distinctly unrocking. “My favourite albums were by the 
Spice Girls – I got Spiceworld on video,” Thatcher remembers, “and the 
Backstreet Boys.” Kerr recalls going to see Goldfrapp when he was 15. “I still 
love Goldfrapp,” he says. “I remember being the only straight person there and 
thinking: ‘Do only gay people go to gigs?’”

The one person they wish they could most closely emulate, however, is 
indisputably rock: Dave Grohl.

“Not only does he make the music he wants to make, every angle is how he wants 
to do it,” Kerr says. “It gives no excuse for rockstardom and arrogance – he’s 
a good all-round role model and he could do both our jobs in our band very 
competently.”

“And manage it and record it,” Thatcher adds. “What a bastard.”

• The single Figure It Out is released on Warner Bros, followed by the album 
Royal Blood on 25 August
 