
In television scheduling, as in battle, surprising the opposition is a smart 
tactic. And commercial rivals can surely not have been expecting the BBC to go 
a whole 12 months early with a programme to mark December’s 80th anniversary of 
the abdication of King Edward VIII in December 1936, withRoyal Wives at War 
(Friday, 9pm, BBC2.)


As television about the royals has historically been the genre – apart from 
shows featuring sex or politics – most likely to provoke newspaper 
controversies, the aim of the plan, apart from attempting to catch ITV and 
Channel 4 unawares, may also have been to sneak past journalists at a time when 
they are still blurredly returning to work: especially as the story of the 
monarch who gave up his throne for his married American mistress involves 
royalty, sex and politics.

If so, the strategy has failed. Allegations that Lady Colin Campbell defames 
the reputation of the late Queen Mother – whose husband, George VI, gained the 
throne but probably shortened his life as a result of his brother’s dissolution 
– have become the first “What is the BBC thinking of?”media row of 2016 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3382347/Outrage-BBC2-claims-Queen-Mum-jealous-Simpson-loved-Edward-VIII.html>
, distracting from the corporation’s notable victory in having got away with 
putting so much sex intoWar and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace>.

As is frequently the case, actually watching the programme that caused the 
fuss has been a corrective experience. The problem with royal television is 
that the form is prone to a default tone of cringing sycophancy, as confirmed 
by this week’s other piece of Mountbatten-Windsor-watching:When Ant and Dec Met 
the Prince: 40 Years of the Prince’s Trust 
<http://www.itv.com/hub/when-ant-and-dec-met-the-prince-40-years-of-the-princes-trust/2a3986a0001>
 (Monday, ITV). That programme had access – the jaunty Geordies talked to 
Charles, Camilla, William and Harry – without any insight, other than the 
revelation that both TV royalty and the actual royals benefit from the 
willingness of those they meet to laugh more loudly than their jokes deserve.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwO9aGKkY4BI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwO9aGKkY4BI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwO9aGKkY4BI&media=>
 Watch the trailer for When Ant and Dec Met the Prince: 40 Years of The 
Prince’s Trust. 
In contrast, Royal Wives at War features no access but some insight. The 
biggest problem is not the claims, but how they are presented. The main 
narrative is carried by fictionalised monologues delivered by Emma Davies as a 
plumply disapproving Queen Mother and Gina McKee’s spikily disappointed Wallis 
Simpson from the perspective of 1967, when the two women met in England at the 
unveiling of a plaque to the late Queen Mary. These soliloquies are punctuated, 
presumably in an attempt at a televisual equivalent of footnotes in written 
histories, by discussions between two separate groups of royal historians and 
biographers, sitting on red leather sofas in a gentleman’s club that admits 
women.

It is in one of these plush huddles that Lady Colin Campbell suggests that the 
Queen Mother, when young, had herself been in love with the future Edward VIII, 
and that this contributed to the resentment between the two women. The 
suggestion is solidified when Gina Mckee, in her crepe-skin ageing makeup, 
snarls that her enemy was “sweet on David”.

As it happens, by Lady Colin’s royal biographical standards, the claim is 
relatively mild. In one of her books, she claimed that the Queen Mother was 
born to her family’s French cook, rather than down the noble Scottish line to 
which she is officially linked, so the production team can claim to have shown 
due editorial diligence by restricting her to a suggestion of a tug-of-love 
over David, Prince of Wales. The producers have also suffered from the fact 
that, due to her tempestuous tenure inI’m a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/nov/18/who-is-lady-colin-campbell-and-why-does-she-sound-like-rastamouse-doing-an-irish-accent>
 late last year, Lady Colin now has enhanced recognition, meaning that her 
soundbites now make a deeper mark on the media.

The best defence of the programme, though, is that Lady Colin’s claim is 
supported, from the opposite sofa, by Hugo Vickers, an historian and biographer 
of impeccable solemnity, who can be regarded as relatively unlikely ever to 
chew reptile genitals in the jungle under the supervision ofAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>. Prophetically, Vickers 
warns that “people will deny” the theory, but that he believes it to be true.

Royal Wives at War is often an easy programme to argue with. For example, the 
lines given to the dramatised Queen Mother, in which she complains that she 
doesn’t want to meet Wallis Simpson on that day in 1967, but that her daughter, 
Queen Elizabeth II, told her that “after all these years, it’s time to bury the 
hatchet”. Really? Surely any such conversation between the two queens would 
have been a much more coded discussion about duty.

On the matter of Lady Colin’s supposedly “outrageous” allegation, though, the 
drama-documentary is in the clear. Perhaps only in the groveling genre of royal 
television would it be regarded as scandalous to suggest that one historical 
figure once mildly fancied another.
 