
When the Canadian artist Heather Cassils was set alight on the Dorfman stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/nov/09/heather-cassils-inextinguishable-fire-spill-festival-national-theatre>
 one afternoon last November as part of the Spill festival, it sent a visible 
smoke signal about the changing direction of theNational Theatre under Rufus 
Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/05/first-boss-rufus-norris-trevor-argent-national-theatre>
. The announcement of Norris’s second season today includes further indications 
of the changing identity of the NT, the way it works with artists, who it works 
with and how, and the way that it engages with the rest of the theatre ecology 
through conversation, collaboration and co-production.

With the development and programming of Bryony Kimmings 
<http://www.bryonykimmings.com/>’s all-singing, all-dancing musical A 
Pacifist’s Guide to the War on Cancer, a co-production with Complicite 
Associates, which will have performances atHome in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/21/welcome-home-manchesters-25m-arts-centre-finally-opens-its-doors>
 before it arrives in the Dorfman in the autumn, the NT is putting down a 
marker on intent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab5dc516aedec1f11ef34e55b3759c58fa15672%2F320_551_3520_5209%2F3520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris's%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%27s%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab5dc516aedec1f11ef34e55b3759c58fa15672%2F320_551_3520_5209%2F3520.jpg>
 Rufus Norris, artistic director of the National Theatre. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
“Bryony feels absolutely representative of the kind of theatre-makers we want 
to engage with and this is exactly the kind of way we want to engage with her,” 
saysBen Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/24/ben-power-national-theatre-hush>
, the deputy artistic director of the NT. “She makes work that’s formally 
inventive,challenging in content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/07/bryony-kimmings-edinburgh-fake-it-til-you-make-it-traverse-theatre>
 and form, and this piece is on a big scale; being able to offer her resources 
and one of our main stages is a move forward for her and us.”

There’s also a new devised piece, Love, made by Alexander Zeldin, whose Beyond 
Caring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/07/beyond-caring-review-zero-hours-contracts>
, originally made forthe Yard <http://www.theyardtheatre.co.uk/> played the 
NT’s Temporary Space last year. Love will be created with child performers in a 
co-production with Birmingham Rep. The programming of Love in the Dorfman is 
not just a proclamation about the changing nature of the repertoire but also 
about who works at the NT and at what stage in their career.


“Working with someone like Alex is a huge departure for the NT,” says Power. 
“There’s no script so we can’t programme it on that basis. That hasn’t happened 
often in the past except perhaps withMike Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/mike-leigh-interview>. It’s a 
huge leap for us to be programming and delivering work that adopts some of the 
process-led approaches we’ve had at theNT Studio 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/support-us/why-support-the-national-theatre/national-theatre-studio-archive>
 for a long time in terms of development, but which in the past may never have 
been seen on our stages. It’s what artists need and want. In other words we are 
changing our practice and where we put our resources to meet artists’ needs.”

There is much more of this kind of work in the pipeline, and it’s a 
significant shift for the NT and comes about for several reasons. One is that 
Norris comes from a very different theatrical tradition than his predecessor,
Nicholas Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/10/nicholas-hytner-national-theatre-director-12-years-verdict>
, and has always felt very much at home in the Studio, a space for risk and 
experiment. The second is the way the old literary department has now been 
reinvented and amalgamated with the Studio to create theNew Work Department 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/national-theatre-launches-engine-room-new-work/>
 under the leadership of Emily McLaughlin, who was previously at the Royal 
Court. That reflects changing definitions of what constitutes new writing, and 
the fact that plays are now often as likely to be wrought as they are to be 
written. There are also the lessons learned from the closure of the Cottesloe 
for refurbishment that led to theShed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/apr/16/national-theatre-shed-south-bank>
/Temporary theatre whose rough provisional status allowed the NT to risk 
bringing in a new kind of work, which has also brought a new and younger 
audience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff08c3525a97bd3ea1ebbd5e27a9cd0642eec40fe%2F0_0_5760_3744%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris's%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%27s%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff08c3525a97bd3ea1ebbd5e27a9cd0642eec40fe%2F0_0_5760_3744%2F5760.jpg>
 Ben Power, deputy artistic director, at the Temporary theatre … the space has 
been a catalyst for change. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
“The Temporary theatre was a totally pragmatic decision, brought about because 
the Cottesloe had to close,” says Power, “but it gave us a jolt. Maybe one that 
was needed. It made us think about work differently and look at how we can 
shift the model in the permanent spaces.” He goes on: “We need to make this 
building more open, more democratic and more transparent. The spirit of the 
Temporary space is seeping through the entire building, and creating a new 
energy.”

It’s an energy that is reflected in the programming of a new verbatim piece, 
Another World: Losing Our Children to Islamic State, created by Nicholas Kent 
andGillian Slovo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/03/gillian-slovo-golden-pen-award>, 
who worked on the Tricycle theatre’s productionGuantanamo ‘Honor Bound to 
Defend Freedom’ 
<http://www.tricycle.co.uk/home/about-the-tricycle-pages/about-us-tab-menu/archive/archived-theatre-production/guantanamo-honor-bound-to-defend-freedom/>
 together. It is based on interviews with Muslims in the UK, France and 
Belgium, and will include testimony from parents whose children have gone to 
fight withIS <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> or marry jihadists.

We have to be national in what we are debating, the subjects we are looking 
at, the people we are representing
Rufus Norris 
“It just demanded to be produced, it couldn’t wait, so we’re doing it as a 
final extra piece in the Temporary space before it comes down,” says 
McLaughlin, who suggests that such programming reflects a desire to be more 
current and responsive and fitsNorris’s avowed determination that the NT should 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/25/rufus-norris-first-national-theatre-season-interview>
 to “reflect the city and the country we are in. We have to be national in 
terms of what we are debating, the subjects we are looking at, and particularly 
the people and stories we are representing.”

All this doesn’t mean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/21/rufus-norriss-national-theatre-must-celebrate-the-new-and-honour-the-past>
 that the classical repertoire or the new play written by a single author will 
be neglected. Chichester Festival Theatre’s acclaimedYoung Chekhov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/18/young-chekhov-birth-genius-review-evolution-new-kind-drama>
 season will come to the building during the summer and there are new plays by 
Nina Raine (Consent, co-produced by Out of Joint) andLucy Kirkwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/14/lucy-kirkwood-ben-duke-like-rabbits>
 (Mosquitoes, which will be directed by Norris and which is produced in 
association withManhattan Theatre Club <http://www.manhattantheatreclub.com/>). 
Both women have had success elsewhere, but have never written a new play for 
the NT previously (Kirkwood adaptedHansel and Gretel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/14/hansel-and-gretel-review>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d14252d308aec59abd378bba3a847103bf7558%2F0_0_4473_3102%2F4473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris's%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%27s%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7d14252d308aec59abd378bba3a847103bf7558%2F0_0_4473_3102%2F4473.jpg>
 Platonov, part of Chichester’s Young Chekhov series that will come to London 
in summer 2016. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
“Nina and Lucy landing at the same moment feels like a statement,” says Power. 
“The generation of writers who were filling the Lyttelton and Olivier 10 year 
ago were theBennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview>
s, the Stoppards and the Frayns. It’s crucial we make new relationships because 
it’s very much time for a new generation to claim the mantel of being NT 
writers.”

Those relationships also include co-producers and an understanding that the NT 
must be more collaborative. The National Theatre Scotland/Live Theatre hit,Our 
Ladies of Perpetual Succour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/01/our-ladies-of-perpetual-succour-on-the-road>
, will play the Dorfman in August as part of its tour, and Sally Cookson will 
be directing in the Olivier this Christmas with a co-production with Bristol 
Old Vic ofPeter Pan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/06/peter-pan-review>, a reworked 
version of her devised show seen at Bristol in 2012.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd45e1e5647a933f37a10889c13c5a0ed411195a%2F0_319_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rufus%20Norris's%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rufus%20Norris%27s%20National%20Theatre%20ushers%20in%20new%20generation%20of%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fnational-theatre-rufus-norris-second-season-experiment-new-generation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd45e1e5647a933f37a10889c13c5a0ed411195a%2F0_319_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Our Ladies of Perpetual Succour at the Edinburgh festival in 2015. Photograph: 
Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Just as the Temporary space was a pragmatic response to the closure of the 
Cottesloe but one that has paid creative dividends, so this new era of 
co-productions – the season boasts more of them than at any point in the NT’s 
history – is born of the fact that the funding climate is a difficult one and 
the NT will be losing an income stream with the closure ofWar Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/17/national-theatre-to-end-war-horse-despite-runaway-success>
.

Why the NT's 'new work department' is of national importance for theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/feb/04/nt-new-work-department-national-theatre>
“The commercial income has been fantastic and rightly celebrated, and we’ve 
been lucky to have had it,” says Power, “but it protected the NT from the 
reality of having to remodel in the way companies and theatres have done all 
over the country since 2010. Now we are catching up with everyone in terms of 
asking the hard questions about what we need to do and what we really believe 
in. It’s exciting.” It is. The NT’s reinvention starts right here and right now.
 