
1) Lawes needs to be at top of his game for England

Second-guessing the complexities of Eddie Jones’s attacking strategy is often 
a bootless errand. Is Elliot Daly selected in the hope that George Ford and 
Owen Farrell can stretch the heavy South Africa forwards and unlock space for 
him or to add his booming left boot to what will be a heavy reliance on 
kicking? Or is Jonathan Joseph’s groin niggle simply not worth the risk?

What is clear, however, is England’s lineout has been nigh-on flawless since 
Jones took over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/eddie-jones-appointed-england-coach-rfu>
, thanks in the main to George Kruis and Maro Itoje. England do not want for 
second-row depth but in the absence of the Saracens pair much rests on the 
shoulders of Northampton’s Courtney Lawes. He wins his 50th cap on Saturday 
but, unlike his second-row partner, Joe Launchbury, who is as steady as they 
come, Lawes has a habit of producing either excellent performances or average 
ones with little in between.

He has been hindered by a swollen knee recently but he must be at the very top 
of his game, dovetailing with his club-mate and captain, Dylan Hartley, another 
short of match practice, to keep England on top at the lineout. South Africa 
have picked three locks in Eben Etzebeth, Lood de Jager and Pieter-Steph du 
Toit, who slots into the back row, and that trio will ruthlessly exploit any 
weaknesses.

Eddie Jones backs England to hit their peak for next World Cup final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/eddie-jones-england-peak-world-cup-final>
2) Will South Africa squeeze or have attacking intent?

South Africa, it would appear, do not do subtlety. Roundly thrashed by New 
Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
 in their last Test match, they have not exactly picked a side to face England 
that suggests they will do anything other than squeeze at Twickenham. Three 
second-rows, the return of Willem Alberts, no Elton Jantjies or Faf du Klerk – 
the penny does not seem to have dropped that you do not beat the very best by 
simply beating them up any more.

Of course one must earn the right to play; one must be physical up front, 
especially against Eddie Jones’s resurgent England, but by modern standards 
that is a prerequisite and,as Ireland demonstrated in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
, tries win elite Test matches. Perhaps it is all a ruse, perhaps the 
Springboks will play with an attacking intent from the word go. One can but 
hope. World rugby is all the poorer when South Africa are in the doldrums.

3) Paying public yet to be convinced by Wales

How Wales respond to their shellacking by Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
 will be fascinating. Defensively they cannot be as bad as they were last 
Saturday. Shaun Edwardssimply will not stand for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/wales-shaun-edwards-australia-argentina>
. Add in the return of Alun Wyn Jones and Sam Warburton to the forwards as well 
as Jonathan Davies and Liam Williams to the backs and one can look forward to a 
more robust defence and inventive attack. Will it be enough to draw the crowds, 
though?

The attendance for the defeat by Australia was around 55,000 – significantly 
down on what would have been hoped for – and, with the Wales football team 
hosting Serbia on the same night, also in Cardiff, and still riding the crest 
of a wave after reaching theEuro 2016 semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
, the turnout against the Pumas may be even lower. The noises from the Wales 
camp are that they are working on improving skills that should in turn lead to 
more eye-catching performances but it seems the paying public is yet to be 
convinced.

4) Argentina’s stock may rise as high as Isa’s

A clash of styles is expected in Cardiff – one side who play too much, the 
other not enough. Argentina seem determined to live by the sword at present – 
Daniel Hourcade has a philosophy and a long-term strategy that is unwavering, 
as demonstrated with a refusal to pick Europe-based players such as Juan 
Imhoff. And the decision to recall Juan Martín Hernández hardly paves the way 
for a more pragmatic approach from the Pumas.

The last time they were in the Welsh capital they stuck 43 points on Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/ireland-argentina-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 and themanner in which they took on Australia at Twickenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/25/argentina-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, looking to attack from all corners of the field, would suggest they will be 
coming to play on Saturday. And none more so than Facundo Isa, their No8, whose 
stock is on a continual rise.

This feels like an important autumn for Argentina: there is the need to back 
up their World Cup heroics and their progress in the Rugby Championship by 
demonstrating that they can come to Europe and beat the home nations on their 
own turf. They certainly have the personnel to do it on Saturday.

5) Scotland will miss Nel in revenge mission

Is there a more aesthetically pleasing sight in rugby than a Wallabies 
backline in full flow? Yes, Wales were defensively abysmal last Saturday and 
the All Blacks may have something to say about it but whereas New Zealand 
overwhelm, and offload, their way to countless tries, Australia do it with an 
unparalleled grace. But for all that, it is the front-row battle that 
fascinates at Murrayfield. Australia’s is unchanged but, according to Sir Ian 
McGeechan, not as potent as that which was so uncharacteristically impressive 
at the World Cup 12 months ago.

Scotland, meanwhile, have a pair of props with one cap between them, either 
side of Ross Ford who wins his 100th. At tighthead Zander Fagerson has 
impressed for Glasgow this season but there can be no doubting how much 
Scotland will miss WP Nel, even if Vern Cotter was typically deadpan about it: 
“He’s out with a neck injury, which came as a surprise to us as we didn’t think 
he had a neck.” If Scotland are to have any chance of avenging theirWorld Cup 
heartache 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/18/australia-scotland-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
, then they must get on top of the Australian scrum, denying them the quick 
ball that Bernard Foley craves. So Fagerson and the debutant Allan Dell are in 
for a busy afternoon.

6) Italy poised for ‘Black-lash’ and next New Zealand generation

Only the truly flint-hearted will not feel for Conor O’Shea and Italy. A first 
home Test against New Zealand is challenging enough but to do so when they are 
recipients of the inevitable ‘Black-lash’ suggests they are on a hiding to 
nothing. O’Shea hasdived into the challenge in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/25/conor-oshea-italy-head-coach-mike-catt>
 head-first and it will be fascinating to see what improvements he can make. 
But they will take time and are unlikely to be evident in this kind of fixture.

Steve Hansen was always likely to make wholesale changes, especially after New 
Zealand picked up a number of injures against Ireland, and he has indeed made 
12 from the starting XV in Chicago after their loose first-half performance. 
Anton Lienert-Brown comes in at inside-centre to continue his fast start to 
international rugby and the pocket rocket Damien McKenzie will hope to rekindle 
some of his fireworks for the Chiefs when winning only his second cap from 
full-back. It is the presence of Rieko Ioane on the bench that excites most, 
however. He is 19, the latest off the Auckland grammar school production line 
and, if the outside back comes on against Italy, he will be the youngest All 
Black since Jonah Lomu. Over to you Conor.

7) France cast nervous glance at world rankings

During the hand-wringing, recriminations and downright whinging over the pool 
of death at last year’s World Cup, it was often forgotten that one of the chief 
reasons England, Wales and Australia were grouped together is that Samoa had 
risen to the top eight in the world at the time of the draw – perhaps Pool B, 
where Japanwon three matches and did not qualify 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/11/usa-japan-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
 was really the most challenging of them all. But for Samoa to climb that high 
in the rankings, considering the lack of funds, infrastructure and support, not 
to mention having their best youngsters cherrypicked, was remarkable.

Things do not look so rosy for them at the moment, ranked 14th in the world, 
but it is Saturday’s opponents, France, who have more reason to cast a nervous 
glance at the world rankings. They are eighth, with Scotland, in ninth, hot on 
their heels. France will have too much firepower for Samoa but the relatively 
little preparation time afforded to them – their arrangement is far less 
focused on the national side than the RFU’s EPS agreement with the Premiership 
– means they must not only win but get up to speed to face Australia and New 
Zealand later in the autumn. With the World Cup draw being made after next 
year’s Six Nations the dangers for France are obvious.

8) Ireland reap rewards as Schmidt authority grows

With a completely changed starting XV from that which began at Soldier Field 
there is perhaps a hint of anticlimax to Ireland’s return to Dublin. It will no 
doubt have a feel of the victory parade about it but Joe Schmidt’s is a mind 
that never rests and the chance to cast his eye over his squad players against 
Canada, now coached by the fellow Kiwi and former Ulster director of rugby Mark 
Anscombe, will be one he is relishing.

The only starter on Saturday to feature against the All Blacks is Ultan 
Dillane, a 23-year-old lock with a huge future, and others to keep an eye on at 
Lansdowne Road include Garry Ringrose at outside-centre and the No8 Jack 
O’Donoghue. It is pleasing, too, to see Peter O’Mahony back in an Ireland shirt.

Not so long ago Schmidt was far from popular in Ireland after a World Cup 
campaign in which they struggled to make it out of second gear but, as his 
authority at the IRFU has grown, so Ireland have started to reap the rewards, 
certainly in terms of broadening their talent pool. It may not do the provinces 
much good in the short-term but Ireland are no doubt prospering.

9) Barbarians v Fiji certain to put smiles on faces

There is a danger when lauding Fiji’s handling skills and footwork to come 
across as condescending, to revel in their God-given talents but to frown on 
their inability to get the basics – scrum, lineout, maul – right. That does not 
do justice to the progress made by Fiji and their scrum was among the most 
solid in Pool A during the World Cup. Indeed, it gave Joe Marler problems, Bob 
Dwyer was not best pleased about it and the rest is history.

But their fixture against the Barbarians will be one to sit back and enjoy. It 
is a strong Fiji line-up against a BaaBaas group thatcame close to defeating 
South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/barbarians-south-africa-rugby-union-match-report>
 last weekend and there will undoubtedly be fireworks. England v South Africa 
feels an untimely downpour away from a largely forgettable stodge-fest but the 
Barbarians against Fiji is certain to put smiles on faces.

10) England women continue next chapter

Wales coach Howley drops Dan Lydiate and Jamie Roberts for Argentina Test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/wales-rob-howley-drops-jamie-roberts-dan-lydiate-argentina-rugby-union>
It was a scratchy start to life as the rebranded Red Roses but a win, 
nonetheless, for England women against France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/england-women-rugby-france-match-report-rochelle-clark>
 on Wednesday and, while not quite the dawn of a new era, perhaps the start of 
the next chapter for the sidewho won the World Cup in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/england-win-womens-world-cup-canada-match-report>
. A focus on sevens in the lead-up to the Rio Olympics unquestionably hindered 
England but those players have now returned and Wednesday’s starting line-up 
was arguably the strongest fielded since lifting the World Cup in Paris. There 
was a lot of rust, plenty of handling errors but as the game grew the cohesion 
began to return.

Recent matches against Ireland have been extremely close and it is a short 
turnaround for Simon Middleton’s team – designed to replicate the intense 
nature of a World Cup. Now that 48 sevens and 15s England players are on 
professional contracts, though, the cohesion is bound to grow. The road to the 
defence of England’s world title feels fully under way.
 