
The mayor of Moscow announced last week that Big Communist Street will be 
renamed Solzhenitsyn Street 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/26/world/europe/26moscow.html?ref=europe>. 
Unfortunately, this is not a sign that Russia is attempting to come to terms 
with the Soviet past that Putin is often portrayed as hankering after. Rather, 
it gives a neat illustration of the authorities', and many Russians', attitude 
towards the Soviet Union.

The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 marked a drastic break from the past, the 
burial of an ideology that was unable to meet a people's needs and aspirations. 
But it proved a false dawn for democracy. The psychological and philosophical 
revolution required for long-lasting democratic development in Russia will be a
much longer and more complicated process. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/mar/16/jamesmarsonjustnotdemocrat>

Stalin remains popular 
<http://www.iht.com/articles/2008/07/23/opinion/edyoung.php>, and recently 
released school history books 
<http://www.iht.com/articles/2008/09/01/europe/stalin.php> have praised him as 
an "effective manager" who acted "entirely rationally". His "achievements," 
such as industrialisation and victory in the second world war, are emphasised 
ahead of his treatment of human beings. Which no doubt sounds rather familiar 
to modern Russia-watchers.

The Communist party, naturally, whimpered its discontent at the decision to 
rename the street. The party is a political dinosaur that lost influence in the 
1990s by willingly playing the supporting role of competitive loser. Its 
decline and the concurrent rise of the proto-Soviet alternative of Putinism 
demonstrate which elements of the Soviet past have been rejected, and which are 
endlessly played to and encouraged.

Putinism represents a sanitised version of the Soviet Union. The resurgence 
under Putin ofRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> as a military 
and economic power, loved and feared in equal measure by Russians, has 
demonstrated the true meaning of 1991: the ideological aspect of communism has 
been rejected, but a great deal of the Soviet mentality remains. Putinism has 
been able to embrace market economy (with heavy state involvement) without 
relinquishing traditional attitudes towards, for example, other countries (such 
as Ukraine and the US), the role of leaders and government and the country's 
"special path" of development.

The decision to devote the new street name to Solzhenitsyn is telling. 
Medvedev has said 
<http://www.isria.info/RESTRICTED/D/2008/SEPTEMBER_25/diplo_20september2008_36.htm>
, "There is no use in returning to the past â€¦ No new external conditions, or 
any external pressure, will change our strategic line to build a free, 
progressive and democratic state." But the renaming cannot be seen as a 
precursor of an attempt to come to a deeper public analysis of Russia's history 
in order to move towards a "free, progressive and democratic" future.

Solzhenitsyn's critique of communism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/aug/04/solzhenitsyn.russia> 
dovetails neatly with Putinism. To the dissident, communism was an ideology 
dreamt up in Europe and artificially forced on Russia by the Bolsheviks. It had 
no basis in Russian history or the Russian people, and the Stalinist 
repressions had their roots in this "foreign" Marxist-Leninist political 
ideology. The fall of the Soviet Union and this ideology, therefore, eventually 
led to the political programme that Solzhenitsyn always promoted: a "special 
path" for Russia, eschewing western liberalism.

The fate of Moscow's numerous other symbols of the Soviet past will be 
revealing. What about Leninsky Prospekt? Or Marksistkaya station? Or the 
ubiquitous hammers and sickles? A programme to replace these, accompanied by a 
widespread campaign to foster a more nuanced public understanding of the Soviet 
Union is hardly likely. Renaming one street after Solzhenitsyn is just a 
convenient fig leaf for the Kremlin's pick and mix of the Soviet past.
 