
Thank goodness for the continued publication of Russia’s independent 
newspaper, Novaya Gazeta. Without it, we may never have known of the outrageous 
case of the 47-year-old Chechenpolice chief who pressured a 17-year-old girl 
into becoming his second polygamous wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/15/russian-official-shrivelled-women-marriage>
.

Chechen teenager 'forced' to marry police chief amid growing row in Russia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/18/chechen-teenager-forced-marriage-russia>
Nor would we know that Russia’s senior children’s rights official, Pavel 
Astakhov, defended the right of middle-aged men to marry teenagers on the basis 
that women are often “shrivelled” by the time they turn 27.

Nor would we know that the wedding ceremony on Saturday was attended by 
Chechnya’s Russian-supported president,Ramzan Kadyrov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ramzan-kadyrov>.

He watched as Nazhud Guchigov (who may be 57 rather than 47) married Kheda 
Goylabiyeva, who turned 17 on 1 May.A picture of her in her wedding dress in 
the Times <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/world/europe/article4443157.ece> 
shows her looking anything but happy moments before the wedding.

But she did as required during the ceremony by responding yes when she was 
asked three times whether she wanted to marry the police chief. It is reported 
that she wept afterwards.

The story came to light courtesy of Novaya Gazeta 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Novaya_Gazeta>, the Moscow-based newspaper partly 
owned by Mikhail Gorbachev and Alexander Lebedev (although the lattersaid in 
March he would stop bankrolling the paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/mar/20/alexander-lebedev-gives-up-bankrolling-russias-novaya-gazeta>
).


It was written by Yelena Milashena, a veteran reporter with Novaya Gazeta, who 
said that she had been turned away from Goylabiyeva’s home.

She said: “I was kicked out of the family home by people sent to make sure I 
didn’t get to speak to the girl. The girl’s mother thanked me for my help, but 
said there was nothing anyone could do now to save them now”.

Her article alleged that the girl’s family had received threats about the 
consequences if they did not allow the marriage to occur.


Polygamy is technically illegal under Russian law, but is fairly common in 
Chechnya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chechnya>.

Sources: The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/15/russian-official-shrivelled-women-marriage>
/The Times <http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/world/europe/article4443157.ece>

 