
A Russian double agent who fled to the US after betraying the espionage ring 
which includedAnna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman> has 
been convicted in absentia and sentenced to 25 years in prison.

Alexander Poteyev was found guilty of state treason and desertion.

Both Chapman and Poteyev's wife, Marina, appeared as witnesses during the 
trial, and in its judgment the Moscow district military court revealed that he 
had sent a plaintive text message to the latter after leavingRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, saying: "Mari, try to take this 
calmly: I'm not going away for a while, I'm going away forever. I did not want 
to, but I had to. I will start a new life. I'll try to help the children."

Chapman, 29, and nine other sleeper agents known as "illegals" were captured 
last year in America after they had been under US intelligence surveillance for 
several years. They were laterswapped for four men imprisoned in Russia who had 
allegedly spied for MI6 and the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/09/russian-spies-swap-us>. An 11th 
agent was arrested in Cyprus but then skipped bail and disappeared.

The prosecution of Poteyev, a former Afghan war veteran and long-serving 
officer in Russia's foreign intelligence service (SVR), was held in secret but 
journalists were allowed in to hear the court's final judgment.

"Poteyev deserted, leaving first for Belarus on his foreign passport and then 
with the help of the American special services he travelled to Germany, and 
from there to the United States, where he is hiding to this day," the court 
found.

Russian media first identified Poteyev, 59, as the man who betrayed the 
illegals in November. An initial report named a Colonel Shcherbakov as the 
culprit and anassassin was said to have been sent on his trail  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/11/kremlin-assassin-anna-chapman-traitor>
. However, intelligence sources then said that Poteyev, who had been deputy 
head of the US section of the SVR's S directorate, was responsible.

During the trial Chapman identified Poteyev as one of her handlers.
 