
Anna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, the 28-year-old 
Russian woman deported from the United States in a spy swap with the Kremlin, 
has reportedly surfaced on Facebook to deny claims she wants to sell her story 
for $250,000 (Â£164,000).

Reports in the Moscow press said Chapman wrote "This is an absolute lie" in 
English next to a link to a story in theNew York Post 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/pagesix/red_anna_eyes_swiss_payoff_HY61v3mTrTPvaYToJTWMcN>
. The US tabloid claimed yesterday she was "shopping for a $250,000 media deal" 
and hoped to be paid via a Swiss associate to prevent US authorities 
sequestering the money.

Before her arrest Chapman was an active networker on social media sites 
including Odnoklassniki and Vkontakte. HerFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> page lists 2,018 friends and 
has prompted many spoofs.

Chapman and nine other undercover agents allegedly recruited by Russia's 
foreign intelligence service (SVR) were arrested in the US earlier this month. 
They were swapped in Vienna for four men accused byRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> of spying for western intelligence 
agencies.

Since the agents returned to Moscow, SVR officers have been questioning them 
at a secret facility amidst intense media speculation over their future careers.

A US company, Vivid Entertainment, said yesterdayit had approached Chapman to 
appear in a pornographic film.

Chapman's lawyer, Robert Baum, has said there is no prohibition against her 
giving interviews, only against making money from them, although now she has 
returned to Russia "there are obvious issues about the enforceability of that 
provision".

Baum said Chapman had asked him to forward all interview requests for her 
personal consideration.
 