
A correspondent for the independent Russian newspaper, Novaya Gazeta, was 
beaten and briefly detained in eastern Ukraine on Tuesday,reports the Committee 
to Protect Journalists (CPJ) 
<https://cpj.org/2015/06/russian-journalist-detained-beaten-in-eastern-ukra.php>
.

Pavel Kanygin, a special correspondent for the Moscow-based paper, said he was 
held for five hours and interrogated by members of the separatist group who 
refer to the region as the Donetsk People’s Republic (DNR).

After his release, Kanygin said he was held at gunpoint and asked whether he 
was one of them or a “ukropy” (the derogatory term for Ukrainians used by the 
separatists). “When I told him I am for peace, he hit me in the eye with his 
fist”, said Kanygin.

Novaya Gazeta’s deputy editor, Sergey Sokolov, told the CPJ that Kanygin had 
gone to the DNR press office in Donetsk to apply for reporting accreditation.


He was searched and a Ukrainian journalist’s business card was found in his 
possession. The separatists called him a criminal and accused him of working 
for Ukrainian media.


The reporter, who has written widely on the conflict in eastern Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>, was then forced to undergo a blood 
test, which the separatists said was positive for drugs. Novaya Gazeta’s 
editor-in-chief, Dmitry Muratov, said the drug allegations against Kanygin were 
fabricated.

Kanygin was later driven to a checkpoint on Ukraine’s border with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and released.


CPJ’s Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and central Asia 
programme coordinator, Nina Ognianova, condemned the DNR’s action. She said: 
“Obstructing a journalist, attacking him, and throwing him out of the territory 
only reinforces the notion that the Donetsk People’s Republic has something to 
hide”.

Novaya Gazeta is part-owned by Alexander Lebedev, owner of the Independent 
titles. But in March this year,he said he would stop bankrolling the paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/mar/20/alexander-lebedev-gives-up-bankrolling-russias-novaya-gazeta>
, which is regarded as hostile to the president, Vladimir Putin.

Source: CPJ 
<https://cpj.org/2015/06/russian-journalist-detained-beaten-in-eastern-ukra.php>
 