
The woman at the centre of one of the most intriguing spying scandals since 
the cold war reappeared last night after video footage was leaked showing her 
taking part in a photoshoot for a Russian men's magazine.

Anna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jun/30/anna-chapman>, who 
was swapped in July in the biggest spy exchange between Moscow and Washington 
for decades, wasfilmed posing in a series of low-cut dresses 
<http://news.life.ru/news/35742> and mini-skirts.

The shoot for the magazine Heat took place earlier this month in Moscow in the 
five-star Baltschug Kempinski, overlooking the Kremlin.

Tonight the Russian news portal lifenews.ru published a video 
<http://news.life.ru/news/35742>, in which Chapman, wearing a sequinned 
turquoise mini-dress, poses with a pair of suitably spy-like dark glasses. In 
another frame, she sits by the window with the Kremlin's spires and towers in 
the background.

In breathless Russian prose, lifenews.ru last night described Chapman as "the 
girl about whom thousands of men dream" and described the session as 
"sensational".

Since returning to Moscow on 9 July, Chapman has vanished from sight – while 
making it clear via intermediaries that she was ready to sell her story if the 
right offer came along.

A diplomat's daughter, Chapman was the most high-profile of 10 Russian 
"sleepers" arrested in America in June after being caught trying to embed 
themselves in American society while secretly reporting to the Kremlin and 
leading double lives.

The first clue that Chapman was in Moscow surfaced this week when she posted a 
photo taken during the session on her Facebook page.

According to lifenews.ru, Heat is now taking legal action against Chapman, 
accusing her of breach of copyright. It is not clear when the magazine's 
exclusive with the 28-year-old spy, who spent several years working in London 
and is a former employee of Barclays Bank, will appear.

It is also uncertain whether Chapman's employer, Russia's SVR foreign 
intelligence service, gave its blessing to the session.

None of the other nine Russians have broken cover; reports suggest they are 
being kept at a safe house in the capital.

Last month, Russia's prime minister Vladimir Putin revealed he had met the 
spies and that they had enjoyed a patriotic singsong.

Russia's last celebrity spy, Andrei Lugovoi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/dec/08/russia.world1> – accused of 
murdering the Russian dissident Alexander Litvinenko in London in November 2006 
– is now a deputy in Russia's parliament. There seems little doubt that Chapman 
could follow a similar route and embark on a political career. Her initial plan 
to fly to Britain after she was unmasked was thwarted when London made clear 
she wasn't welcome.

Lifenews.ru last night also published still photos of Chapman's latest 
modelling session <http://www.lifenews.ru/news/35734>. It said the spy had 
agreed to a photo-shoot but, apparently under pressure from her superiors, had 
declined to give an interview.

• This article was amended on 27 August 2010. The original said the spy 
exchange between Washington and Moscow took place in June, and that the hotel 
where theAnna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman> 
photoshoot took place was the Balchug. This has been corrected.
 