
Banning a film – or any other work of art – is rarely a good idea. The very 
prohibition tends to draw far more attention to a work than it might otherwise 
receive, and often far more than it deserves.

So the Russian authorities who have pulled Child 44 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/15/hollywoods-child-44-pulled-in-russia-after-falling-foul-of-culture-ministry>
 might like to consider the cult that grew up aroundA Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/sep/11/alantravis> in the UK (and around 
thethrill of travelling to France to see the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/mar/03/fiction>), until the prohibition 
was lifted in 2000; or most recently the indignation – up to and including the
president of the United States – when Sony decided not to distribute The 
Interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/19/obama-sony-the-interview-mistake-north-korea>
 after the company’s website was hacked. That film, based on a fictional 
assassination of North Korea’s Kim Jong-un, was not worth making, let alone 
banning; it was little more than juvenile trash. The ban gave it a credibility 
it never warranted.

Hollywood's Child 44 pulled in Russia after falling foul of culture ministry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/15/hollywoods-child-44-pulled-in-russia-after-falling-foul-of-culture-ministry>
The same, entirely practical, argument applies to Moscow’s decision to cancel 
the release of Child 44, a Hollywood thriller set in the Stalin period. The 
reasons given were that it contains distortions of history, and would be on 
Russian screens as the countrycommemorates the Soviet Union’s victory over Nazi 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/17/kim-jong-un-russia-soviet-defeat-nazis>
. Unfortunately, but all too predictably, most kneejerk western comment has
dwelt on the first reason 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3041046/Russia-cancels-release-film-version-Child-44-one-day-premier-grounds-Soviet-era-thriller-distorts-history.html>
 at the expense of the second.

The film, based on a novel by Tom Rob Smith and entirely fictitious, is about 
a child serial killer. But its thrust, according to the advance billing, is the 
way the crimes are hushed up and a freelance investigator hounded for pursuing 
murders that are supposed not to happen under Soviet communism. It is this, 
rather than the gruesome subject per se, that is believed to have prompted the 
ban.

And, inevitably, this is being interpreted as the latest proof of the 
all-round wickedness ofVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>: of his desire to take 
Russia back to the dark years of Soviet censorship; and that he is trying to 
rewrite Russian history in general, and to rehabilitate Stalin in particular. 
The evidence for all these arguments is questionable, to say the least. Yes, 
there has been somerewriting of Russian and Soviet history under Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/05/vladimir-putin-yalta-ukraine-crimea-historical-narrative>
. Yes, the cultural atmosphere has closed in, compared to the joyous 
free-for-all of the early Boris Yeltsin years. And, yes, the narrowing of 
horizons has become more marked since the annexation of Crimea, and the 
outbreak of war in Ukraine. Much of this is retrograde.

The old ultra-violence
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/mar/03/fiction> 
But it is simplifying matters to stop there. The rewriting of history during 
Putin’s presidency, and specifically the compiling ofnew textbooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jan/14/books.russia> for schools, is 
not, as it has often been presented outside Russia, an attempt to whitewash 
Stalin, but to present Russian history as a continuum, from the tsars and 
pre-revolutionary reforms to the Bolshevik revolution, Stalinism and the 
collapse of communism, without leaving the blank spaces of old.Solzhenitsyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/aug/04/solzhenitsyn.russia>, it 
should be noted, is on the curriculum.

These would be murky waters for any country and its historians to navigate. 
They are especially perilous for a country that has felt, to an extent, 
humiliated by the disintegration of the Soviet Union; and where versions of 
history, including recent post-Soviet history, remain highly polarised. Western 
critics seize on the treatment of Stalin as a touchstone of Putin’s 
malevolence, but this ignores several facts.

Putin cannot be blamed for opinion polls that show Russians hailing Stalin 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/poll-finds-stalins-popularity-high/476342.html>
 as a favourite historical figure. In fact, Stalin does not usually top such 
polls; the laurels have gone to Peter the Great,Alexander Nevsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/08/alexander-nevsky-reel-history> 
and others, but it is always Stalin – whether at number two or three – who 
features in western accounts.

Putin is no apologist for Stalin. He has been outspoken about the repression 
and the camps. But he, like many Russians today, was brought up to see Stalin 
primarily as a war leader who took the Soviet Union to victory over Hitler and 
Nazism, despite enormous suffering and losses. And while he and many Russians 
accept the dark side of Stalin, there are still many others who do not, and who 
insist that Stalin was ignorant of what was being done on his behalf. It may 
take another generation for that to change.

In the current, post-Crimea climate of puffed-up patriotism, Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is planning to make the most of the 
70th anniversary of the victory over Germany when it is marked on 9 May. It is 
not just Putin or his ministers who might have taken exception to a negative 
western portrayal of that period at such a time; very many ordinary people 
would have done so too.

For Russia to ban Child 44 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/child-44> is 
shortsighted and will probably prove counterproductive. But the timing could 
hardly have been worse. It neglected – or was it deliberately designed to 
flout? – the almost religious awe in which Victory Day is still widely held. 
Once the celebrations are over, let’s hope that the prohibition is quietly 
lifted, leaving Russia’s cinema goers to judge the film for themselves.
 