
London’s new Labour mayor Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> has announced key members of 
the team he hopes will help him deliver his manifesto pledges as he embarks on 
his first term as mayor. It is a line-up which, as promised, gives senior roles 
to women, confirms his determination to alter the economics of housebuilding in 
the capital and also demonstrates his recognition of the need to work 
productively with national government.

Top of the list comes Valerie Shawcross, who will be his deputy mayor for 
transport and also, pending formal confirmation, his deputy chair of the
Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London (TfL) board. 
Shawcross, who has just stepped down as a member of the London Assembly after 
16 years, has considerable experience of dealing with transport issues and a 
sound grasp of the mysteries of TfL’s finances. These strengths will be vital 
to implementing Mayor Khan’s transport agenda, which includes improving 
conditions for cyclists, pedestrianising Oxford Street and implementing a 
four-year fares freeze without damaging the capital’s transport investment 
programme.

While chair and deputy chair of the Assembly’s transport committee, Shawcross 
demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jan/15/we-could-freeze-fares-but-should-we>
 the insight and grip needed for forging a new relationship between the mayor’s 
office and TfL. Her cross-examination of TfL commissioner Mike Brown during the
election campaign 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Zac-Versus-Sadiq-become-London-ebook/dp/B01FWMQW6G/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1463722451&sr=1-1&keywords=zac+versus+sadiq+dave+hill>
partially unravelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/may/02/london-mayor-who-says-sadiq-khans-fare-freeze-figures-cant-add-up>
 the transport body’s controversial estimate that the cost of the fares freeze 
would be far higher than Khan had claimed. Shawcross commands respect in TfL 
circles, which should go a long way towards helping her make a success of her 
new job.

Former Labour transport minister Andrew Adonis, who had been rumoured to be in 
line for the transport deputy position, also has a place in Khan’s team. The 
mayor intends to appoint him chair of theCrossrail 2 <http://crossrail2.co.uk> 
board, a position he would fill alongside continuing to chair the government’s 
national infrastructure commission. Adonis’s appointment will create a formal 
bridge between City Hall and chancellor George Osborne, with whom Khan had what 
is described as “a very positive meeting” on Monday evening.

It is no surprise that James Murray is being brought in from Islington Council 
to become Khan’s deputy mayor for housing. Murray worked closely oncandidate 
Khan’s housing policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/aug/07/estate-regeneration-the-king-square-solution>
 and is regarded as one of the most imaginative and, in the eyes of some 
property developers, most obdurate borough housing leaders in town. To him will 
fall the hefty task of simultaneously increasing overall housebuilding and the 
percentage of “genuinely affordable” homes delivered within that total - a 
mission critics regard as a circle that cannot be squared. There is, as yet, no 
appointment to the companion role of deputy mayor for planning, though that is 
forthcoming.

Deputy mayor for policing and crime will be Sophie Linden, a former adviser to 
David Blunkett at the home office and presently deputy mayor of Hackney 
Council, where she haslead responsibility for community safety and engagement 
<http://www.hackney.gov.uk/cabinet>. Linden is a strong supporter 
<http://www.hackneygazette.co.uk/news/politics/fresh_call_to_return_police_officers_despite_no_pcso_cuts_1_4358440>
 of community policing, which Khan has promised to enhance. Last year, she was
pressured into withdrawing 
<http://hackneycitizen.co.uk/2015/06/15/deputy-mayor-sophie-linden-controversial-pspo-withdrawn/>
 a proposed public space protection order in Hackney, which included rough 
sleeping among a list of anti-social activities, following concerted 
opposition. Striking the best balance between conflicting community concerns 
can be difficult. It will be interesting to see what sort of working 
relationship Linden forges with Met chief Bernard Hogan-Howe and what her 
priorities for him will be.

The provisional installing of Labour AM Fiona Twycross 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/assembly/fiona-twycross/more-about> as chair 
of the London fire and emergency planning authority completes the latest group 
of high profile appointments. They join a team that already includesJoanne 
McCartney AM as statutory deputy mayor 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/joanne-mccartney-am> - she’d be the 
one to step in if Khan had to step down -David Bellamy 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/david-bellamy> as chief of staff, 
Nick Bowes <https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/nick-bowes> as director of 
policy,Patrick Hennessy 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/patrick-hennessy> as communications 
director,Leah Kreitzman 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/leah-kreitzman> as director of 
external and international affairs andJack Stenner 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/people/mayoral/jack-stenner> as director of 
political and public affairs. There remain further positions to be filled as 
well as that of planning deputy in due course (as they say).


Dave Hill’s book about the 2016 mayoral election campaign, entitled Zac versus 
Sadiq - The fight to become London Mayor isavailable now in eBook form 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Zac-Versus-Sadiq-become-London-ebook/dp/B01FWMQW6G/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1463722451&sr=1-1&keywords=zac+versus+sadiq+dave+hill>
 with a paperback to follow soon.
 