
The San Sebastián film festival gave us this week the best and worst of what 
Hollywood acting had to offer. Matthew McConaughey's performance inDallas 
Buyers Club – such a hit recently in Toronto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/07/dallas-buyers-club-review-toronto>
 – reconfirmed his startling career surge, giving a barnstormer turn from deep 
in the heart of Texas as the homophobic good ol' boy who has to think hard 
about his attitudes when he is diagnosed HIV positive. Aside from that, 
however, there was a terrible clunker fromAtom Egoyan: Devil's Knot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/10/devils-knot-review-toronto> – a 
grisly mediocrity of a film: shallow, badly acted and pretty questionable.

It is based on the child murders in West Memphis in 1993 which led to unsafe 
convictions of three young men: goth/metal rebels who were hysterically accused 
of satanic-ritual practices on flimsy and manufactured evidence. The case has 
been the subject of some excellent, scrupulous documentaries: Joe Berlinger and 
Bruce Sinofsky'sParadise Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143102/paradise-lost-3> (1996), which 
spawned two TV sequel updates and Amy Berg'sWest Of Memphis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149845/west-of-memphis> (2012). These 
film-makers set out to analyse, to deconstruct, to show how hard-pressed law 
officers, under intense pressure, fell hook line and sinker for the sinister 
absurdity of satanic abuse – and let the real culprit get away with it. Atom 
Egoyan's wooden drama is entirely pointless and has nothing to add, other than 
a haze of spurious exploitation. It fails to set out the problem clearly, 
fudges the ending, and with its excitable acting puts some of the nervous 
hysteria back in. Reese Witherspoon is on sullen and uninteresting form, 
playing a mother to one of the murdered children. But the real low point, 
sadly, is Colin Firth, attempting a quasi-Arkansas accent as a local detective 
who thinks the boys are innocent. Firth phones this one in from a call-box. It 
is extraordinary to think that this nonsense came from Atom Egoyan, the same 
director who gave usThe Sweet Hereafter <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120255/>.

Michalis Konstantatos's Luton – showing in the New Directors strand – is a 
Greek movie in the style of Yorgos Lanthimos. I assumed that the title was some 
sort of Hellenic slang which Brits at the festival would misread, but no, it 
really does refer to the Bedfordshire town affectionatelyassociated with Eric 
Morecambe <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5tISqvuOu9w>. One of the characters, 
a teenage boy, mentions that he is heading over there to study. He is part of 
this film's strange gallery of dysfunction. A series of disjointed scenes show 
us fragments of the lives of apparently disconnected people. An overweight 
family man. A sleek, glamorous woman who may or may not be a high-class escort. 
A subdued and nervous teenage boy (the one off to Luton). Their existences are 
dramatised in hard, flat lighting and blank and deadpan style. Single, static 
shots will be held for long periods of time before cutting to an enigmatic 
close-up – or to a different scene entirely. When the connection between these 
people is revealed, the movie's shock-factor is ramped up exponentially, though 
the origin of this creepy nexus is not explained. It is well made, but entirely 
preposterous: an exercise in style over substance. But there is undoubted style.

Spanish cinema was again providing the old-fashioned warmth with Liliana 
Torres's very personal filmFamily Tour <http://familytourthemovie.com/>, about 
a young film-maker who comes on a visit back home after a long period away 
working in Mexico. She finds a country in agony about its economy and its job 
prospects for young people, and deeply resentful of foreigners from the Latin 
American world coming to partake of Spanish social security. Núria Gago plays 
the lead, nursing a prickly and exasperated affection for her mother, and still 
fascinated in her hometown, in spite of herself. It is a gentle, undemanding, 
and very human picture.

More from San Sebastián

• San Sebastián report: Jake Gyllenhaal's double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/sep/23/jake-gyllenhaal-san-sebastian-film>
• San Sebastián report: Beatlemania and horseplay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/sep/24/spanish-beatlemania-san-sebastian>
 