
Pat Sanderson has helped run a confectionery business alongside playing 
flanker for Worcester but this was one of the sweetest days in the 30-year-old 
former England captain's up-and-down playing career. Worcester had looked like 
tasting another bitter defeat until Sanderson plunged over theHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> line seven minutes from the 
end of a game of fluctuating fortunes after the visitors' pack had driven 
forward from a lineout. The Warriors then clung on for their first win of the 
season thanks to a score from a player who left The Stoop three summers ago.

Sanderson had been player of the year at Quins but was not offered a new 
contract and joined newly promotedWorcester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> instead. A year ago he was 
playing for England against New Zealand across the road from here but, as 
Forrest Gump might have said about that box of chocolates, "you never know what 
you're going to get" and he was eventually left out of the World Cup squad.

"Yes, it was nice to get over the line, even if it wasn't one of my most 
glorious efforts," he said. "But there's no bad blood between me and 
Harlequins. I've got a lot of friends here and that won't change. As for my 
England career, I'll not give up trying to get back in the squad."

Sanderson was keen to pay tribute to his new back-row colleague Netani Talei, 
making his debut after appearing for Fiji in the World Cup. Talei must have 
thought English club rugby was a doddle when he carved through the Quins 
defence for the game's opening try after 10 minutes and he helped give the 
Warriors' pack a physical edge lacking a week earlier in a feeble home defeat 
against the Ospreys.

That result, which along with this one makes the Welsh side virtual 
certainties to qualify for the semi-finals of this competition despite having 
to meet Quins at The Stoop next month, was the low point of the season for the 
Warriors, who are anchoring the Premiership. Their head coach, Mike Ruddock, 
admitted that the squad had "looked really deeply at themselves during the 
week" to restore some dignity to the club. With the All Blacks Greg Rawlinson 
and Rico Gear joining in the next month, there are now reasons to be cheerful 
again at Sixways.

"We had let ourselves down badly last week," said Ruddock. "It was a totally 
unprofessional performance that lacked commitment but it was a measure of the 
team that we came back. During the week we tried to simplify our game. Over 
time I hope to play a more expansive game and not just rely on a rolling maul, 
but perhaps not today."

That Worcester's three tries were scored by forwards, the other from the 
Tongan hooker Aleki Lutui, and Harlequins' three scores all came from more 
thrilling moves and were finished off spectacularly by backs tells its own 
story. But Sanderson's opposite number, Will Skinner, was arguably Quins' best 
player, linking brilliantly with Chris Hala'ufia to put Ugo Monye in for the 
first of the wing's two tries. Skinner's lack of size will always be debated as 
Neil Back's was but the former Tiger will push Paul Volley for the No7 spot 
this season, one of many selectorial conundrums for Dean Richards as they 
prepare for a trip to meet Stade Fran√ßais this weekend.

Harlequins Brown; Strettle (Keogh, 35), Luscombe, Barry, Monye; Malone (capt), 
Care; Jones, Brooker, Ross (Brooks, 73), Spanghero (Kohn, 73), Evans, Robshaw, 
Skinner, Hala'ufia (Guest, 73).

Tries Monye 2, Brown. Cons Malone 2. Pen Malone.

Sin-bin Hala'ufia, 27.

Worcester Crichton; Delport (Benjamin, 69), Rasmussen, Tucker (Pennell, 59), 
Garvey; Brown, M Powell; Morris (Windo, 68), Lutui (Fortey, 60), Taumoepeau, 
Murphy (Bowley, 58), Gillies, Wood, Sanderson, Talei.

Tries Talei, Lutui, Sanderson. Con Crichton. Pens Crichton, Brown.

Sin-bin Garvey, 56.

Referee C White (Cheltenham). Attendance 8,829.
 