
On Boxing Day last year, the BBC’s chilling adaptation of Agatha Christie’s 
And Then There Were None violently woke six million viewers from their food and 
booze comas. Gone was the sepia-tinted nostalgia for the good old days of steam 
trains, hatpins and dressing for dinner. From Aidan Turner’ssteamy towel scenes 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/aidan-turner-goes-nearly-naked-7080096> to 
the cocaine-snorting antics of playboy Douglas Booth and doctor Toby Stephens , 
there was nothing safe or polite about this carnival of killing and 
comeuppance, as 10 English archetypes found themselves stranded on an island 
fighting for survival.

Sarah Phelps, the three-parter’s screenwriter, was swiftly commissioned to pen 
a follow-up for this year’s festive viewing. The result, a noirish adaptation 
of The Witness for the Prosecution, revolves around the murder of a glamorous 
but lonely older woman and those who stand to inherit her money. Full of 
heart-stopping twists, Witness starsKim Cattrall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kim-cattrall> and Andrea Riseborough, 
alongside Toby Jones as a lawyer busting a gut to keep his client from the 
gallows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7210058bfb05444cb92d22297adb9e2c23701e9e%2F0_711_3992_4990%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7210058bfb05444cb92d22297adb9e2c23701e9e%2F0_711_3992_4990%2F3992.jpg>
 ‘I kept thinking God Almighty, this is Aeschylus’ … Sarah Phelps. Photograph: 
Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Put off by the cosy worlds of Marple and Poirot, Phelps had never read or 
watched any Christie stories, until she was asked to look at And Then There 
Were None. She was shocked by how “nasty, brutal, bracing and savage” the story 
was, tempered only by some gallows humour. “I kept thinking, ‘God almighty, 
this is Aeschylus, it’s Greek tragedy.’”

Both adaptations (she’s now working on a third) take place between the world 
wars – Witness in the 1920s, None during the summer of 1939, with the world on 
the brink of calamity. “She takes the temperature of her time,” says Phelps, 
“and finds it adrenalised, uneven and desperate. That really excited me.”

Phelps believes that even though they’re from a bygone age these works still 
contain the “thrilling heartbeat of what’s happening right now”. Economic 
inequality, the fallibility of the patriarchy, “the grim realities of what 
nationalism will do in a country. How you can look at people and think you know 
them and not know them at all.” She has been musing over moments that come to 
define an epoch. “The 20th century really starts in 1914,” she says ominously, 
“and I wonder if the 21st century is actually starting now.”

Phelps grew up in Molesey, Surrey, and left school at the age of 16 but went 
back as a mature student to study English at Cambridge. Now 50, she’s on “a bit 
of a mission” to dispel the misinformed nostalgia that fuels nationalism and 
may have contributed to a Brexit vote. She gets furious when people question 
the cocaine binge she wrote into And Then There Were None and her decision to 
include a black soldier in her first world war nurses and doctors drama,The 
Crimson Field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/apr/07/the-crimson-field-tv-review>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1f01b367318717fa96fb7d18d6ec5e6568d0d3%2F523_574_3403_2042%2F3403.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1f01b367318717fa96fb7d18d6ec5e6568d0d3%2F523_574_3403_2042%2F3403.jpg>
 Cocaine binges … And Then There Were None. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC 
“Of course they had cocaine back then,” she says. “Do you imagine that those 
first world war surgeons operating on the front line stayed awake out of 
patriotism? ‘Why have you got black people in the first world war?’ Jesus 
Christ, is there nothing you understand about our society? Everything you’ve 
got is built on the bones of someone else. Tellthat story when you want to do a 
period drama – because, knowing that, you’ll know where we are now.”

Phelps previously adapted Oliver Twist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/23/dickens-on-screen-highs-lows> 
(starring Timothy Spall, Tom Hardy and Sophie Okonedo) and Great Expectations 
(Ray Winstone, Gillian Anderson). Traditional, monolithic treatments of great 
works, she says, “don’t pay the dues to the writer or to the truth of the times 
they lived in, which were brutal. Every time they get repackaged as nostalgia 
TV I can feel my hands turning into claws. This is not how people lived.”

Phelps isn’t afraid to take liberties. She cut the famous line – “What larks, 
Pip” – uttered by father figure Joe Gargery in Great Expectations because she 
thought it made him sound daft. “Just because he’s a working-class man,” she 
says, “doesn’t mean to say he’s an idiot.” As a blacksmith who would have 
apprentices, he could have been in a guild, she reasons, an intelligent 
business man. “The whole world turns on his anvil, and he knows it, but to 
write him as being good, Dickens has to make him thick. But he’s not thick.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3505769c19a520a6c3ed170df091e484c2799a4%2F594_280_3180_1908%2F3180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3505769c19a520a6c3ed170df091e484c2799a4%2F594_280_3180_1908%2F3180.jpg>
 ‘Every now and then I throw a curveball’ … Billy Howle and Kim Cattrall in The 
Witness for the Prosecution. Photograph: BBC 
She knows, however, which lines have to stay – such as the key moment in 
Witness when an ex-soldier says: “I couldn’t settle to anything, not after 
service.” Of course he can’t, says Phelps. “He’s been trained to kill people, 
to run towards danger like an absolute lunatic and not flinch, because that’s 
what Englishmen do. And now, here he is back in London doing some washing up.”

It hasn’t all been period drama for Phelps. Her unfaithful rendering 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/television/2015/04/bbc_s_the_casual_vacancy_miniseries_reviewed_why_it_s_infinitely_better.html>
 of JK Rowling’s The Casual Vacancy was deemed better than the book by some 
critics. But it was soaps she cut her teeth in – first the BBC World Service 
series Westway, and then on EastEnders, where her most recent storyline was the 
death of Peggy Mitchell, played by Barbara Windsor.

“I knew it had to happen really quickly,” says Phelps. The nation’s beloved 
Peggy, with terminal cancer, took an overdose after a visit from the ghost of 
Pat Butcher. “It had to be Pat, all lit up like a Woolworths Christmas tree, to 
keep her company on her journey across the river. I loved watching them 
together, these two proper women.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0865219f11188e7133905f29d15dbd15699e532d%2F210_193_4090_2455%2F4090.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sarah%20Phelps%20on%20writing%20EastEnders%20sex%20scenes%20and%20shaking%20up%20Agatha%20Christie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fsarah-phelps-writing-eastenders-sex-scenes-agatha-christie-adaptation-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0865219f11188e7133905f29d15dbd15699e532d%2F210_193_4090_2455%2F4090.jpg>
 ‘It had to happen quickly’ … Barbara Windsor, left, and Pam St Clement in 
Peggy’s suicide scene in EastEnders. Photograph: Kieron McCarron/BBC 
Not all scenes flow so readily. Phelps does confess to a terror of the blank 
page, and recalls once being stuck on anEastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> script: “I was banging my 
head against a wall because I couldn’t see a way in. So I wrote it in this 
highly charged, erotic way, where everyone was cursing and ripping their 
clothes off and shagging violently against walls – while getting across what I 
needed to get across in the scene. It was unadulterated filth: ankles behind 
ears, pumping buttocks. It was like the fall of Rome, only upstairs at the Vic.”

Although Phelps only took this hardcore approach once, she says: “Every now 
and then, I throw a curveball in to see what happens. Sometimes, you work 
through the night and need to recharge your batteries, so I do something that 
will never make it into production, or that I never want anyone else to see.”

These deviations do, however, leave their traces in the energy of the final 
cut. The joy of soaps, says Phelps, is that “you’ve half an hour to tell a 
story, to take this familiar world and spin it so that people say, ‘Hang on – 
whatwas that?’” 

• The Witness for the Prosecution is on BBC1 on Boxing Day at 9pm and on 27 
December at 9pm.
 