
David Sillitoe believes Arthur Seaton, the hero of his late father's novel 
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturday_Night_and_Sunday_Morning>, would not 
have been "breaking shop windows and stealing phones" (On the trail of an angry 
young man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/15/on-the-trail-of-an-angry-young-man?INTCMP=SRCH>
, G2, 16 August). I'm not so sure. In chapter five, Arthur says he would like 
to blow up Nottingham Castle, by planting "a thousand tons of bone-dry TNT in 
the tunnel called Mortimer's Hole". In chapter seven he expresses solidarity 
with a man who has just heaved a brick through a shop window. With his brother, 
Arthur then takes revenge on a drunken motorist whose car has hit him, by 
tipping the offending vehicle over. Alan Sillitoe shows how such destructive 
acts might feel empowering to a disaffected young man in an unjust world; 
though "locked in a revengeful act they felt a sublime team-spirit of effort 
filling their hearts with a radiant light of unique power and value, of 
achievement and hope for greater and better things".

Professor John Goodridge

Nottingham Trent University

• "Some people would consider," [the clerk] observed, "that stealing the 
motor-car was the worst offence; and so it is. But cheeking the police 
undoubtedly carries the severest penalty; and so it ought. Supposing you were 
to say twelve months for the theft, which is mild; and three years for the 
furious driving, which is lenient; and fifteen years for the cheek ... those 
figures, if added together correctly, tot up to nineteen years." "First rate!" 
said the Chairman. Kenneth Grahame,The Wind in The Willows 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=bqhaAAAAMAAJ&lpg=PA140&ots=X-K06W1BZq&pg=PA140#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, 1908.

Gavin Ross

Harpenden, Hertfordshire 

• Thanks for printing Naomi Klein's subtle and provocative article (If you rob 
people of the little they have, expect resistance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/17/looing-with-lights-off?INTCMP=SRCH>
, 18 August). It's a good job she didn't publish it on Facebook or she would 
have been summoned for incitement.

Geof Branch

London 

• I was astonished to read my letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/aug/15/we-have-the-answers?INTCMP=SRCH> 
(16 August) after you had taken it upon yourself to remove two crucial 
conditions from the central point. Those who set out deliberately to raise a 
child without any prospect of that child having a resident supporting parent, 
and those who engineer this situation for gain, are not in the same category as 
those who find themselves conscientious single parents through no fault of 
their own. A benefits system which encourages the former is not welfare; it is 
the reverse. All the evidence is that the system tends to cause a chain of 
misery through childhood and dependency thereafter.

David Brancher

Abergavenny, Monmouthshire

• Following the August riots, we should not be surprised to see summery 
justice.

Ian Brooker

Crawley, West Sussex
 