
The Foreign Office has concluded there is no clear risk of serious Saudi 
breaches of international humanitarian law inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, even though it admits UK defence 
personnel cannot “form a complete understanding” of the Saudi-led coalition’s 
attitudes to such laws because they “do not have access to all the information 
required”.

Ministers have previously said that UK forces advising the Saudis on airstrike 
techniques in Riyadh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/labour-says-uk-arms-sold-saudi-arabia-breach-international-humanitarian-law-yemen>
 are able to form an impression of attitudes to international humanitarian law.

The admission about the level of UK access to Saudi bombing techniques and 
planning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/04/saudi-arabia-yemen-bombing-uk-claims-humanitarian-law-committee>
 comes in the government’s formal response to a report by two select committees 
– business and international development – recommending suspension of UK arms 
sales pending an independentUN-led investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/un-report-into-saudi-led-strikes-in-yemen-raises-questions-over-uk-role>
 into the conduct of the 18 months of the Yemen civil war.

The recommendation led to rows between MPs across party lines, as some Labour 
MPs joined with Conservatives to stave off an attack on the UK defence 
industry, and theUK’s strategic relationship with Gulf states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/nov/05/david-cameron-arms-sales-gulf>
.

The government response to the report totally rejects the need to suspend arms 
sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/labour-call-for-uk-to-withdraw-support-for-saudi-led-coalition-in-yemen-fails>
. It says ministers are not opposed to an international inquiry but continue to 
believe the Saudis should be allowed to conduct their own inquiries first.

British arms sales to Saudi Arabia are immoral and illegal | Diane Abbott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/british-arms-sales-saudi-arabia-immoral-illegal-yemen>
Airstrikes by the Saudi-led coalition have been responsible for 60% of the 
2,067 civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/third-of-saudi-airstrikes-on-yemen-have-hit-civilian-sites-data-shows>
 killed in the conflict over a yearlong span starting on 1 July 2015, according 
to the United Nations.

The largely predictable government response centres on its statement that it 
takes all allegations of violations of humanitarian law seriously, and 
regularly makes representations to the Saudi authorities, but has not concluded 
any such breaches have occurred in Yemen bySaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> to warrant the withdrawal of 
arms exports licences.

The two select committees had concluded: “Since September 2015, the Saudis 
have announced the results of nine investigations, despite having received 
evidence of at least 185 incidents from the UN, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty 
International. Moreover, a number of the Saudi investigations reported results 
which contradict evidence documented by the UN. This raises concerns about the 
credibility of the process.”

The government response does raise questions about how its judgment was 
reached, however, as it states: “UK Defence personnel are unable to form a 
complete understanding of the coalition’s regard for international humanitarian 
law in Yemen as they do not have access to all the information required to do 
so.”

But the committee report insists that the UK “has not been directly involved 
in investigations undertaken by the Saudi-led joint investigations team, has 
not provided any specific operational advice to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for 
operations in Yemen and has not provided training on political authorisation of 
military operations”.

The government says UK officers in Saudi are involved in liaison and training 
work, saying: “It is entirely right that we should share techniques for 
minimising civilian casualties with other countries to ensure their military 
campaigns can be conducted in the most humane manner possible.”

It adds: “These liaison officers are not embedded personnel taking part in the 
Saudi Arabian-led operations and are not involved in carrying out strikes, 
directing or conducting operations in Yemen or selecting targets, nor in the 
Saudi targeting decision-making process. All UK personnel remain under UK 
command and control.”

The statement continues that “insights obtained by UK Defence personnel into 
Saudi processes and procedures contribute to our overall view on the approach 
and attitude of Saudi Arabia to International humanitarian law.

“Saudi Coalition members have the best insight into their own military 
procedures and will be able to conduct the most thorough and conclusive 
investigations. It will also allow the countries to really understand whether 
anything went wrong, apply lessons learned and take any follow up action.”

Andrew Smith, of Campaign Against Arms Trade, said: “The government is in 
denial about the devastating impact of the Saudi-led bombardment and its own 
complicity in it. This is a very weak and shameful response and makes clear 
that arms company profits are being prioritised over the human rights and lives 
of Yemeni people.

“The evidence from the UN, the House of Commons committees and others has been 
overwhelming, yet the government has refused to act.We are always being told UK 
arms export controls are rigorous and robust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/human-rights-groups-condemn-steep-rise-in-uk-arms-sales-to-saudis>
, but this shows nothing could be further from the truth.”
 