
It was conceived in the ashes of the old millennium as a prize that would 
celebrate new voices, challenge old genre boundaries and capitalise on the 
wisdom of crowds.

The scale of the challenge we had set ourselves back in 1999 became 
immediately clear when the wisdom of the reading groups based at bookshops 
around the country, whose votes helped shape the shortlist, clashed with that 
of the celebrity judging panel over who should be the first winner. The groups 
united behind David Mitchell’s novel Ghostwritten, while the individual judges 
ruled in favour of Philip Gourevitch’s We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We 
Will be Killed with our Families.


Gourevitch’s account of the Rwandan genocide “transcended reportage”, as judge 
Amanda Foreman said, “haunting all of our thoughts long after we had read it”. 
It set a standard for books of moral as well as literary stature. Nevertheless, 
there’s a bit of me that has always mourned the absence of Mitchell from a roll 
of honour that has grown in stature as the winners have moved through their 
careers. It’s extraordinary today to think ofZadie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/zadiesmith> as a nervous 25-year-old waiting 
to step into the limelight of her very first literary award in 2000, or of 
Chris Ware struggling for words in 2001 as he became the first graphic novelist 
to win a generalist literary award, not just in the UK but anywhere.


Guardian first book award: all the winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/07/guardian-first-book-award-all-the-winners>
But prizes grow up, and find themselves jostling for space in territories 
where they were once pioneers. This year’s Baileys women’s prize for fiction 
has no fewer than11 first novels on a shortlist of 20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/08/baileys-prize-longlists-self-published-debut-and-10-other-first-novels>
, and there has been a proliferation of newer initiatives that reach across 
genres for exciting new literary departures: think of theGoldsmiths prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/11/novel-about-john-lennon-and-primal-screaming-wins-goldsmiths-prize>
 or theTed Hughes award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/27/kate-tempest-ted-hughes-poetry-prize>
.


So, not without a few tears on the books desk for an institution that has been 
a centrepiece of our year for nearly two decades, we’ve decided to call it a 
day.


We like to think we’ve played a part in kickstarting the careers of 17 
fabulously innovative and diverse authors, ranging from nature writerRobert 
Macfarlane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/11/guardianfirstbookaward2003.guardianfirstbookaward>
 to novelist and short story writerYiyun Li  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jan/07/featuresreviews.guardianreview15>
and back-to-front biographerAlexander Masters. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview7>


We’re immensely grateful to the judges who have given their time and expertise 
over the years, to the Waterstones reading groups who have enlivened the 
process – and the annual award parties – with their smart, and often pithy, 
opinions. And to our online books community for their sometimes game-changing
10th title nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/31/guardian-first-book-award-10th-finalist>
.


So there’s much to celebrate and, rather than sign off in maudlin mood, here 
are some favourite behind-the-scenes moments. If you have been involved in any 
part of the prize, please add your own in the comments below.


2001

Comedian and yet-to-be bestselling children’s author Charlie Higson’s 
passionate championship of Chris Ware’sJimmy Corrigan: the Smartest Kid on Earth
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jul/21/biography.highereducation>, 
which converted even the deeply sceptical science historian Roy Porter into a 
born again graphic novel fan.

2002

Biographer Hermione Lee coaxing Irvine Welsh into line when he threatened a 
walkout over the decision to award a British prize to an American: Jonathan 
Safran Foer forEverything Is Illuminated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jun/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview28>
. (Also Lisa Jardine’s whispered confidence that she wished the novel had been 
eligible for the Booker, which she was chairing that year.)

2008

An overheard encounter with Radiohead’s Colin Greenwood at the afterparty for 
Alex Ross’sThe Rest Is Noise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/14/rest-is-noise-alex-ross>: 

“Are you a musician?” 

“I play a bit in the garage with my brother.”

2009

Petina Gappah’s winner’s speech for An Elegy for Easterly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/19/short-stories-elegy-easterly-gappah>
: “Did you read the books on the shortlist? I mean, seriously good. If I’d been 
judging the prize I certainly would not have chosen me.”

2011

Newbie publisher Stefan Tobler’s response to the shortlisting of one of his 
first titles,Down the Rabbit Hole, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2012/may/29/guardian-first-book-award-2012>
 which was nominated by readers: “We launched the yearWaterstones almost went 
bust 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2011/may/20/hmv-sells-waterstones-russian-billionaire>
 and pretty much stopped ordering books for a while. The fact that theGuardian 
first book award <https://www.theguardian.com/books/guardianfirstbookaward> led 
to Down the Rabbit Hole becoming an overnight success was pure magic.”

2012 

William Dalrymple and Jeanette Winterson being told to behave when they 
blocked against the award of a single prize, on the grounds that it was 
impossible to judge fiction against nonfiction. They duly behaved and awarded 
the prize to Kevin Powers’s novelThe Yellow Birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/31/the-yellow-birds-kevin-powers-review>
 (Katherine Boo’s account of a Mumbai slum,Beyond the Beautiful Forevers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/29/behind-beautiful-forevers-katherine-boo-review>
, was the underrunner.)

2015

Andrew McMillan’s bracingly literal demonstration that there’s nothing 
precious about new poetry, at the party to announce his win with Physical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/25/guardian-first-book-award-2015-andrew-mcmillan-poet>
. The first poet to make it to the podium entertained the crowd by reading from 
a poem entitled Urination, which began “I’m scared of bumping someone while 
they piss” - and went on to illustrate why.

 