
Profits at Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> more than halved in 
the first six months of the year as its bill for the payment protection 
insurance (PPI) scandal increased by £600m and it paid out penalties for 
rigging interest rates.

The unexpectedly large new provision for PPI took the amount set aside by the 
24% taxpayer-owned bank to £10.4bn and pushed the industry's tally for the 
biggest mis-selling scandal in history to more than £23bn.

António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, Lloyds' boss, 
apologised for the interest rate manipulation, which saw the bank hit with a 
bill of £226m on Monday. He warned that further "legacy" issues meant it had to 
make further provisions, which in total reached £1.1bn in its first-half 
results.

The bank, which has the biggest PPI bill of any lender and owns Bank of 
Scotland and Halifax, admitted the cost of the PPI mis-selling - it has 
received claims for 40% of the policies sold since 2000 - could escalate.

Horta-Osório is preparing to present a new three-year plan to the bank's board 
that is likely to spark fears of bank closures and another swathe of job cutson 
top of 15,000 earmarked for his first three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jun/30/lloyds-boss-unrepentant-job-losses>
. At the helm since March 2011,when he broke ranks with the industry to begin 
paying out PPI claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/05/lloyds-loss-payment-protection-costs>
, he committed to stay to "at least" 2017 to see through his new strategy, 
which will be unveiled in the autumn.

The pre-tax profits of £863m – down by £1.3bn from a year ago – were 
overshadowed by the£226m in fines imposed this week, including compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/28/bank-of-england-lloyds-bailout-funding>
 to the Bank of England, which showed traders had been manipulating interest 
rates to cut fees for its emergency lifeline in the financial crisis. It was 
"as shocking to us as it was to you", he said. "I would like to say again we 
feel the actions of those individuals was totally unacceptable and we condemn 
them without any reservation ... I am sorry for the impact the actions of these 
individuals have had on our customers, our colleagues and our shareholders."

The bank's remuneration committee will be looking at the implications for 
bonuses for 22 individuals highlighted by regulators as well as others who may 
have to be penalised for the manipulation, which took place between 2006 and 
2009.

No commitment was made about publicising the outcome of the disciplinary 
proceedings, but chairman Lord Blackwell, who had to write to the Bank of 
England governor Mark Carney to apologise for the rate manipulation, said: "We 
will look at all the options (to claw back pay) but have to act within the 
current law."

The £1.1bn provision also included £225m to cover ongoing regulatory issues 
and £50m for interest-rate swaps mis-selling, where it has now provided £580m 
in compensation.

Horta-Osório said these issues should not have an impact on the underlying 
performance, by which measure profits rose 32% to £3.9bn. Bad debt provisions 
fell 58% to £758m.The bank is incurring £200m in costs a month for PPI and of 
the £10.4bn provision, some £2.1bn is to cover the cost of administrating 
claims.

The UK arm of Santander also took a new £65m provision for PPI after receiving 
claims from 300 claims management companies. The Spanish-owned bank said 45% of 
claims were from customers who did not have policies.

The City is waiting for the government to sell off the rest of its stake in 
Lloyds, which has fallen from 43% at the time of the bailout. Horta-Osório said 
the bank was "in better shape in terms of getting the taxpayers' money back".

Talks with the bank regulator the Prudential Regulation Authority about 
resuming dividends for the first time – after being blocked by the EU because 
of the bailout – will begin in the second half. Payouts from the bank, once one 
of the biggest dividend payers, will begin at a "modest" level but rise to at 
least 50% of earnings.

The shares fell 2.8% to 74.25p – just above the 73.6p at which the government 
breaks even on its stake.

The industry is facing an investigation by the Competition and Markets 
Authority, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/18/banking-sector-review-watchdog-finance-competition>
and Horta-Osório attempted to demonstrate competition in a market place in 
which Lloyds has market shares of over 18% in current accounts, mortgages and 
savings.

He signalled growth in the future in areas such as its Black Horse finance 
business, which is being helped by car sales, which it has been suggested have 
been fuelled by PPI claims. Asked about his new strategy, he refused to comment 
on job cuts or say branch closures were inevitable but talked about rapid 
growth of digital channels.

The bank also warned about impact of the Scottish vote on independence in 
September. "In the event of a yes[yes] vote, the scale of potential change is 
currently unclear, but we have been undertaking contingency planning," the bank 
said.
 