


You never quite know where you are with a play these days. Of three French 
dramas that have recently opened in London – by Jean Anouilh,Jean Genet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jeangenet> and Florian Zeller – two have 
been relocated to the US. Theatregoers can also see an Uncle Vanya in middle 
England, and a Dublin production of Patrick Marber’s After Miss Julie that 
moves the action from England to Northern Ireland.

The Truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/17/the-truth-review-florian-zeller-harold-pinter>
, which has just opened at the Menier Chocolate Factory in London, is the third 
of Christopher Hampton’s Zeller reworkings to be seen in the UK over the last 
18 months. A dazzling, shape-shifting marital farce, it uses English language 
and accents but takes place around Paris, as doesThe Father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/23/the-father-review-ustinov-theatre-royal-bath-florian-zeller>
, his unsettling presentation of Alzheimer’s disease, which is having another 
West End run ahead of a UK tour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7faf482be2983e091875d6ca023498ffd3e12fb%2F0_458_4305_2581%2F4305.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7faf482be2983e091875d6ca023498ffd3e12fb%2F0_458_4305_2581%2F4305.jpg>
 English accents but set in France … Alexander Hanson (Michel) and Frances 
O’Connor (Alice) in The Truth by Florian Zeller. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
However, for The Mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/27/the-mother-review-gina-mckee-tricycle-london>
, recently seen at the Kilburn Tricycle, Hampton moved Zeller’s Parisian 
characters to London. As a consequence, a businessman has to trek for a 
conference not to Dijon, which is presented in the French original as a dreary 
place that no one would really want to visit, but to Leicester – a city famed 
for crisps rather than mustard. (Some in the audience might object that Dijon 
FCO don’t match the glamorous table-topping football of Leicester City.)

Taking a script on a trip in this way can make a local audience feel more at 
home. But, as my colleague Helen Meany suggested in her review of the Irish
After Miss Julie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/14/after-miss-julie-review-project-arts-centre-dublin-patrick-marber-strindberg>
, putting a play somewhere else on the map isn’t as simple as changing the 
dialect and the landscape outside the window. There is an additional difficulty 
with Marber’s play because his narrative has already travelled from the late 
19th-century Sweden of August Strindberg’s Miss Julie to England on general 
election night in 1945.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0992d2c8a00afef3422f889610aab100d35c1f26%2F554_400_4587_2753%2F4587.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0992d2c8a00afef3422f889610aab100d35c1f26%2F554_400_4587_2753%2F4587.jpg>
 Not as simple as changing the landscape outside the window … Ciaran McMenamin 
and Lisa Dwyer Hogg in After Miss Julie by Patrick Marber. Photograph: Ciaran 
Bagnall 
 This was a clever parallel because of a similarity in the stand-off between 
an entrenched upper-class and a restless proletariat in those places at those 
times. But, although the author has approved the revival’s further jumps across 
the Irish sea, and to VE Day in 1945, the class, political and especially 
religious situations were significantly different in England and Northern 
Ireland at that period.

In the Donmar’s Welcome Home, Captain Fox! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/02/welcome-home-captain-fox-review-a-riot-of-illusion-and-self-delusion>
, also in London, Anthony Weigh retains the basic premise of Anouilh’s Le 
Voyageur Sans Bagage – an attempt to reunite an amnesiac soldier with his lost 
family – from France 18 years after the first world war to the US at the same 
remove from the 1939-45 conflict. The revised text is very clever and extremely 
funny – making this, with The Truth, a fine time for French-derived farce in 
English theatre – and is full of knowing nods to the Anouilh play, such as a 
couple of pretentiously Frenchified East Coast arrivistes, the Dupont-Duforts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F156f85c1f54754668bd5e21a203dd09a671ed9c4%2F0_0_4781_2869%2F4781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F156f85c1f54754668bd5e21a203dd09a671ed9c4%2F0_0_4781_2869%2F4781.jpg>
 Clever and funny revised text, with a new US setting … Fenella Woolgar 
(Valerie) and Rory Keenan (Gene) in Welcome Home, Captain Fox! Photograph: 
Manuel Harlan 
However, this translation also demonstrates that nations are not 
interchangeable. Weigh’s American soldier is an ex-POW who has been found in 
postwar East Germany not knowing who he is. As Welcome Home, Captain Fox! is 
set during the cold war, Americans of that era might have worried that the 
homecoming hero had been brainwashed by communists, a period fear reflected in 
Richard Condon’s 1959 novel The Manchurian Candidate, which became a movie 
three years later.

 This subtext, though, is scarcely present in the play because Weigh is 
adapting a text set three decades earlier, in another culture. The problem is 
similar to the Northern Ireland-set Miss Julie: a writer aiming to end up in 
1950s Long Island wouldn’t have begun from 1930s France, and so is always 
dragging unnecessary baggage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf67ef470488a877d576195253184292782e6a42%2F0_92_4652_2790%2F4652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf67ef470488a877d576195253184292782e6a42%2F0_92_4652_2790%2F4652.jpg>
 Now set in the English countryside … Vanessa Kirby (Elena), Tobias Menzies 
(Michael), Richard Lumsden (Cartwright) and Paul Rhys (John) in Uncle Vanya. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
 A contradictory combination of geographical liberty with textual fidelity 
also causes a stumble in Robert Icke’s otherwise superb version ofChekhov’s 
Uncle Vanya at London’s Almeida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/14/uncle-vanya-review-almeida-theatre-robert-icke>
. Icke has exported the source story from late 19th-century Russia to the 
contemporary English countryside, and turned the character of Astrov, a country 
doctor, into Michael, a GP. However, because Icke gives Michael Astrov’s 
professional memories and anecdotes, he recounts journeying for hours between 
patients, and seems regularly to perform both major surgery and anaesthesia. In 
a present-day context, this medical workload is so unlikely that some members 
of the audience may suspect a satire on Jeremy Hunt’s suggested new working 
hours for NHS staff.

 Among these country-jumping productions, the one that settles most 
comfortably into its new territory isThe Maids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/01/the-maids-review-uzo-aduba-genet-laura-carmichael-zawe-ashton-trafalgar-studios-london>
, a transportive adaptation of Jean Genet’s 1947 play by Benedict Andrews and 
Andrew Upton. Although the writers are based in Australia, this version of 
Genet’s savage comedy about two servants who plot to kill their mistress has 
been shifted from France to present-day America. Because director Jamie Lloyd 
has cast black actors,Uzo Aduba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/live/2016/mar/03/uzo-aduba-webchat-the-maids-trafalgar-studios>
 and Zawe Ashton, as employees of a white lady boss, played by Laura 
Carmichael, the imposed locale adds a racial subtext that deepens the play, 
while the religious references in Genet’s text remain as plausible for African 
Americans as for French characters in the respective periods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b491d3a095553b42223dba10e5d851041f2bed1%2F0_114_4345_2606%2F4345.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scene%20change%3A%20the%20problems%20with%20relocating%20plays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Fscene-change-the-problems-with-relocating-plays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b491d3a095553b42223dba10e5d851041f2bed1%2F0_114_4345_2606%2F4345.jpg>
 Doubly site-specific … Andrew Lancel as Brian Clough and Tony Bell as Peter 
Taylor in The Damned United at West Yorkshire Playhouse. Photograph: Malcolm 
Johnson 
 Not all theatrical productions can be as free in their movements. With some 
plays, the subject matter acts as a satnav. For example, Anders Lustgarten’s 
highly entertaining adaptation for the Red Ladder company of David Peace’s novel
The Damned United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/11/the-damned-united-review-david-peace-west-yorkshire-playhouse-leeds-brian-clough>
 is doubly site-specific. Dealing with Brian Clough’s spells as manager at 
Derby County and Leeds United, it has to be set in the places where those 
football clubs are based and has been thematically scheduled for runs at both 
the West Yorkshire and Derby playhouses. Even more fixedly,Richard Bean’s The 
Nap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/16/the-nap-review-crucible-sheffield-snooker-richard-bean-jack-o-connell>
, which opened at the Sheffield Crucible last week, is a comedy about snooker 
that was written to be performed on the very stage where the World Snooker 
championships take place each year. The script is good enough to travel but 
could never be as perfectly positioned elsewhere. Sometimes plays need to know 
their place.
 