
A £1.2m project to recruit thousands of walkers and other members of the 
public to help save Britain’s ash trees is to be launched on Monday.

The aim of the AshTag <http://www.ashtag.org/> project is to use “citizen 
science” to pinpoint trees that are resistant toash dieback disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ash-dieback>. Cuttings from these 
resilient trees could then be used to create a new, healthy generation of ash 
trees that could replace those ravaged by chalara dieback, which reached the UK 
in 2012 and is devastating many woods. In Denmark, the disease has killed 90% 
of the ash trees. Scientists hope to minimise the damage by building up details 
of resistant trees.

Gabriel Hemery, chief executive of the Sylva Foundation, one of the promoters 
of the AshTag project, said: “Last month scientists announced they had 
identified one ash tree that appeared to be resistant to the fungus that causes 
dieback. We want to find more trees like this. Then we can create stock to 
replace affected ash trees.”

From Monday, members of the public will be able to register for the scheme on 
theLiving Ash Project <http://livingashproject.org.uk/> website and request 
tags that they can use to mark ash trees, while also providing details of the 
trees on the website. People will then be able to monitor the health of those 
trees and report those that do not succumb to dieback. The aim is to find at 
least 400 resistant ash trees from which cuttings will be taken in order to 
create a new generation of healthy trees.

The importance of the project was stressed by Professor Nicola Spence, chief 
plant health officer at the Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs, 
which is funding the project. “Forty-six species of plants and animals can only 
live on ash trees, so it is not only the trees we will be saving,” she said.
 