
UK scientists and clinicians working on a groundbreaking trial to test a 
possible cure forHIV <https://www.theguardian.com/society/aids-and-hiv> 
infection say they have made remarkable progress after a test patient showed no 
sign of the virus following treatment.

The research, being carried out by five of Britain’s top universities with NHS 
support, is combining standard antiretroviral drugs with a drug that 
reactivates dormant HIV and a vaccine that induces the immune system to destroy 
the infected cells.

Antiretoviral drugs alone are highly effective at stopping the virus from 
reproducing but do not eradicate the disease, so must be taken for life.

Fifty patients are taking part in the trial. Early tests on the first person 
to complete the treatment show no signs of the virus in his blood, the Sunday 
Times reported.

There is still a long way to go before the treatment can be deemed a success 
as the virus has previously re-emerged in people thought to have been “cured” 
and the use of antiretroviral drugs means the researchers cannot be sure the 
HIV has gone. Nevertheless, there is optimism over the findings.

Mark Samuels, the managing director of the National Institute for Health 
Research Office for Clinical Research Infra­structure,told the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/british-scientists-on-brink-of-hiv-cure-w7zb86zw0>
: “This is one of the first serious attempts at a full cure for HIV. We are 
exploring the real possibility of curing HIV. This is a huge challenge and it’s 
still early days but the progress has been remarkable.”

HIV is able to hide from the immune system in dormant cells where highly 
sophisticated modern testing cannot find it, and therefore resist therapy. The 
treatment endeavours to trick the virus into emerging from its hiding places 
and then trigger the body’s immune system to recognise it and attack it,an 
approach that has been called “kick and kill”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/15/kick-and-kill-best-new-hope-aids-cure>

There are approximately 37 million people living with HIV worldwide and about 
35 million people have died from the virus.

The difficulty of declaring a patient clear of HIV was illustrated by the case 
of a girl in Mississippi who was put on a strong course of antiretroviral drugs 
within 30 hours of her birth in 2010 after her mother was found to be HIV 
positive. Treatment continued until the hospital lost contact with the mother 
18 months later. When mother and child reappeared five months later the baby 
had no detectable virus in her blood, raising hopes that early intervention had 
cured her,but two years later the virus re-emerged. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jul/11/hiv-cure-girl-still-has-virus>

The only person believed to have been cured was Timothy Ray Brown, an American 
treated in Germany. He needed a bone marrow transplant to replace his own 
cancerous cells with stem cells that would remake his immune system; his doctor 
found him a donor who was naturally resistant to HIV infection due to a genetic 
mutation that blocks HIV from entering the cells in the human body.

However, stem cell transplants are difficult and potentially dangerous for the 
recipient and only undertaken where they can save a life.
 