

Victorian researchers have found newborn babies with hyperactive immune cells 
in their cord blood are more likely to develop allergies to milk, eggs, 
peanuts, wheat and other common foods by the age of one.

It is hoped the finding could lead to future treatments during or before 
pregnancy to prevent childhood food allergies, which areon the rise in Australia
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/15/australians-hospitalised-life-threatening-allergic-reactions-up-by-50>
 and affect 10% of babies in Melbourne before they are 12 months old.

Human-Neanderthal relationships may be at root of modern allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/07/human-neanderthal-relationships-may-be-at-root-of-modern-allergies>
Researchers have struggled to pinpoint why allergies are rising, with a number 
of factors suspected to be behind the phenomenon.

The research was led by the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 
<http://www.wehi.edu.au/news/food-allergy-linked-hyperactive-immune-system-birth>
, which used food allergy information and cord blood stores collected from 
1,000 women and their babies through theBarwon Infant Study 
<http://www.barwoninfantstudy.org.au/>.

Professor Len Harrison, a co-author of the study from the University of 
Melbourne, said there was a lot of interest in cord blood because it provided a 
rich source of stem cells, which develop into many different cell types in the 
body during early life and growth.

“Through analysing the cord blood we showed there was this relationship 
between food allergies in the babies and the activation of the monocytes in 
their cord blood,” Harrison said.

“Monocytes are the less specialised types of immune cells which respond 
immediately to things like infections and the activation of these were a 
signifier of future high risk of food allergy.”

The researchers also showed that the activation of these monocytes could 
change the character of T-cells, a type of white blood cell that plays a 
central role in immunity, so that they were predisposed to cause allergic 
reactions to some foods.

“Now we’ve pinpointed this, the question is: what’s driving it, what is 
priming the immune system to be more reactive?” Harrison said. “Is it something 
that occurred during birth or before?

“The incidence of food allergy has been increasing over the years so it can’t 
be just genes. It must be to do with how the environment is also influencing 
and changing gene expression.”

The researchers will now go back to their data on the mothers and examine 
factors such as their diet, lifestyles and exposure to environmental toxins to 
see if they might be involved in triggering the hyperactive immune cells.

'He has to have a life, we have to take that risk': children living extreme 
allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/19/children-living-extreme-allergies>
“There’s a whole host of factors that might impact on this state of 
inflammation that we have to work through,” Harrison said.

The findings were published in the medical journal Science Translational 
Medicine <http://stm.sciencemag.org/> on Thursday.

Associate Professor Peter Vuillermin, a paediatrician who leads the Barwon 
Infant Study, said childhood food allergies were not only becoming more common 
in Australia but more severe.

“The evidence for that is fairly unequivocal,” he said. “There has been a 
threefold increase in hospital presentations due to food allergy over recent 
decades and most of this increase has been among children under five years of 
age.

“We don’t know why the increase in food allergy has occurred. The important 
thing about this study is that we’ve shown the immune systems of babies who 
develop food allergy are in a sense ‘primed’ for allergic disease by the time 
they are born.”

Dr Robert Loblay, a clinical immunologist and the director of the Royal Prince 
Alfred hospital’s allergy unit in Sydney, described the study findings as 
interesting.

“It is plausible that they have provided in their findings a mechanistic 
explanation for susceptibility to food allergy and I await further results with 
interest,” he said.
 