
Dundee-based pensions and savings firm Alliance Trust has started registering 
companies in England after warning of "uncertainty" over theScottish 
independence <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> 
referendum.

The FTSE 250 firm is the latest bluechip name in Scotland's financial 
establishment towarn that independence poses a risk for its business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/27/scottish-independence-economics-standard-life>
. Last week Standard Life said it could quit Scotland if it became an 
independent country. Royal Bank of Scotland has said a yes vote would damage 
its credit rating, while Lloyds Banking Group added this week that a yes vote 
would have a"material impact" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/05/lloyds-bank-scotland-independence-costs-borrowing-impact>
 on the business. The boss of insurance giant Aviva, however, told Sky News 
that independence was not an issue for his company.

Alliance Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust>, 
established in 1888 in Dundee, described the referendum as significant.

Katherine Garrett-Cox, chief executive of Alliance Trust, said the company had 
started to create companies registered in England, as part of its "duty" to 
customers.

But it was "premature" to talk about moving Alliance Trust's headquarters out 
of Dundee, she said. "We have every intention of making sure we are there for a 
long time, but this is about creating optionality because we still don't know 
the answers to some pretty important questions."

Around 80% of Alliance's customers and two thirds of its shareholders are 
outside Scotland. The firm has an office in London, but 230 of its 260 staff 
are in Scotland. "So [the referendum] is a significant issue for us and we want 
to be absolutely clear and transparent to our customers and shareholders," 
Garrett-Cox said. "What our customers are telling us is that [they want to 
ensure] the tax wrap status of their pensions and savings is protected 
regardless of political outcomes, so that is why we are seeking to reassure 
them, that we have got it covered. One of the risks we have outlined in our 
report today ... is that we don't know how taxation and jurisdiction issues 
will be applicable in an independentScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>."

The company's announcement coincided with a speech from the chief secretary to 
the Treasury, Danny Alexander, who warned that Scottish householders would pay 
more for pensions under independence because they will lose the insurance 
guarantee of the UK Pension Protection Fund.

The Scottish National Party has said it will create its own protection fund, 
but Alexander argued this will drive up costs because firms would be less able 
to spread risk.

He also reiterated the government's opposition to the SNP's preferred option 
of letting Scotland join a currency union, likening it to "embarking on a 
damaging divorce, and insisting we should still share a credit card". Speaking 
to the National Association of Pension Funds, he said: "I've seen some people 
suggest we are not serious about refusing a currency union. Let's call this the 
John McEnroe defence. Except in this instance it's not just one person they're 
shouting at, but three. And our decision – taken in the best interests of 
Scotland and the rest of the UK – is final."

Kenneth Gibson, a Scottish Nationalist member of the Scottish parliament, who 
chairs the finance committee, said: "People across Scotland are growing tired 
of Westminster's attempts to bully and scaremonger on independence." Gibson 
also highlighted Aviva's position, describing it as "the latest company to say 
that independence is not an issue for them". A spokesperson for the the Better 
Off Together campaign seized on Alliance's announcement: "With each passing day 
the reality of the risks involved with leaving the UK become clearer."

As well as pillars of the Scottish financial establishment, Shell and BP have 
led the warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/06/shell-chief-warns-against-scottish-independence>
 from the North Sea oil and gas sector over the consequences of a go-it-alone 
vote.

With the yes campaign lagging in the polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/03/scottish-anxiety-independence-revealed-poll>
, analysts at Citi group said a positive vote looked unlikely. However in a 
report published on Friday, Citi drew attention to three risks that would face 
an independent Scotland: a deficit well above UK levels, the fiscal hazard of 
being on the hook for a banking sector 1,000 greater than the economy, as well 
as currency and monetary uncertainty. "Referendum risk" was on the rise across 
Europe, the analysts said, although they concluded that a possible vote on 
Britain's continued EU membership in 2017 was the most underappreciated. "Even 
a failed vote might set the stage for market-moving surprise and generate 
heightened uncertainty".
 