
Scotland's procurement body for local authorities has set up a framework for 
telecare services.

Scotland Excel has said that all 32 Scottish councils, plus two of the 
country's largest housing associations, have confirmed they will use the 
contract.

Six suppliers have won places: Chubb Systems, ICare, Jontek, Possum, Tunstall 
Healthcare and Tynetec. The contract will be open initially until the end of 
December 2013, but could be extended by a further year.

The organisation said the key objective is to enable older people, those with 
disabilities or mental health problems and other vulnerable people to live as 
independently as possible in their own homes.

It also aims to help remove some longstanding interoperability issues and 
provide more flexibility in the choice of equipment.

The forecast spend for each participating local authority is about £3.4m a 
year, equating to £10.2m over the term of the framework, including the 
extension period.

Scotland Excel said that a price comparison exercise showed annual savings 
achieved through the framework across local authorities will range between just 
below 1% up to 15.4%. The average saving will be 8.8%.

Its telecare procurement steering group examined a framework agreement offered 
by the Government Procurement Service for telecare, but felt that it was not 
ideally suited to meet the needs of Scottish local authorities and decided to 
run its own procurement.

"Technology and telecare products will play an increasing role in promoting 
such independence and reduce the reliance on traditional services and the costs 
associated with these," said Scotland Excel.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 