
Labour campaigners in Scotland have hailed Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> as a likely saviour of 
their demoralised party after more than 2,000 supporters packed out a series of 
campaign rallies in four Scottish cities.

With fresh polls suggesting Corbyn is the runaway favourite to win Labour’s 
leadership contest, the Islington North MP spoke to packed-out halls in a
36-hour tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/13/jeremy-corbyn-blames-scotland-electoral-defeat-weak-austerity-trident-stances>
 of Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow on Thursday and Friday, reflecting 
the surge in support for him across the UK.

“We think now is the time for Jeremy,” said Jim Malone, an organiser of the 
Fire Brigades Union who helped organise Corbyn’s Dundee University event on 
Thursday evening. Corbyn could be the “anchor” that Labour had lost and now 
sorely needed, Malone said, as the leadership candidate stood in front of a
Dundee <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/dundee> trade union banner with a 
clenched red fist newly painted on it.

There is widespread scepticism about his candidacy in senior echelons of the 
party’s Scottish wing – he knows very little ofScottish politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland> but Corbyn was “the gold 
standard” of sincerity and honesty, Malone said. “He’s an authentic politician, 
and we believe he’s unique in modern British politics. His campaign has 
certainly electrified the country. He’s given us hope over fear, but we believe 
he has also captured the soul again of the labour and trade union movement.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-scottish-labour-campaigners-potential-saviour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e79aa776455002791afc0ce97937ad54f62712%2F0_140_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20Labour%20campaigners%20rally%20behind%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-scottish-labour-campaigners-potential-saviour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20Labour%20campaigners%20rally%20behind%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Faug%2F14%2Fjeremy-corbyn-scottish-labour-campaigners-potential-saviour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e79aa776455002791afc0ce97937ad54f62712%2F0_140_4928_2956%2F4928.jpg>
 Corbyn speaking in Edinburgh. Photograph: Mark Runnacles/Getty Images 
The collapse in Labour’s support in Scotland – roughly a third of its 
traditional votedeserted it for the Scottish National party in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/09/scottish-labour-faces-epic-battle-come-back-from-dead>
 – is keenly felt in Dundee. Once a Labour stronghold, the city is now SNP 
dominated and recorded the biggest yes vote of any area in last September’s 
independence referendum.

After eight years of steady erosion of its support to the SNP’s election 
machine, Corbyn-mania has given the left in Scotland’s Labour movement a 
sudden, heady surge of excitement. He drew more than 300 people to a near 
capacity lunchtime event inAberdeen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/aberdeen> 
on Thursday, and some 500 more to his evening event in Dundee.

Another lunchtime rally attracted 700 people in Edinburgh on Friday – it 
needed an overspill room – and an evening rally in Glasgow was expected to 
attract about 800 people. The Glasgow event has been moved to a larger venue, 
after tickets for a smaller hall were snapped up before it had been fully 
advertised. Glasgow too was a “yes city” in theindependence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/28/snp-scots-could-still-go-it-alone>
. It no longer has a single Labour MP.

Neil Findlay – a leftwing, trade union-backed Labour MSP who is coordinating 
Corbyn’s campaign in Scotland – was jubilant. “Despite theEdinburgh festival 
being on <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edinburgh-festival-2015>, this is 
the hottest ticket in Scotland,” he said. In sunny Aberdeen on Thursday, 
Findlay had quipped: “There’s sunshine wherever Jeremy goes.”

Many former Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> supporters 
fled to the SNP in anger, Corbyn’s supporters say, because of Labour’s weak 
stance on opposing Tory cuts, its decision to endorse renewal of Trident 
nuclear weapons, and Ed Miliband’s failure to connect.

Miliband was not seen as an authentic champion of the working classes in 
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> – he was the wrong kind of 
north Londoner. Margaret Richardson, a Labour activist and retired accountant, 
had been told by voters as she canvassed for Labour during the election that 
they distrusted Miliband after he stood against his brother David for the UK 
leadership.

“The SNP has had it all its own way in Scotland,” Richardson said. “It will 
help grassroots Labour, because I think people are looking for someone who’s 
actually principled. [Corbyn] seems for me sincere. I think with Ed, he was too 
much of a nerd.”

But Corbyn-mania may not run as deeply here as it appears. At the Dundee 
meeting, perhaps a third of the audience sat in their seats during the 
obligatory standing ovation. In Aberdeen too, there were rows of people at the 
back of the room who just politely clapped. Some were there out of curiosity. 
Many were opponents, there to observe. In Dundee, one yes campaigner launched a 
tirade on Labour’s refusal to endorse independence.

Corbyn blames Scotland electoral defeat on weak austerity and Trident stances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/13/jeremy-corbyn-blames-scotland-electoral-defeat-weak-austerity-trident-stances>
“There were people in that room who spat on me in May,” said Michael Marra, 
Labour’s defeatedgeneral election candidate for Dundee West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/06/labour-tactical-voting-snp-dundee-west-michael-marra-jim-mcgovern>
 and a nephew of one of Scotland’s most famous folk singers, also called 
Michael Marra.

“They’re not supporters of the Labour party,” said Marra. “They were there 
because perhaps some of the things he said appeals to them but the idea that 
the room [is] filled with Labour supporters? Neither was that room 
representative of the electorate.” Even so, said Marra, Corbyn is genuine.


“In modern media terms, I think the authenticity of voice and character is 
huge but I didn’t hear anything tonight in terms of how we can answer the 
electability question,” he said.

“I do agree that this feels like the Labour party’s Scotland moment – there’s 
a rejection of authority and there’s a rejection of the establishment both 
within the party and outwith it. But speaking to members of the public, I have 
heard a different story. I don’t think the people I have spoken to believe he 
can win [a UK general election].”

Among the capacity crowd at the Edinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh> International Conference Centre on 
Friday was Kezia Dugdale, who is widely expected to be voted in as Scottish 
Labour leader on Saturday. She too is a sceptic, but has been drawn to watch 
diffident Corbyn – potentially her future leader. “I owe him that,” she told 
the Guardian, before meeting Corbyn for the first time for a private meeting in 
a side room.

Dugdale is supporting Corbyn’s rival Yvette Cooper, but said: “I can’t dismiss 
hundreds, if not thousands of people in different parts of the UK rallying 
around a person who represents an idea.”

Corbyn could be energising the Labour grassroots like no other candidate, 
Dugdale said. But she added: “You have to be really careful not to raise a 
sense of false hope. That’s what we saw from the yes campaign in the 
referendum, time and time again. Filling out a large hall [doesn’t] necessarily 
mean you have all the answers, all the ideas, that we need to have to form a 
credible government.”

Yet Raymond Mennie, 65, a former mechanical engineering lecturer who took part 
in a three-month long sit-in at a Timex watch factory in Dundee in 1982, 
believes Corbyn offers the party a potency it has lacked since the 1990s.

Gordon Brown to speak on Labour leadership as MPs panic over Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/14/gordon-brown-speak-labour-leadership-contest-mps-panic-corbyn>
Mennie is co-founder of the Dundee People’s Assembly Against Austerity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/16/peoples-assembly-pans-burnham-cooper-kendall-rally-no-show>
 campaign – its banner was placed alongside the trade union red fist banner 
behind Corbyn as he spoke. “His policy platform and his open democratic style 
is the best antidote for the problems caused by theBlair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/12/even-if-hate-me-dont-take-labour-over-cliff-edge-tony-blair>
 andBrown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/14/gordon-brown-speak-labour-leadership-contest-mps-panic-corbyn>
 years that lost millions of votes across Britain and considerable support for 
the Labour party in Scotland,” Mennie said.

“A Corbyn Labour party could win that vote back because, in essence, the 
people of Scotland want change, change from the neo-liberal mantra which has 
failed to provide release.”

But even Corbyn’s allies agree that he knows little about Scottish politics or 
the SNP. Corbyn has spent several hours on his Scottish tour in private 
briefing sessions with Findlay and Katy Clark, a leftwinger who lost her 
Commons seat to the SNP in May. He is on a steep learning curve, said Nathan 
Morrison, a local organiser of the Corbyn campaign who was elected as a Labour 
councillor in Aberdeen at 19.

But he would be worth the investment. “There’s potential for that because, 
with Jeremy Corbyn’s policies, we would be presenting a river of red water 
between us and the SNP. They won’t be able to give us that nonsense of ‘you’re 
just red Tories’. There’s no way they could call a Jeremy Corbyn-led party 
that.”

But Morrison adds: “No one should delude themselves, it will be a long march 
back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/09/is-there-hope-for-labour-in-scotland>
 for us.”
 