
Sir Ian Cheshire, outgoing chief executive of the B&Q owner, Kingfisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/kingfisher>, has become the latest 
business leader to warn about the impact on investment and consumers if 
Scotland votes for independence, issuing a rallying call to other executives to 
speak out. Along with more than 130 other business leaders, he has firmly 
placed himself in the no camp.


The yes camp


The pro-independence campaign group Business for Scotland said it “has 2,500 
members who run businesses in Scotland, employ people across the country in a 
range of industries, and all believe thatScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> is in the best 
interests of Scotland and Scottish business.”

More than 100 business leaders added their names to a declaration in favour of 
independence on Wednesday, following a similarstatement signed by around 200 
executives 
<http://www.businessforscotland.co.uk/200-business-people-declare-for-yes-with-an-economic-vision/>
 in August.


Business for Scotland said the individuals were signing in a personal capacity 
and that the mix of small, medium and large firms was representative of 
business inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

Prominent among the latest signatories are Doug Duguid, founder of energy 
services company Enermech and William Hall of heating firm Alba Air Energy, 
while earlier supporters included Sir Brian Souter of Stagecoach, the 
Perth-based bus and rail group.Stagecoach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup> says it is neutral on 
independence, while its chief executive, Martin Griffiths, has brushed off 
concerns that a yes vote would damage one of Scotland’s biggest private 
businesses.

 Senior Scottish financiers also rejected warnings that independence could 
seriously damage Scotland’s banking sector, insisting that acurrency union was 
the most likely result of a yes vote. Seven business leaders wrote a letter to 
the FT 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f0545746-1996-11e4-b06c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz39Vgzh0gK>
, includingex-RBS chairman Sir George Mathewson, Sir Donald MacKay, the former 
chairman of the Scottish Mortgage Investment Trust, andMichelle Thomson, 
managing director of Business for Scotland.

They flagged up the possibility of an EU referendum and potential exit as far 
higher risks. They concluded: “Finally, thefinancial sector in Scotland will 
always prosper because we have the skills, the talent and the connections that 
are needed to thrive.”

Mathewson has argued 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f6915450-1b18-11e4-b649-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3Cu39t6Zq>
 that anindependent Scotland would be able to use tax and other policy to 
expand its financial sector.

Thomson said <http://www.businessforscotland.co.uk/profile-michelle-thomson/>: 
“For too long, economic policies have not favoured Scotland nor encouraged the 
SME sector on which Scotland’s economic health depends.”

The no camp


A fortnight ago, about 130 business leaders, who between them employ 50,000 
people in Scotland, wrote anopen letter in the Scotsman newspaper 
<http://bettertogether.net/blog/entry/yet-more-business-leaders-are-saying-no-thanks-to-separation>
 sayingNo Thanks to separation. The group, led by the chief executive of 
engineering giant Weir, Keith Cochrane, said the “business case” for Scottish 
independence had not been made.

Kingfisher boss Cheshire does not believe Scotland will be able to keep the 
pound, which would mean repricing 35,00 products, with the cost being passed on 
to customers. He called on other business leaders to come out and make similar 
points, saying“It’s now or never.”

Jean-Bernard Levy, the head of France’s Thales – Britain’s second-largest 
defence contractor – said a yes vote wouldforce the company to reconsider its 
facilities on both sides of the border 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/09/09/uk-scotland-independence-thales-idUKKBN0H40Q120140909>
.

BP boss Bob Dudley, said he does not want to see Scotland “drifting away” from 
the UK, becauseindependence would almost certainly mean higher costs for his 
business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/feb/04/bp-chief-bob-dudley-scotland-independence>
.

HSBC chairman Douglas Flint has warned that uncertainty over Scotland’s 
currency 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/economics/11048951/Scotland-has-to-realise-the-pound-has-been-a-core-part-of-its-success.html>
could prompt capital flight from the country and leave it in a “parlous” 
financial state.

Weir, one of Scotland’s biggest companies, said independence will “guarantee” 
higher costs for business but produce few and uncertain benefits, after 
commissioning a report on the economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/03/scottish-independence-guaranteed-costs-weir-group-scotland>
.

Standard Life, one of the main pillars of Scotland’s finance industry, has set 
up English subsidiaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2014/aug/05/scottish-independence-standard-life>
 as a part of “contingency” planning that could see it quit Scotland.


Royal Bank of Scotland, Scotland’s biggest bank, has tried not to raise the 
temperature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/01/royal-bank-scotland-profit-warning-foreign-exchange-investigation-scottish-independence>
 despiteharbouring concerns over the risks to its credit rating and business. 


Lloyds Banking Group has warned of a “material impact” on its costs and 
borrowing, implying a knock-on impact for businesses and customers for the 
owner of Lloyds, Halifax and Bank of Scotland.

Alliance Trust, a pensions and savings firm based in Dundee, has been 
registering companies in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/07/scottish-independence-alliance-trust-register-england>
.

Former Sainsbury’s boss Justin King, was accused of scaremongering by the 
Scottish National party 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b8f05d3c-8cfa-11e3-ad57-00144feab7de.html#axzz3Cu39t6Zq>
 when he warned thatindependence could mean higher food prices north of the 
border. Asda and Morrisons have also warned consumers would face higher prices, 
reflecting the higher transport costs for some remote areas.
 