
As part of its #LovetoRead campaign, the BBC last week released a list of 30 
novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list>
 by authors born or based in Scotland designed, under the auspices of a public 
vote, to identify the nation’s favourite. The selection, as all such lists are 
wont to do, sparked much contention and dissent. So we decided to conduct an 
experiment.

We totted up every book our readers recommended in the comments below our news 
story and compiled an alternative lineup based on your nominations. From more 
than 500 comments, topping your picks were three on the BBC list: James Hogg’s 
Confessions of a Justified Sinner, followed by Alasdair Gray’s Lanark and Lewis 
Grassic Gibbon’s Sunset Song. After that, we hit more contested territory. 
Honourable mentions go to Neil M Gunn, Josephine Tey, Ian Rankin, Compton 
MacKenzie, George MacDonald Fraser (especiallyThe Flashman Papers 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/flashman-2.html>), George Douglas Brown’s The 
House With the Green Shutters, and Iain Crichton-Smith’sConsider the Lilies 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/consider-the-lilies.html> – but there were 10 
clear favourites.

Voting on the original list is open now 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/2ClzCqc45kb6xffl0bfD2w2/vote-for-your-favourite-scottish-novel>
, with a final shortlist of 10 to be revealed by the BBC in October, but here 
are the 10 books our readers think the panel have missed:

1. Kidnapped <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kidnapped-15.html> by Robert 
Louis Stevenson

Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde may have been set in a fictionalised Edinburgh, but its 
heavily stylised design was no match for the sheer adventure (and, we suspect, 
charge of childhood nostalgia) of Kidnapped, the story of David Balfour’s 
exploits in the aftermath of the 1745 Jacobite Rising.

Malarkeyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80340573>
 captured its particularly Scottish resonance:


My dad reads Kidnapped every year or two. It’s a rollicking page-turner, but 
also a tour across the real geography of the highlands that is recognisable to 
any hiker. As an expat, it’s comforting to read the book and picture the real 
glens and passes I remember.

2. The Crow Road <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/crow-road.html> by Iain 
Banks

“It was the day my grandmother exploded.” Choosing which novel by Banks to 
include instead of The Wasp Factory proved far tougher than the almost 
unanimous assessment that Banks’s debut was not his best; 11 of his books were 
suggested in total but The Crow Road clinched it with that opening sentence – 
and this appraisal fromUninventiveName 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80320208>
:

For my money, The Crow Road is better than The Wasp Factory. It obviously 
doesn’t have the shock factor of that book, but it’s a fantastic mix of 
clashing personalities, interests and classes within a single extended Scottish 
family. It’s also much more about Scotland than The Wasp Factory, and some of 
the descriptions of both small-town ruralScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and the cities made me so nostalgic 
for home it almost hurt (I read it in China). Many of the characters in it felt 
so real to me it was like I had grown up with them myself. I never got that 
from any of Banks’s other fiction.

3. “Anything by Christopher Brookmyre”

This title was suggested by teajunkie79 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80345035>
, and readers proved reluctant to limit themselves to one single book by this “
sparkling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80359637>
” contemporary writer. Take your pick from between The Sacred Art of Stealing,A 
Tale Etched in Blood and Hard Black Pencil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/jun/17/featuresreviews.guardianreview14>
 or Pandaemonium.

4. How to Be Both <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/how-to-be-both-281622.html>
 by Ali Smith

Smith’s multi-award-winning novel is perhaps the most surprising omission from 
the original list.

5. Espedair Street <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/espedair-street.html> by 
Iain Banks

You can have more than one book per author on our list, and the second-most 
nominated book by Banks was this Paisley-based story of sex, drugs and 
rock’n’roll. AsLodger79 explained: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80320605>

Iain Banks <https://www.theguardian.com/books/iainbanks> really could have his 
own section here – The Crow Road and Espedair Street for me. The latter because 
it is such an enjoyable read that brings out a smile.


6. Swing Hammer Swing! 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/swing-hammer-swing.html> by Jeff Torrington 

While Lanark may be said to have inaugurated a new school of urban Scottish 
writing, Jeff Torrington’s 1992 Whitbread prize-winning novel, set in the late 
1960s, really put the infamous Glasgow slum the Gorbals on the literary map.

7. Cain’s Book <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cain-s-book.html> by 
Alexander Trocchi

The junky genius of Alexander Trocchi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/aug/23/thejunkygeniusofalexander>
Irvine Welsh was by no means the first to take a cold hard look at drug 
addiction and poverty in Scotland. Cain’s Book was the subject of an obscenity 
trial in Britain when it was first published in 1960. Trocchi himself was so 
deeply in the throes of heroin addiction that he was unable to attend his own 
launch party, but this “existential masterpiece”, toquote reader MRB001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80376600>
, has inspired authors as diverse as Allan Ginsberg, William Burroughs and Tom 
McCarthy.Carlaregina gaves us a whistlestop biography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80379801>
 of the man himself:

Trocchi was another Scot who ended up in the US and is virtually unknown at 
home. After a spell in Paris, where he published a literary magazine, he went 
to New York in 1956 and was very influential [on] people like the Beat poets 
and the young Leonard Cohen. He faced a possible death sentence after giving 
heroin to a 16-year-old girl and fled the US on a boat to Aberdeen using false 
ID papers. He appears in many biographies and histories of that period.

Cain’s Book was tied in your tally with Trocchi’s slightly earlier novel Young 
Adam.

8. Lymond Chronicles by Dorothy Dunnett

Given that there was such a dearth of historical fiction on the original list, 
it seems a shame to limit Dunnett to a single entry. Consensus among her 
advocates was that King Hereafter, a tale of the historical Macbeth, and The 
Game of Kings should be first ports of call before tackling her six-part series 
about Francis Crawford of Lymond, the Lymond Chronicles, which she followed 
with the eight-part prequel The House of Niccolò.kristinezkochanski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80334174>
 made the case:

 Although not great literature in the way that some of the other books cited 
are, I absolutely loved Dorothy Dunnett’s Lymond chronicles. A wonderfully 
complicated series of historical novels with a fascinating fictional cast who 
are placed in real historical context in Scotland, England, France, Russia, the 
Ottoman empire, Malta. They seemed to get around everywhere and involved in 
everything in the mid-16th century. If you like clever historical fiction, you 
will love these.

9. Beside the Ocean of Time 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/beside-the-ocean-of-time.html> by George 
Mackay Brown

Brown’s last book is “stunningly beautiful”, according to Camaradeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80327751>
, and there were plenty of suggestions in favour of this “truly beautiful 
writer … strangely neglected in general”, asIkeythetinker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80387270>
 observed. Magnus and Time in a Red Coat were also suggested.

10. And the Land Lay Still 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/and-the-land-lay-still.html> by James 
Robertson

Edwin Morgan’s Sonnets from Scotland, which supplies the title of Robertson’s 
fourth book, gives a sense of both the novel’s beauty and epic scale: “Only now 
this unforeseen / reluctance, like a slate we could not clean / of characters, 
yet could not read, or write / our answers on, or smash, or take with us.” You 
preferred Robertson’s panoramic survey of postwar Scotland to The Testament of 
Gideon Mack, Robertson’s homage to James Hogg, which starred on the original 
list at No 21, asthoughtandexpression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/aug/01/whats-your-favourite-scottish-novel-and-is-it-on-the-bbcs-list#comment-80365332>
 wrote:

It is more ambitious in intent as well as scope, and is one of the few truly 
successful novels about politics and its effects on people, as well as being a 
wonderful portrait of a period of time in recent Scottish history. One of the 
best Scottish books I’ve ever read.
 