
Following the unveiling of the white paper, Scotland's future – your guide to 
an independent Scotland <http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2013/11/9348>, 
we want to discuss the impact of the 670-page report dubbed the "independence 
encyclopaedia" on the future of Scottish higher education.

The paper says there will be "major direct gains" for Scottish universities in 
an independent Scotland. Thepolicy proposals 
<http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2013/11/9348/9> are as follows:

• Access to higher education will be based on "ability not wealth"
• Scottish students will continue to receive free access to universities in 
Scotland
• Negotiation with Westminster on fair funding formula with UK research 
councils, based on population share
• Scotland to develop its own policy on immigration to support students during 
and after their studies
• Promotion of Scottish higher education through a dedicated overseas 
diplomatic and trade network

David Willetts, minister for universities and science, has already warned that 
Scottish academics"would lose billions in funding" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/nov/11/scottish-academics-lose-billions-research-academics>
 if the country became independent. There are also concerns that Scottish 
universities would face a brain drain of talent after independence as funding 
declined.

Higher Education Statistics Agency figures show that Scotland's universities 
are more reliant on UK grants, which provide 26% of their overall research 
funding compared to 22% grant income for the UK as a whole. Edinburgh 
University alone won a third (£83m) of its research funding from UK grants – 
more than from the ScottishFunding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/funding> Council.

A UK government paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/scotland-analysis-science-and-research>
 published earlier this month also looked at the impact of independence on 
scientific research. In 2012-13 Scottish higher education institutions secured 
£257min grants from the UK research councils, which equates to 13% of UK 
funding on research (excluding infrastructure), compared to Scotland's 8% share 
of UK GDP.

"We do great things as a single, integrated system and a single integrated 
brings with it great strengths," Willetts said. "It's a coherent system which 
works well for Scotland; we don't want to see it fragmented or split up." But 
Michael Russell, Scottish education secretary believes Scottish universities 
are "a case study in the benefits of decisions about Scotland being taken in 
Scotland – the central point of the independence debate".

Join us in the comments section on Friday 29 November from 12-2pm GMT to 
discuss the impact of the Scottish referendum on the future of higher 
education. Here's what we are looking to discuss:

• Research funding <https://www.theguardian.com/education/researchfunding> and 
collaboration
• Student recruitment and finance
• Academic movement and immigration
• Global reputation and ranking

You can also follow the debate live on Twitter using the hashtag #HElivechat 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23HElivechat&src=typd>

Panel

Mary Senior is the Scottish official of the University and College Union 
<http://www.ucu.org.uk/scotland>. @mary_senior_ 
<https://twitter.com/mary_senior_> @UCUScotland 
<https://twitter.com/UCUScotland>

Gordon Maloney is president of NUS Scotland 
<http://www.nus.org.uk/en/nus-scotland/>. @gordonmaloney 
<https://twitter.com/gordonmaloney>

David McCollum is a lecturer in geography and sustainable development at the 
University of St Andrews.

Scott Tindal is a research fellow (funded by the ESRC Centre for Population 
Change) at the University of St Andrews.

Elisabet Weedon is deputy director and a senior research fellow in the Centre 
for Research in Education Inclusion and Diversity at the University of 
Edinburgh, and currently working on theESRC funded project 
<http://www.ed.ac.uk/schools-departments/education/rke/centres-groups/creid/projects/he-in-scotland/he-in-scotland>
: higher education in Scotland, the devolution settlement and the referendum on 
independence.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 