
Should the war against Japan ever have taken place? The surprise attack on 
Pearl Harbor in December 1941 brought a devastating response from the United 
States, and turned the European war into a world-wide conflict. Sixty years 
afterJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> capitulated, the old 
soldiers have marched past the Cenotaph, still proud and spry, but probably for 
the last time. Few of them, sadly, will parade on the 70th anniversary, though 
arguments about the end of the Pacific war, and whether it was right to drop 
the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, will go on without them.

The debate about the end of the war against Japan obscures a more important 
question: why did the war begin in the first place? Was it a gigantic blunder, 
triggered by decisions made two years earlier by a British prime minister on 
the far side of the globe?

This emphasis on ends rather than beginnings can be seen in The Sun, a new 
film by Russian directorAlexander Sokurov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alexander-sokurov> (best known for the 
acclaimed Russian Ark), and the third part in his tetralogy, following films 
about Hitler and Lenin, depicting crucial moments in the lives of the 20th 
century's most powerful men. Set in the immediate aftermath of Japan's defeat, 
it describes the meetings between the Emperor Hirohito and General Douglas 
MacArthur, the commander-in-chief of the American occupying forces.

Sokurov is a noted documentary maker, and The Sun resembles a dream-like 
newsreel filmed by a secret camera deep in the emperor's bunker. We see 
Hirohito waited on by his cringeing retainers, who dress and feed him as if he 
were a handicapped child, which in effect he was. As he waits for them to 
button his shirt, or murmurs to his marine biology specimens in his private 
laboratory, he resembles a royal figure rather closer to home: well-meaning, 
babied by his wife and utterly disengaged from reality.

When the Pacific war drew to a close there were powerful voices among the 
Allies who called for Hirohito to be tried as a war criminal. But MacArthur 
feared this would so humiliate the Japanese that it would be impossible to 
maintain peace and guide the nation towards democracy.

Pedantic, dreamy, surprised by everything in the real world, Hirohito grasps 
that a supreme gesture is called for. In a bizarre but strangely moving moment, 
he informs his dazed subjects that he is no longer a god. Everyone is amazed; 
the madman has announced that he is no longer Napoleon. Hirohito assures his 
courtiers that his body, which we assume he has never closely inspected, is no 
different from theirs. The gesture satisfies MacArthur, and peace is secured. A 
few war criminals are hanged, but democracy and a guilt-free nation can work to 
prepare the world for the coming of the Sony Walkman. But why did the war ever 
begin?

Hitler's determination to invade Russia was evident from his first days in 
power. The expansion of the German peoples to the east and the destruction of 
Bolshevism are constant refrains in his speeches and writings. Germany could no 
longer breathe in overcrowded Europe, and the only open spaces lay in Poland 
and Russia. Nowhere does Hitler visualise expanding to the west, of war with 
France, Britain, Denmark and Holland. Hitler's invasion of Poland was his first 
step towards the east and a Germanic empire stretching to the Urals. Honouring 
their treaty commitments to Poland, the British and French governments declared 
war on Germany, but their armies were swiftly defeated in the field. German 
bombers devastated Britain's cities, and the U-boat offensive nearly starved 
the country into surrender. Poland received no help from us, and the Nazis 
turned it into a gigantic slaughterhouse.

Should Britain and France have stayed out of the war? No, emphatically. But we 
should have declared war on Germany only when we could win. By 1943, Hitler's 
forces were being ground down by the Red Army, and we would have had every 
chance of defeating the Germans in western Europe.

As someone who was so affected by our war with Japan, I am more interested in 
the consequences of the British government's misguided decision. Would Japan 
have attacked Pearl Harbor, the most significant event of my life, if Britain 
and France had not declared war on Germany in 1939? I suspect not. The attack 
was a desperate gamble prompted by the American oil embargo, which would be 
lifted only if the Japanese withdrew from China. The oil that Japan eyed so 
eagerly was in the Dutch East Indies, but deterred by a strong British, French 
and Dutch presence, the Japanese might well have yielded to American demands 
and withdrawn from China.

The Japanese tanks that I saw rolling into Shanghai on the day of the attack 
might have been moving in the opposite direction. The lives of millions of 
Chinese and Asians would have been spared, along with thousands of British 
soldiers in Burma and Singapore.

I would never have seen my father in a state of panic and confusion when he 
burst into my bedroom and told me to get dressed, adding (the most amazing 
thing I had ever heard) that there would be no more school. I would never have 
seen my mother endure the freezing winters in our unheated concrete buildings 
in Lunghua Camp, where we were interned. I would never have heeded the warnings 
that I sensed deep inside my head, telling me that I would have to look after 
myself, nature's most frightening alarm call.

As it happened, our lives in Shanghai came to a sudden end. During the years 
of internment I saw a great many adults weakened by hunger and malaria, 
gradually losing hope that the war would ever end. Parents in the camp were 
unable to feed their children, protect them or even keep them warm. Lunghua was 
in effect an enormous slum, and as in any slum the teenage boys ran wild. 
Though I was not aware of it, all this probably led to the estrangement between 
my parents and myself that lasted all my life.

At the same time, I would never have become a hyperactive adolescent, 
impatient with English life, who in middle age began to wonder if his whole 
life had been a strange and avoidable accident, prompted by a misguided British 
prime minister and a Japanese emperor who was unable to restrain his generals 
but believed that he was a god.

The Sun brilliantly sums up all the dilemmas that surround war and peace. We 
see the great protagonists of world war as individuals coming to terms with the 
differences that separate their rival cultures; Hirohito and MacArthur reveal 
their total incomprehension of each other. That a final reconciliation was 
reached by one of them declaring he was not a god, and that this was accepted 
by the other, MacArthur, as a resolution that would guarantee peace and 
democracy, is the great achievement at the heart of this remarkable film.

Â· The Sun is on general release
 