
A driverless car has been tested for the first time on UK streets in the 
latest development in self-driving technology in Britain.

The trial saw a two-seater LUTZ Pathfinder travel 1.25 miles (2km) through 
pedestrianised areas ofMilton Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/milton-keynes>, reaching speeds of up to 15mph 
while having to cope with walkers and cyclists for the first time. A driver was 
on board to take over in case of emergency.


The cars, built by Transport Systems Catapult <https://ts.catapult.org.uk/> 
(TSC), used virtual maps of the Buckinghamshire town to navigate the area 
around the train station and business district.

Google and Uber have tested autonomous vehicles on American roads, but 
previous UK trials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/11/driverless-cars-roll-out-trials-uk-roads>
 have involved a human manually operating the vehicle.

Although fully automated cars are not expected to be in use in the UK for 
about 10 years, the government is keen to ensure that Britain is at the 
forefront of developing driverless technology.

Earlier this year, ministers launched a consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/11/motorist-consultation-prepare-uk-driverless-cars-collision-liability-remote-parking>
 on changes to motor insurance rules and the highway code. This is aimed at 
allowing self-driving cars to be on the roads by 2020.

The business secretary, Greg Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/greg-clark>, said: “The global market for 
autonomous vehicles presents huge opportunities for our automotive and 
technology firms.

“The research that underpins the technology and software will have 
applications way beyond autonomous vehicles.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fself-driving-car-first-uk-test-milton-keynes-driverless-lutz-pathfinder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe14fe73c1ac86ff980ad4cdef5bb8cb76fc8b095%2F0_13_3530_2119%2F3530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-driving%20car%20tested%20for%20first%20time%20in%20UK%20in%20Milton%20Keynes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fself-driving-car-first-uk-test-milton-keynes-driverless-lutz-pathfinder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-driving%20car%20tested%20for%20first%20time%20in%20UK%20in%20Milton%20Keynes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fself-driving-car-first-uk-test-milton-keynes-driverless-lutz-pathfinder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe14fe73c1ac86ff980ad4cdef5bb8cb76fc8b095%2F0_13_3530_2119%2F3530.jpg>
 The two-seater vehicle uses lidar, similar to radar, to gauge the surrounding 
area and avoid accidents. Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
A computer on board the vehicle senses the surrounding environment with 
cameras and lidar, a similar system to radar that uses light from a laser, to 
avoid accidents.

The demonstration marks the end of 18 months of development by TSC, a 
not-for-profit research organisation funded by a combination of public money 
and private sector investment.

TSC said the Milton Keynes trial had been a success and the vehicles had 
operated as expected.

The test was also designed to gauge the public reaction to the technology and 
begin work on the regulatory architecture that will govern autonomous vehicles.

TSC said it had worked with Milton Keynes council on safety planning and hoped 
that the trial showed driverless vehicles could be used for transportation in 
other towns.

“Driverless vehicles are coming to Britain and what we have demonstrated today 
is a huge step on that journey,” said Neil Fulton, the TSC programme director.

He said successful tests in Milton Keynes would pave the way for further 
research and trials participated in by UK universities and small businesses.

The software in charge of the vehicle, Selenium, was developed by scientists, 
mathematicians and engineers from the Oxford Robotics Institute, through a 
company calledOxbotica <http://www.oxbotica.com/>.

Driverless car tests have had mixed results in the US, where the technology is 
further developed than in the UK.

Uber has raced ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/18/uber-riders-self-driving-cars>
 of its competitors,deploying Ford Fusions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-ford-fusion>
 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, which do not require hands on the wheel, as part 
of the company’s regular taxi service.

It is also developing a driverless car in partnership with Swedish carmaker 
Volvo.

But electric car company Tesla raised concerns about the implications of 
driverless vehicles in May, after one of its cars using autopilot mode was
involved in a fatal crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/11/tesla-self-driving-cars-autopilot-update>
.

Last month, a Google self-driving car collided with another vehicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/26/google-self-driving-car-in-broadside-collision-after-other-car-jumps-red-light-lexus-suv>
 after the latter ran through a red light.

Ministers want the UK to be a world leader in the driverless vehicle market, 
whichcould be worth £900bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/13/jaguar-land-rover-autonomous-vehicles-test-uk-2020>
 by 2025, according to a KPMG study.

In the budget in March, the then chancellor George Osborne said self-driving 
cars could betested on British motorways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/12/george-osborne-driverless-car-trials-budget>
 next year.
 