
The Senate has cleared the way for the Turnbull government to proceed with the 
trial of its cashless welfare card designed to restrict access to alcohol and 
gambling.

Cashless welfare card plan stalled after Labor and crossbench call for more 
time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/12/cashless-welfare-card-plan-stalled-after-labor-and-crossbench-call-for-more-time>
The bill passed the upper house without amendments on Wednesday evening, 
prompting the government to hail the “watershed moment in how we deliver 
welfare”.

The final vote – 37 in favour to 10 against – reflected the Labor opposition’s 
decision to support the legislation after it said it had gained assurances 
about the details. The government also persuaded most crossbenchers to back the 
plan, despite some of them expressingreservations about the adequacy of 
community consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/09/fears-cashless-welfare-card-could-discriminate-against-indigenous-people>
.

The legislation 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/legislation/bills/r5520_first-reps/toc_pdf/15142b01.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf>
 will allow the government to trial the card in three sites, including Ceduna 
in South Australia from early next year.

Welfare recipients will have access to only 20% of their funds through their 
normal bank account, including cash withdrawals.

 The remaining 80% of payments will be available only via the special Visa 
Debit card. People will be unable to spend the restricted portions of their 
payments on alcohol products or gambling services or withdraw those amounts as 
cash.

Alan Tudge, the assistant minister to the prime minister, praised the Senate 
for passing the legislation.

Tudge said the trials aimed to “reduce the welfare-fuelled alcohol, drug and 
gambling abuse that unfortunately occurs in some of our communities”.

All working-age income support recipients within a trial site would be part of 
the trial and receive the card, he said. Aged pensioners and workers were not 
required to participate, but could volunteer to opt in.

“A local authority will be established in a trial region which will have the 
power, on application, to adjust the amount that is placed onto an individual’s 
debit card,” Tudge said.

“The individual would need to satisfy the authority that basic obligations are 
being met, such as regularly sending children to school.

“The trial will be accompanied by additional investments in drug and alcohol 
and financial management support in each location, to assist people reduce or 
eliminate their dependence on alcohol, drugs or problem gambling.”

Labor, which had raised concerns about “the lack of detail” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/12/cashless-welfare-card-plan-stalled-after-labor-and-crossbench-call-for-more-time>
 about the trial, supported the legislation but vowed to hold the government to 
account.

Indigenous and community groups condemn cashless welfare card plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/14/indigenous-and-community-groups-condemn-cashless-welfare-card-plan>
Labor’s payments spokeswoman, Jenny Macklin, and its Indigenous affairs 
spokesman, Shayne Neumann, said the opposition had gained assurances “that 
there will be a robust evaluation framework agreed, made public and in place 
ahead of the trial commencing”.

But the Greens senator Rachel Siewert said welfare management did not work, 
and there should be a greater focus on support services.

“The legislation is an evidence free zone; we have no evidence that this 
top-down measure will reduce disadvantage in the trial zones,” Siewert said.

“There is a huge loss of dignity with this measure, and people having control 
of their own lives. We know finding employment and overcoming the causes of 
disadvantage is aided by people having control over their lives.”


The card was first proposed by the mining magnate Andrew Forrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/02/andrewe-forrest-urges-back-indigenous-reforms>
 in a report on Indigenous employment.

The Coalition and Labor were joined by crossbench senators Bob Day, Glenn 
Lazarus, John Madigan, Dio Wang, Nick Xenophon, Jacqui Lambie and David 
Leyonhjelm in supporting the bill.

Ricky Muir was the only crossbench senator to vote with the Greens against the 
legislation.

Tudge said he had promised Lambie and Xenophon “that we would go back to 
Ceduna together and have a further public meeting with them to discuss any 
further outstanding issues that might arise”.
 