
Aim

"To make provision <http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2007/ukpga_20070027_en_1> 
about serious crime prevention orders; to create offences in respect of the 
encouragement or assistance of crime; to enable information to be shared or 
processed to prevent fraud or for purposes relating to proceeds of crime; to 
enable data matching to be conducted both in relation to fraud and for other 
purposes; to transfer functions to the Serious Organised Crime Agency."

Main provisions

• Creates the Serious Crime Prevention Order (SCPO), a civil order nicknamed 
the "gangster asbo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2007/jan/17/ukcrime.immigrationpolicy>". SCPOs 
can be used to restrict where an individual can live and limit their work and 
travel arrangements. SCPOs can last for up to five years and breaching them can 
result in up to five years' imprisonment.
• Allows widespread data sharing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2007/jan/18/ukcrime.prisonsandprobation1> between 
the government agencies with the aim of tackling fraud. These data matching 
exercises could include databases registering tax, pension and benefit records.
• Abolishes the Asset Recovery Agency and redistributes its functions; 
recovery of the proceeds of crime becomes the responsibility of theSerious 
Organised Crime Agency <http://www.soca.gov.uk>.
• Replaces the common law offence of incitement with three new statutory 
offences of encouraging or assisting a crime.

Background

SCPOs were designed to allow the police to target suspected crime bosses 
without bringing criminal charges. The government estimated that the act would 
be used totarget 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/feb/02/immigrationpolicy.constitution> 
about 30 crime lords a year.

The decision in this act to allow large-scale data matching exercises - a 
fishing expedition in which several databases are searched to identify 
suspicious patterns of activity – marks a major shift in the government's rules 
on data sharing. A 2006report 
<http://www.dca.gov.uk/foi/sharing/information-sharing.pdf> from a cabinet 
committee overturned the basic data protection that personal information 
provided to a government department for one purpose should not, in general, be 
used for another. The new principle approved by the cabinet says that "
information will 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2006/aug/24/epublic.technology> normally be 
shared in the public sector provided that it is in the public interest".

Criticism

JUSTICE, an independent all-party legal and human rights organisation, 
described the SCPOs as a "dangerous departure 
<http://www.justice.org.uk/images/pdfs/HLSecondReadingbriefingSeriousCrimeBill.pdf>
 from the principle that the criminal justice system should have primacy in 
controlling criminal behaviour".

The House of Lords Constitution committee pointed out that the criminal 
justice system "includes 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld200607/ldselect/ldconst/41/4103.htm#a3>
 a range of procedural and substantive protections" designed to prevent 
miscarriages of justice.

The committee expressed doubts about using civil orders to target organised 
crime. Its report said: "a broad question  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2007/feb/02/immigrationpolicy.constitution>
for the house is whether the use of civil orders in an attempt to prevent 
serious criminal activity is a step too far in the development of preventative 
orders.

"Whether or not the trend towards greater use of preventative civil orders is 
constitutionally legitimate (a matter on which we express doubt), we take the 
view that SCPOs represent an incursion into the liberty of the subject and 
constitute a form of punishment that cannot be justified in the absence of a 
criminal conviction."
 