
Aim

"To provide for  
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2005/ukpga_20050015_en_1#Legislation-Preamble>
the establishment and functions of the Serious Organised Crime Agency; to make 
provision about investigations, prosecutions, offenders and witnesses in 
criminal proceedings and the protection of persons involved in investigations 
or proceeding; to amend theProceeds of Crime Act 2002 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/15/proceeds-crime-act>
; to make further provision for combating crime and disorder, including new 
provision about powers of arrest and search warrants and aboutparental 
compensation orders <http://www.respect.gov.uk/members/article.aspx?id=11710>."

Main provisions

• Establishes the Serious Organised Crime Agency and designates its functions.
• Creates new provisions relating to parental compensation orders, civil 
orders which require parents or guardians topay compensation for damages or 
losses created by a child under 10 (therefore under the age of criminal 
responsibility).
• Restricts the right to demonstrate 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2005/ukpga_20050015_en_12#pt4-pb3-l1g132> 
within an exclusion zone of up to one kilometre from any point in Parliament 
Square. Those who want to demonstrate outside parliament, or indeed in 
Trafalgar Square – the traditional site of public protest – must apply to the 
commissioner of the Metropolitan Police six days in advance, or if this is not 
practical then with no less than 24 hours notice.
• Creates a new offence of trespassing on a designated site 
<http://security.homeoffice.gov.uk/legislation/current-legislation/terrorism-act-2006/criminal-trespass-sites>
. The site can be Crown Land, land that belongs to the monarch or heir to the 
throne or land a secretary of state believes is appropriate for designation in 
the interests of national security.
• Makes all offences arrestable. Previously a police officer had to determine 
whether he suspected a person of committing a non-arrestable, arrestable or 
serious arrestable offence. The powers available flowed from that determination.
• Extends previous legislation so that DNA retention on the National DNA 
Database is permitted even where a suspect has been cleared.

Background

Ostensibly, this act was to enable the establishment of the Serious Organised 
Crime Agency <http://www.soca.gov.uk/aboutUs/index.html> (SOCA). Launched in 
April 2006, SOCAbought together 
<http://www.crimereduction.homeoffice.gov.uk/organisedcrime/organisedcrime06.htm>
 the National Crime Squad, the National Criminal Intelligence Service and the 
parts of HM Revenue and Customs and the UK Immigration Service that deal with 
drug trafficking and people smuggling.

The legislation also makes a number of key changes to police powers and makes 
every offence, no matter how minor, arrestable. Prior to this act, there were a 
limited number of arrestable offences (one of the definitions was that the 
crime carried a penalty of five years' imprisonment). Under theCriminal Justice 
and Police Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/14/criminal-justice-police-act>
 2001, fingerprints and DNA samples taken from a person arrested during the 
course of an investigation can be retained indefinitely on the National DNA 
Database, regardless of whether the suspect is charged or convicted of an 
offence.

The most controversial aspect of the act was the decision to criminalise 
unauthorised demonstrations within an exclusion zone of one kilometre around 
Parliament Square. These provisions were in part an attempt to end the one-man 
protest byBrian Haw <http://www.parliament-square.org.uk>, an anti-war 
campaigner who has been staging a peace vigil in Parliament Square since June 
2001. Initially theHigh Court ruled 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/jul/30/iraq.antiwar> that since his 
protest began before the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act became law he 
did not need to seek authorisation, but a later appealoverturned that decision 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2006/may/09/politics.iraq> and held that the act 
did apply to him.

A draft <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/dec/03/queens-speech-equality>
 of the constitutional renewal bill released in March 2008, includes a proposal 
to repeal these contentious provisions.

Criticism

There was widespread unease among civil liberty groups about the new police 
arrest powers. Human rights campaign groups such as JUSTICE expressed concerns 
that the act "grants too  <http://www.justice.org.uk/images/pdfs/socpb36.pdf>
much discretion to individual officers and will lead to large numbers of 
unnecessary arrests". Under this act, officers merely have to satisfy 
themselves that there are reasonable grounds for arresting an individual 
because of their involvement or suspected involvement or attempted involvement 
in the commission of a criminal offence. JUSTICE pointed out that the 
legislation is drafted so broadly that it "will be very easy for an officer to 
justify an arrest" and that this could lead to unfair targeting of ethnic 
minority groups.

The bar on unauthorised demonstrations within central London galvanised a 
grassroots campaign <http://parliamentprotest.org.uk> against the measure that 
continues <http://www.repeal-socpa.info> to this day.
 