
Astronomer Seth Shostak believes we will find ET in the next two decades; he 
has a cup of coffee riding on it. But don’t interpret such modest stakes as 
scepticism – the-72-year-old American has made it his life’s work to listen for 
life beyond Earth, and, according to the man himself, just isn’t the sort to 
bet a Maserati.

Shostak has spent the past 25 years of his career at the Search for 
Extraterrestrial Intelligence (Seti) Institute in California, where there are 
42 antennas poised to pick up alien communication. He believes that Earth-like, 
habitable planets might not be rare at all; there could be billions.


“It doesn’t seem unreasonable to think that we are not alone, if all those 
planets are completely sterile, you’ve got to think, wow there must be 
something really special and miraculous about Earth – but generally those 
people are not scientists,” he says.

“Finding life beyond Earth would be like giving neanderthals access to the 
British Museum; we could learn so much from a society that is more advanced 
than ours, and it would calibrate our own existence.”


Astronomy <https://www.theguardian.com/science/astronomy> was a childhood 
interest for Shostak. He remembers picking up an atlas (he was very interested 
in maps) and becoming enthralled by a solar system diagram at the back. By age 
10 he had built a telescope. And it was the sci-fi films being made during 
those formative years which sparked his interest in aliens. “Those movies 
really scared me, they made me ill all night – but I explained to my mother 
that I just had to see them,” he says, citing War of the Worlds, It Came from 
Outer Space and I Married an Alien as memorable childhood hits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fseth-shokstak-we-will-find-aliens-in-the-next-two-decades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1856306524188f621aa9a31b96729c95d42f9f8%2F0_210_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Seth%20Shostak%3A%20We%20will%20find%20aliens%20in%20the%20next%20two%20decades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fseth-shokstak-we-will-find-aliens-in-the-next-two-decades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Seth%20Shostak%3A%20We%20will%20find%20aliens%20in%20the%20next%20two%20decades&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcareers%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fseth-shokstak-we-will-find-aliens-in-the-next-two-decades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1856306524188f621aa9a31b96729c95d42f9f8%2F0_210_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Could aliens look like those seen in Independence Day: Resurgence? Photograph: 
Mikael Buck/REX/Shutterstock 
At 11, Shostak began making alien films of his own with friends; The Teenage 
Monster Blob, Which I Was, starred an alien monster made out of six pounds of 
Play-Doh. “When I was first making films, we tried to make serious drama. But 
audiences laughed, and we switched to making comedies and parodies,” he says.


Today he is called upon for his alien expertise by directors making sci-fi 
films and television shows. Contrary to said films and shows, he doesn’t spend 
his days sitting around with earphones on, straining to hear a signal. If you 
looked in at Shostak’s office during most days, you’d find him attending to 
that universal chore of the modern world: email. Apparently, even intergalactic 
explorers have admin. But he says the most productive hours of his day are 
spent discussing strategies with his Seti colleagues, writing articles about 
their research, and producing a weekly scienceradio show 
<http://bigpicturescience.org/>.


Is ET likely to look like he does in the Spielberg movie? Probably not. Any 
encounter is more likely to be with something post-biological, according to 
Shostak. Movie-makers are sometimes disappointed by that answer. “I think the 
aliens will be machine-like, and not soft and squidgy,” the scientist says. “We 
are working on the assumption that they must be at least as technologically 
advanced as we are if they are able to make contact. We aren’t going to find 
klingon neanderthals – they might be out there, but they are not doing anything 
that we can find.”

ET aside, aliens are invariably depicted as hostile, and intent on wreaking 
destruction. The new Independence Day sequel is no exception. “Films [like 
Independence Day] speak to our hardwired fears – but I worry more about the 
price of popcorn in the cinema,” says Shostak. Other scientists –including 
Stephen Hawking 
<http://www.space.com/29999-stephen-hawking-intelligent-alien-life-danger.html> 
– have cautioned that making contact with aliens could be dangerous, but as 
Shostak points out Seti isn’t broadcasting messages, it is just listening.

“I don’t share those concerns anyway – any society that has the ability to 
send rockets to earth is centuries ahead of us – at least – and will already 
know we are here. We have betrayed our presence with radio signals since the 
second world war.

“Besides, I doubt aliens would drop what they’re doing to come over here and 
wipe out Clapham Junction – why would they do that? They probably have what we 
have at home – except for our culture, maybe they are big Cliff Richard fans or 
like our reality television.”

Shostak is pretty relaxed about the film industry playing fast and loose with 
science. He doesn’t mind that “Professor Fudnick” and “Doctor Fliebelveitzer” 
do not address one another by their first names, as normal scientists do. And 
there are some practical things he has helped with, like cooking up an excuse 
as to why a dead alien in Green Lantern looked so much like a human.


Could these newly-discovered planets orbiting an ultracool dwarf host life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/02/could-these-newly-discovered-planets-orbiting-an-ultracool-dwarf-host-life>
“Only about 30% of the advice I give is actually incorporated somehow into 
their films,” he says. “But that is okay – the goal is to get kids interested 
in science and give it some emotional appeal.” A high percentage of scientists 
have their initial interest in the field sparked by popular culture – film and 
television – according to Shostak. “I give talks at schools, and when I ask who 
believes in aliens, every hand shoots up, because – what kid isn’t interested 
in aliens?”

Alien-obsession certainly never left Shostak. After studying physics at 
university as an undergraduate, astronomy sucked him back in. “I signed up to 
do physics at grad school but walked into an astronomy classroom within the 
first few weeks and saw the pictures on the wall; nebuli, galaxies, planets, 
the 200-inch Hale Telescope, all that appealed to me a lot more than physics 
did, so I switched classes.” He went on to specialise in radio astronomy – 
which complemented his interest in electronics – and spent 13 years working at 
a Dutch university, before returning to the US and being approached by Seti.

Work is never boring for Shostak, discoveries are being made all the time and 
technology advances every year, which keeps things exciting. Plus he has that 
cup of coffee to look forward to. Until then, he’ll keep shooting for the stars.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 