
Seven Trent has made a promising start to the new Ofwat regulatory regime, the 
water company said as it reported better than expected results.

Full year profits rose 4.4% to £313.6m, and it confirmed an expected 5% cut in 
the dividend. It said it expected to save £670m in total expenditure over the 
five years to 2020 as it made further efficiency savings. This is about £260m 
better than the target set by the regulator, and it is also benefiting from 
lower borrowing costs in the current interest rate environment.

The company claims to have the lowest water and sewage bills in Britain, while 
customer complaints were down 28% year on year. Steve Clayton, head of equity 
research at Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

The group is benefiting from lower funding costs, with the average effective 
interest rate on the group’s debts dropping nearly 1% to 4.5%. The drive to 
push costs down has allowed the company to continue to charge the lowest 
combined water and sewerage bills in Britain. On average, bills are less than a 
pound a day.

Angelos Anastasiou, utilities analyst at Whitman Howard, said:

Severn Trent’s results announcement states that “group financial results [are] 
in line with expectations”, but full year adjusted pre-tax profit and earnings 
per share are ahead of both our and the market’s expectations. The 5.0% cut in 
the 2015/16 dividend on the other hand, is exactly as had been previously 
indicated.

The other area that is ahead of expectations is the net reward in Ofwat’s 
Outcome Delivery Incentives (ODIs) which at £23.2m for 20 15/16 is greater than 
the £15m indicated in the February trading update (which itself had been 
increased from £10m at the interims).

So overall, this first set of full year results is good...but with just 3% 
total return upside we maintain our hold recommendation, and still seeSevern 
Trent <https://www.theguardian.com/business/severntrent> as the most expensive 
of the three waters currently.

 Even so, Severn Trent’s shares are currently 48p higher at £22.61.

Among the mid-caps there has been a more mixed response to a couple of 
updates, with insurance groupHomeserve 21p higher at 452.3p but software group 
Avevadown 95p or nearly 6% to £15.05. Aveva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/avevagroup>, which called off a merger 
with France’s Schneider Electric in December, unveiled an 18% decline in full 
year profits to £51.2m.
 