
Get relevant experience

Kate Temple-Brown, client director at Austin Brown Consulting 
<http://www.austinbrownconsulting.com/>: "If you haven't already, it's worth 
starting out with an internship and getting relevant experience to take to you 
a permanent position. Job boards such asExternships 
<http://www.externships.com/> have roles in all sectors. It's also worth 
remembering that often startups and smaller firms prioritise cultural fit and 
transferrable skills over classic job experience, making them great for 
graduates."

Tailor every application

Michelle Poole, qualified career consultant from Birmingham City University 
<https://www.bcu.ac.uk/>: "Make sure you read each point on the person 
specification and clearly outline, possibly using the person specification 
points as headers, where you have demonstrated this and to what level."

Show off your achievements

Louise Grant, marketing and administration officer at the Fuller CV 
<http://www.thefullercv.com/>: "Ensure your CV highlights your achievements and 
quantify these to gain attention. Make sure you mention specific examples. If 
you were working within a budget, state the size of it to show employers your 
experience. If you saved the company money, mention how much too.Recruiters 
wish to see why they should invest in you and what benefit you will bring to 
their company."

Research challenges and suggest solutions

Jon Gregory, job search and application coach who edits win-that-job.com 
<http://win-that-job.com/>: "Look at the role and organisation you're applying 
to and identify the key challenges the post-holder will face â€“ background 
research helps with this. From there, tease out individual instances of your 
past experience against each of these and show how you have both the experience 
and the potential to nail those tasks."

Don't let age be a barrier

Hannah Morton-Hedges, qualified careers adviser. She runs Momentum Careers 
Advice <http://www.momentumcareersadvice.com/>: "I find that a huge problem for 
young grads straight out of university is they struggle to differentiate 
themselves from the other applicants. Many graduates hold very similar, and 
often limited, skills and experiences and as a recruiter, these can all easily 
merge into one; it can become tricky to remember who is who. Mature students 
won't have that problem. Plus they have lots of experiences to draw on in order 
to illustrate transferable skills."

Show a clear direction

Michelle Poole: "It is important to give your CV some direction using a 
profile section, and potentially a key skills section. Ensure both are very 
clear and focused towards the job you're applying for. This will align any 
broad experiences you've had, and highlight how they transfer well to the role 
you are applying for. It also provides context to the employer before they get 
to your work history section."

Put it in the post

Colin Lloyd, qualified career coach and regional director for Personal Career 
Management <http://www.personalcareermanagement.com/>: "To stand out when 
making a direct approach, think about printing out copies of your CV and a 
cover letter on good quality paper and hand deliver it to your target 
employers. Many recruitment teams will see huge responses for trainee and 
entry-level roles, with typically hundreds of applications by email, so a well 
crafted, paper CV can make a difference."

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly update and careers 
ebook <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/>.
 