
Auguste Rodin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/auguste-rodin> made 
sculpture modern by wrestling with its past. His art is a tangled sensual 
battle of old and new in which Michelangelo and the classical nude give birth 
to expressionism, surrealism and even dadaism.

A “lost” work by Rodin that has just resurfaced in Switzerland after a century 
exemplifies how passionately he embraced art’s noblest traditions – and how 
boldly he made them new.

Man with Serpent (1887) 
<https://news.artnet.com/wp-content/news-upload/2015/08/Rodin-Snake.jpg> is his 
only bronze cast of a violent image that grew out of his masterwork The Gates 
of Hell. It shows a man struggling desperately with a giant snake, his naked 
muscles straining as he defies its venomous attack. This terrific work has been 
given to the Museum of Fine Arts in Lausanne. In it, Rodin takes on rivals from 
the past and battles with the inner power of sculpture itself.

The unmistakable inspiration of this serpentine glory is the Laocoon 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/75/Vatican-Le_Laocoon.jpg> in 
the Vatican Museum, an ancient masterpiece that was dug up in Rome in 1506 and 
became one of the classical works Renaissance artists most admired. Laocoon and 
his sons are being killed by giant snakes: as he fights for their lives, 
Laocoon’s face is a mask of suffering. Michelangelo himself was there when it 
was excavated in a Roman vineyard and the contortions of Laocoon echo through 
his art. Just as Laocoon fights the serpent,Michelangelo’s slaves 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c6/Michelangelo-Buonarroti-Slaves-Louvre.jpg>
 struggle with or fatally accept their bonds.

Rodin’s Man with Serpent is potently Michelangelesque, resurrecting the 
anguish of this most forceful of sculptors. The sensual struggle Rodin has 
created resembles the twisting morass of bodies inMichelangelo’s teenaged 
masterpiece The Battle of the Centaurs 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/39/Michelangelo,_centauromachia,_1492_ca._01.JPG>
. Yet in taking on the Renaissance, Rodin changes art itself.

His artistic ambition was colossal. Rodin set out to match and outdo the 
masters. His immense projectThe Gates of Hell 
<https://www.college.columbia.edu/core/sites/core/files/images/Hoellentor.jpg>, 
out of which this and many of his other figures (includingThe Kiss 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/c/c4/Der_kuss.jpg>) originate, 
was an attempt to recreate the portal to the underworld described in Dante’s 
Inferno. In fact, Rodin shows practically the whole of the Inferno in his 
recreation of Hell’s gates. At the same time he competes with the 15th-century 
Florentine sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti, whose doors depicting the Bible are known 
asThe Gates of Paradise 
<http://www.italian-renaissance-art.com/images/Ghiberti-Gates-of-Paradise-.jpg>.

Damn braces us, wrote William Blake. Hell is energy, and energy is eternal 
delight. Rodin is of the devil’s party and he knows it. His vision of hell is 
non-judgmental and post-Christian: this world of sex and death is, for Rodin, 
simply the human condition. Thus he takes the great moral struggles that 
tortured Michelangelo and makes them purely carnal, existential, erotic. The 
man fights the serpent not because of any god or curse, but because life is an 
orgy of desire and terror. Rodin is the first and greatest sculptor of the 
modern condition and this is a slithering icon of his provocative genius.
 