
Harassment and bullying is widespread within the Australian federal police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-federal-police>, with 
nearly 50% of women reporting sexual harassment in the past five years, an 
investigation has found.

Off the back of her work with the defence force, the former sex discrimination 
commissioner Elizabeth Broderick has now completeda review of the AFP 
<https://www.afp.gov.au/broderick>.

After six months of work and more than 1,000 interviews, she concludes the 
extent of sexual harassment and bullying warrants an urgent need for action. 
She found:


 * 46% of women and 20% of men reported being sexually harassed in the 
workplace in the past five years – more than double the national average

 * 62% of men and 66% of women reported they were bullied in the workplace in 
the past five years

 * members don’t trust the reporting system – many believe a complaint can 
have a negative impact on their career or leave them being ostracised

 * others said complaints took too long to resolve and the whole system was 
not “victim-focused”

Broderick recommends a specialised and independent office should be set up and 
headed by an assistant commissioner, reporting directly to the AFP 
commissioner, to investigate claims and support victims.


Have you encountered sexism in the workplace? Share your story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/podcast-jessica-valenti-feminist-submit-experiences-questions>
Many women indicated they had rewarding and worthwhile careers in the AFP, but 
for a large proportion their experiences were tainted by a range of challenges, 
including:


 * difficulties of having to “fit in” in with a male-dominated culture

 * having to “prove themselves”

 * in some cases working in a sexualised environment

Others spoke of the struggle to choose between a career and family, and a 
stigma attached to maternity leave.


But Broderick commended the AFP for trying to create a more flexible 
workplace, through trials of split shifts and other rostering initiatives. She 
proposed a “flex by default” policy, which would see refusal of flexible hours 
reviewed by senior leaders.

Her review also found women were under-represented across the AFP. As of April 
2016, women made up 35% of all personnel and 22% of police personnel.

Sisters sacked by Channel Seven after lodging sexual harassment complaint
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/19/sisters-sacked-by-channel-seven-after-lodging-sexual-harassment-complaint>
Despite the findings, Broderick says there’s no reason for reduced community 
confidence. “Quite the contrary,” she said. “In all my interactions with the 
AFP leadership team I have observed a strong desire to step forward in a 
transformative manner, not just tinkering around the edges.”

The AFP commissioner, Andrew Colvin, admitted to being disturbed by the level 
of bullying and sexual harassment within the organisation. “These practices 
will not be tolerated and I am putting in place actions which will respond 
positively to all 24 recommendations in this report,” he said.

An assistant commissioner, Ray Johnson, will head up a new division to lead 
the reform process.

 