
All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media>, the independent 
producer behind shows including Shameless and Midsomer Murders, has kicked off 
a long-expected strategic review by appointing UBS to look at options including 
a £700m-plus sale.

The company had been widely expected to start a review – with a sale 
considered the most likely outcome – as soon as possible after being able to 
show potential buyers solid figures on its business performance in the first 
six months of its financial year at the end of February.

All3Media appointed UBS, which worked with the company in 2006 when private 
equity firm Permira took a majority stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/jul/31/privateequity.broadcasting?INTCMP=SRCH>
, to oversee the review at a board meeting on Wednesday.

Speculation that All3Media may look to sell emerged last year with ITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/nov/25/itv-may-buy-production-company-all3media?INTCMP=SRCH>
, which has struggled to grow its own in-house production operation ITV 
Studios, touted as a potential buyer.

However, one source close to ITV said they believed that if it does seek to 
make an acquisition it is most likely to look for a "reasonable-sized" business 
outside the UK.

All3Media, which reported earnings of £50.5m in the year to the end of August 
2009, has a growing US business, with revenues expected to exceed $100m (£63m) 
this year.

The company is understood to have significantly improved its business 
performance as the industry recovered from the 2009 advertising recession, with 
an expectation of earnings in the region of £65m in the 12 months to the end of 
August this year, with debt thought to be cut to about £250m.

One analyst believes that the business could be worth about £600m – at a 
multiple of about 10 times expected earnings. Elisabeth Murdoch recently sold 
her production business, Shine, to News Corporation at about that multiple, 
while Time Warner's acquisition of Shed Media was at around 8 to 10 times 
earnings.

Taking into account the quality and range of All3Media's programming output, a 
12-times multiple could be attached to a deal, putting the price tag at as much 
as £780m.

However, there are a number of factors to be considered, including the issue 
of earn-outs for key creative talent. All3Media is made up of about 16 
independent producers the company has acquired.

A second analyst believes that even if a buyer emerges there is unlikely to be 
any deal, and in particular any chance of achieving a top-end valuation, before 
September after ALL3Media's full-year figures will be known.

Officially All3Media says that the strategic review will look at a number of 
options including a share offering, but sources with knowledge of the situation 
believe finding a buyer is the most likely option.

It is well known in city circles that Permira has been keen to seek an exit 
for some time. All3Media management own more than 40% of the business.

Businesses which have shown an interest in major media assets include US media 
companies Time Warner, which is thought more likely to now look to build 
operations outside the UK following the acquisition of Shed Media, and NBC 
Universal.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> or on Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 