
A £750m sale of All3Media, the television production firm behind Skins and 
Shameless, is understood to have attracted interest from companies including 
American Idol's owner Apollo and Sony Pictures Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>.

All3Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/all3media> is in the early stages 
of a strategic review, which is being carried out by the investment bank UBS, 
and has attracted interest from both private equity and trade buyers. Initial 
approaches for theMidsomer Murders producer have come from the US firms 
Providence Private Equity as well as from Apollo Global Management and the 
television arm of Sony's film studio.

This month Apollo agreed to pay $511m (£310m) for CKX, the entertainment 
company behindAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/10/apollo-global-management-buys-ckx>
 andSo You Think You Can Dance, which also owns rights to the likeness and 
names of Elvis Presley and Muhammad Ali. CKX acquired Simon Fuller's previous 
company, 19 Entertainment, in 2005.Providence is an investor in Hulu, an online 
TV venture with partners including News Corp, Disney and NBC Universal, and is 
selling its stake in Warner Music since Len Blavatnik's $3.3bn takeover.

Sony Pictures Television is keen to rekindle its ambition to expand its global 
production presence, having recently divested itself of its 20% stake in Shine, 
the production firm Elisabeth Murdoch sold to her father Rupert's News Corp 
earlier this year.

Officially, All3Media is looking at a range of strategic options, including a 
share offering. However, it is well known in the City that the private equity 
investor Permira, which bought into the firm in 2006, is keen for a sale, with 
a global media group the preferred suitor. Permira is bullishly pushing a 
target price of more than £750m, based on 12 times the forecast 2011 earnings 
of £62m-£65m. This is the same multiple that Elisabeth Murdoch got for Shine, 
although observers consider eight times earnings to be closer to the mark.

One person aware of the sale process believes that the expressions of interest 
are well below the top-end figure Permira is seeking. The source also indicated 
that although the process was still at an early stage, some of the companies 
that pursue their interest in All3Media may end up looking to do so as a joint 
bid.

Cash-rich ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>, widely seen as a 
potential suitor, has balked at the asking price, believing it to be too steep.

All3Media has had a strong year so far, picking up Bafta's for The Only Way is 
Essex and The Cube, which air on ITV, and achieving record ratings for MTV with 
the debut of the scripted reality showGeordie Shore.
 