
All sales of UK weapons to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> should be suspended until an 
independent inquiry into alleged breaches of international law in Yemen has 
been completed, two select committees have agreed in a joint report.

The committees accuse the Saudi government of obstructing efforts to 
investigate the alleged violations, which human rights organisations say are 
the result of its campaign of airstrikes in the country.

The UK government has failed to undertake its own credible investigations, and 
some ministers had told parliament of checks that had not in fact taken place, 
the committees said.

They feared British support, principally through arms sales, was “having the 
effect of conferring legitimacy” on Saudi Arabia’s actions, the report said.

How Saudi Arabia's airstrikes have hit civilian life in Yemen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/how-saudi-arabias-airstrikes-have-hit-civilian-life-in-yemen>
 However, plans to have their recommendation to suspend arms sales endorsed by 
the joint committee on arms controls exports (CAEC) have been blocked by 
opposition led by Crispin Blunt, the Conservative chairman of the foreign 
affairs select committee.

 In a highly unusual move, the foreign affairs committee simultaneously 
produced its own report suggesting the legitimacy of UK arms sales should be 
left for a court to decide.

Even the foreign affairs committee report, however, calls for an independent 
UN-led investigation into allegations that Saudi Arabia has violated 
international humanitarian law inYemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>
.

Saudi Arabia intervened in March 2015 to support the Yemeni government against 
Houthi rebels, who are backed by Iran and control the capital, Sana’a. The UN 
has put the death toll in the 18-month war at more than 10,000 people, 3,799 of 
them civilians.Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> 
groups accuse the Saudi air campaign of routinely hitting civilian targets.

Britain has sold more than £3.7bn of arms to Saudi Arabia since the airstrikes 
began.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fowen-jones-yemen-conflict-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yemen%3A%20Britain's%20forgotten%20conflict%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fowen-jones-yemen-conflict-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yemen%3A%20Britain%27s%20forgotten%20conflict%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fowen-jones-yemen-conflict-video&media=>
Owen Jones on Yemen: Britain’s forgotten conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/13/owen-jones-yemen-conflict-video>
Blunt and his allies on the CAEC created a furore at a lengthy private meeting 
last week when they prevented the committee reaching a consensus by walking out 
and ensuring there were not enough MPs to form a quorum. A draft report had 
called for the suspension of arms sales to Saudi Arabia.

The CAEC is unusual at Westminster in that it consists of members of four 
different select committees – defence, business, international development and 
foreign affairs. Its task is to monitor the government’s licensing of arms 
exports. A minimum representation is required from each constituent committee 
for the overall joint committee to be quorate.

Crispin Blunt to intensify row about Saudi arms sales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/crispin-blunt-to-intensify-row-about-saudi-arms-sales>
Blunt’s manouevre has created ill feeling among those who believe he walked 
out knowing this was the only way to prevent being defeated in a vote. For his 
part, Blunt said he could not see how the UK could secure its strategic 
objectives except in an alliance with Riyadh.

The episode underlines the fragility of political support at Westminster for 
the UK’s continuing close relations with the country.

The joint report by the business and international development committees 
states: “The UK government has not responded to allegations of IHL 
[international humanitarian law] breaches by the Saudi-led coalition in any 
meaningful way and we are concerned that our support for the coalition, 
principally through arms sales, is having the effect of conferring legitimacy 
on its actions.”

Challenging the veracity of the Saudis’ defence, they also state: “We are not 
convinced that Saudi Arabia is best placed to investigate reports of IHL 
breaches and their lack of progress in reporting findings only confirms our 
concerns that they are obstructing the process.”

UK in denial over Saudi arms sales being used in Yemen, claims Oxfam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/uk-in-denial-over-saudi-arms-sales-being-used-in-yemen-claims-oxfam>
The committees also take the government to task for asserting that it was in a 
position to judge whether the Saudi bombing campaign was in breach of 
international law and then withdrawing the claim in a series of written 
parliamentary answers. “These corrections not only damage confidence in 
cross-Whitehall coordination and competence but, more importantly, undermine 
the government’s view that there is no clear risk that UK arms licensed to 
Saudi Arabia will be used in violations of IHL in Yemen.”

They single out Philip Dunne, the then minister for defence procurement, 
saying he gave a series of assurances about UK checks on the Saudi bombing 
campaign that the government has since admitted did not take place.

The Conservative MP Chris White, who chaired the inquiry into the exports and 
is a member of the business committee, said: “ The government can no longer 
wait and see and must now take urgent action, halting the sale of arms to the 
Saudi-led coalition until we can be sure that there is no risk of violation.”

In the Lords, however, the foreign office whip Annabel Goldie insisted Britain 
operated one of the most robust arms export control regimes in the world.

“The key test for our continued arms export to Saudi Arabia is whether there 
is a clear risk that those weapons might be used in the commission of a serious 
violation of law.

“Having regard to all the information available to us we assess that this test 
has not been met.”
 