
It was cinema’s Gerard Butler who once observed 
<http://www.contactmusic.com/gerard-butler/news/gerard-butler-no-one-works-harder-than-me_3604281>
: “There’s no one in this world I think works harder than me.” It’s true. 
Although a UN report found their daily toil sufficiently backbreaking and 
hazardous to rank them as amongthe very poorest of the poor 
<http://www.philstar.com/agriculture/778532/filipino-fisherfolk-among-poorest-poor>
, there are Filipino fishermen who come home and almost collapse after 18 hours 
on the waters, only to rally themselves when their wife sniffs: “Tough day? Do 
me a favour – you’re not Gerard Butler. Gerard’s been in his trailer since 7am 
and he’s still waiting for the light.”

The fact is, movie acting is the toughest profession, and anyone who feels 
moved to query that has simply never shot a really intense scene about being on 
welfare with Kristen Stewart, much less had to bang her afterwards. People who 
endure that go fishing to relax, you know what I mean? That’s how tough the gig 
is.

And so to another week in which the role, and the toll of the role, has been 
diversely discussed by those forced to weather it. We begin with returning 
characterShia LaBeouf <https://www.theguardian.com/film/shia-labeouf>, whose 
tireless attempts to get everyone to forget he was once a Disney star mark him 
out as a Proper Celebrity. Shia understands his responsibility to add to the 
gaiety of the nations, and consequently has torn through various 
breakdown-effect public poses in the past few years. Ways in which he has 
“given back” include – but are by no means limited to –doing acid in front of 
Ron Weasley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/05/rupert-grint-stage-debut-interview>
; a plagiarism scandal he sought to defuseby hiring a skywriting plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2014/jan/09/shia-labeouf-drug-taking-plagiarism-messed-up>
;wearing a paper bag reading “I Am Not Famous Anymore” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/news/shia-labeouf-wears-paper-bag-on-his-head-to-the-premiere-of-nymphomaniac-at-berlin-film-festival-9118259.html>
 to a premiere; staging an art installation in which he sat for five days in an 
LA gallery and allowed the public to join him in short shifts;revealing he was 
raped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/28/shia-labeouf-raped-performance-art-project-dazed>
 by a woman during the latter performance; amajestically irksome motivational 
speech <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZXsQAXx_ao0> on YouTube; filming 
himself binge-watching his own movies in a cinema for three days. (He walked 
out for Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, fact fans, but managed to stay for 
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull.)

Anyway, Shia’s latest outing is a lengthy interview 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/shia-labeouf-drinking-steven-spielberg-american-honey-1201851776/>
 in Variety, in which he announces: “I’m learning how to distil my ‘crazy’ into 
something manageable, that I can shape and deliver on the day.” I must say I 
like the sound of his new film, directorAndrea Arnold’s American Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/14/american-honey-review-andrea-arnold-mislays-map-but-us-roadtrip-still-sweetly-intriguing>
, a lot. “For American Honey, Arnold never gave LaBeouf a script,” we learn, 
“just a black-and-white picture of a forest for inspiration.” Very much hoping 
that one doesn’t come out the same week asRogue One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/12/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story-trailer-five-things-we-learned>
.

The movie concerns “a gang of nomad thieves and misfit kids selling magazine 
subscriptions on a cross-country road trip”. And in keeping with today’s theme, 
it appears to be a shoot of a rare order, where the cast slept in motels and 
were encouraged to replicate their fictional relationships. “You do whatever is 
required for it to be true, for it to be honest,” explains Shia. “I had to run 
this group, sort of like a pimp.” He acquired 12 new tattoos during the shoot, 
including a matched pair of Missy Elliotts on his knees. He doesn’t like Missy 
Elliott that much, apparently – it was just “peer pressure”.

Other interview highlights? Mugging off Mister Spielberg – “He’s a less a 
director than he is a fucking company” – and Variety’s deadpan parenthesis 
“Spielberg declined to comment”. And there’s a reminder that actors can always 
find new variations on the old fib “I don’t act for trophies. But you know, it 
would be nice to be nominated.” Or as Shia puts it: “The Oscars are about 
politics. I got to earn my way back. It’s not about who is the best. I’m not 
that guy for a long time – for a long, long time. I’m good with that, though. 
Sometimes that shit is a curse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fshia-labeouf-daniel-craig-tom-hiddleston-toll-of-the-role-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a31fd92199ca2f41be21f30a4ab2b9142a11dce%2F0_72_4050_2430%2F4050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shia%20LaBeouf%2C%20Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Daniel%20Craig%20reveal%20the%20toll%20of%20the%20role&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fshia-labeouf-daniel-craig-tom-hiddleston-toll-of-the-role-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shia%20LaBeouf%2C%20Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Daniel%20Craig%20reveal%20the%20toll%20of%20the%20role&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fshia-labeouf-daniel-craig-tom-hiddleston-toll-of-the-role-taylor-swift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a31fd92199ca2f41be21f30a4ab2b9142a11dce%2F0_72_4050_2430%2F4050.jpg>
 Daniel Craig: $150m for two movies? That’s a tough one … Photograph: Mark 
Garten/AP 
Elsewhere in acting, though, there is a horrendous – if tenuously credible – 
dilemma for Daniel Craig. Does he or does he not take therumoured $150m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/daniel-craig-offered-150m-two-more-bonds>
 he is being offered to commit to two further James Bond movies? At first look, 
this would seem to be a gimme, but remember: even among movie acting gigs, Bond 
is one of the absolute toughest. As Craig put it after the last one: he’d 
rather “slash my wrists” than go through it again. In fact, reading his 
frequent discourses on Bond’s demands, it seems desperately wet of Björk to 
have vowed never to act again after makingDancer in the Dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/sep/15/1> with Lars Von Trier in 2000. 
Man up, love! I honestly think it would have finished Björk off if some gender 
alchemy had required her to shag around in an edition-of-10 Aston Martin 
between various luxury spa locations, all the while trying to retrieve 
important nanotechnology from some intriguingly scarred foreigner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fshia-labeouf-daniel-craig-tom-hiddleston-toll-of-the-role-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8ae4cc9a32b6e3e871727119e404a9a42505be8%2F767_340_1107_1384%2F1107.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shia%20LaBeouf%2C%20Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Daniel%20Craig%20reveal%20the%20toll%20of%20the%20role&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fshia-labeouf-daniel-craig-tom-hiddleston-toll-of-the-role-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shia%20LaBeouf%2C%20Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Daniel%20Craig%20reveal%20the%20toll%20of%20the%20role&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Fshia-labeouf-daniel-craig-tom-hiddleston-toll-of-the-role-taylor-swift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8ae4cc9a32b6e3e871727119e404a9a42505be8%2F767_340_1107_1384%2F1107.jpg>
 Tom Hiddleston: swiftly ruled out for Bond. Photograph: Action 
Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Then again, while we’re on the subject of Bond, does his reported split with 
Taylor Swift put Tom Hiddleston back in the frame for the role? Aspreviously 
discussed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/may/20/idris-elba-must-be-james-bond-tom-hiddleston-daniel-craig>
, Lost in Showbiz has grave reservations about the suitability of Hiddleston 
for Bond, particularly on the basis of an interview he once gave in which he 
explained that as an actor, “I can’t turn off my intelligence”. But following 
his high-profile three-month relationship with Taylor … well, things have 
merely crystallised. No offence, but I don’t go to the movies to watch my 
country being covertly defended by someone who’d wearan I Love TS singlet 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3675252/Theory-Tom-Hiddleston-s-T-shirt-declaring-love-Taylor-Swift-sweeps-Twitter.html>
. You might as well give Isis our nuclear codes or make Boris Johnson foreign 
secretary.

I speak, of course, of the photos of Tom cavorting in the sea with Taylor, 
wearing a customised vest. Clearly his outfit was a joke, some impenetrable 
Fourth of July japery between new lovers. But it’s out there now, and for all 
the briefing and counter-briefing over who dumped whom, I can’t help feeling 
one of the sundered parties is going to swim forward faster and more lethally. 
Oh Tom, Tom, Tom! Why did you think it was safe to go into the water?
 