
The actor and artist Shia LaBeouf, the Community creator and podcaster Dan 
Harmon, the Serial executive producer Julie Snyder and videos of cats are the 
prime attractions at Bingefest, a new 24-hour festival to take place at the
Sydney Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney-opera-house> this December.

The Opera House’s first new festival in five years, Bingefest will focus on 
everything from TV and podcasts to memes and games, giving audiences a series 
of events that range from Buffy-watching marathons to Street Fighter 
tournaments.


Headliner LaBeouf’s recent projects and public appearances have been notable 
for their absurdist leanings, such aslive-streaming footage of himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/nov/12/shia-labeouf-watches-every-shia-labeouf-movie-back-to-back-video>
 watching his all his own films back-to-back andoccupying an Oxford elevator 
for 24 hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/19/shia-labeouf-occupies-oxford-elevator-for-performance-art-project>
.

LaBeouf and his collaborators from both these projects, the Finnish artist 
Nastja Säde Rönkkö and the UK artist Luke Turner, will be embracing their 
uber-modernist tendencies, performing “a new participatory performance artwork” 
commissioned for Bingefest over the course of the weekend.

Watching Shia LaBeouf watch Shia LaBeouf is fascinating in its dullness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/watching-shia-labeouf-watch-shia-labeouf-is-fascinating-in-its-dullness>
Snyder, a senior producer at the US radio program This American Life and an 
executive producer of the hit podcastSerial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial>, will give a presentation 
about “binge-worthy journalism”.

Harmon, the creator of the US television comedy series Community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/community>, will join Australian 
comedians Celia Pacquola and Luke McGregor for an event that organisers hope 
will pair panel discussion with creative collaboration. There will also be a 
live recording of Harmon’s weekly comedy podcast, Harmontown. Jad Abumrad – the 
co-creator and host of the radio show and podcast Radiolab – will be presenting 
on “gut-churn” and the creative process.

Other highlights include an overnight Buffy marathon curated by the pop 
culture website the AV Club, which will also be hosting All the TV You Should 
Have Watched By Now; theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Cat Video Festival, a 
family-friendly hour of cat videos and cat-related activities; and the Harambe 
Memorial Service, in which a panel of journalists and comedians, including Mark 
Di Stefano, Rosie Waterland, James Colley and Dan Ilic relive the biggest memes 
in internet history.


“Television, podcasts, gaming and the internet at large create an artistic 
frame through which we view the world,” said Bingefest’s founder and curator, 
Danielle Harvey. The festival will take place on 17–18 December at the Sydney 
Opera House.
 