
If you're wondering what to get a loved one for their birthday, then look no 
further than a LawStore gift voucher. "Nothing could be more thoughtful than 
the gift of legal security," says the flyer. Who could disagree?

The LawStore <http://www.thelaw-store.co.uk/>, along the Regent arcade of the 
Glades shopping centre in Bromley, Kent, is the brainchild of Kent and 
Manchester law firm MTA Solicitors. It is one of the first examples of what 
could soon be a big trend of bringing the lawyer to the consumer, rather than 
the other way round. It seems that lawyers are finally emerging from the dingy 
office above an Indian takeaway down a side road.

As I reported last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2011/aug/19/online-legal-services-growth>, the 
founder of Freeserve, Ajaz Ahmed, has partnered with Yorkshire law firm Last 
Cawthra Feather to launch city centre law shops where you can receive immediate 
advice under the brand Legal365, with a pilot shop opening shortly in Leeds. 
Last November – at the same time MTA opened the LawStore – QualitySolicitors 
Freeman Harris opened a store in Lewisham shopping centre, south London.

The concept of legal retail outlets, while unusual, is not new. Bristol law 
firm Peter Browne Solicitors has long run theLaw Shop 
<http://www.lawshopbristol.co.uk/ls_whatis.html>, providing free resources and 
selling DIY legal packs to help people tackle their own legal problems, with 
the option of paying for the guidance of a solicitor while doing so (at £7 for 
every five minutes).

Another variation is the shopping centre stand where you cannot actually get 
legal advice on the spot, but you can make contact with a law firm and set the 
ball rolling.Lawyers2You <http://www.lawyers2you.co.uk/>, a brand owned by law 
firm Blakemores, has stands across the Midlands, while this month Britain's Got 
Talent judge Amanda Holden launched the first of what will be 500 so-called 
legal access points in largerWH Smith stores 
<http://www.qualitysolicitors.com/whsmith.html>. These will allow consumers to 
book appointments with their local QualitySolicitors (QS) firm. QS is a growing 
law firm collective trying to build the first national legal brand.

Back in Bromley, MTA chief executive David Green said the LawStore was already 
paying for itself in driving business to the firm. It is a simple affair, with 
a small reception area with very friendly receptionist and consultation area 
behind; clinics for different areas of law are held every day and should 
someone just drop in and need help there and then, the firm can whistle up a 
lawyer from its nearby offices. Most come in to make appointments, however.

This can only be good for the public. While some solicitors see these 
developments as tacky, it is a reminder that the notion of access to justice 
includes physical accessibility. And there is every chance that such 
initiatives will actually expand the market for legal services by stimulating 
latent demand.

What they also demonstrate is a recognition that some lawyers are lacking when 
it comes to the service they provide – not the advice, but the way it is 
delivered. Unfortunately, many solicitors do not separate the two, which in 
part explains why we now have the legal ombudsman.

There is no doubt that lawyers are feeling threatened by this 
"consumerisation" of the profession and the introduction of alternative 
business structures (ABSs) and non-lawyer ownership of law firms – likely to 
start early next year – will only accelerate this. The LawStore and its ilk 
could be small beer alongside the likes ofCo-operative Legal Services 
<http://www.co-operative.coop/legalservices/>, which has built up a £24m legal 
business in less than five years and already offers advice over the phone.

It recently piloted face-to-face advice in three branches of the Britannia 
bank (which merged with the Co-op in 2009). A spokesman said they were still 
assessing the results "with a view to widening the pilot later this year, but 
at this stage the exact plans have not yet been finalised".

The Co-op has pledged to be in the first wave of ABSs, but is closely guarding 
its expansion plans. Most observers expect other retail brands to enter the 
market too.

Meanwhile, rather than debating their strategic response to these trends, 
solicitors are getting exercised over comments made about solicitorsby Amanda 
Holden on This Morning 
<http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/latest-news/row-over-holdens-comments-on-solicitors-prompts-itv-clarification>
 and complaining that QualitySolicitors has appropriated the word "quality" to 
the detriment of non-member firms (indeed, the Law Society's new advertising 
campaign seems to be trying to reclaim it with the strapline "Choose quality 
advice 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/productsandservices/services/promotingyourpractice.law>
").

This lack of understanding of how the retail market works is why firms like 
MTA are already ahead of the pack by delivering the law in a way the client, 
rather than the lawyer, wants. They realise that what they do is called legal 
services for a reason.

Neil Rose is the editor of legalfutures.co.uk <http://www.legalfutures.co.uk/>
 