
According to the Office for Fair Access’ 2014 report 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCMQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.offa.org.uk%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2014%2F07%2FOFFA201405-1213monitoring-outcomes.pdf&ei=CUxFVL-OBYeR7AaJhYCQBQ&usg=AFQjCNFZAu9ALEkiEkEEPhhI0deLAvpDcw&sig2=2yU7osANBZ995buFSZE4Vw&bvm=bv.77880786,d.ZGU>
, the most advantaged 20% of young people are still over six times more likely 
to attend a selective institution than the most disadvantaged 40%. And, as 
universities increase their A-level tariffs, some argue that the situation is 
likely to get worse. In last week’s education Guardian, professorPatrick McGhee 
argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/14/poor-pupil-oxbridge-less-likely-pope-bono>
 that universities should consider a student’s background when making 
admissions decisions. Here’s the reaction from university staff:

Patrick Fullick, education consultant and former director of teacher training 
and master’s degree programmes at the University of Southampton

Universities already make use of contextual data for admissions, but they do 
so in the very worst way. Through the personal statement, applicants from 
advantaged backgrounds are given free rein to play the system by supplying 
exactly the kind of information that selectors are looking for: from work 
experience to involvement in clubs and societies.

Of course university tutors are able to see what external factors might affect 
an application, but unless they have access to the correct information, these 
interpretations could be called into question. Such admission decisions might 
be hard to defend if subject to challenge in a legal setting.

Placing aspiring university applicants on a map (both literal and 
metaphorical) that enables fair decisions to be made about their potential 
would liberate university selectors from the excruciating job of reading 
between the lines. It would also mean that academics could defend their 
decisions where they had considered a student’s background.

In an age when big data rules, the development of data sets relating to 
university applications is not something that presents an insuperable challenge.

Geoffrey Alderman, Michael Gross professor of politics and contemporary 
history at the University of Buckingham. He was formerly pro vice-chancellor at 
Middlesex University

I was born into a working-class family in Hackney: my mother was a housewife 
and my father earned a subsistence wage as a packer in a Stepney warehouse. 
There was always food on the table but I was made aware from an early age that 
the Alderman household was severely “cash-limited”.

Aged 11, I won a place at the local grammar school and, six years later, made 
the leap of a lifetime when my headmaster suggested I sat the Oxford history 
entrance exams. I spent a week there, writing exams and being interviewed. The 
interviews, incidentally, were far more searching than the exams: I had to 
defend my opinions and answer, on the spot, probing questions on a wide range 
of subjects, not confined to history.

Many years later I asked one of my tutors whether what would now be called 
“context” had played any part in the decision to admit me. He was appalled. I 
had entered a competitive examination and had won my place. Had this place been 
offered – let’s say – in spite of inadequate exam results, through some 
compensatory fiat of social engineering, I would also have been appalled. And 
deeply insulted.

Over the decades I’ve interviewed hundreds of students, and occasionally I’ve 
persuaded colleagues to admit them in spite of poor A-levels, based on my 
professional judgment of their intellectual capabilities. I’ve never been 
proved wrong. But I’ve never considered social context. Social engineering may 
well be a public good. But it’s inherently discriminatory (it necessarily 
penalises students from certain socio-economic backgrounds) and – therefore – 
has no place in any university that claims to prioritise academic excellence.

Fiona Elsted, lecturer and departmental employability development director at 
the University of Essex

Imagine the following scenario: Zoe is a bright and articulate 11 year old 
living with both her parents who, due to illness, have been unable to find paid 
work for much of her life. Her school hasa high percentage of pupils who, like 
her, are eligible for free school meals 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/newsarchive/top-comprehensives-socially-selective-half-national-average-proportion-pupils-free-school-meals/>
. It hasno sixth form. 
<http://www.researchonline.org.uk/sds/search/download.do;jsessionid=2AAA39FCCF4C22581611B9221159802C?ref=Y3005>

If Zoe does apply to university she will have some formidable competition: 
other applicants will have attended a school with an “outstanding” Ofsted 
rating, enjoyed a comfortable home life andhave parents with degrees 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/john-jerrim-report-final-4.pdf>
. Undoubtedly, those students will deserve the good A-level grades they achieve 
but Zoe’s slightly lower grades (A-levels, unlessadvice is poor 
<http://www.ucas.com/sites/default/files/applicant-survey-report-2012.pdf>) 
will be hard won and unlikely to reflect her future potential. You could expect
more growth in a student like Zoe, 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/documents/ContextualData/SPA_ContextualisedAdmissions.July2013.pdf>
 but the grades are a barrier.

This is where the use of contextual data 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/information/contextualdata/examplesofhowheisuse> comes 
into its own. Taking into accountfactors 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/information/contextualdata/> such as postcode, school 
attended and socio-economic group, admissions teams can make a holistic 
assessment of applications. Then a decision may be taken as to whether or not 
to make a‘contextual offer’. 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/documents/ContextualData/SPA_ContextualisedAdmissions.July2013.pdf>
 This means Zoe’s achievements so far are noted, but so too is her future 
potential.

It’s not like anything sneaky is going on here: it is simply a way of 
supporting students to gain a place at a well-respected university. Less 
disadvantaged students receive support in this too. They benefit from 
“higher-quality” teaching; parents with degrees themselves; stability at home 
and teaching staff who can guide the application process to make sure the
personal statement 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/the-personal-statement/> stands 
out. For these clear advantages, and outside help, we do not penalise an 
applicant; yet for the lack of advantage we frequently do. Contextual data 
could level the playing field.

There’s a bit of a gamble involved but so far Supporting Professionalism in 
Applications (SPA 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/documents/ContextualData/SPA_ContextualisedAdmissions.July2013.pdf>
), a body that provides advice on admissions issues, has found that those to 
whom contextual offers were made have not disappointed but have insteadachieved 
more than satisfactory grades and managed their courses well 
<http://www.spa.ac.uk/documents/ContextualData/SPA_ContextualisedAdmissions.July2013.pdf>
.

Professor Stephen Gorard, school of education, Durham University 

Allowing institutions to make subjective judgements on the basis of an 
individual’s context won’t make the system any better.

Contextual data was used in crucial policy-making decisions at school level in 
England from 2002-10, in the form of contextualised value-added progress 
calculations. The results informed inspections, school closures and mergers, 
and school and departmental improvement approaches. In contextual value added 
data (CVA), the background characteristics of pupils were used to help predict 
their later qualifications, and so decide whether an individual had done better 
or worse than expected.It was a complete failure 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/01411920903144251/abstract>, 
relying only on visible and available indicators, and highly sensitive to tiny 
variations in measures.

One of the biggest issues was missing data: a problem we still encounter 
today. Currently it is not known whether around 4% of pupils in state schools 
are eligible for free school meals (FSM) or not. In reality, these pupils are
more deprived on average than FSM-eligible pupils are 
<http://dro.dur.ac.uk/11128/>. But the schools taking them not only had 
harder-to teach pupils, they had worse CVA, and receive no pupil premium 
funding for them because officially the data is missing.

If FSM were used as context in higher education admissions the same kinds of 
unfairness would happen. Every year around 11% of school pupils have unknown 
ethnic origin, and the number of applicants to higher education refusing to 
state their parents’ occupational status is large and growing.

The idea of getting around missing context measures by using values for areas 
or institutions actually makes things worse. There are more school pupils for 
whom there is no post code data than for any other variable. And, anyway, 
assuming that an individual has the modal characteristics of the place they 
live in or the school they attended is a blatant example of the ecological 
fallacy in logic.

Do you think universities should use contextual data when considering a 
student’s Ucas application? Share your thoughts in the comments below.

Join the Higher Education Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network> for more comment, 
analysis andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your 
inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 