
Q I graduated a year ago and I am Â£12,000 in debt because of a combination of 
student loans, credit card debt and other financial problems. I have heard that 
if you go bankrupt you can clear your student loan all in one go and you don't 
ever have to pay it back. This sounds very attractive to me right now, as I 
can't really see how I am ever going to get out of this mess. I'm tempted to do 
it and sort out my debt for ever, but is there a catch?
DK

A The catch is that being a bankrupt will affect your chances of getting a 
mortgage, credit or, in some cases, a job in the future. The reason that this 
issue has come to light recently is due to a planned change in the insolvency 
rules. The proposals are part of the government's attempt to encourage more 
people to become entrepreneurs, and it will reduce the number of years you have 
to wait before you are discharged as a bankrupt (ie until the slate is wiped 
clean, credit-wise).

Though it may sound tempting, and could be technically possible, bankruptcy is 
a drastic step, and you should take proper advice from a money expert before 
you even consider it.

Here are a few things to think about before you plunge in. If you are 
considering a job in the legal profession - eg as a solicitor - then you won't 
be able to practise as a bankrupt. Mortgage companies and credit card providers 
will be very wary of lending you money in the future - which may affect your 
plans to buy a home for many years. A record of unpaid debts sits on your 
credit file for six years - so you need to be aware that mobile phone 
companies, banks and building societies will know this if they do a credit 
check on you.

It's not as simple as getting rid of your student loan once and for all. If 
you are having financial difficulties, your best plan of action is to speak to 
a debt counsellor or visit your local Citizens Advice Bureau for some 
specialist advice. Going bankrupt is a serious decision and not a quick fix for 
short-term money problems. You may be better in the long run to organise a 
structured repayment plan instead.

Useful numbers
 National Debtline: 0808 808 4000
 Consumer Credit Counselling Service: 0800 138 1111
 