
A woman serving a 10-year sentence in France is to be released after spending 
three years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/french-president-pardons-jacqueline-sauvage-over-killing-of-violent-husband>
 by order of the French president. Jacqueline Sauvage had been convicted of 
killing her husband after suffering years of abuse at his hands.

The announcement from the presidential palace in Paris said 
<http://www.elysee.fr/communiques-de-presse/article/jacqueline-sauvage/> that 
President François Hollande was acting under article 17 of the French 
constitution, and after receiving advice from the justice ministry. Article 17 
states simply that thepresident “is vested with the power to grant individual 
pardons” 
<http://www2.assemblee-nationale.fr/langues/welcome-to-the-english-website-of-the-french-national-assembly>
.

French president pardons Jacqueline Sauvage over killing of violent husband
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/french-president-pardons-jacqueline-sauvage-over-killing-of-violent-husband>
We can have every sympathy for Sauvage, who appears to have been the victim of 
what we would regard asbattered woman syndrome 
<http://family.findlaw.com/domestic-violence/battered-women-s-syndrome.html>. 
Despite that, the idea of a politician overturning the decision of a court may 
still make us feel uncomfortable.

Was Hollande respecting public opinion in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> when he set Sauvage free? After all, 
she is hardly likely to kill again; and other women pushed beyond endurance are 
unlikely to be deterred by the prospect of prison. Or was the president trying 
to curry favour with the electorate ahead of presidential elections next year? 
Perhaps it was both.

The US constitution grants the president the power “to grant reprieves and 
pardons for offences against the United States, except in cases of 
impeachment”. Even so, I was far from comfortable withBill Clinton’s decision 
to pardon 140 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jan/21/edvulliamy.johnarlidge> in the 
two hours before he ceased to be US president 15 years ago. And yet, as the 
Guardianreported at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/feb/15/usa.philhoad>, Clinton was not 
the only president to let questionable figures off the hook. Perhaps the most 
notorious was Gerald Ford,who pardoned his predecessor, Richard Nixon, in 1974 
<http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=4696>. These pardons relate to federal 
crimes. But most US governors have the power to grant state pardons, in some 
cases replacing the death penalty with one of imprisonment.

There is a crucial difference between the powers of a democratic president or 
governor and those of a despot, however. In a democracy, the head of state can 
only reduce or remit a prison sentence; in a tyranny, the despot can impose or 
increase a sentence as well.

A pardon is essentially a form of clemency. That idea is well illustrated by 
the modern form ofa royal pardon 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/268717/pardon.jpg>
 in the United Kingdom. It recites that the sovereign is “graciously pleased” 
to extend her “grace and mercy” to the individual who is to be pardoned. The 
power now found in written constitutions has been exercised by monarchs since 
time immemorial. In the UK, it remains part of theprerogative powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/23/monarchy.iraq>.

Martin Kettle: Declaration of war on royal prerogative
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/23/monarchy.iraq> 
As the government explained in 2013, in the case of the wartime codebreaker 
Alan Turing who was convicted of homosexual activity in 1952 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
, the justice secretary can ask the Queen to grant a pardon under the royal 
prerogative of mercy for civilians convicted in England and Wales. Similar 
powers are exercised by ministers in Scotland and Northern Ireland, as well as 
by the defence secretary.

The Ministry of Justice said that a pardon was normally granted only when an 
individual was “innocent” of the offence concerned and where a request had been 
made by someone with a vested interest, such as a family member. However, a 
posthumous pardon was granted to Turing, who helped break the Germans’ Enigma 
code, even though neither requirement had been met in his case, reflecting what 
ministers regarded as the “unique nature” of his achievements. One of the great 
advantages of exercising prerogative powers under an uncodified constitution is 
that ministers can make up the rules as they go along.

In English law, though, a pardon does not quash a conviction. It merely 
releases the recipient from “all pains, penalties and punishments whatsoever 
that from the said conviction may ensure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/24/enigma-codebreaker-alan-turing-royal-pardon>
”. So even thoughDerek Bentley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1953/jan/28/fromthearchive> was 
pardoned in 1993, 40 years after he was hanged for murder,it was not until 1998 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Crim/1998/2516.html> that his conviction 
was quashed 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/january/28/newsid_3393000/3393807.stm>
 by the court of appeal. The then lord chief justice, Lord Bingham, said that 
the summing up by his predecessor Lord Goddard had denied Bentley “that fair 
trial which is the birthright of every British citizen”.

Pardons used to be granted when a lot of people had been wrongly convicted of 
a motoring offence because of some technical error – a wrongly positioned road 
sign, for example. But despite the administrative convenience, issuing a mass 
pardon amounted to sweeping that error under the carpet.

Miscarriages of justice, when they occur, should be put right by the courts. 
And if the courts get it wrong – on sentencing, for example – then parliament 
should put them right. But ministers must not usurp the role of the judges. 
Even so, there are times when only a pardon will do. It is a longstop for use 
when the rest of the criminal justice system fails. But they should be granted 
sparingly – if at all.
 