
Q I have got a credit card and owe £6,400 at 0.6% per month. I pay £200 per 
month towards this. I also have a loan on which I owe £3,400 and which I am 
repaying at £147 per month. Do you think I should get one loan to pay these two 
off?

MM

A What would you hope to achieve from combining the two loans? If you are 
looking for a lower monthly payment then bear in mind that this means you will 
be paying back your debts over a longer period. Taking out a personal loan 
would mean you were tied into making instalments over a set period, which could 
be as long as five years.

In addition, you are unlikely to find a personal loan offering as low a rate 
as the 0.6% you have on your credit card at present. Indeed, even the most 
competitive personal loans won't beat that rate of interest. At the rate you 
are paying, most of the money will be going towards paying off the debt, rather 
than just the interest, which is a very good policy.

The alternatives are not so attractive. For example, an unsecured loan for 
£5,000 over three years from Northern Rock will cost you £153 a month (interest 
rate 6.9%) while the same deal from Nationwide will be £155 a month (interest 
rate of 7.9%). These rates, which are best buys at present, are higher than the 
£147 per month you are paying on your loan at present.

There would be no sense in taking out a more expensive loan at a higher rate 
of interest when you seem to have found a good deal already. You don't say how 
much you earn or whether you are finding it a struggle to repay the debt. If 
you are having difficulties repaying your loan, it may be worth talking to your 
provider to suggest that they freeze the interest and allow you to pay off the 
capital. Lenders often prefer to have the debt repaid than for you to default.
 