
Q A week ago I received a letter telling me that I had a debt of Â£2,800 and 
that I should contact the company to find out how to resolve this outstanding 
debt.

When I made the call I was told that this was an outstanding debt of four 
years ago and if I did not have the total amount fully paid in 48 hours that 
they would send the bailiffs in. I told them that I did not have this amount of 
money to pay them in one go. However, I would be happy to set up a direct debit 
to pay the debt off.

I have been told that this is not possible and that the only way to stop the 
bailiffs from coming around or getting a county court judgment (CCJ) is to pay 
the debt off in one lump sum. They also told me that they could contact my 
company that I work for and gain access to my wage!

Another question that they asked me was what arrangements I had made to pay 
off this debt. I told them that I was in contact with my friends to see if they 
could help me. The company told me they were only interested if I called my 
bank to get a loan to pay off this debt.

Please can you advise me on my rights and what is the best way to approach 
this situation? I am happy to pay off this debt but cannot pay it off in one 
go. I think the company has taken on the debt from my bank, but they would not 
explain. Does it make sense to get back into more debt which has interest added 
to it to pay of an old debt off?

YK

A First you need to establish what this debt is for, and to whom you owe it. 
While it is frightening to receive a call from debt collectors who are 
threatening to send in the bailiffs, you should be clear about exactly who you 
are dealing with before you part with any money. Do you know what the debt is 
for, when you incurred it, and who the main creditor is? You are probably right 
in thinking that the company who phoned you up is actually collecting the debt 
on behalf of someone else. It may be better for you to deal directly with the 
company to whom you owe the money.

It is not true that a debt collector can gain access to your wages, and any 
company which makes those kind of threats is not dealing equitably with you. 
Nor do you have to let the bailiffs into your home if they call round. The 
actions of this company sound highly suspicious. There is no reason why you 
should not be able to use money borrowed from your friends in order to pay the 
money off if a lump sum if you are able to do that.

You need to act quickly. I suggest you contact the National Debtline 
<http://www.nationaldebtline.co.uk/> (0800 808 4000) for advice, then try to 
establish where the debt has come from and with which company you are dealing. 
You may well be able to set up a direct debit to pay back the money you owe in 
instalments, regardless of what this debt collection company is telling you. 
There is no point in taking on another loan if you think that you can clear the 
debt in regular instalments out of your wages.

If you don't find the help you need, you could also try your local Citizens 
Advice Bureau <http://www.nacab.org.uk/>, though you will have to make an 
appointment to see a money expert and this means it could take longer to 
resolve your problem. It may also be worth having a word with your bank 
manager, to clear up the issue and to ensure that you don't have any other 
outstanding debts.
 