
There's an episode of The Simpsons 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/feb/16/the-simpsons-top-10-episodes>
 in which Homer and the family visit London. Walking past a theatre, they 
encounterIan McKellen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/dec/09/ian-mckellen-gandalf-hobbit-interview>
, currently appearing in Macbeth. Unaware of the theatrical superstition that 
Macbeth should not be mentioned by name, Homer says the title of the play and 
McKellen is promptly struck by lightning. As the actor leaves to get ready for 
the performance, the family wish him good luck – so unwittingly breaking 
another theatrical taboo. The long-suffering star is promptly hit on the head 
by falling masonry.

The episode playfully skewers the superstitions of theatre folk 
<http://www.steppenwolf.org/watchlisten/program-articles/detail.aspx?id=23>, 
which range from a ban on whistling onstage to never passing another actor on 
the stairs, or unpacking your makeup box until after the reviews are in. My 
favourite is the ghost light – the small onstage light that must never be 
turned off. Its function is entirely practical: to ensure that anyone arriving 
backstage can see and doesn't accidentally fall into the pit. The more 
entertaining notion is that it is there after all the actors have left, to 
appease the ghosts and provide a light by which to stage their own performances.

It's also held to be bad luck to speak the last line of the play during 
rehearsal. And some actors believe that it's bad luck to put shoes on the 
table, while others believe it's unlucky to leave them on the floor. (Though in 
a rat or mouse-infested theatre that might be a wise precaution.)

It's easy to see why some might consider passing a funeral cortege on the way 
to the theatre unlucky, but other superstitions are baffling. I've no idea why 
chimney sweeps were once considered such good luck that the great actorEleonora 
Duse <http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/features/the-lost-library-of-eleonora-duse> 
insisted on one being present during a premiere.

But it's Shakespeare's Macbeth which is most shrouded in superstition – 
perhaps because of its supernatural element or perhaps merely because of the 
large number of fights. Some say the curse is a result of the backstage death 
of the boy actor playing Lady Macbeth during the premiere in 1606. And there 
have been countless cases of revivals hit by disaster: most recently Jonathan 
Slinger was knocked off his bike and broke his arm while playing the role for 
the RSC afterdismissing superstitions around the play 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/theatre-features/8461494/Jonathan-Slinger-Macbeth-The-hardest-part-Ive-played.html>
. Of course it's perfectly possible that as many actors have been injured or 
choked to death on cucumber sandwiches during performances of The Importance of 
Being Earnest, but we haven't totted these disasters up as we do with Macbeth.

Nonetheless maybe Alan Cumming 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/jul/01/alan-cumming-shakespeare-and-me-macbeth>
, who has just opened at the Ethel Barrymore theatre on Broadway in hisone-man 
Macbeth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/jun/17/macbeth-glasgow-tramway-alan-cumming1>
, had better look out.

Last month he took to Twitter 
<http://newyorktheater.me/2013/03/20/alan-cumming-will-say-macbeth-even-in-the-theater/>
 to announce that he has no truck with superstition, saying: "I am going to say 
Macbeth everywhere, even in the theatre. None of this Scottish play stuff for 
me." But according to a report in The Stage, the producers have other ideas, 
and have put up a sign in the foyerasking audiences to refrain from mentioning 
the title 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/production/2013/04/broadway-producers-ask-audiences-to-beware-macbeths-curse/>
 while in the venue. I can understand the superstitions of nervous actors, but 
nervous producers? Could it be that the move is less to do with genuine 
theatrical superstition and more of a marketing ploy to drum up a bit of 
tension and excitement?
 