
Redesigning NHS emergency care, tackling poor performance and harnessing the 
health service’s purchasing power are among the priorities of theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England chief executive.

Simon Stevens, delivering the keynote speech on the opening day of this year’s 
NHS Confederation conference in Liverpool, set out his plans for how the NHS 
can deliver theFive Year Forward View 
<http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/>.

The forward view, published last year, outlines a vision for the health 
service. It had power, Stevens said, because it was based not on his personal 
plan but on the collective view of organisations across the sector.

He told the audience of more than 3,000 health sector leaders: “We, the 
national health service, have set out our stall before the British people and 
come together to charter our own destiny.”

He added: “We have a plan. The NHS is up for it. We’ve got 54 million people 
in this country on our side.”

I see no likelihood that the NHS will receive additional infusions of cash 
this year
Simon Stevens 
Among the measures announced in his speech were: 

‘Success regime’

Stevens announced unprecedented new measures to tackle poor performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/03/nhs-regulators-to-take-over-health-services-in-three-english-regions>
 in three areas – north Cumbria, Essex and north-west Devon. The “success 
regime” will see regulators work with NHS England in the three regions to 
tackle problems and draw up “a more holistic diagnosis as to what needs to 
change”.

Previous strategies for improving NHS performance, Stevens said, had been 
“tested to destruction”.

Urgent and emergency care redesign

Stevens called for redesign of “the urgent care spaghetti” and said the 
current system was confusing for patients, meaning too many went to A&E, 
despite other options being available.

“We have got to do a far better job of joining this up from the public’s point 
of view,” he said. “We’ve got to do a better job of supporting self-care.”

He invited NHS leaders to “come play with us” and get involved in helping the 
health service better manage the rising demand for emergency care.

NHS cannot take more cuts to social care, say healthcare leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jun/02/nhs-no-more-cuts-to-social-care>
Harnessing NHS ‘purchasing power’


“I see no likelihood that the NHS will receive additional infusions of cash 
this year,” said Stevens, and managers will have to make do with what resources 
are allocated to them.


There was a need for “honest and balanced conversations about the level of 
demand and activity” the NHS faced, he added.

He said it was vital that the health service got to grips with some of the 
biggest areas of spending.

Picking up on this week’s announcement of curbs on the use of employment 
agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/02/no-more-3500-a-shift-doctors-jeremy-hunt-tells-nhs>
, Stevens said temporary staffing costs were the single largest cause of 
hospital deficits. He added: “That is entirely understandable; it is 
undesirable and it is unsustainable.”

Leaders can expect further measures on spending, he said, along with a “more 
muscular approach to using NHS purchasing power”.

New models for learning disability care

Stevens told delegates that a closure programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/10/nhs-shut-residential-hospitals-learning-disabilities-winterbourne-view>
 was needed for some long-stay institutions for people with a learning 
disability. He said NHS England was inviting 47 clinical commissioning groups 
to collaborate on new service models and a transition programme for people with 
learning disabilities.

Rob Webster: 'If we preserve the NHS in aspic, it will die'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jun/03/rob-webster-preserve-nhs-in-aspic-will-die>
A focus on public health

Reiterating points made in a recent speech by the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/may/21/obesity-diabetes-governments-top-priorities-says-jeremy-hunt>
, Stevens said there would be a focus on public health issues, including 
smoking, alcohol, exercise and obesity.

He called for a national conversation about the role of parents, schools and 
the food industry in tackling obesity.

“Health is what we are after,” he said. “Healthcare is what we do when we have 
not got it ... The H in the NHS is health.”
 