
Sir Martin Sorrell has defended WPP’s controversial long-term share scheme, 
from which he recently received a £36m payout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/16/wpps-martin-sorrell-gets-36m-payout-for-2014-under-contentious-share-plan>
.

Asked whether he felt guilty about his pay package at the Advertising Week 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising-week-europe> conference 
on Tuesday, the WPP chief executive said: “It is not a question of guilt. It is 
a question about the way the system works.”

The payout from the Leap incentive plan is likely to take Sorrell’s total pay 
for last year to about £40m, including his salary and short-term bonus. His 
total earnings fromWPP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/wppgroup> over the 
past 11 years now amount to about £184m.

Sorrell defended the scheme, arguing that he was not the only one who 
benefited from the rise and rise of WPP’s financial performance.

“It is not one man, it is 17 people who participate [in the Leap plan],” he 
said. “Last year the total incentives paid were about £350m. It’s pay for 
performance. You forget [WPP’s] market capitalisation has increased by £10bn 
over the five years [of the Leap performance plan]. If people think there is 
something wrong with the system they can change it.”

Sorrell also said the volatile world of advertising has had to deal with 
figures such asJeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> in the past.

“We’ve had Jeremy Clarksons and they’ve gone,” he said. “I know nothing about 
the ins and outs of Clarkson’s case. But if you say ‘do you have difficult 
decisions to make?’ [then yes] at some point in time you have to make those 
difficult decisions.”

Sorrell sympathised with the difficulty that the BBC has faced over what to do 
about Clarkson’s behaviour – the presenter has been on a final warning since 
apparently uttering the N-word last year – acknowledging that it is natural to 
avoid the “evil day” of potentially having to fire someone.

“When taking difficult decisions with people the natural tendency of human 
beings is when they have difficult decisions to make they delay them,” he said. 
“When you have a difficult decision to make the natural tendency of any human 
being, human being the operative word, is to avoid the evil day. Sometimes it 
is very difficult to avoid it, it depends on the individuals involved.”
 