
A happy workforce is a productive workforce. A 2014 study from the University 
of Warwick 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/economics/staff/eproto/workingpapers/happinessproductivity.pdf>
 (pdf) found that happiness improved performance by 12%. So how can you make 
sure your employees aren’t spending their lunch break looking for a new job?


1 Tell people what you want, not how you want it

It’s easy to say you want a team full of people who show initiative 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/business-blog/recruiting-employees-with-an-entrepreneurial-mindset-richard-heyes-tecmark/>
, but much harder to create a culture that allows people to demonstrate it.

“Wherever you can, talk to people about what you want them to achieve,” says 
Isla Wilson, founder of business growth consultancyRuby Star Associates 
<http://rubystarassociates.co.uk/>. “So, ‘we need to make sure that all 
proposals are high quality,’ rather than, ‘can you complete this checklist for 
every proposal to show me that you’ve spell-checked it and read it, and then 
can I re-read every document before it leaves the building’.”

She adds: “Providing freedom within boundaries is a good way to encourage and 
reward initiative and to build a team who are happy – and accountable. It’s 
much easier to say than it is to do, but it’s worth the effort.”

2 Be consistent in your decision-making 

Most businesses need to put commercial interests first from time to time. But 
if you’ve set an expectation that you’ll accommodate people’s individual 
preferences, doing so can make the team feel unhappy.

A good example of this is a small business owner who has historically always 
approved allholiday requests 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/business-blog/managing-business-popular-holiday-period/>
, but eventually needs to stop doing so to provide a core level of service for 
customers.

Be clear with your team about how decisions will be made. What does the 
business need? What do we, as a team, need? What does each individual need or 
want? If the team knows that decisions are made in this order, its members will 
have a clear expectation of how decisions are reached.

3 Be clear on work-life balance

In a competitive employment market, getting work-life balance right can help 
to retain the best team members and reduce workplace stress.

But Wilson says: “It is worth spending some time working out what is 
achievable. If you know that you have busy periods around project deadlines for 
instance, it may be better to talk in terms of how you balance busy weeks with 
quieter periods, rather than set an expectation that people can always walk out 
the door every day at 5.30pm, regardless of client requirements.”

4 Don’t build a business that reflects your fears

Many people start companies having already worked for large businesses. Wilson 
says: “We often come to our business with a fixed idea of how we don’t want to 
treat staff, which can be a positive basis on which to build a culture.”

But it’s important to look at these approaches in the round. “If you have 
previously worked for a business where people ‘live or die’ by their results, 
you may wish to build a more supportive culture.”

While this is a good instinct, it’s also important to think about how people 
are held to account for performance – so that you don’t build a 
highly-supportive culture where some people don’t pull their weight and others 
have to pick up the slack.

5 Look at the workspace

To create a happy workforce, you need to understand your people and how they 
work, then build the workplace offering around their needs.

It can be practical things. Chris Moriarty, managing director, UK and Ireland, 
ofLeesman <http://leesmanindex.com/>, the world’s largest index of workplace 
effectiveness, says: “Our research has revealed that a large number of 
employees are not particularly content with the noise levels in their workspace.

“Of those who say they’re happy with noise levels, 82% report that their 
environment allows them to work productively.” If that’s the case in your 
office, it’s worth putting up those partition walls or buying some 
sound-dampening textiles.

6 Beware of organised fun

Time together as a team can be valuable, so it might be tempting to think that 
a day at the races is an appropriate reward for good sales. But too much 
organised fun can breed resentment.

Wilson says: “Sometimes too many expectations about socialising together can 
undo great work on building happy and productive teams.” Don’t underestimate 
the impact of leaving your staff free to socialise with people they don’t work 
with.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Hiscox 
<https://www.hiscox.co.uk/>, sponsor of the Adventures in Business hub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/series/adventures-in-business>
 on the Guardian Small Business Network.
 