
“If there is one issue I regard as crucial to successful investment, it is the 
need for a long-term approach.” So said Martin Gilbert a year agoin a 
blistering blogpost 
<http://thinkingaloud.aberdeen-asset.co.uk/en/thinkingaloud/the-bigger-picture/more-marshmallows-in-the-age-of-asset-management>
 for Aberdeen Asset Management, the fund management firm where he is chief 
executive. Short-termism, he continued, is difficult to uproot because it is 
driven by greed, fear and the desire for instant gratification. But Gilbert was 
clear on why “the early exit culture infecting today’s market” should be 
resisted: by focusing on quality, long-termism leads to better outcomes.

Great stuff, and an accurate summary of why the cut-and-run approach to 
managing money damages prosperity. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/the-guardian-view-on-business-short-termism-arrested-development>
 But here comes Gilbert, wearing his other hat of deputy chairman of Sky, 
endorsing the idea thatRupert Murdoch’s £10.75-a-share bid for the company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
 is somehow fair. An offer at a 40% premium to last week’s share price “will 
accelerate and de-risk the delivery of future value for all Sky shareholders,” 
he says.

Murdoch’s dominance is insidious. He must not be allowed to buy Sky | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-tv-leveson>
Well, yes, guaranteed cash is on offer. But, come on, a mechanical takeover 
premium – calculated from a low point for the share price – is a grossly 
superficial way to view matters. Sky’s shares were trading at £11 as recently 
as April and little has happened since then to alter the company’s fundamental 
prospects. Management gave a confident presentation in October that could 
almost have been designed to tell investors to ignore the wobbly share price 
and think of the longer-term rewards from kick-starting the Italian and German 
operations and getting into mobile telephony.

Not everybody was convinced, of course, otherwise the shares would not have 
fallen to 769p. But listen to Polo Tang, respected media analyst atUBS: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ubs> Sky stands at an inflection point 
after a period of heavy investment in broadband and high-definition TV. 
Earnings per share should improve from 62.6p last year to more than 100p by 
2020. His target for Sky, as a standalone business, is £13.70, some 27% above 
the value of the offer from 21st Century Fox.

One shouldn’t be too damning of Gilbert. His powers of negotiation are 
curtailed by the hard fact ofFox’s ownership of 39% of Sky. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/from-launch-to-takeover-rupert-murdoch-and-sky>
 The Murdochs could have chosen to be nastier: they could have made a hostile 
offer at a mere 20% premium and still have hoped to crawl to a position of 
majority ownership. Gilbert and the independent directors, by holding out for a 
40% premium and ensuring that 75% of outside shareholders must approve the 
deal, have at least overcome that danger.

Sky should hold out for more from Rupert Murdoch | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/12/sky-should-seek-better-offer-from-rupert-murdoch>
But there is no reason for long-term investors to be cowed or even grateful. 
Instead they should remember Gilbert’s day-job advice about the perils of 
instant gratification and the need to look at the horizon. There is a simple 
calculation here: if UBS’s analysis is even vaguely correct, the sensible 
response is to reject the offer and wait for greater value to emerge from Sky 
over time. The company has rarely disappointed its owners for long. Just say no 
to the Murdochs’ opportunistic bid.

Outside fund managers coming to the Alliance Trust

A revolution is happening in Dundee. Grand old investment business Alliance 
Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> plans to sell its 
in-house manager and appoint eight outside fund managers instead, to be 
overseen by investment consultants Willis Towers Watson.

In truth, the revolution has been happening in stages since activist investor 
corporation Elliott climbed onboard in 2010. The New York hedge fund argued the 
incumbent directors were enjoying a comfortable and well-paid existence while 
not obviously doing a terrific job for investors. Its views found a sympathetic 
audience.A boardroom shakeup followed last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/01/katherine-garrett-cox-steps-down-alliance-trust-board>
 famed chief executive Katherine Garrett-Cox departed, and now comes the plan 
to bring in outside managers.

There is nothing wrong with a mainstream “externalisation” approach, certainly 
for a trust with £3.6bn of assets. Yet Alliance Trust investors tend to be a 
conservative bunch. Here they are being asked to approve a plan that, in 
effect, starts from scratch. What’s the dividend policy? Who are the managers? 
And, if the plan is to beat a global index by 2%, what’s the investment 
strategy to make it happen?

Answers will follow in time, says Alliance. They had better, because saying 
you’ll find “best in class” managers is just a statement of good intentions 
until the track records are put on display. One of the few solid facts, as 
investors will note, is that costs will increase from 45 basis points to 60. 
More details are needed – and quickly.
 