
Sky chief executive Jeremy Darroch has admitted that one of his biggest 
regrets is closing Sky Songs, the ill-fated music service he now believes could 
have rivalled Spotify.

BSkyB launched the music subscription service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/11/sky-guns-for-itunes-market?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
, which bore hallmarks of the models adopted by Apple's iTunes and a then much 
smaller scale Spotify, in 2009 with much fanfare and the ambitious aim of 
signing up "millions of homes".

However, a little over a year later the satellite broadcaster pulled the plug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/dec/06/bskyb-closes-sky-songs-music-service>
, saying it had been "unable to reach a large enough customer base."

"A couple of years ago we launched a great service called Sky Songs," said 
Darroch, speaking at theAdvertising Week Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising-week-europe> conference in 
London on Tuesday. "I look at what Spotify are doing today, it is doing really 
well, and Sky Songs at the time was very, very similar to that. We got out of 
it too early. I kind of regret that. We could have built a good business."

Darroch said it was not his decision to close the service, and that he wished 
he had backed Sky Songs for longer, but that at the time the company was also 
focusing on projects such as the roll-out of high-definition services to its 10 
million TV customers.

Long-serving Glamour editor Jo Elvin, also a panellist in the session, 
admitted that her toughest business moment had been the arrival of a flood of 
weekly magazines into the women's market that threatened the livelihood of the 
monthlies almost a decade ago.

"About 2005, when weekly magazines started to become a solid force of 
competition, there was a lot of talk how it was all over for the monthlies," 
she said. "I had people queuing to tell me that. It was an important moment for 
me. That is the time to knuckle down and focus on what are your strengths, what 
is it the magazine does well. The minute we stopped thinking we have to try and 
be a weekly somehow that is when it all clicked. It is about holding your 
nerve".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 