
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> is to 
commit the Scottish National party to voting against any military intervention 
by the UK in Syria at Westminster in a move that piles further pressure on 
Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour, which is deeply divided over the issue.

Contrasting her party’s disciplined stance with Labour’s chaotic position on 
the issue, the SNP leader will warn on Saturday that British airstrikes will 
only add to the “already unimaginable human suffering” in the region, rather 
than help to swiftly bring it to an end.

The SNP strategy was endorsed overwhelmingly by the party’s national conference
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2015/oct/16/snp-conference-nicola-sturgeon-swinney-on-health-and-education-snp-conference-live>
 in Aberdeen on Friday, after former leader Alex Salmond said military 
intervention would be futile and would add Syria to a long list of British 
military failures, including in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya.

The party leadership expect David Cameron’s government to push for a Commons 
vote to formally authorise RAF airstrikes inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, with Tory backbenchers complaining 
about a lack of action while France, US and Russia are now attacking.

In her closing speech to the conference, Sturgeon will claim that a vague 
notion that something needs to be done, without any clear evidence that added 
airstrikes can solve the crisis, is wholly inadequate.

Labour MPs should have a free vote on Syria, says John McDonnell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/29/labour-mps-should-have-a-free-vote-on-syria-says-john-mcdonnell>
She will ask: “This question has not been answered – when airstrikes by US, 
Russian, Arab, Turkish and French forces have not brought this multi-layered 
conflict closer to a resolution, what possible grounds are there for believing 
that adding UK airstrikes will do so?”

A “renewed and intensive diplomatic initiative, led by the UN” would be the 
best long-term solution, she will say.

The Tory majority will push through any vote on Syria backed by Cameron, but 
SNP strategists believe that a united stance by their 55 MPs in the Commons 
will highlight Corbyn’s inability to uniteLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> on the issue, weakening his 
authority in parliament and among leftwing voters. It comes as the SNP is 
preparing to fight a Scottish parliamentary election that Sturgeon hopes to win 
with another landslide.

While Corbyn is instinctively opposed to UK intervention, his shadow foreign 
secretary, Hillary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/13/syria-intervene-humanitarian-crisis-un-resolution>
, and many on the Blairite wing of the party support it. .

Salmond told the conference – the party’s largest after its membership 
quadrupled following last year’sindependence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/15/second-scottish-independence-referendum-hands-people-nicola-sturgeon-snp>
 – that Labour’s divisions left it to the SNP to be the voice of “clarity, 
sanity and humanity” on Syria.


Characterising the Tory position as settling scores after Labour defeated 
Cameron on Syria in 2013, and Labour’s as woefully confused, Salmond added to 
loud applause: “The should be no more futile military interventions by the UK. 
No more Afghanistans with no exit strategy, no more Libyas where we spent 13 
times as much bombing as we did reconstructing that country, and no more 
illegal wars such as the one in Iraq.”

If we are to help Syria’s people, we must take action | Hilary Benn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/13/syria-intervene-humanitarian-crisis-un-resolution>
Senior SNP figures have told the Guardian that the party’s firm stance on 
Syria will also build up its standing among centre-left English voters. They 
are keen to counter suspicions that the SNP’s sole motivation is to cause 
conflict with Westminster as they pursue asecond referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2015/oct/15/steve-bell-second-scottish-independence-referendum-cartoon>
.

The party’s ongoing quest to completely replace Labour as Scotland’s dominant 
party of the centre-left will continue on Saturday when the general secretary 
of the Scottish Trades Union Congress, Grahame Smith, will give the first ever 
speech by an STUC leader to an SNP conference.

In a clear sign of Labour’s waning influence among trade unionists in 
Scotland, Smith will welcome Sturgeon’s promise to oppose the UK government’s
trade union reform bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/15/trade-unions-conservative-offensive-decades-strikes-labour>
 but will also gently urge Sturgeon to use her government’s legal powers to 
block the legislation where it affects Holyrood’s policymaking areas.

But it then emerged that the SNP is to ignore any appeals to join other UK 
parties or party leaders – including Labour – in the official cross-party 
campaign to stay in the European Union at the forthcoming referendum. It will 
instead set up its own autonomous yes campaign on Europe.

Its senior figures want to minimise any risks to the SNP’s reputation from 
sharing platforms with a divided Labour party or the Tories, and ensure it 
keeps complete control over its agenda on the EU.

Tories and Labour would kill for unity shown at SNP love-in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/16/snp-love-in-conference-tories-labour-would-kill-for-unity-shown>
SNP leaders also acknowledge that the party has a deeply Europhobic section of 
its membership; many older nationalists believeScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> cannot be truly independent inside 
the EU.

Humza Yousaf, the Scottish government’s minister for Europe, said the SNP 
wanted to run its own campaign to ensure it was positive and grassroots-led. 
Referring to thenickname 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/28/scotland-vote-independence-uk-campaign>
 given to the pro-union Better Together campaign during last year’s Scottish 
independence referendum, Yousaf told the SNP conference in Aberdeen: “I’ve got 
no interest in being part of project fear mark two.

“Let’s make it clear that the SNP will not join the campaign club with the 
Tories. We will not stand shoulder to shoulder as Scottish Labour did with the 
heartless Conservatives. And we will not join with a divided Labour party, who 
don’t have a unified position on Europe, who do more flip-flops than the 
proverbial Olympic gymnast.

“We will have our own campaign, an SNP campaign for a positive, reformed 
Europe. Our yes campaign will not just be positive, it will be grassroots, it 
will be upbeat and it will offer a better, reformed, greener, fairer and a more 
socially liberal EU that works for the betterment of the many and not the few.”

Sturgeon and John Swinney, her deputy first minister at Holyrood, peppered 
their speeches with new policy and spending pledges. Swinney said Scottish 
councils would soon be able to cut local business rates to stimulate investment.

Having already announced plans to build 50,000 new homes if the SNP win next 
May’s Scottish elections, Sturgeon is expected to tell delegates on Saturday 
the party will spend £200m over the next five years to greatly increase 
specialist knee, hip and cataract operations for elderly people at five new 
centres.
 