
Building services engineers design and install all the elements of a building 
which bring it to life. From lighting and acoustics to lifts, escalators and 
security systems â€” they are in control. They work collaboratively with 
architects and other construction professionals to produce a variety of 
buildings, with projects ranging from small schools, to the largest city 
offices.

Buildings are huge consumers of materials and energy. They contribute around 
half of the UK's CO2 emissions meaning engineers are at the frontline of the 
battle to create a more sustainable environment. A key focus for a building 
services engineer is not only designing a building that works, but one that 
will consume the lowest amount of energy and have minimal environmental impact.

Historically, the role would have been to install all the services within the 
space allocated by the architect, but the focus has switched. As engineers play 
a more pivotal role in driving sustainability, being involved during the early 
stages of building is a critical part of the job. They influence the shape and 
orientation of a building to make the best use of local conditions and maximise 
renewable technologies.

Engineers can either be office or site-based, but most will spend their time 
in range of locations. Typical office tasks will involve producing designs in 
2D and 3D, computer modelling and simulation of buildings, and researching new 
technologies. Outside the office, engineers work with architects to review 
designs, visit building sites and meet with manufacturers to explore new 
products.

Building services engineers need to be able to work as part of a team, have an 
analytical mind and enjoy problem-solving. Strong capabilities in IT, modelling 
software, computer-aided design (CAD) and drawings are essential. Strong 
communication skills, both written and oral, are a must as the role has a high 
client interface, liaising and presenting solutions. Applicants should also be 
interested in how buildings function. There are plenty of resources online to 
learn about buildings and developments in the industry.

To start the career you will need at least a grade C in GCSE science, English 
and maths. And to progress to a technician level, apprenticeships are available 
which pay while learning on the job. Alternative routes include a BTEC 
national, diplomas or A-levels in science, technology, engineering and maths 
subjects.

Progressing to chartered engineer level requires an accredited engineering 
degree and further learning to masters level. Although building services 
engineering degrees are available, most graduate schemes are open to those from 
any engineering background. Larger companies are increasingly accepting 
applicants with backgrounds in science and mathematics and provide on-the-job 
training.

For example, each year Grontmij seeks out science and engineering graduates 
for theirbuilding services graduate recruitment programme 
<http://www.grontmij.co.uk/careers/Pages/bs.aspx>. Graduates joining the 
four-year programme are enrolled in aChartered Institution of Building Services 
Engineers (CIBSE) <http://www.cibse.org/> accredited graduate training 
programme, which is expected to lead to registration with theEngineering 
Council of Great Britain <http://www.engc.org.uk/> and a chartered engineer 
status.

Richard Beer is a senior design engineer at Grontmij 
<http://www.grontmij.co.uk/Pages/default.aspx>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more content and 
advice like this direct to your inbox,sign up for our weekly Careers update 
<http://careers.theguardian.com/competition/sign-up-guardian-careers>.
 