
It would be churlish not to support the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg's 
latest attempts to move social mobility 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2012/may/22/nick-clegg-britain-social-mobility>
 up the policy agenda, even if it too often appears like sticking plasters on 
the deeper wounds created by increasing tuition fees and cutting investment in 
sure start.

There is a deeper conceptual contradiction however with the coalition's social 
mobility approach, one that is more important for higher education. The 
government appears in one breath to want to extend opportunity for occupational 
progression to as many young people as possible. Yet it places virtually all 
its attention on changing the social composition of the most high earning and 
status jobs. These roles will always however be very limited in number.

It would be a novel approach indeed to reducing unemployment to expand the 
number of judges, MPs, doctors and chief executives. The implication for higher 
education is that the bulk of the contribution that it makes to social mobility 
is not part of the story. Research last year by theResolution Foundation 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/moving-social-mobility-1990s-and-2000s/>
 showed that in the 2000s only 4% of those who were upwardly mobile had no 
qualifications while 52% held a degree. But this social mobility is not the 
long range sort emphasised by the coalition. It is much more diverse, often 
regionally based related to the relationships that higher education providers 
have with local employers. This is the kind of short range social mobility that 
sees so many working class and mature students from the London School for 
Hospitality at theUniversity of West London <http://www.uwl.ac.uk/> go into 
good jobs in the local tourism and leisure industry, andHarper Adams College 
<http://www.harper-adams.ac.uk/> have one of the highest graduate employability 
rates in the country, rivalling Oxbridge, supporting thousands of their 
students to go into careers in land based industries.

It is not however limited to the newer institutions. The vast majority of 
Russell Group <http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/> graduates do not go into law or 
medicine. Many, and this includes the working class ones, go into the public 
and voluntary sectors or start their own small and medium enterprises (SMEs). 
But the impact of HE on their lives, as with their counterparts in the post 
1992s, is being ignored.

The consequences of the failure of the real HE contribution to social mobility 
to feature in the policy discourse could be quite profound for the sector. The 
chief executive ofHefce <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/> Sir Alan Langlands has been 
quite vocal this year about the need for a 'new narrative' regarding HE, if the 
sector is to prove to the government that it should not be subject to further 
cuts in investment in the forthcoming comprehensive spending review. The need 
for this narrative is even more pressing when the leader of the opposition Ed 
Miliband's most vocal contribution to the debate around HE and its role in 
social mobility, in May, was to argue that there is too much attention paid to 
going to university and any newLabour government would address 'academic 
snobbery' 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/may/21/ed-miliband-snobbery-vocational-courses>
 via greater stress on apprenticeships and technical education. The true story 
regarding HE and social mobility needs to be central to Langland's new 
narrative for HE.

If the sector cannot prove its social worth then it can only expect further 
cuts. This story has to be told though by HE itself. This means embracing a 
broad definition of access to higher education and student success and making 
it central to the public understanding of what HE does. HEIs across the mission 
groups cannot afford to give their contribution to social mobility and access 
only a walk-on part in their narrative of the value of HE, because they are 
either concerned about 'standards' or disgruntled about the bureaucracy 
attached to Key Information Sets (KIS). What the continued emphasis on social 
mobility is doing, is placing the issue more and more at the centre of 
political debate. If HE cannot shape how it is understood and find its place in 
it, then further financial pain may be inevitable.

Dr Graeme Atherton is head of AccessHE <http://www2.accesshe.ac.uk/> - a 
London-based organisation that supports under-represented groups into higher 
education

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 