
Social media is rallying behind an alternative to Bob Geldof’s Band Aid 30, 
whichchampions advice and solidarity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/oct/29/african-musicians-record-song-ebola-awareness>
 over scenes of desperation designed to tug at the heart and purse strings of 
the general public.


Africa Stop Ebola 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Africa-Stop-Ebola/1542298179316863> was 
recorded before the release of Sir Bob’s third rehash of the charity single 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/18/band-aid-30-becomes-fastest-selling-single-of-2014>
, and includes well-known African musicians such as Tiken Jah Fakoly from the 
Ivory Coast and Malian artists Amadou and Mariam, Salif Keita and Oumou Sangare.

The #AfricaStopEbola hashtag is being used to share and discuss the 
alternative charity single, which has seen an increase in support sinceBand Aid 
30 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/band-aid-30> launched on Sunday.

An African-focused blogger, A View from the Cave asked “what if #BandAid30 
just threw its support behind #AfricaStopEbola”.The statement wasbacked up by 
Ugandan commentator TMS Ruge 
<https://twitter.com/tmsruge/status/531946008255926274>, who suggested that it 
should have been the first thing that they did. Twitter user@terez07 
<https://twitter.com/terez07> from Tanzania called BandAid30 “insufferable” and 
encouraged people to skip it. Although@imju_steva 
<https://twitter.com/imju_steva> questioned whether it mattered where the money 
came from .
Terez Williamson (@terez07) 
Skip the insufferable #BandAid30 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BandAid30?src=hash>. Support the GORGEOUS single 
#AfricaStopEbola <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AfricaStopEbola?src=hash> Written 
+ performed by West Africanshttp://t.co/3YSoAcTFSP <http://t.co/3YSoAcTFSP>
 <https://twitter.com/terez07/status/535407562896986112> November 20, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/terez07/status/535407562896986112> Imju Steva (@imju_steva)
given the emergency, #Ebola <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Ebola?src=hash> 
affected people maybe won't mind about money coming from@bandaid30 
<https://twitter.com/BandAid30> or #AfricaStopEbola 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/AfricaStopEbola?src=hash> but PLZ ====>>>> (cont)
 <https://twitter.com/imju_steva/status/535176618386653184> November 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/imju_steva/status/535176618386653184> 
The lyrics capture the collective sadness  
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=1552291444984203&id=1542298179316863>
felt in countries most badly hit by the disease: “Africa is full of sadness, to 
see our families die … everyone is in danger … we must act”, attempts to tackle 
the broader issues around the disease and shares practical medical advice, like 
the verse sang by Fakoly:

If you feel sick the doctors will help you

I assure you, the doctors will help you

There is hope to stop Ebola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola>

Have confidence in the doctors

The official YouTube video has been watched nearly 200,000 times and it is 
currently at number 78 on the iTunes download charts. BandAid 30 is at number 
one <http://snkhan.co.uk/stuff/iTunes.php>. All profits of Africa stop Ebola 
will go to Medecins Sans Frontiers/Doctors without Borders, who are working to 
treat the virus in the region.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DruYQY6z3mV8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DruYQY6z3mV8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DruYQY6z3mV8&media=>
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> Stop Ebola is a radical 
departure from Band Aid, whose tactic has been to scramble together the biggest 
pop stars in the world – from One Direction to Bono – and encourage the western 
public to dig deep with emotive lyrics.

This year’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/17/band-aid-30-new-world-dread-and-fear-deconstruction-lyrics>
 lyrics include “where a kiss of love can kill you/Where there’s death in every 
tear” instead of “where the only water flowing is the bitter sting of tears” - 
written to address theEthiopian famine in 1984 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/22/-sp-ethiopia-30-years-famine-human-rights>
. The public is then encouraged to “free”, “feed” and “help” the world and 
finally to “Let them know it’s Christmas time again”.

Do the lyrics matter? Geldof has famously said 
<http://www.nme.com/news/various-artists/81108>: “I don’t care if you like it, 
just buy it”, with Band Aid 30 raising £1m within minutes of being screened on 
X Factor. But commentators have criticised the approach for perpetuating a
30-year-old narrative 
<http://africasacountry.com/bandaid30-have-we-learned-nothing/> of Africa as a 
homogenous, desperate place. Questions have also been raised about theethics of 
using dead or dying woman 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2014-11-20-bandaid30-the-narcissists-anthem-gets-a-sequel/#.VG3Wu1esXUN>
 at the start of video.

Writing for the Guardian yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/19/turn-down-band-aid-bob-geldof-africa-fuse-odg>
, Ghana-raised afrobeat star Fuse ODG said he ducked out of Band Aid project 
after being “shocked and appalled” by the offensive lyrics. He argues that the 
narrative of poverty and famine is “extremely powerful psychologically”, and 
although people may get a “warm fuzzy feeling” by buying a charity single, they 
are much less likely to invest in the continent in the future.

Fuse has coined the term This Is The New African, T.I.N.A for short, which he 
says is encouraging people to see the continent in a new light and empower 
those who live there in the process – he has also used it to help push hismusic 
into the global mainstream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/30/fuse-odg-tina-review>.
 