
One of my friends, Ron, is the son of working-class British immigrants and was 
the first in his family to attend university in Australia. He always held that 
his class would have worked against him back in the UK, keeping him out of 
university. But he also found similar barriers growing up in Australia and 
counted himself as having beaten the odds when he finally graduated.

Recently Ron and I were talking about his experience and comparing it to 
today's students. Ron still maintained that, even with its problems, Australian 
higher education is more accessible than in the UK. But is he right?

Defining disadvantage

Both countries have mass higher education systems that, according to the OECD 
<http://www.oecd.org/edu/eag.htm>, have provided almost 40% of each nation's 
population with a tertiary qualification. Within this, both countries are 
trying to improve access for students considered disadvantaged.

In Australia, this is often defined by where you grow up and measured by 
postcode. The most recentDepartment of Education statistics 
<https://education.gov.au/selected-higher-education-statistics-2012-student-data>
 show about 16% of domestic undergraduate students come from low socioeconomic 
areas 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/2033.0.55.001main+features42011>
.

In the UK, disadvantage is commonly measured by parental occupation 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/classifications/current-standard-classifications/soc2010/soc2010-volume-3-ns-sec--rebased-on-soc2010--user-manual/index.html>
. Recentstatistics show <https://www.hesa.ac.uk/pis/09/10/urg> that about 32% 
of full-time first degree entrants were from families withroutine/manual labour 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/classifications/current-standard-classifications/soc2010/soc2010-volume-3-ns-sec--rebased-on-soc2010--user-manual/index.html>
 backgrounds. In both countries these figures are under-representative, meaning 
they are lower than they should be, based on each group's relevant share of the 
national population.

However this is a very broad brushstroke approach to defining disadvantage. 
Each country has identified more specific groups of disadvantaged students.

The groups of students still under-represented

In Australia, Indigenous student enrolments are only about half what they 
should be, again given their share of the national population. Enrolments from 
students living in rural and remote areas (think the outback) are only about a 
third of what they should be. Also under-represented are students with 
disabilities, students from non-English speaking backgrounds and women studying 
towards professions that tend to lead tohigher wages 
<http://www.graduatecareers.com.au/mediacentre/newsandmediareleases/>.

In the UK, young people in the most disadvantaged areas (or wards) would need 
to treble their participation rate 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/media/hefce/content/pubs/2013/201328/HEFCE_2013_28.pdf> 
in order to match the rate of those from the most advantaged areas. Also, the 
gap in participation between London and the rest of the country is widening. 
Across the UK, young participation rates in Wales are the lowest. The story for 
women is the same as it is in Australia: more women than men access higher 
education, but still experience a significantgender pay gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/nov/07/gender-pay-gap-official-figures-disparity>
 after graduating.

The picture painted in both Australia and the UK is therefore similar. As each 
country's higher education system continues to expand, the actual numbers of 
disadvantaged students gaining access increases, but their proportional share 
increases much more slowly â€“ if at all.

If you imagine the higher education sector as a pie then it means that the 
size of the pie has got much bigger in recent years, but the share of the pie 
given to some groups of disadvantaged students hasn't changed. Although social 
mobility in and through higher education has improved for this generation of 
students, for too many, things are little better than when Ron's parents 
emigrated.

Time to get more accurate definitions?

Perhaps the real challenge for both countries is getting more accurate 
definitions and measurements of disadvantage. For example in Australia, the use 
of the postcode or census district to measure socioeconomic disadvantage is 
inaccurate.

In the UK, London is a demographic game changer due to its sheer size and 
available resources compared to the rest of the UK. This means that comparisons 
between London and the rest of the UKoften become distorting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/oct/29/university-widening-access-london-hefce>
, leading to the impression that simply relocating to the capital will 
automatically increase your child's chances of social mobility.

In defence of all those working to address educational disadvantage, to date 
no-one has found an alternative, reliable measurement that doesn't require 
individuals to answer personal and intrusive questions regarding their 
background. But that doesn't mean we should stop trying.

Tim Pitman is senior research fellow at the national centre for student equity 
in higher education at John Curtin institute of public policy, Curtin 
University.@timothypitman <https://twitter.com/timothypitman>

Australian and UK universities mimic each other's strategies when it comes to 
higher education funding and policy. But who's leading the way, and are they 
going in the right direction? We spend two weeks debating, sharing stories and 
opening up the discussion.

Join the Higher Education Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 