
The first official outing of the Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/social-mobility-and-child-poverty-commission>
 with the publication of Alan Milburn'sHigher Education: The Fair Access 
Challenge 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/higher-education-the-fair-access-challenge>
, has made very depressing reading for those of us who have spent the past 10 
years and more trying to helpRussell Group <http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/> 
universities increase the number of state educated students who apply, and get 
accepted.

While we knew it would be a tough job, it seems not only have we not made as 
much progress as we'd hoped, but that numbers have gone into reverse, with 
proportionally fewer state school students studying at Russell Group 
institutions in 2011-2012 than 2003-2004. The report also claims that an 
estimated 3,700 state school students with the right grades to get into Russell 
Group universities fail to get a place each year, up from"the missing 3,000" 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/research/the-missing-3000/> we first documented 
when I was at the Sutton Trust in 2004.

Quite apart from the issue of attainment, we haven't even got the problem of 
low aspirations cracked, and the report quotes striking new evidence fromVikki 
Boliver at Durham University <http://www.dur.ac.uk/sass/staff/profile/?id=9700> 
that state school students are two grades better qualified than their 
privately-educated peers before they are likely to apply to a Russell Group 
university.

The reasons for this are of course complex and varied. But if they appear 
opaque, I am increasingly convinced that the solution lies in greater 
transparency. Controversial though it is in parts of the sector, I 
wholeheartedly support the commission's call for the universal use of 
contextual data in the admissions process – indeed I'd go further, and say that 
we should also be aiming for a collective and uniform approach to the use of 
contextual data.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> need to know not 
only what data is oris not being used in the assessment of their applications, 
but, I would argue, they should be able to trust that their data is being used 
in the same way by each institution they apply to, so that their chances of 
getting a place reflect their genuine capabilities regardless of their 
background.

While I hear the Russell Group's concern about a systematic approach being 
"problematic, because it can rely too heavily on data which is limited" 
<http://russellgroup.ac.uk/russell-group-latest-news/154-2013/5513-russell-group-response-to-the-social-mobility-and-child-poverty-commission-report/>
 my response is that it cannot be beyond the whit of these august institutions 
to sort the data out. At the same time, we should acknowledge that it's a 
particularly tough time to be pressing both this point and, as Miburn and his 
colleagues do, calling for greater collaboration between universities in terms 
of collective, statistical access target setting.

The government's introduction of a market imperative is encouraging fiercer 
competition than ever before between institutions, while the policy allowing 
universities to recruitunlimited numbers of students with AAB grades at A-level 
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/higher-education-network/blog/2012/jan/13/aab-student-recruitment-season-begins>
makes it harder than ever for them to coalesce behind a principal of lower 
offers for some students in some circumstances. But here too my genuine 
sympathy for the context in which our universities are currently battling is 
tempered by their tendency to revert to the usual"it's about attainment, 
universities can't do this alone" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/jun/10/oxford-admissions-attainment-aspiration?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
 message, rather than tackling the government on these crucial policy issues.

Pushing the focus back onto attainment leads us into the cul-de-sac of the 
emotive debate about 'lowering standards'. All the shrill complaints about 
dumbing down and social engineering coming from certain quarters clash with my 
own experiences as an admissions tutor at Cambridge.

While there I became fascinated by the role the interview played in the 
admissions proces. Although it was part of a more complex whole, I often 
speculated about what would happen if, for one year, we were to do away with 
the interview. I am sure we would have ended up with a slightly different group 
of students, but would they really have been any less able, or less successful? 
I very much doubt it.

Of course, this is just a gut feeling, but it is one corroborated by evidence 
that, on average, state school pupils outperform privately-educated pupils with 
the same grades at university.

So let's trust both the increasing amounts of evidence we have available and 
our belief about the need to give everyone a fair chance in life and start 
using contextual data in a systematic and uniform way. I'd be willing to wager 
that in doing so, we will we not see any decline in standards. Most 
importantly, we will start to see the improvement in social mobility that so 
many of us – the Russell Group universities included – have been working so 
hard to achieve.

Dr Tessa Stone is the chief executive of education charity, Brightside 
<http://www.thebrightsidetrust.org/> – follow it on Twitter @Bright_Tweets 
<https://twitter.com/Bright_Tweets>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.guardian.co.uk/culture-professionals>.
 