
 A solar-powered plane attempting to make an unprecedented flight across the 
Pacific has been forced to make an unscheduled stop in Japan due to poor 
weather conditions.

Solar Impulse 2 en route from China to Hawaii has made a detour to Nagoya. It 
took off early on Sunday for a six-day, six-night, flight over the Pacific 
Ocean.

Pilot André Borschberg, 62, left Nanjing, in eastern China, at about 2.40am 
following extended delays due to weather-related safety concerns. The 
5,270-mile (8,500km) flight would have been a record for duration by a single 
pilot.

Borschberg was asked to circle over the Sea of Japan while meteorologists 
assessed the situation. They have now decided not to proceed, and the plane 
arrived at the Komaki airfield just before 3pm GMT on Monday.
Solar plane map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/06/solar-impulse-diverts/giv-21277B20pcu5l6XQn/>
Speaking to mission control in Monaco from the cockpit of the plane, the pilot 
said situations like this are to be expected. “Overall from the start I 
personally had a really wonderful time. But there is always unexpected 
situations, either from a technical point of view or from a weather point of 
view, to cope with. It’s taken 18 years to sort technical questions, whether 
it’s specialists trying to find the right route... so that was really a very 
interesting start.

“Now we face some changes so we will have to see if these changes are really 
important. In terms of strategy I think we’ll know more in a few hours, and to 
keep all the options open. I’m waiting here in the sea of Japan, and the 
Japanese MCC and authorities have been extremely helpful, extremely open and 
nice, they accommodate our wishes to have this aircraft integrated into their 
traffic.

“Part of the programme was to do some holding anyway. We’re doing the holding 
a little bit earlier than expected, but for the time being it doesn’t change 
anything. We need to see what the new forecast tells us.”


Bertrand Piccard, who has been watching the flight from mission control, 
added: “We are not daredevils, we are explorers. We have to put safety at the 
top of all of our priorities. Everyone is very happy with the plane - but the 
weather does not fit. We land in Nagoya and we wait for better conditions to 
continue.”

Solar Impulse 2 is powered by more than 17,000 solar cells built into wings 
that, at 72 metres, are almost as long as those of an Airbus A380 superjumbo.

Borschberg completed Solar Impulse 2’s first overnight leg, with the aircraft 
relying solely on batteries charged by the sun’s energy, but poor weather ahead 
threw the rest of the marathon flight into doubt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdUByOFcZhRU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdUByOFcZhRU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdUByOFcZhRU&media=>
 The Solar Impulse team explain the delay 
A statement was posted on the Solar Impulse website, which helps track the 
flight’s journey, earlier today. It said: “Yesterday we had the possibility to 
cross the weather front just before Hawaii on day 5. However, with the 
forecasts we now have, we don’t see this possibility anymore, which means that 
for the moment the road to Hawaii is blocked. We need all the data from the 
next weather forecasts, so that our weather experts can analyse what’s going to 
happen in the next four to five days.

“Whilst we wait for the forecasts, we have decided to hold the position of the 
aircraft. We have asked André to stay where he is: it’s fine, the weather is 
good and the batteries are charging. During this time we will analyse where he 
will have to go to find a possibility to cross that front.”

The China to Hawaii journey is the seventh and most challenging leg of the 
attempt to circumnavigate the world using just the energy of the Sun. Solar 
Impulse 2, which is covered in 17,000 solar cells, took off from Abu Dhabi in 
March. It has since stopped in Oman, India, Myanmar and China.
 