
Harriet Nabukwasi is saving up. Having seen people claim her neighbour’s land, 
she is determined hers will not go the same way. The only way to protect the 
half-acre site in Mudokori village inTororo 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tororo>, eastern Uganda, is to register the land 
and acquire a title.

“This land is our life,” says Nabukwasi, 31, who lives there with her three 
children and 56-year-old mother. “It is very important for my children.”

So far, she’s saved up enough to pay surveyors 100,000 Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda> shillings (£21) “to continue the 
process of registering my land”, she says. “Now, I even pay school fees for my 
children. I am happy now.”

Empowering female traders in east Africa will boost growth – and fight poverty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/15/empowering-female-traders-east-africa-will-boost-growth-fight-poverty>
Nabukwasi is able to save for her goal because of her work with Solar Sister 
<https://www.solarsister.org/about>, a not-for-profit social enterprise that 
has created a network of female entrepreneurs.

The organisation recruits women (and some men) in the most impoverished and 
remote areas of Uganda to sell affordable solar lamps, mobile phone chargers 
and fuel-efficient stoves. The women are self-employed, earning a 10%-20% 
commission.

Last month, an assessment of the organisation’s impact by the International 
Centre for Research on Women (ICRW) 
<http://www.icrw.org/media/news/icrw-finds-solar-sister-empowers-women-increases-their-income-and-makes-communities-safer>
 concluded that the Solar Sister model improved women’s lives, increased their 
incomes and made communities safer.

Solar Sister has a network of business development associates (BDAs) who 
recruit, train and support the female entrepreneurs.

“Entrepreneurs are encouraged to embrace ‘sisterhood’, where they often come 
together in groups to learn, share challenges, tips, and ideas. They later use 
their community networks of family and neighbours to sell [to],” says Marion 
Abbo, a BDA in Tororo.

As well as earning money, Nabukwasi now lights her house with a solar lamp, 
cooks on energy saving stoves, charges her mobile phone from home, and her 
children no longer have to rush to finish their homework before dusk. “Solar 
Sister has been a game changer,” she says.

At least 877 Solar Sister entrepreneurs now work in Uganda, more than 
three-quarters of whom are female. The organisation has attracted more than 
2,000 entrepreneurs in Uganda, Tanzania and Nigeria since 2010.

 According to Clare Achola, the Solar Sister Uganda country manager, the main 
goal is to allow women to be financially independent. It is not a full-time 
job, which means women can fit the work between domestic chores.

The ICRW research 
<http://www.icrw.org/publications/%E2%80%9C-solar-sister-forward-we-go%E2%80%9D-brief>
 found, among other things, that income from clean-energy businesses allowed 
women to become financially independent and contribute to household earnings. 
Some women say their husbands and communities now have more respect for their 
opinions. The ICRW believes that household economic security has improved 
because of the money saved by no longer using expensive fuel such as kerosene.

Moreover, solar lanterns and better stoves produce fewer emissions, reducing 
respiratory and eye problems in the house.

On Kenya's climate frontline, female farmers are building a secure future | 
Robert Kibet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/16/kenya-climate-frontline-female-farmers-building-secure-future-drought-samburu>
“Solar Sister taps into the power of women’s social networks to bring energy 
access to the most hard-to-reach communities,” thereport 
<http://www.icrw.org/media/news/icrw-finds-solar-sister-empowers-women-increases-their-income-and-makes-communities-safer>
 concludes.

Achola says Solar Sister is not making a profit, but relies on donations to 
continue its work. “We are making losses; whatever money we get is recycled. We 
get grants from donors to supplement us to get these products to the women.”

Solar Sister’s founder, Katherine Lucey <https://www.solarsister.org/about>, a 
former investment banker, says she was inspired to start the organisation after 
working for a family foundation in Uganda. The foundation was installing solar 
power in rural areas, and Lucey was impressed by the transformative impact “a 
simple light can have on [the life] of a rural family”.

“I was particularly inspired by one woman named Rebecca 
<https://www.solarsister.org/blog/use-networks-of-women-entrepreneurs-to-reach-out-to-customers-in-otherwise-hard-to-reach-areas>
, in Mpigi [in central Uganda], who used solar light to improve her poultry 
business,” says Lucey. “I realised the importance of including women as part of 
the solution for energy access since they are the ones who manage the household 
and make the daily decisions about what type of energy is used.”

In Uganda, only 20% of the population has access to electricity 
<http://www.ubos.org/onlinefiles/uploads/ubos/NPHC/2014%20National%20Census%20Main%20Report.pdf>
 (pdf) while more than 50% of rural households rely on open kerosene lamps. But 
such lanterns are fire hazards, emit toxic fumes and strain family budgets.

According to Lighting Africa 
<https://www.lightingafrica.org/resources/market-research/market-trends/>, a 
World Bank group programme to increase access to clean sources of energy for 
lighting, Africa has a large off-grid population.More than 590 million 
<http://light.lbl.gov/library/LA-Mkt-Synthesis.pdf> people live with no 
connection to their national electric grid, exposing them to hazardous options.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsolar-sister-uganda-women-lights-entrepreneurial-spirit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9c49964461f590a77509fb7ee79a6a1abdab3f6%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Solar%20Sister%20lights%20entrepreneurial%20spirit%20to%20improve%20women%E2%80%99s%20lives%20in%20Uganda%20%7C%20Alon%20Mwesigwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsolar-sister-uganda-women-lights-entrepreneurial-spirit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Solar%20Sister%20lights%20entrepreneurial%20spirit%20to%20improve%20women%E2%80%99s%20lives%20in%20Uganda%20%7C%20Alon%20Mwesigwa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsolar-sister-uganda-women-lights-entrepreneurial-spirit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9c49964461f590a77509fb7ee79a6a1abdab3f6%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Harriet Nabukwasi, right, explains to her neighbour how a solar lamp works. 
Photograph: Alon Mwesigwa 
An entrepreneur needs initial capital of at least 200,000 shillings (£42) to 
become a Solar Sister. “We want [the entrepreneurs] to take this as their 
business,” says Achola. “We tell them they have to buy the products we give 
them. If they don’t have money, we tell them to wait until they get it.”

Achola believes that when women pay for products, it pushes them to work 
harder. Men are also encouraged to join and engage in their wife’s work, to 
avoid family conflict when she earns money.

John Owere, 60, says he took over his wife’s Solar Sister work when she became 
too busy with her teaching. Owere, a farmer and father of six, says the income 
he gets from selling solar lamps supplements his wife’s. “[The business] is 
seasonal; when it is time for harvest people buy and when there is famine, 
people use the money to buy food; when it is time for returning to school, 
people have to pay school fees,” he says.

Nabukwasi says there are challenges, especially when they have to travel long 
distances to meet potential buyers. This requires transport and phone calls, 
which can eat into the commission on sales.

Lucey says: “We coach them to learn to identify their business costs and to 
learn how to be profitable and run sustainable businesses. We empower them to 
know that the solutions are in their own hands.” For her, ending a culture of 
dependency on aid is crucial to help people escape economic hardship and deal 
with the issue of energy poverty.

• This article was amended on 18 July 2016. Quoting an interviewee, we 
originally stated that Solar Sisters entrepreneurs bought products at a 
subsidised price. We have since been told this is not the case.
 