
Yeti Airlines, flight YT712 to Nepalgunj, is preparing to leave the remote 
mountainous town of Simikot. A man checks his watch. He waits restlessly to 
hear whether he can board the plane. The uniformed man behind the desk hangs up 
the phone and shakes his head. "Sorry sir," he says. "The flight is now full." 
The man sighs angrily and walks away, unaware that he has just saved a woman's 
life.

For many people in Nepal access to health services is severely limited by the 
remoteness of their village, the mountainous terrain and a lack of road 
networks. The majority of women who die during childbirth are from these remote 
areas. Many of their deaths could be prevented if the women could reach a 
hospital in time.

This is where the airlines come in. Earlier this year the Nepalese 
government's Aama programme ran a workshop with airline operators about women's 
health and safe motherhood issues. The airlines committed to saving and 
subsidising two seats on every flight for people needing emergency medical 
treatment, with preference going to women with pregnancy delivery 
complications. The seats are saved until 30 minutes before the flight's 
departure.

In just a few months, 30 women have used this service. It has almost certainly 
saved their lives and the lives of their babies. Nepal is pioneering this 
initiative which demonstrates a commitment to reducing maternal mortality that 
extends beyond the usual stakeholders for health. "But the really great thing 
about it," says Sarah Sanyahumbi from DFID Nepal, "is that it utilises a 
service that is already there."
 