
With Gary Barlow's rerecording of Greatest Day having been quietly dispensed 
with by the FA – and removed from iTunes – music's Group of Death is wide open. 
Which song celebrating Ingerlund will capture the public imagination during the 
World Cup? Or will any of them? We've rounded up some of the contenders so you 
can judge for yourself …

Epic Dream ft Andy Serkis – Hope & Glory/Eve of the War

Who are they? "Londoner Phil Harrow" and Andy Serkis. Yes, Andy Serkis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-serkis>, out of Middle Earth.


What's the song like? A recreation of Eve of the War, from Jeff Wayne's War of 
the Worlds, backed with a 48-piece orchestra recorded at Abbey Road. And, over 
the top Serkis intones in an actorly tone. Sometimes the words are actorly. And 
sometimes they are Serkis insisting "Come on, all the way! Come on England!" 
It's the backing vocals that really make it, though: who has never wanted to 
hear an operatic chorus bellowing "Ingerlund! Ingerlund!" over the top of Eve 
of the War? What? No one? This one is genuinely bonkers. Sadly, there is no 
refrain of "The chances of England winning the Cup are a million to one."

Is the song about football? Yes, in the sense that football is about 
platitudes about playing the game with hearts aflame.

Does it feature a rap? No. Unless you count the fact that Serkis is speaking 
rather than singing.

World in Motion rating: 7/10. This one could be the Cameroon-in-1990 of World 
Cup songs – a little fancied outsider that captures the public imagination.

Lily Allen – Bass Like Home

Who is she? You really don't need us to tell you.


What's the song like? Dance-pop, that sounds like it's come straight out of a 
club 20 years or so ago. It's clearly an awful lot more professional than most 
else on this list.

Is the song about football? It's billed as an unofficial World Cup song, but 
God knows why – canny marketing, probably – because one mention of Gazza aside, 
it's got nothing to do with football. It's more a nostalgic celebration of 
Brits-on-the-piss hedonism – "Rule Britannia, 'Tannia rules the rave/ We've 
been doing it since back in the day/ Ayia Napa and Ibiza ain't the same thing."

Does it feature a rap? No

World in Motion rating? 6/10. It's the best song here, but points deducted for 
not being about football.

Gabz – Holiday in Brazil

Who is she? A 15-year-old singer-songwriter from Herfordshire, and 2013 
Britain's Got Talent finalist. Her single Lighters, released in the wake of BGT 
on Sony, reached No 6. She doesn't appear to be on Sony anymore.


What's the song like? Pop reggae-lite, laden with horns. "England! Cheering on 
the team! In the sunshine! As we live the dream! This is football! The 
beautiful game! What a thrill! On a holiday in Brazil!" It seems to be almost 
entirely chorus. The video features lookalikes of David Beckham, Harry Styles 
and what might be David Luiz, but to be honest he looks so unlike anyone that 
it might be a bloke from the cornershop in a Brazil shirt.

Is the song about football? Yes. And holidays. It includes the downbeat 
assessment "if we're honest then we'll need a bit of luck", which might have 
been transcribed from a Roy Hodgson press conference.

Does it feature a rap? Not a featured rap, but Gabz raps the verses.

World in Motion rating: 4/10
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDwrutuVe77w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDwrutuVe77w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDwrutuVe77w&media=>
Scarlett's Roses – Roll on Rio

Who are they? "A live pop-ska band hailing from south London … The refreshing 
truthful tales of London life – whether it’s the longing for what you once had 
(Pulling Petals), the urge to rekindle a flame (Back to Disneyland), or simply 
'Ryan your dumb son.' (Truth Be Told) - there truly is something here for 
everyone."


What's their song like? Breezy and tropical, despite its video being neither 
breezy nor tropical. But when your budget extends to filming on London suburban 
trains, breezy and tropical is a bit hard to achieve. It sounds a bit like 
Modern Romance, long forgotten early 80s pioneers of breezily tropical suburban 
pop.

Is the song about football? Yes. Well, more specifically it's about the 
eternal disappointment of supporting England. "Oh Rio, we seem to be/ Outsiders 
for the world to see/ But I never lost faith."

Does it feature a rap? Yes. "So why do they always write us off? Say we got a 
strong team but our hearts are soft."

World in Motion rating: 4/10
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCWjxw2oxNHY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCWjxw2oxNHY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCWjxw2oxNHY&media=>
Dexters – I'll Never Find Another You

Who are they? Five-piece London guitar band, who've toured with the Enemy, the 
View and Glasvegas.


What's their song like? It's a cover of a 1968 single by the Seekers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Ga9Bs4fzSY&feature=kp>, bafflingly. It's also 
the Sun's official England anthem, equally bafflingly. And if we were required 
to find two words to describe it, we would unhesitatingly go for some 
combination of landfill and indie. It's not bad, per se, just utterly pointless.

Is it about football? No.

Does it feature a rap? No.

World in Motion rating: 2/10
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gSbsNVQuVA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gSbsNVQuVA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5gSbsNVQuVA&media=>
The Parents – Come on England (Give It Some Welly)

Who are they? No idea. So we'll just quote their Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/theparents>: "Im the king of debonair, a royal dirty 
bleeder. Take off your underwear, and take me to your leader. On the dancefloor 
you'll be there, my princess of persuasion. Im the answer to your prayer, your 
cosmic love."


What's the song like? Cheery indie-rock, that marries the experience of 
watching England to going to the offie and the chippy. It's aiming to be the 
year's witty entry, like a modern update onSerious Drinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/27/old-music-serious-drinking-love-terraces>
. It's not that good, of course, because it's trying too hard. The beginning of 
the video holds out the prospect that something truly nightmarish might be 
coming – could they be football's Fat White Family? – but the promise is never 
delivered.

Is it about football? Yes – and once again, about the heartbreak of watching 
England. Truly, Three Lions spawned a monster.

World in Motion rating: 4/10
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD7J-ZQ9WLJk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD7J-ZQ9WLJk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD7J-ZQ9WLJk&media=>
Joe Weller – World Cup Song: Brazil 2014

Who is he? A YouTube sensation, who's got football form, with songs called 
Ronaldo Chop, Mezut Özil Arsenal Song and MC Moyes. He's also got "amusing" 
speech videos, which are probably aimed at a rather younger audience than us:
there's one in which he explains how stupid flies must be 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DQeD6_Krfpw&list=PLVykh8Zqq_thel6xCUAiWnW6j2JZ5aUgB>
 to fly into windows.


What's the song like? We're so transfixed by the video that we can barely pay 
attention to the song. He had enough budget to go to Brazil to film the clip, 
in which he is disturbingly made up to look like an array of different World 
Cup playeras (the Zlatan Ibrahmovich is particularly horrible). He may yet come 
to regret blacking up to be Mario Balotelli. Say what you like, though, because 
he knows about search engine optimisation – you don't call your song World Cup 
Song: Brazil 2014 because you love the poetry of the words. He's also the only 
one in the charts – No 89!

Is it about football? Yes. But as we say, it's all about the video.

Is there a rap? The whole song's a rap! And there's a featured rap, too, from 
Randolph!

World in Motion rating: 5/10
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2i6NXIVzpN0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2i6NXIVzpN0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2i6NXIVzpN0&media=> 