
South Korean Pokémon Go <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> 
players have been forced to leave their home towns and flock to a remote city 
close to the North Korean border in order to play because of the country’s 
mapping restrictions.


As a location-based game augmented reality game, Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-review-it-may-not-be-a-good-game-but-its-a-great-experience>
 relies on data from Google Maps to function, but South Korean security 
restrictions on mapping data have blocked Google from providing map features 
across a significant proportion of the country, including realtime information, 
3D maps, personal transport directions and indoor maps.

“Due to government restrictions on maps data, it’s impossible for Pokémon Go 
to work properly using Google Maps service inSouth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>,” a person familiar with the 
matter told Reuters.

Local map providers use government-issued maps that have sensitive areas 
excluded, but a law that prevents export of government-supplied mapping data 
stops Google from using it, despite having been seeking a license for the data 
since 2008. Googlerecently publicly challenged the law 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/google-challenges-south-korea-over-mapping-restrictions-1463478584>
.

However, a city close to the border with North Korea, called Sokcho, has not 
been classified as a South Korean territory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sokcho> and therefore has the mapping data 
required to make Pokémon Go function.

One user posted on an internet message board: “I didn’t go to some big tourist 
attraction; all I did was walk around for tens of kilometres to play a game. 
But I’m more satisfied with this than any other trip. I would still be in 
Sokcho had it not been for an urgent issue.”

Bus tickets from the capital, Seoul, to the city have sold out, according to 
reports <http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20160713000873>. 

Sokcho, which sits on the eastern coast adjacent to the Seoraksan National 
Park, has been quick to capitalise on its unusual status, sharing maps of free 
Wi-Fi areas and advertising itself on social media as “the onlyPokémon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon> Go holy land on the peninsula”.

South Korea is the world’s fourth-biggest gaming market after China, the US 
and Japan, according to research firm Newzoo, potentially representing a big 
opportunity loss for Niantic and the Pokémon Company.


The smash-hit game has yet to be officially launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/uk-rollout-of-pokemon-go-halted-heres-how-to-get-it-on-iphone-and-android-now>
 outside of Australia, New Zealand and the US, with Nianticstruggling to meet 
the server demands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-australian-users-report-server-problems-due-to-high-demand>
 of existing players, but plays across the world have resorted to circumventing 
the region lock by sideloading the app on Android or downloading it with a US 
iTunes account on an iPhone.

It has been downloaded between 10m and 50m times from the Google Play Store 
alone, while the app has been downloaded from a third-party Android app hosting 
service over 5m times.

 * UK rollout of Pokémon Go delayed – here’s how to get it on iPhone and 
Android now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/uk-rollout-of-pokemon-go-halted-heres-how-to-get-it-on-iphone-and-android-now>

 * 14 essential tips to get you started in Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-14-tips-to-get-you-started-on-your-creature-collecting-adventure>
 