
South African voters are going to the polls for municipal elections that pose 
the first real challenge to the ruling African National Congress party since it 
swept to power following the end of apartheid.


A feeble economy, unemployment that affects one in four people and corruption 
scandals that have dogged the president, Jacob Zuma, have all eroded the appeal 
of the once unbeatable party of anti-apartheid hero Nelson Mandela.

Polls before Wednesday’s elections suggested the party could lose control of 
three of South Africa’s main cities, Johannesburg, Port Elizabeth and the 
greater metropolitan area around the capital Pretoria.

Those areas alone are home to more than 8 million people, and bring influence 
over annual budgets of about $10bn (£7.5bn).

The election is “about whether the ANC is going to remain a party that is 
strong in both the cities and the countryside, or whether it is going to be a 
party that’s mainly based in the country areas and might have to concede the 
cities to the opposition parties,” Steven Friedman, a political analyst, told 
the AP.

Breaking the mould? South Africa at a crossroads as country goes to polls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/this-is-when-we-break-the-mould-south-africa-at-a-political-crossroads>
Beyond the loss of financial and political power, a defeat at the polls would 
be a profound psychological shock to many in the party, who believe that its 
leadership of the decades-long struggle against apartheid has given it a 
permanent mandate to rule.

The ANC’s secretary-general, Gwede Mantashe, recently told supporters that the 
party had been “anointed by God 
<http://www.timeslive.co.za/thetimes/2016/07/18/God-chose-ANC-to-lead>”, and 
compared its past leaders to biblical figures.

Its main rival is the Democratic Alliance, once seen as a party of liberal, 
middle-class whites, now for the first time running under a black leader, Mmusi 
Maimane. It already controls Cape Town, where it has a reputation for competent 
management, and is hoping to expand its powerbase before national elections in 
2019.

The DA has promised to liberalise the economy to stimulate growth in a country 
that has stagnated since the 2008 financial crisis, cutting red tape and making 
it easier to hire and fire workers.

Soweto uprising 40 years on: the image that shocked the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/soweto-uprising-40-years-on-hector-pieterson-image-shocked-the-world>
The ANC also faces a new challenge from the Economic Freedom Fighters, a party 
with a more radical agenda led by ex-ANC firebrandJulius Malema 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14718226>. It is standing for the 
first time in local elections on a platform that includes promises to 
nationalise mines and redistribute land without compensation.

“I wanted to give the new kids on the block a chance,” Edward Mariba, 44, in 
Johannesburg told Reuters after casting a vote for the EFF.


If the ANC performs badly on Wednesday, it may put pressure on Zuma to step 
down before his term officially ends in 2019. He has already faced calls to 
resign, including after a recent court finding that hespent government money on 
improvements to his private home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/jacob-zuma-ordered-repay-upgrades-nkandla-home-south-african-state-funds>
.

The constitutional court ordered him to repay more than half a million dollars 
to the state. Critics also say he has been too close to a wealthy business 
family of Indian origin, with several senior politicians alleging that the 
Guptas wereinvolved in senior cabinet appointments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/jacob-zuma-denies-outside-influence-in-south-african-cabinet>
.

“Zuma doesn’t make decisions alone so the ANC is not Zuma alone, it’s a 
collective. They just need to change a few things,” said 32 year-old security 
guard Senzo Makhubela, who had decided to stick with the ruling party for now.

Many South Africans hope that even if the ANC does manage to scrape back to 
power in most of the country, the very real threat of defeat might serve as a 
push for cleaner and more effective rule.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fsouth-africas-local-elections-pose-crucial-test-for-ruling-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4c3cebf27f14e9760c9d268c339202aea223055%2F0_118_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa's%20local%20elections%20pose%20crucial%20test%20for%20ruling%20ANC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fsouth-africas-local-elections-pose-crucial-test-for-ruling-anc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%27s%20local%20elections%20pose%20crucial%20test%20for%20ruling%20ANC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fsouth-africas-local-elections-pose-crucial-test-for-ruling-anc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4c3cebf27f14e9760c9d268c339202aea223055%2F0_118_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 A boy pushes his bicycle as he holds a candidate poster of the African 
National Congress in Vuwani. Photograph: Mujahid Safodien/AFP/Getty Images 
“We are now entering an era where you cannot predict the outcome of the 
elections. This never used to be the case,” Prince Mashele, of the 
Pretoria-based Centre for Politics and Research, told AFP.

“There is an element of unpredictability [that may] inject an element of 
accountability in the political system … We are dealing with a situation of an 
angry electorate.”

There are about 26 million people registered to vote at over 22,000 polling 
stations. Voting closes at 7pm local time, but results will not start coming in 
until the early hours of Thursday, with the preliminary totals expected about 
24 hours after polling stations close.

The campaign has been marred by violence, particularly in KwaZulu-Natal, an 
ANC stronghold where several activists and candidates have been attacked or 
murdered, and others have gone into hiding.

The police have created a special taskforce to investigate the attacks, and 
the government deployed 2,000 troops to secure polling stations on voting day.






 