
A senior South African politician has said he was offered the job of finance 
minister by an Indian family accused of wielding influence over PresidentJacob 
Zuma <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma> in the latest scandal to rock the 
government.


South Africa playing a high-stakes game as president and treasury square off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/south-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma>
The deputy finance minister, Mcebisi Jonas, said the offer was made by the 
Guptas, a wealthy family that has built up an array of companies inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> since moving to the country in 
the 1990s.

The alleged job offer, which the family denies making, occurred before Zuma 
sacked the respected finance minister Nhlanhla Nene in December – a shock move 
that triggered a collapse in the rand and massive withdrawal of foreign 
investment.

“Members of the Gupta family offered me the position of minister of finance to 
replace then-minister Nene. I rejected this out of hand,” Jonas said in a 
statement on Wednesday.

“The basis of my rejection of their offer is that it makes a mockery of our 
hard-earned democracy, the trust of our people, and no one apart from the 
president of the republic appoints ministers.”

The Guptas issued a statement saying Jonas’s claims were “just more political 
point scoring between rival factions” within the African National Congress.

“Any suggestion that the Gupta family or any of our representatives or 
associates have offered anyone a job in government is totally false,” it added.

But Jonas’s claim added further fuel to allegations that the Guptas used some 
branches of the South African government for their own benefit.

South Africa says #ZumaMustFall after shock sacking of finance minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/south-africa-says-zumamustfall-after-shock-sacking-of-finance-minister>
South Africa’s main opposition party leader called for Zuma’s resignation, 
saying the claim showed his presidency was “a joke”.

“It’s clear the ANC has been captured. We must have a full parliamentary 
inquiry into the appointment of every single cabinet minister,” said the 
Democratic Alliance leader, Mmusi Maimane.

Nene was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/south-africa-says-zumamustfall-after-shock-sacking-of-finance-minister>
 in favour of the little-known David van Rooyen, who was widely seen as a weak 
placeman for corrupt Zuma loyalists.

The appointment of Van Rooyan caused such a negative reaction from investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/south-africa-finance-minister-nene-departure-drives-rand-down-to-all-time-low>
, banks and even in the ruling ANC party that Zuma sacked him after just four 
days.

Pravin Gordhan, who served as finance minister from 2009 to 2014, was 
reappointed to try to restore confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/president-zuma-hires-south-africas-third-finance-chief-in-a-week>
 in an economy that has been battered by falling growth, rising inflation and 
high unemployment.

The Gupta family has built a string of South African companies controlled by 
brothers Ajay, Atul and Rajesh, with interests in computers, mining, media and 
engineering.

Their supporters say they are an industrious immigrant family that made it big 
in their adopted country, providing much-needed investment and jobs.

But their apparent influence over government has become the focus of anger 
about Zuma’s presidency.

The radical leftist Economic Freedom Fighters opposition party has targeted 
the Guptas’ supposed influence over the ANC ahead of municipal elections later 
in the year.

Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report.
 