
Territorial disputes in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> have poisoned a meeting of 
south-east Asian defence ministers, with officials cancelling plans for a joint 
statement traditionally issued at the end of the summit.


US delegates said there was no accord at the meeting of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (Asean), after China demanded the statement omit 
reference to the South China Sea, where it hasoverlapping claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/whats-behind-beijings-drive-control-south-china-sea-hainan>
 with the Philippines, Vietnam, Malaysia, Taiwan and Brunei.

How China's artificial islands led to tension in the South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
“Understandably a number of Asean countries felt that was inappropriate. It 
reflects the divide China’s reclamation and militarisation in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea has caused in the region,” an 
unnamed US official was quoted by Reuters as saying.

Representatives accompanying US defence secretary Ash Carter to the summit in 
Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> argued it would be better 
to cancel the ceremony rather than leave out the contentious point.

“This was an Asean decision but in our view no statement is better than one 
that avoids the important issue of China’s reclamation and militarisation in 
the South China Sea,” the official said.

China’s defence ministry announced later on Wednesday that “certain countries” 
outside the region were responsible for the cancellation after they tried to 
force what it called unrelated content into the joint statement, in an apparent 
reference to the US delegation.

China and the US are not members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
but were invited to the Asean defence ministers meeting plus summit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fsouth-east-asian-ministers-cancel-joint-accord-amid-south-china-sea-hostility%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8160b261da84d9329d2c915a4440de82da057077%2F0_79_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South-east%20Asian%20ministers%20cancel%20joint%20accord%20over%20South%20China%20Sea%20dispute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fsouth-east-asian-ministers-cancel-joint-accord-amid-south-china-sea-hostility%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South-east%20Asian%20ministers%20cancel%20joint%20accord%20over%20South%20China%20Sea%20dispute&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Fsouth-east-asian-ministers-cancel-joint-accord-amid-south-china-sea-hostility%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8160b261da84d9329d2c915a4440de82da057077%2F0_79_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Delegates pose for a group photo before the opening of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) retreat in Subang, Malaysia. Photograph: Chong 
Voon Chung/Xinhua Press/Corbis 
Washington launched a direct military challenge to Beijing’s territorial 
claims last week whenit sent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/us-warship-lassen-defies-beijing-sail-disputed-south-china-sea-islands>
 a guided-missile destroyer, the USS Lassen, to the South China Sea.

The US said the trip within 12 nautical miles (22km) of Subi Reef, where China 
has built military installations, wasmeant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/03/us-pacific-commander-says-sailing-by-chinese-islands-was-not-a-military-threat>
 to demonstrate the principle of freedom of navigation. But Chinese 
vice-foreign minister, Zhang Yesui, summoned US ambassador Max Baucus and told 
him the move was “extremely irresponsible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/us-warship-lassen-defies-beijing-sail-disputed-south-china-sea-islands>
”.

Chinese defence minister Chang Wanquan reiterated that view to Carter at the 
Asean meeting in Malaysia, according to US officials in Kuala Lumpur.

South China Sea images reveal impact on coral of Beijing's military bases
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/sep/17/south-china-sea-images-reveal-impact-on-coral-of-beijings-military-bases>
The US argues that China has militarised island formations and coral reefs. 
Chinese president Xi Jinping told US president Barack Obama in September that 
China has no military intentions for the area.

The naval corridor is an important shipping route for roughly £3.17tn in trade 
and the region is thought to have oil and gas reserves. While China is building 
airstrips and military outposts on the mostly-empty islands, nations in 
south-east Asia have also tried to boost their claims by constructing houses, 
schools and medical centres on islands they claim.

In May, Chinese and Vietnamese ships collided as Beijing tried to set up an 
oil rig. Vietnam released footage of a Chinese ship ramming and sinking a 
Vietnamese fishing boat.
 