
South Africa’s political landscape is shifting almost by the hour. The gloves 
are off in a power struggle that pits the president,Jacob Zuma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zuma>, against a group of reformers led by 
the finance minister, Pravin Gordhan. It is a high-stakes drama that has 
profound implications for the country’s beleaguered economy at a time when the 
international rating agencies are circling, smelling blood.

In a potentially seminal moment in this unfolding soap opera, the deputy 
finance minister, Mcebisi Jonas, has issued an extraordinarypublic statement 
<http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/full-text-mcebisi-jonas-statement-20160316>
 claiming that a business group close to the president offered him the job of 
finance minister late last year.

At the heart of the political economy that now surrounds Zuma, and which 
Gordhan has set out his stall to confront, lies the infamousGupta family 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2015-12-17-guptas-grip-state-captive-to-networks-of-patronage>
 – Indian expats with wide-ranging business interests spanning tech, mining, 
uranium and the media.

South Africa finance minister’s departure drives rand down to all-time low
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/south-africa-finance-minister-nene-departure-drives-rand-down-to-all-time-low>
Job offer

Jonas’ statement said he was contacted by the Guptas and offered the finance 
ministry job before Zumasummarily dismissed Nhlanhla Nene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/south-africa-finance-minister-nene-departure-drives-rand-down-to-all-time-low>
, the respected incumbent, in December and replaced him with a rank non-entity 
ANC backbencher, David van Rooyen. The fall-out was so shocking that local 
reporters and commentators now refer to it as “9/12”.

Jonas says he declined the offer out of hand because only the president has 
the constitutional authority to appoint cabinet ministers.

Pro-democracy group the Council for the Advancement of the South African 
Constitution said hisdisclosure showed the extent to which 
<http://www.casac.org.za/> the country is under threat from a patronage network 
that has grown ever more insidious since Zuma came to power in 2009.

To understand the significance of the moment, it is necessary to take at least 
two steps back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7c0747df0cd74ee7fff6e97529d13aa696c244e%2F0_133_2010_1204%2F2010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20playing%20a%20high-stakes%20game%20as%20president%20and%20treasury%20square%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20playing%20a%20high-stakes%20game%20as%20president%20and%20treasury%20square%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7c0747df0cd74ee7fff6e97529d13aa696c244e%2F0_133_2010_1204%2F2010.jpg>
 Pravin Gordhan smiling as he walks past Jacob Zuma. Photograph: Siphiwe 
Sibeko/Reuters 
The context

Like Brazil and Russia, South Africa’s ANC-led government has struggled to 
offer convincing evidence that it has not run out of ideas in the fight against 
structural economic constraints which limit the prospects for the growth needed 
to reduce poverty and inequality.

This growing gap between haves and have-nots threatens stability and adds to 
the sense of social precariousness and racial unease increasingly at play in 
Africa’s second-biggest economy.

The international investment community and other market analysts have looked 
on asSouth Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> dug itself 
ever deeper into a rut, asking what it might take for the country to propel 
itself ahead of other emerging market economies.

The answer came, ironically, from Zuma himself. Regarded as a large part of 
the problem because he has allowed himself to be captured by vested commercial 
interests, such as the Guptas, it was Zuma who dropped the bombshell on 9/12. 
The ripple effects will be felt for a long time to come.

First, it woke up the “silent majority” within the ANC’s moderate middle and 
social democratic left. Asked on the evening of Nene’s dismissal what the ANC 
thought of the decision, ANC secretary-general Gwede Mantashereplied 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2016-03-02-no-more-key-anc-members-turn-on-zuma>: “The 
ANC has no comment because the ANC was not consulted.”

This was the first of a number of seminal, game-changing moments. Mantashe, a 
key powerbroker within the ruling party, and crucial to the organisational 
structures and power that will determine who succeeds Zuma, was furious. It was 
immediately apparent that Zuma had made an enormous political error of 
judgement.

Never mind the reaction of the markets, which for the remaining two days of 
that tumultuous week battered the currency and South African bonds. Zuma had 
committed a cardinal sin. He had failed to consult the fellow leaders of his 
party, showing just how desperate he was to please his benefactors and serve 
his own interests.

Nene had stood up 
<http://businesstech.co.za/news/government/106705/why-zuma-sacked-nene-according-to-the-eff-and-da/>
 to Zuma on a number of highly controversial issues, including restructuring 
and governance of the state-owned airline South African Airways and the 
procurement of nuclear power, where Zuma, his relatives and friends, such as 
the Guptas, have vested interests that need protection.

As a result Nene was fired and replaced by a political weakling who would be 
beholden to Zuma and, apparently, the Guptas. On his first and – so it would 
turn out – only day in the National Treasury, Van Rooyenturned up 
<http://www.biznews.com/leadership/2016/02/15/named-van-rooyens-two-gupta-advisors-who-almost-hijacked-sa-treasury/>
 with two advisers in the pay of the Gupta family.

Within four days Zuma had been forced to replace Van Rooyen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/president-zuma-hires-south-africas-third-finance-chief-in-a-week>
 with Gordhan, who served as finance minister during Zuma’s first 
administration between 2009 and 2014. Senior ANC leaders, such as Mantashe and 
the increasingly influential treasurer-general, Zweli Mkhize, had made it clear 
to Zuma that what he had done was politically unacceptable.

So Gordhan returned to the treasury with far stronger political backing than 
previously, and remains all but unsackable. Going into the new year the country 
was asking: who runs the government - the president or the finance minister?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45d40385da782595474bf4f8d951417b798113ab%2F0_192_2092_1255%2F2092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20playing%20a%20high-stakes%20game%20as%20president%20and%20treasury%20square%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20playing%20a%20high-stakes%20game%20as%20president%20and%20treasury%20square%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45d40385da782595474bf4f8d951417b798113ab%2F0_192_2092_1255%2F2092.jpg>
 President Jacob Zuma answers parliamentary questions in Cape Town Photograph: 
Mike Hutchings/Reuters 
Political masterpiece

Within minutes of Zuma’s state of the nation address 
<http://www.gov.za/speeches/president-jacob-zuma-state-nation-address-2016-11-feb-2016-0000>
 on February 11, the answer was clear. The treasury was back at the helm.

Gordhan’s budget speech 
<http://mg.co.za/article/2016-02-24-pravin-gordhans-full-2016-budget-speech> 
that followed shortly afterwards was a political masterpiece. He managed to do 
enough to suggest that South Africa would avoid a rating agency downgrade to 
junk status – at least until December. He also offered glimpses of the sort of 
innovation needed to propel a stubbornly sluggish economy towards growth.

It was an act of political leadership. Gordhan made it clear that state-owned 
enterprises would be reformed and new rules brought in to prevent “predatory” 
attempts to capture state institutions for the purposes of self-enrichment.

In response, Zuma resorted to type. He reignited an old investigation 
<http://ewn.co.za/2016/02/28/Hawks-push-ahead-with-Gordhan-investigation> 
against Gordhan over a so-called “rogue” unit established by the South African 
tax service while he was commissioner more than a decade ago. Using loyal 
placemen at the revenue services and the Hawks, a specialist investigative unit 
within the police, Zuma has waged a proxy war against Gordhan for nearly a 
month.

Gordhan seems to be up for the fight. He refused to answer the 27 questions 
that the Hawks sent to him until he was ready to do so, saying he could not be 
distracted from either his preparations for the budget nor a whirlwind roadshow 
in which he met investors, fund managers and market analysts in London, New 
York and Boston.

Two days after his budget speech the Hawks leaked information about their 
investigation of Gordhan, clearly an attempt to undermine the finance minister 
who has emerged as the head of a reformist, progressive consortium within the 
government and the ANC that is opposed to Zuma..

In response to the leak, the ANC heavyweights responded with unusual speed. 
Mantashe provided apublic statement 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2016-02-26-hawks-gunning-for-gordhan-anc-comes-out-in-support-of-finance-minister/#.VunmDMfF5Hg>
 of unequivocal support for Gordhan, indicating just how the balance of power 
is shifting away from Zuma.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77b950a227e509ca23c78e085df49a80753c6c1a%2F0_115_1791_1075%2F1791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20playing%20a%20high-stakes%20game%20as%20president%20and%20treasury%20square%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20playing%20a%20high-stakes%20game%20as%20president%20and%20treasury%20square%20off&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsouth-africa-high-stakes-game-jacob-zuma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77b950a227e509ca23c78e085df49a80753c6c1a%2F0_115_1791_1075%2F1791.jpg>
 South Africa’s deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas. Photograph: Mike 
Hutchings/Reuters 
Dangerous game

But in this high-stakes game of chicken, both sides have to step carefully 
along the tightrope that lies ahead of them towards the ANC’s national 
conference at the end of 2017 when the next ANC leader – and hence the 
country’s next president – will be chosen.

Any misstep could lead to disaster. If Zuma refuses to give ground, Gordhan 
may have to resign or push harder, forcing the president into a corner where he 
may be forced to lash out and cause even more collateral damage.

If Zuma pushes back too hard against Gordhan, or fires him, then the ANC 
heavyweights may have to lead a full revolt against Zuma that would lead to his 
“recall” – the fate that befell former president Thabo Mbeki in September 2008, 
when theANC leadership ruled that he should resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/sep/21/mbeki.resignation> after a court 
judgment suggesting he had interfered in a prosecution of Zuma himself.

The charges against Zuma were suddenly dropped 
<http://www.loc.gov/law/foreign-news/article/south-africa-prosecutor-drops-corruption-charges-against-zuma/>
 in March 2009, a month before he was elected president. This decision is 
currentlybefore the courts 
<http://www.bdlive.co.za/national/2016/03/02/even-if-da-wins-charges-against-zuma-may-not-automatically-be-reinstated>
, and if it goes against him it would be another wound in his side.

Why South African students have turned on their parents’ generation | Eve 
Fairbanks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/nov/18/why-south-african-students-have-turned-on-their-parents-generation>
With the ANC’s electoral domination likely to be challenged for the first time 
in important cities such as Johannesburg, Pretoria and Port Elizabeth in 
municipal elections in the middle of the year, it may be that the party will 
face the prospect of removing Zuma ahead of the end of his term – as ANC 
president in 2017 and South African president in 2019.

Zuma will fight to the very end; that much is clear. Jonas’s act of principled 
leadership is a further milestone in a gripping political narrative and adds 
significantly to the case against the president.

Richard Calland is an associate professor in the public law department at the 
University of Cape Town in South Africa and author ofThe Zuma Years 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Zuma-Years-Africas-Changing/dp/1770220887>

This article first appeared on The Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/high-stakes-drama-as-south-african-president-and-finance-minister-square-off-47698>
 