
Q You recently wrote about avoiding toxic chemicals in a food-preparation 
area. Not long ago, I bought a round dining-room table which can be extended to 
form an oval shape. The wood is birch and I think it's lightly varnished, as I 
can wipe it. But the surface is so soft it's already starting to mark. Is there 
a way to protect the top without varnishing it with toxic chemicals?
Veronika Cheasley-Rau

A Birch is a soft wood that is rather prone to dents and deep scratches. The 
problem may be that its high-gloss finish shows up surface imperfections 
horribly. You could toughen the surface with a couple of thick coats of 
polyurethane varnish, but this will have very high toxic VOC levels, which you 
don't want on your dining table. The simple answer may be to remove the varnish 
and wax or oil the surface, giving it a natural matt finish, thus reducing 
reflections (earthbornpaints.co.uk <http://www.earthbornpaints.co.uk>). Failing 
that, a set of robust, stylish tablemats may just do the trick. For the very 
best, seewww.elladoran.co.uk <http://www.elladoran.co.uk>.

Q Is it feasible to add a lightweight balcony to a first-floor window of a 
Victorian house, large enough for a small table and chairs? Perhaps some sort 
of steel cantilevered structure running under the floor of the room to which it 
is attached?
 Danny Berry

A I recently added something similar to my own home and it's a total pleasure 
to use. The problems you face, however, are many, and you will need to be 
determined to complete it. First, consult your local planning authority for an 
informal discussion: they may well have issues with conservation areas, 
listed-building status and overlooking problems with neighbours. Second, 
consult an engineer, who will calculate the project's viability and then steel 
sizes. You should then take the drawings and figures produced to the local 
building-control office for consultation before applying for both planning 
permission and building-control notice. Last, find a steel fabricator and 
builder to cost, construct and fit it. This will take several months, so don't 
expect to sit back and enjoy until October.

Â· If you have a decorating question for Oliver, email ask.oliver@observer.co.uk
 <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
 