
Australians lost 30% more through sports betting in 2014-15 compared with the 
previous financial year, AustralianGambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gambling-australia> Statistics data 
shows.

Almost $23bn was gambled away in 2014-15. Losses to poker machines made up the 
bulk of that – $11.6bn – a 4.9% increase on the previous financial year.

Sports betting losses are the fastest-growing sector of the gambling industry: 
Australians lost almost $815m. The total amount lost equated to $1,241 per 
head, a 7.7% increase from the previous financial year.

Nick Xenophon and Andrew Wilkie demand federal reform of gambling laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/14/nick-xenophon-and-andrew-wilkie-demand-federal-reform-of-gambling-laws>
 On Sunday the Victorian government proposed a crackdown on sports betting ads 
on public transport and near schools. It would be banned under reforms put 
forward by the minister for gaming and liquor regulation, Marlene Kairouz.

Wagering-related problem gambling costs Victorians between $1.5bn and $2.8bn 
each year.

“Gambling is not an integral part of sport,” Kairouz said. “Kids should be 
talking about their favourite sporting teams, not the odds of that team 
winning.”

The South Australian senator Nick Xenophon and the Tasmanian independent MP 
Andrew Wilkie <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/andrew-wilkie> are 
united in their push for gambling reform. Last month they called for sports 
betting advertising during G-rated television broadcasts to be banned and 
maximum $1 bets on poker machines.

The Australian Gambling Statistics data 
<http://www.qgso.qld.gov.au/products/reports/aus-gambling-stats/aus-gambling-stats-32nd-edn-summary-tables.pdf>
 shows that total gambling-related losses were greatest in NSW, at $8.9bn, 
followed by Victoria at $5.7bn and Queensland at $3.7bn.

Dr Charles Livingstone, from Monash University’s school of public health and 
preventive medicine, who is a leading researcher on the impact of gambling on 
public health, said gambling-related harm came third behind that caused by 
tobacco and alcohol.

“Its impact is the equivalent to having major depression in terms of harm and 
life years lost,” Livingstone said.

“On top of that, we’re seeing a younger generation coming through that has 
been groomed to gamble, and an older generation that has been saturated by 
pokies and their harm.

“I think we’re slowly starting to see an emerging consensus from governments 
that we need to control this. But the problem is, many state governments are 
dependent on pokies revenue.”
 