
Anna Chapman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anna-chapman>, the Russian 
sleeper agent at the centre of a spy ring in the US, is to become a leader of 
the youth wing of Vladimir Putin's United Russia party, according to reports in 
Moscow.

Russian media said Chapman would be appointed at a congress of Molodaya 
Gvardiya (Young Guard) in the capital tomorrow. "Chapman will become the head 
of one of the new governing bodies of Molodaya Gvardiya," a source in the 
organisation told a newspaper.

Vedomosti said Chapman, 28, would be assigned work with "patriots and young 
businesspeople".

Nationalist youth groups like Molodaya Gvardiya are seen by the Kremlin as an 
essential tool in attempts to suppress "the orange scenario" - a reference to 
mass protests known as the orange revolution that forced a change in Ukraine's 
leadership in 2005.

Putin, the prime minister, has already expressed his admiration for Chapman 
and the other nine deep-cover Russian agents who were exposed and ejected from 
the US in June.

In July, he got together with the putative spies - who were never formally 
accused of espionage - to sing nostalgic Soviet songs. He praised them for 
"suffering daily dangers" and predicted they would "work in worthy places" and 
"have bright and interesting lives".

President Dmitry Medvedev later awarded the agents unspecified state honours 
in a ceremony at the Kremlin.

Molodaya Gvardiya is a fanatically pro-Putin youth group that fell under 
suspicion last month, when newspaper reporter Oleg Kashin was beaten close to 
death with an iron bar outside his home in Moscow. The group had earlier 
denounced Kashin as a "journalist-traitor" and published his photograph on its 
website with the caption: "Will be punished."

Chapman - known to Russian tabloids as "Agent 90-60-90" because of her figure 
measurements, in cms â€“ was not available for comment. She has given no in-depth 
interviews since being deported from the US but has posed semi-naked for men's 
magazines, attended a rocket launch at the Baikonur cosmodrome in Kazakhstan 
and shown up at a technology forum.

In September, the 10 deported agents travelled together for a holiday at Lake 
Baikal in Siberia. They descended in a mini-submarine to the bottom of the lake 
and "ate local delicacies", according to the lifenews.ru website.
 