
Never a man to do things by halves, and rarely a man to tell anyone else what 
he was doing, Stanley Kubrick fuelled Hollywood's rumour mill to a greater 
extent than any other director. Even his death last year did little to reduce 
the steady flow of fantastic tales about his future projects, and top of the 
list has been the sci-fi epic,AI <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ai>. Kubrick 
had nurtured this project for more than 20 years, and it was announced as his 
next project several times. But ultimately, it outlived him.

Last year, the AI saga took a new turn when it was announced that Steven 
Spielberg had decided to direct the film, with a release planned for summer 
2001. With no known direct connection between the two directors, the news came 
as something of a surprise, but they were close associates, and their film 
careers were bizarrely intertwined.

Had it not been for Spielberg, in fact, Kubrick's film legacy might have taken 
an entirely different shape. "They are both great writers but they have 
different handwriting," says Jan Harlan, Kubrick's brother-in-law and 
long-standing executive producer. "They are similar in their intellect. They 
are both very fast and very, very bright." As unofficial earthly representative 
of Kubrick, a close friend for more than 40 years and the sole link between 
Spielberg's AI and Kubrick's, Harlan is in the perfect position to clear up 
decades of speculation surrounding the director.

"He and Spielberg spoke all the time," he continues. "I have six or seven 
years' worth of correspondence between them over AI, which I recently passed 
over to Spielberg along with over 1,000 drawings." Harlan has recently read 
Spielberg's new script and is very enthusiastic about it. He has seen the 
initial models and designs ("mind-bogglingly wonderful", "huge teams of 
people"), and though he is still sworn to secrecy on the details, he confirms 
that Haley Joel Osment (the boy from The Sixth Sense) and Jude Law are both on 
board.

AI (short for Artificial Intelligence) is an adaptation of a 1969 short story 
by Brian Aldiss called Super-Toys Last All Summer Long, to which Kubrick bought 
the rights in 1983. Set in a flooded futuristic world, the story is like a 
robot version of Pinocchio, centring on an android boy with human emotions. 
"Stanley took that idea and projected it into the future, not only the child 
but the society as well," Harlan explains. "He always liked to tackle new 
things and a really fantastic fairy tale was something he hadn't done yet."

Spielberg's own fantastic sci-fi fairytale, ET, had been released the year 
before, and it had an influence on Kubrick in the same way that 2001: A Space 
Odyssey had influenced Spielberg to make Close Encounters of the Third Kind. At 
the same time as AI, however, there were two other stories Kubrick had been 
grooming for development for decades: Eyes Wide Shut, to which he had bought 
the film rights in 1972, and a second world war project called The Aryan 
Papers. These three projects were intensively developed, then put on the back 
burner for the rest of Kubrick's life.

After an initial bout of work on AI with Aldiss in the early 70s, it was 
shelved, partly in response to Star Wars. So The Aryan Papers was the 
frontrunner after Kubrick finished Full Metal Jacket in 1987. "Kubrick always 
wanted to do a film on the Holocaust, but he never got a good script," says 
Harlan. He had tried to commission an original screenplay from the novelist 
Isaac Bashevis Singer (who turned it down on the grounds that he knew nothing 
about the Holocaust), before settling on an adaptation of the novel Wartime 
Lies, by Lewis Begley.

"We were very committed to do this film," Harlan recalls. "We had done 
enormous amounts of research and preparation, but there came a point when he 
and Warner boss Terry Semel decided it would be better to do AI first. It had 
to do with Schindler's List," he said. "It was such a good film and so 
successful, and Stanley's film would have come out about a year later. He'd 
already had this experience with Full Metal Jacket, which came out the year 
after Platoon, and that hurt us, there's no question about it." So in 1995, The 
Aryan Papers was abandoned and Kubrick returned to AI.

 Aldiss contributed sporadically, and other writers were brought in, including 
another British sci-fi writer, Ian Watson, and novelist Sara Maitland. By this 
stage, the internet community had discovered the project, and rumours started 
to fly on a daily basis, fuelled by Kubrick's secrecy and refusal to 
communicate with the press. There was the rumour, for example, that AI had 
begun production in the early 90s, and that Kubrick was shooting Joseph 
Mazzello (one of the child actors from Jurassic Park) for four weeks at a time 
every couple of years. "Total nonsense," Harlan replies, "although we did test 
Joseph and he was put on a contract, but then he didn't do the film."

What about the rumoured involvement of Chris Cunningham, futuristic video 
director for the likes of Madonna, Bj√∂rk and Aphex Twin and part-time robot 
designer? "We did try to build remote control machines and stuff like that. We 
tried to construct a little boy with a movable rubber face to see whether we 
could make it look appealing. But it was a total failure, it looked awful."

How much of the footage had already been shot before he died? "We did some 
test shots from a helicopter of oil rigs in the North sea. We wanted to see the 
sea during really bad weather. That was all. Spielberg is basically starting 
from zero." Or there is the rumour that Kubrick was already working on effects 
shots with Industrial Light & Magic, but stopped everything when he saw ILM's 
computer-generated dinosaurs for Spielberg's Jurassic Park. "There's a grain of 
truth in that, yes, because he was really astonished by Jurassic Park and AI 
needs that kind of stuff even more. So he said, 'The longer we wait, the 
better'."

Thus AI was put on the back burner again, and Eyes Wide Shut became Kubrick's 
final film. Like AI, it had been in Kubrick's possession since the 70s, and had 
been worked and reworked from Schnitzler's source material. "He was stuck on it 
for 20 years. He didn't know how to end it," Harlan remembers. "At one point, 
about 15 years ago, he was totally high for a week. He said, 'I have a 
brilliant idea: I'll do it in New York and I'll have Woody Allen playing the 
lead. It makes total sense!' Of course, Woody told me he never heard anything 
about it."

Harlan maintains that Kubrick would certainly have returned to AI after Eyes 
Wide Shut. "He had no intention of dying, I assure you. But at one point, 
Stanley actually said to Spielberg: 'You would be the best guy to direct this 
film, I'll be the producer.' I can't tell you whether he would have directed it 
himself or given it to Spielberg. That was still very much a possibility."

Having crossed Kubrick's path so often, having influenced, obstructed and 
ultimately earned his respect, Spielberg now finds himself in an entirely new 
relationship to Kubrick, as his officially approved successor. It is a shift 
that Harlan and the rest of the Kubrick estate seem entirely satisfied with. 
"There's really no one else who could have done it apart from Spielberg. I'm 
more than happy about it; I'm ecstatic. It's exactly what Stanley would have 
wanted. Well, second best to living."
 