
When Lucasfilm and Disney announced the cast of the new Star Wars film on 
Tuesday, fans fell into two camps: thosecelebrating the return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/29/star-wars-episode-7-cast-announced-adam-driver-john-boyega>
 of Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher and Harrison Ford, and those furiously Googling 
the new (young) cast members. Meet the new class of Star Wars stars:

John Boyega
 John Boyega (centre) with the cast of Attack the Block. Photograph: Richard 
Saker 
Best known for Attack the Block 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140925/attack-the-block>, the 2011 film 
in which a teenage gang defends their south London block from aliens, Boyega is 
a 22-year-old actor and presumably a lead in the new Star Wars film. He would 
also be the first black lead in the series (though James Earl Jones deserves 
that nod for the voice of Darth Vader, hewas not credited in the original 
release <http://www.webcitation.org/69UOnwfCN> of either Episodes IV or V, at 
his own request, and so by technicality does not make the mark).

Daisy Ridley

Probably the least known of all the cast members, Ridley has primarily done 
British TV work <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm5397459/> (Mr Selfridge, Silent 
Witness), along with these series of shorts that a young actors' production 
company posted online.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di88cjgcyoX0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di88cjgcyoX0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di88cjgcyoX0&media=>
Adam Driver

Rumors that Driver had been cast as a "Darth Vader-like" villain  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/feb/27/star-wars-episode-vii-adam-driver-casting-jj-abrams>
began weeks ago, so the confirmation of his casting is no surprise. The 
30-year-old is known mostly for this work on the HBO series Girls and small 
indie films, and asthe Guardian's Ben Child notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/feb/27/star-wars-episode-vii-adam-driver-casting-jj-abrams>
, he has the size (6ft 3in and "weaselly yet muscular, like a geeky American 
football quarterback"), voice and acting chops to pull off villainous.
 Mia Wasikowska and Adam Driver. Photograph: eOne 
If he is indeed the nemesis of Luke Skywalker & Co, he has bodybuilder-size 
shoes to fill (David Prowse <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Prowse>, who 
wore the original suit, stood at 6ft 6in). "He only has to ask Hayden 
Christensen for advice if he wants to find outhow it can all go horribly wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2007/aug/21/badchemistrycoupleswhofail>
."

Oscar Isaac

After years of playing supporting roles in films like Robin Hood and Drive, 
Isaac took the eponymous lead in the Coen brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/coen-brothers-inside-llewyn-davis-interview>
'Inside Llewyn Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-llewyn-davis?page=2>. 
 Inside Llewyn Davis: Oscar Isaac with that elusive cat. Photograph: Alison 
Rosa/AP Photo/CBS FIlms 
His deft performance in that film earned him heaps of critical plaudits, about 
which hetold the Guardian's Catherine Shoard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/oscar-isaac-inside-llewyn-davies-cannes>
: "The irony hasn't been lost on me … Being celebrated for playing someone who 
wasn't. … I know those people; it could have easily just gone the other way for 
me too."

Andy Serkis

As Gollum nee Smeagol, King Kong, and Caesar the chimpanzee who would rule us 
all,Andy Serkis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-serkis> has established 
himself as an actor so eerily good at imitation and invention thatcritics have 
called for award categories to expand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/19/andy-serkis-planet-apes-oscars> 
just to reward his performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/01/andy-serkis-mo-cap-oscar>
.
 Andy Serkis comes out of the hobbit's home during the film premiere for The 
Hobbit. Photograph: Stephen Barker/Rex Features 
Serkis, who's been acting and directing for years, will almost certainly don 
the motion-capture suit again and grace theStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> universe with … whatever it is he 
and the folks at Lucasfilm would like. Ideally the new film will bridge the gap 
from Star Wars' original models and masks to the prequels disastrous CGI-mania: 
Serkis is precisely the man to help them do that.

Domhnall Gleeson

Gleeson, who played a Weasley in Harry Potter and a simpering bandit in the 
Coen brothers' True Grit, may be more recognizable to audiences.
 Domhnall Gleeson, third from the left and Brid Brennan in Shadow Dancer. 
The Irish actor has not shied from contradictory performances:  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/16/domhnall-gleeson-handsome-is-not-really>
he's taken roles in Anna Karenina (as the good guy, Levin), as the lead in 
time-travel rom-com About Time, and as an IRA soldier in Shadow Dancer. He's 
also appearing with Michael Fassbender in Frank.

Max von Sydow

Carl Adolph von Sydow's resume reads like a brief summary of 20th and 21st 
centuary film history: he was the knight in The Seventh Seal, a priest in The 
Exorcist, and Harry Haller in Steppenwolf. He was in Conan the Barbarian, David 
Lynch's Dune, Ghostbusters II, and has played Jesus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstar-wars-episode-vii-cast-return-new-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F29%2F1398796874126%2Fc98f1914-b59e-4422-834f-d41c0bd63f56-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20Episode%207%20cast%3A%20meet%20the%20newcomers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstar-wars-episode-vii-cast-return-new-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20Episode%207%20cast%3A%20meet%20the%20newcomers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstar-wars-episode-vii-cast-return-new-actors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F29%2F1398796874126%2Fc98f1914-b59e-4422-834f-d41c0bd63f56-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Actor Max von Sydow Photograph: Stephane Cardinale/People Avenue/Corbis 
He acted for the legendary director Ingmar Bergman in 11 films. He narrated 
Moomins and the Comet Chase. The 85-year-old polyglot does it all, and the 
Guardian has called him the "god of gravitas". About his acting name, he told 
Hadley Freeman:

"Yes! Ha ha ha! During my military service, I performed a sketch in which I 
played a flea called Max. So when critics kept misspelling my name, I decided 
to change it and thought, 'Ah! Max!'"

The originals

As for the rest of the cast, there are no surprises that the original actors, 
as rumored, will be part of the new films. Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Mark 
Hamill, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew and Kenny Baker are back. But others are 
missing: where are Billy Dee Williams and James Earl Jones? Will Frank Oz 
return in some way? (The disembodied voices of Jedi ghosts do have a way of 
making it back into these films, after all.)

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstar-wars-episode-vii-cast-return-new-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F29%2F1398797515698%2Fead02199-0747-463b-bc78-6a8d00fb72fe-2060x896.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Star%20Wars%20Episode%207%20cast%3A%20meet%20the%20newcomers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstar-wars-episode-vii-cast-return-new-actors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Star%20Wars%20Episode%207%20cast%3A%20meet%20the%20newcomers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fapr%2F29%2Fstar-wars-episode-vii-cast-return-new-actors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F29%2F1398797515698%2Fead02199-0747-463b-bc78-6a8d00fb72fe-2060x896.jpeg>
 The original stars, more recently Photograph: CARSTENSEN ROBERTS NEARMY/EPA 
Archive interviews with the Star Wars cast and crew

• Domhnall Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/16/domhnall-gleeson-handsome-is-not-really>
• Oscar Isaac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/23/oscar-isaac-inside-llewyn-davies-cannes>
• Max Von Sydow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/13/max-von-sydow-interview>
• John Boyega 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/08/attack-block-london-teenagers-interview>
• Andy Serkis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/02/interview-andy-serkis>
• Adam Driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/18/adam-driver-girls-inside-llewyn-davis>
• JJ Abrams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/09/jj-abrams-star-trek-into-darkness-interview>
 