
Angela Lansbury, actor 

I feel as if I was born into musical theatre with Stephen literally holding my 
hand â€“ because Anyone Can Whistle was my premiere performance in a Broadway 
musical. It was so unlike anything that had ever been seen on stage: it almost 
caused a riot. But then he was the enfant terrible of his time.

The only time I worked with him on a personal basis was when there was some 
question as to whether I would play Mrs Lovett in Sweeney Todd. The producer 
Harold Prince wired to ask if I would be interested and I wired back: "Who is 
Nellie Lovett?" The story was about the demon barber of Fleet Street, and I 
knew damn well that if I was going to go back to Broadway, it had to be in a 
starring role.

So I went to New York and Stephen invited me to his house to play me her first 
number, The Worst Pies in London. It is hilariously funny, and when he played 
it, he laughed so hard he couldn't get the words out. I was on the floor. So 
between the two of us, we decided Nellie was going to be a very strong asset to 
Sweeney Todd, making it a great role for me to have a crack at.

He is a generous, warm-hearted person and his contribution to theatre is 
immeasurable.

Trevor Nunn, director

I never meant to leave putting on a Sondheim so late. I've always admired him 
and had tried to do a couple of productions before. So it was fantastically 
exciting to finally do one, A Little Night Music, at the Menier Chocolate 
Factory in London, where budgets are extremely tight.

I've always enjoyed working in small theatres, though: we could be up close 
and personal, able to investigate and release all of the work's Chekhovian 
ingredients.

I had talked to Stephen before rehearsals, and he agreed that Chekhov had been 
in his mind when he was writing it. Stephen came to a preview. It was 
electrifying: we were exhilarated, but worried that what we were doing wasn't 
what he meant. He was very emotional and congratulatory, though, which was 
gratifying.

Stephen is a writer you can readily bracket with Shakespeare and Chekhov. He 
should not to be thought of as a writer of musicals, but as a writer of theatre 
who understands all its possibilities, and who has extraordinary wit and 
insight into character. As we enter the 21st century, his status as one of the 
greats is absolutely secure.

Rebecca Front, actor

I got into Sondheim, like a lot of actors, at drama school. He has always been 
loved by actors because a lot of people say you don't need to be a fantastic 
singer to do some of the songs. It certainly helps if you are, but there are 
plenty of people who can deliver a Sondheim song without being an amazing 
vocalist, because so much is in the lyrics, and in how you deliver it, your 
breathing and intensity.

I used to write songs when I was a student and lyrics were my big thing. So 
obviously Sondheim became a hero because he is an amazing lyricist as well as 
an incredible musician. There aren't that many people who can do both so 
brilliantly.

It was a dream come true performing in Company, one of the best jobs I've ever 
had. The show works on so many levels: George Furth's story is fantastic, the 
dialogue is wonderful, and Sam Mendes put a really good production together. 
When we found out Sondheim was coming over, and was going to conduct 
masterclasses during preview week for us all, I thought I'd died and gone to 
heaven. It was fantastic to listen to him saying things like: "I mean, I think 
that gag still works, does it work? You can always change it if you want to." 
He was very relaxed and witty.

There is this myth that Americans don't do irony. He completely stamps on 
that. He is ironic and sharp. Occasionally his tunes can sound romantic, but he 
undercuts things, musically and lyrically, which makes him sound cutting-edge. 
So long as irony is fashionable, Sondheim is going to be relevant.

John Logan, writer

I saw the original production of Sweeney Todd on Broadway when I was at high 
school, and it was one of the transformative events of my young theatre-going 
life. It was one of those shows that stayed with you for ever. I've talked to 
tonnes of people who feel the same way. So it was humbling to work on the film 
version, to explore the depth of the score, narrative and characters with 
Stephen himself.

We became friends while working on the film, spending a lot of time together 
in London where it was shot. We stayed at the same hotel and went to the 
theatre every night, because there is no more carnivorous theatre animal than 
Stephen: he sees everything, and he tired me out, believe me. In his avuncular 
way, he kept nudging me and saying: "You're such a good playwright, you should 
get back into it."

So I wrote Red, about Mark Rothko. It was at the Donmar and is about to open 
on Broadway. I dedicated it to him. "ToStephen Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sondheim>," it reads, "for reminding me." 
And what he reminded me is that I am a playwright.

The word teacher means a lot to Stephen. He had great mentors and I think he 
believes that one of his callings is to be a teacher for other younger artists. 
That's certainly what he is to me, and probably about 500 others. Working with 
him was probably the greatest pleasure in my life as a writer.
 