
The question: Can you keep Christ and give up being a Christian? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/aug/09/religion-christianity>

Remember that Charlie Brown poster: "I love humanity, I just can't stand 
people"? I had it on my wall in my youth. If I still had it, I'd be tempted to 
send it toAnne Rice <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annerice> as a sympathy 
gift.

Sometime around 30 Friday July Anne Rice posted a message on her Facebook page 
saying that she was leaving the Catholic church, for the second time. (She was 
born in the faith, renounced it, wrote about vampires, then rejoined 
Catholicism 12 years ago and wrote a couple of novelsimagining the life of 
Jesus Christ <http://www.annerice.com/christthelord-outofegypt-editions.html>.)

As Rice told the LA Times – who naturally rang her up 
<http://www.latimes.com/news/local/la-me-beliefs-anne-rice-20100807,0,5152082.story>
 – she still believes in God and the importance of prayer, she just feels "much 
more morally comfortable walking away from organized religion".

Her decision, she explained, was a matter of "rejecting what I've discovered 
about the persecution of gays, the persecution and oppression of women and the 
actions of the churches on many different levels. I've also found that I can't 
find a basis in scripture for a lot of the positions that churches and 
denominations take today, and I can't find any basis at all for an anointed, 
hierarchical priesthood. So all of this finally created a pressure in me, a 
kind of confusion, a toxic anger at times, and I felt I had to step aside. And 
that's what I have done."

So the woman who wrote about Christ as the "ultimate supernatural hero 
<http://www.annerice.com/christthelord-outofegypt-editions.html>" has made the 
heroic decision to stand up for what she believes in.

The one thing you can be sure about the global Christian community is that, 
like all communities of passionate belief, there will always be sections of it 
that like nothing more than a good, frustration-relieving hate (preferably of 
someone who can't answer back and who is probably a fiction anyway).

This can be a difficult fact to accept for many of us. Personally, I was under 
the impression that Jesus Christ's purpose was to indicate the path to God and 
salvation and his advice was to focus on two commandments: love God with all 
your heart and will, and love your neighbour as yourself. As far as I am aware, 
Jesus never told anyone to hate, or to be paranoid.

But – newsflash – Christians are just like other people. We are envious, 
fearful, resentful and way-too inclined to tear into others rather question 
ourselves.

The message of Jesus Christ's teachings is basically threatening to all these 
innately human characteristics: it asks for humility, love and patience and to 
resist the immediately gratifying response.

And that is damned hard, so everyone fails to come up to the ideal (Christians 
like to talk about the community of saints – but if you'd been able to meet an 
old-time saint, trust me, they would have had bad temper and BO like the rest 
of us). But just because you don't quite make the grade, if you are caught up 
by a glimpse of how things might be, you don't stop trying.

Anne Rice raises some very valid points. Her decision to stay within the 
Catholic church or leave is a personal matter she has clearly thought hard 
about and her concerns chime with many, many people today.

But I want to applaud those who take the tougher gig – those kind-hearted, 
open-minded Christians who stay to work within organised religion. I suspect 
that role is the more heroic. (And I write as some one who, like Anne Rice, has 
retreated from organised religion.)

The churches are material attempts, however imperfect, to bear witness to the 
hope that human beings can enrich one another rather than be doomed to exist as 
isolated and fragmented individuals. As institutions, it is true, organised 
religions will always be lumbering and slow to change. The wilful nastiness of 
many so-called religious people can be frustrating and sometimes appalling, 
but, if you read the Bible, God was always having a controversy with his 
people, who would keep misunderstanding him.

Yes, we hear an awful lot from the fearful blowhards who insist on their 
superior piety while peddling hate. But there are so many others. Witness 
Pastor Gabriel Salguero's gentle and elegantopen letter to Anne Rice 
<http://newsweek.washingtonpost.com/onfaith/panelists/gabriel_salguero/2010/08/an_evangelical_leaders_open_letter_to_anne_rice.html>
 in his Washington Post Blog. Christian pilgrimage needs the irritation of the 
doubting outsiders, but it also needs the day-to-day toiling of the faithful 
within the churches.

So the task today, True Believers, is to resist throwing abuse over the divide.

Being a Christian is hard, Charlie Brown.
 