
Stephen Sondheim's legendary 1970 musical Company centres on Bobby, a New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> commitment-phobe flitting 
between various girlfriends. However, after 40 years, Bobby could be about to 
change his sexual preferences, after reports that the composer is working on a 
revised "gay" version of the musical.

John Tiffany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/19/john-tiffany-national-theatre-scotland>
, the Tony award-winning director of Once, proposed the re-reading to Sondheim 
and is workshopping the idea in New York withDaniel Evans, artistic director of 
Sheffield Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/27/daniel-evans-sondheim-company-interview>
, playing Bobby.

Evans played the role as it was originally written at the Sheffield Crucible 
two years ago <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/dec/06/company-review>.

As for the girlfriends, the character of Joanne – originally played by Elaine 
Stritch in the Broadway premiere – has been taken byAlan Cumming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-cumming>, with Ugly Betty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/dec/21/ugly-betty-the-beauty>
's Michael Urie and Tony nominee Bobby Steggert also in the cast.

The workshop will result in an in-house performance on Friday, after which New 
York's RoundaboutTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company 
will make a decision about a possible future production.

There have long been suggestions that Sondheim and his late book writer George 
Furth <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/15/television.theatre> intended
Bobby to be read as a closeted homosexual 
<http://www.capitalnewyork.com/article/culture/2011/04/1825967/missing-number-sondheims-company>
, on the basis of his lack of commitment next to his married friends.

Sondheim told the New York Times 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/10/15/sondheim-working-on-a-revised-version-of-company/>
 he has been "rewriting lyrics here and there and rewriting some of the 
dialogue, though as little as possible since George isn't around".

He added: "It's still a musical about commitment, but marriage is seen as 
something very different in 2013 than it was in 1970. We don't deal with gay 
marriage as such, but this version lets us explore the issues of commitment in 
a fresh way."

Tiffany, who became an associate director at the Royal Court earlier this 
year, has just opened a production ofThe Glass Menagerie on Broadway to 
critical acclaim 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/30/good-reviews-propel-glass-menagerie-sales-on-broadway/?_r=0>
.
 