
Ashton Kutcher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ashton-kutcher> and Josh Gad 
have defended their biopic of Steve Jobs as an accurate depiction of the 
origins of Apple.

Kutcher and Gad, who play Jobs and Apple's co-founder Steve Wozniak 
respectively in the forthcoming release – called, simply,Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jobs> – rebuffed complaints from Wozniak that 
the film bungled elements of the company's origins and phenomenal rise in the 
1970s and 80s.

On Thursday, the pair told Macworld/iWorld, an annual gathering of Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> enthusiasts in San Francisco, 
that they went deep into the roles and even filmed at Jobs's family home in Los 
Altos to boost authenticity.

"We filmed at the actual house. We got to meet his stepmother and sister. It 
was surreal for them to see this transpire all over again in the same place 
that it happened," said Gad.

Gad, who made his name in the musical The Book of Mormon, said he was 
"computer illiterate" but had prepared for the role by taking programming 
courses and reading Wozniak's autobiography, iWoz. He said hoped Wozniak would 
be won over after seeing the film in full when it is released in April.

Wozniak complained last week after seeing a clip from the film, which 
premiered at the Sundance festival. "What I saw was just so far from anything 
that really happened or was said in those days,"he told Good Morning America. 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/technology/2013/01/apple-co-founder-steve-wozniak-criticizes-jobs-biopic-film/>

He said he never wore a tie, as depicted in the clip, or resembled a real 
professional. He also faulted the film for portraying Jobs as a precocious 
visionary who evangelised about technology's ability to transform the world, a 
characteristic which came later.

"As far as the personalities that were in that scene, this was just 
ridiculous," he said. Jobs would have been offended and embarrassed to be 
portrayed as a would-be "father of society", he said. "I think he would say 
that was, you know, a little bit too phony."

The film was directed by Joshua Michael Stern and will be released by Open 
Road Films and Five Star Feature Films on 19 April, the 37th anniversary 
Apple's founding.

Gad said the film was not a documentary, and that particularities of wardrobe 
mattered less than its striving for truth. "I greatly, greatly appreciate 
[Wozniak], and hope when he sees the movie in its entirety he'll understand we 
went to great lengths to capture the essence of his journey … It was done with 
the utmost love, admiration and respect."

Gad said playing a living person was daunting, but that acting was, by its 
nature, pretending. "You don't become that person unless you're psychotic." He 
praised his co-star's technical savvy – Kutcher threw out a rogue prop from a 
scene. "He said no, this wouldn't have been built for another year. That was 
incredible. I was just trying to remember my lines."

The actors, addressing a packed hall of self-professed geeks, comprised the 
opening event of thefour-day conference, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/31/macworld-apple-share-price-fall?CMP=twt_gu>
 which will showcase new iOS services and apps.

Kutcher said he immersed himself in the role and compiled a SoundCloud of 
everything Jobs ever said publicly. "All you got to do is start repeating 
Steve, and you sound really smart."

Kutcher elaborated on reports that he fell ill after emulating Jobs's 
fruitarian diet. "I read this thing called the mucus-free diet, which he'd read 
when he was younger. It talks about the value of sugar from grapes and the 
elimination of mucus from system, which is harbour for disease. I thought: this 
makes a lot of sense … So for about a month I ate only fruit and drank carrot 
juice."

Two days before filming was due to begin he "doubled over in ridiculous pain" 
and went to hospital. Tests diagnosed pancreatitis. Jobs died in 2011 of 
pancreatic cancer.

Gad broke the melancholy moment, interjecting: "That's why you should do what 
I do, and eat everythingbut fruit."

Kutcher said it was intimidating playing a person who remained fresh in so 
many people's memories. "There's no video around of Lincoln," he said, a 
reference to Daniel Day-Lewis's acclaimed depiction of the US president. 
"Playing a guy which everyone will have judgment of or criticism about was 
really, really scary."

He said he tried not to judge Jobs, the shrewd salesman to Wozniak's technical 
genius, over pocketing the lion's share of profits. ""As an actor you don't 
judge your character. You justify them … Historically, we're told he took the 
margin."

Early reviews of the film have been mixed, with many calling it decent 
<http://venturebeat.com/2013/01/26/jobs-biopic-reviews/> but not a patch on The 
Social Network's depiction of Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg.
 