
Exactly a century ago this holiday weekend, more than a dozen men climbed to 
the top of a mountain outside Atlanta, pulled on white hoods and lit a 16ft, 
kerosene-soaked wooden cross. It marked the rebirth of Ku Klux Klan, and Stone 
Mountain became the Klan’s spiritual home.


The next year, work started on an enormous relief carving – the largest in the 
world – to commemorate the heroes of the Confederacy. Since then the rock has 
stood like a historical door stop, an 825ft reminder of the Lost Cause.

“But the Lost Cause was slavery,” Richard Rose said recently. He is the head 
of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in 
Atlanta, where in recent years Stone Mountain has become a point of increasing 
tension for him and many others in a city now far more black than white.

This autumn, two sides have emerged in a new ideological skirmish over the 
monument. It’s the latest battlefield in an ongoing war over Confederate 
symbols across the south. So far neither side is able to claim victory on Stone 
Mountain.

But Rose said his group was about to escalate the fight, starting with a suit 
against the state ofGeorgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia>, which owns the mountain 
and the monument.

After that, he said: “We will take more direct action.”

•••

The mountain is actually a single stone, like an enormous granite egg sitting 
in the earth, which has eroded around it for millions of years. As long as 
humans have traversed this part of the continent they have oriented themselves 
around the rock. Native Americans called it the “stone mountain” and met there 
for ceremonies. By the mid-19th century, tourists were gathering to admire the 
mountain’s beauty.


In the early 20th century, a group of white men in Atlanta read a novel called 
The Clansman, by Thomas Dixon. The original Klan, for all its notoriety, had 
only operated for a couple of years during the Reconstruction era, after the 
civil war. But the book romanticized the group, and appealed to white Georgians 
who felt power slipping from their grasp. The men decided to resurrect the Klan 
on Thanksgiving 1915, to coincide with the local release of the book’s film 
adaptation:Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/05/birth-of-a-nation-100-year-anniversary-racism-cinema>
. Stone Mountain offered a natural and dramatic ceremonial site.

The group climbed to the mountain’s rounded summit, where a granite altar held 
copies of the US constitution, the Declaration of Independence and the laws of 
the reborn Ku Klux Klan. From that dramatic setting the KKK grew to about five 
million members nationwide, and held regular meetings on the mountaintop. At 
the same time, the Daughters of the Confederacy commissionedGutzon Borglum 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/biography/rushmore-borglum/>
, a renowned sculptor from Connecticut, to carve the monument. Borglum, who did 
not complete the Stone Mountain project, went on to carve Mount Rushmore.

For a while, people remembered the mountain’s racial connection. In 1963 when 
Martin Luther King Jr delivered his “I Have a Dream 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H0yP4aLyq1g>” speech in Washington, he 
included the line: “Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia.”

Everyone knew he was leveling a finger at the Klan. 

•••
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F27%2F1448642419164%2F4c2d33ba-12e6-4336-88b7-396d8e3f4dce-2060x1408.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stone%20Mountain%20monument%20at%20center%20of%20racial%20tension%20over%20Confederate%20tributes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stone%20Mountain%20monument%20at%20center%20of%20racial%20tension%20over%20Confederate%20tributes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F27%2F1448642419164%2F4c2d33ba-12e6-4336-88b7-396d8e3f4dce-2060x1408.jpeg>
 Staffer Mattie Harris at the base of the Stone Mountain monument: ‘I try not 
to think about the negative.’ Photograph: Matthew Teague for the Guardian 
At the base of the mountain today there is an It’s-a-Small-World version of an 
Appalachian village, with glass blowers and story tellers and faux-rustic shops 
selling T-shirts. Finding an unobscured view of the mountain is surprisingly 
difficult.

“Go past the attractions and through the marketplace,” a young Stone Mountain 
staffer said this week, as she checked tourists for wristbands.

She was black. In fact everyone wearing Stone Mountain uniforms in the village 
was young and black. Asked if it felt strange to work in the literal shadow of 
Jefferson Davis, Robert E Lee and Stonewall Jackson, they seemed largely 
puzzled by the question.

Past the attractions and through the marketplace, Mattie Harris stood holding 
a measuring stick to check small visitors before allowing them into the 
holiday-themed “snow zone”. Behind her, the heroes of the Confederacy sat on 
their stone horses.

“I don’t really know much about it. It’s my second day,” she said. She had 
never heard about the monument before she arrived there. “I try not to think 
about the negative.”

The idea that the monument could become so banal, physically looming but 
mentally commonplace, alarms Rose, the NAACP head.

“African Americans have a long history of adjusting, just getting by,” he 
said. The town of Stone Mountain – not the theme-park village, but the town 
around it – is 75% black. “It’s easy for people to walk to work at the 
mountain, and just accept it.”

The NAACP wants the carving removed, the Confederate flags removed from the 
site, and the street names changed from Robert E Lee Boulevard, Jefferson Davis 
Drive and so forth. It’s not defacing history, Rose argued, because no civil 
war history happened at Stone Mountain.

“We recognize the horrible human cost of the war. And there are many sites in 
Georgia, like Andersonville and Chickamauga, where those lives are 
memorialized,” he said. “But Stone Mountain doesn’t speak to that. Its only 
purpose is raising the leaders of an insurrection to hero status.”

•••
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dfc68e44636734fdd9e180e32c3417c0fce7f66%2F0_334_5460_3275%2F5460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stone%20Mountain%20monument%20at%20center%20of%20racial%20tension%20over%20Confederate%20tributes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stone%20Mountain%20monument%20at%20center%20of%20racial%20tension%20over%20Confederate%20tributes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dfc68e44636734fdd9e180e32c3417c0fce7f66%2F0_334_5460_3275%2F5460.jpg>
 A confederate flag rally and march is held at Georgia’s Stone Mountain to 
demonstrate opposition to a proposed mountain-top monument that would honour 
Martin Luther King. Photograph: Steve Eberhardt/Demotix/Corbis 
In a food court outside the village marketplace, Dave and Karen Jones of 
Janesville, Wisconsin, sat eating hamburgers with their grandchildren. They 
seemed nonplussed by any controversy about the monument.

“Why? Why do we have to get rid of all our history?” Karen said. She winced, 
and shrugged her shoulders. “Who does it offend?”

Possibly the people whose ancestors the stone figures fought to keep in 
bondage.

“But is it the black people making that an issue?” Dave said. “It’s white 
people on their behalf.”

That’s not exactly true. Outside the bubble of the Stone Mountain village – 
and its employ – a black family had just finished hiking down the side of the 
mountain. They wore exercise clothes, carried water bottles and averted their 
eyes from the carving.

“This was here long before they claimed it as a Confederate monument,” Rashida 
Brandt said. She and her family had come from Durham, North Carolina.

Her brother, Omari, said the monument was a scar on an otherwise beautiful 
landscape.

“It’s an homage to treason,” he said. Asked whether the carving should be 
removed, he paused and looked at his little girl, Zuri. “I am torn about that,” 
he said. “I don’t think we should sanitize what happened.”

A police car cruised past slowly, twice, as he spoke. Another parked across 
the road. “I’m more afraid of the police than statues,” Omari said. “That’s a 
more quiet but more powerful racism.”

His wife, Nakia, nodded toward one of the patrol cars as it crawled past a 
second time.

“Did you see the officer give you a thumbs up to check whether you’re OK?” she 
asked. “It’s because we are talking with you. That bothers me.”

•••
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8447f9122f3e3dca883f1146e47424c1c1b4d662%2F0_283_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stone%20Mountain%20monument%20at%20center%20of%20racial%20tension%20over%20Confederate%20tributes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stone%20Mountain%20monument%20at%20center%20of%20racial%20tension%20over%20Confederate%20tributes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fstone-mountain-confederate-monument-racial-tension%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8447f9122f3e3dca883f1146e47424c1c1b4d662%2F0_283_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A protester burns a Confederate flag during a rally at Stone Mountain Park in 
August. Photograph: Curtis Compton/Zuma Press/Corbis 
Pro-Confederate flag rally at 'south's Mount Rushmore' draws hundreds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/02/confederate-flag-protest-georgia>
This autumn, a movement for compromise gathered momentum. Its proponents 
wanted to place a bell dedicated to Martin Luther King Jr on the mountain. A 
couple of weeks ago opponents waving Confederate flags gathered for a rally on 
the summit, decrying the idea.

Then discussion shifted to the notion of a museum to commemorate black 
soldiers who fought in the civil war.

In a remarkable legal twist, the Sons of Confederate Veterans (SCV) claimed 
that the mountain’s purpose was explicitly defined by the state government as a 
monument to the Confederacy. So commemoration of rebels – who fought against 
the law of the land – has become the law of the land. Anything else, the SCV 
says, is illegal.

“The act of the General Assembly which created the Stone Mountain Memorial 
Association specifically states the park, including both the mountain and all 
adjacent property, is to be maintained and operated as a Confederate memorial 
(OCGA 12-3-191),” the SCV wrote in a statement.

Georgia’s governor, Nathan Deal, concurred. 

“Stone Mountain is set up and preserved by state law as a Confederate 
memorial,” he wrote.

The SCV went on: “The erection of a monument to anything other than the 
Confederate Cause being placed on top of Stone Mountain because of the 
objections of opponents of Georgia’s Confederate heritage would be akin to the 
state flying a Confederate battle flag atop the King Center in Atlanta against 
the wishes of King supporters.”

Then came a second twist on the idealogical battlefield: the NAACP agreed. To 
place a monument to King on the mountain would sully his reputation, they said. 
The only answer is to eradicate the carving altogether.

So now both sides have dug their trenches, as the NAACP prepares to launch a 
new legal offensive. If that doesn’t work, Rose said, the monument’s opponents 
will demonstrate in the street and organize boycotts.

Paul Hudson, a professor at Georgia Perimeter College 
<http://newsroom.gpc.edu/stories/paul-hudson-receives-governor%E2%80%99s-award-arts-and-humanities>
, is the author of Stone Mountain: a Multicultural History. He takes the 
longest possible view of the mountain: it stood for eons before the Confederate 
figures appeared on its flank, and it will stand long after wind and rain wear 
them away.

In the meantime, he said, the ideal solution is to remember the Confederacy 
with accuracy instead of romance. To view the past with longing is dangerous, 
he said. But forgetting the past is equally perilous.

“You can’t just erase history,” he said. “No matter how unpleasant.”
 