
Now Scott Morrison wants to stop the bets. The social services minister on 
Monday announced a review into the use of illegal, offshore bookies, thathe 
says are <http://scottmorrison.dss.gov.au/transcripts/doorstop-interview-8> 
“predating upon Australians right across the country”.

He used the occasion of Father’s Day to reflect on the 400,000 Australians 
with a gambling addiction 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/addictive-gambling-habits-can-destroy-family-life/story-fni0ffsx-1227515290999>
, pointing to the higher rates of of family violence, neglect and poverty “that 
come with the problem gambling curse”.

Former NSW premier Barry O'Farrell to lead offshore online gambling review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/07/former-nsw-premier-barry-ofarrell-to-lead-offshore-online-gambling-review>
Unmentioned – and outside the terms of the review – is the type of gambling 
that still ensnares two-thirds of problem punters. They aren’t online, nor 
watching Tom Waterhouse’s mug on TV, but inside Australia’s pubs and clubs, 
feeding cash into the pokies.

Around 64% of people who seek treatment for gambling are addicted to poker 
machines, according to the latest figures.

Per-capita, the only places with more pokies than Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/24/gaming-machine-count-puts-nsw-second-in-the-world>
 are gilded casino statelets, such Monaco, Sint Maarten and Aruba. In raw 
numbers, just one state in the world runs more poker machines than New South 
Wales – that would be Nevada, home to Las Vegas.

It is difficult to reconcile Morrison’s concern for the plight of problem 
gamblers with the way his party has treated the chief source of gambling 
addiction in Australia.

In 2010 the Productivity Commission estimated that some 41% of poker machine 
revenue derived from problem gamblers. It recommended a slew of 
harm-minimisation measures, including capping maximum bets at $1, and forcing 
punters to set a limit on how much they could lose in one sitting.


A reform package incorporating these measures – championed by independent 
senator Andrew Wilkie – withered in the face of a savvy, cashed-uppublic 
campaign by the pokies industry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XYiGw3b8hpc>.
michael safi (@safimichael) 
strong donations story in @smh <https://twitter.com/smh>. here's coincidence 
of gambling money and progress of 2010 wilkie reforms@poisontofu 
<https://twitter.com/poisontofu> pic.twitter.com/9voV3KIUBO 
<http://t.co/9voV3KIUBO>
 <https://twitter.com/safimichael/status/625538873104297985> July 27, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/safimichael/status/625538873104297985> 
Australian Electoral Commission records also show, in the months after Wilkie 
announced his reforms,a $1.5m spike in donations  
<https://twitter.com/safimichael/status/625538873104297985?lang=en>to the major 
parties by Clubs NSW and the Australian Hotels Association, directed 
overwhelmingly at the Coalition.

Little attempt has been made to obscure this cosy relationship. In a video 
announcement at the 2013 election, the Liberal party’s gambling policy was 
literally introduced by the chief executive of Clubs NSW, Anthony Ball.

In power, one of the first acts of the Abbott government – backed by Labor – 
was to repeal the anaemic reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/10/gambling-laws-labor-backs-moves-to-water-down-its-own-reforms>
 that had manage to pass the previous parliament. When one measure, putting a 
withdrawal limit on ATMs in gambling venues, survived, the then social services 
minister Kevin Andrewssimply ordered  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/19/minister-orders-hands-off-approach-to-gambling-atm-withdrawal-limit>
his department not to “engage in active monitoring of compliance”.


Recognising its own power, the poker machine industry has not wasted the 
opportunity to lobby for rollbacks of safety measures at the state level, too.

In NSW, the Baird government has signed two successive “memoranda of 
understanding” with the clubs industry, pledging (and following through on) tax 
cuts for big clubs; larger tax rebates; the easing of restrictions of 
casino-game terminals; and lifting the limit for pokies “smart-cards” to 
$5,000, up from $200.

And – what are the odds! – within two months of the first agreement being 
signed, the clubs handed the NSW Liberals a $200,000 donation.

Gambling researcher Francis Markham has documented a similar relaxation of 
regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/11/ka-ching-how-the-gambling-lobby-won-the-fight-over-pokie-reforms>
 in the Australian Capital Territory, the Northern Territory, and Queensland.

That said, a closer look at sports betting is welcome. Just how much 
Australians spend betting online is yet to be quantified,but gambling treatment 
clinics are already reporting a doubling and tripling in the number of people 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/backgroundbriefing/odds-on-you-lose-the-new-cohort-of-problem-gamblers/6689598>
 – particularly young men – losing vast sums, quickly.

But on Monday, Morrison said new regulations on the 30-odd legal betting 
operators in Australia were not the primary focus of the review.


Instead, he said, it would look at “how we can better provide protections in 
the gaming environment for those who are legal operators, and to protect 
Australians who can fall prey to the offshore illegal sites”.

But are the legal sites offering much more protection for problem gamblers 
than their offshore colleagues? They comply with anti-money laundering 
provisions, and flash a perfunctory warning to gamble responsibly, but for 
addicts, “there’s not a lot” the legal sites do differently, according to Sally 
Gainsbury, a gambling researcher at Southern Cross University.


Ka-ching! How the gambling lobby won the fight over pokie reforms | Francis 
Markham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/11/ka-ching-how-the-gambling-lobby-won-the-fight-over-pokie-reforms>
Financial counsellors, backed by Nick Xenophon, have already suggested changes 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/17/sports-betting-call-to-ban-unsolicited-credit-offers-as-problem-gambling-rises>
that could rein the “uncontrolled” industry in. Banning bets on credit, 
stopping bookies from wooing punters with free trips to the races – these are 
not radical suggestions, but so far they’ve been ignored.

Absent any meaningful new safety measures, one has to ask what this review is 
for, exactly. To protect the addicts? Or the betting companies who want their 
money?

Morrison has found a new offshore enemy. Expect a move against illegal bookies 
when the review ends later this year. Just don’t mistake it as a measure aimed 
at helping problem gamblers.
 