
Among the recent arrivals in the post have been two new box sets, each 
dedicated to the often shambolic recordings of a particular label. Artifact: 
The Dawn of Creation Records, assembles everything released on Alan McGee’s 
label during the first two years of its existence, and a load of stuff that 
wasn’t – demos, unreleased singles, radio sessions – and stops long before 
Creation reached its zenith. Put it this way, the only things on Artifact that 
might be considered “hits” – even within the insular world of 80s indie – are 
the Jesus and Mary Chain’s first single, Upside Down, the Loft’s gleaming Up 
the Hill and Down the Slope, and the debut from Primal Scream.

The other set, Ork Records: New York, New York, compiles the output of “the 
world’s first punk label”, set up in August 1975 by Terry Ork to release 
Television’s debut single, Little Johnny Jewel. Its hit rate is rather higher – 
as well as Television, it features crucial early releases by the Feelies, 
Richard Hell and the dBs – but it takes a particular kind of listener to thrill 
to Funky Kinky by Kenneth Higney or Let It Blurt by Lester Bangs.

I wouldn’t call either of these box sets “essential”. But they’re fascinating, 
and what makes them fascinating is their imperfections. The temptation, when 
compiling music history in box-set form, is to airbrush it – to present a 
series of unalloyed triumphs, great song after great song, maybe with the 
inessential stuff tacked on the end as a bonus disc, or some alternate takes to 
tempt in the completists. I’ve got plenty of those box sets, and you probably 
do, too. They’re the ones I listen to the most, too, because I know I’m going 
to get hit of pleasure after hit of pleasure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9XXhYlRM0pg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9XXhYlRM0pg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9XXhYlRM0pg&media=>
But box sets like Artifact or Ork Records are in some ways a more compelling 
experience to listen to, even if their warts-and-all approach has sometimes 
seen the warts grow into huge protuberances. Their completist approach actually 
captures a time and a place – you learn more about Creation from Artifact than 
you do from your My Bloody Valentine records. Listening to a box set of this 
type is like finding a packet of Pears soap when you’re clearing out an elderly 
relative’s things after they die: open the packaging and you can smell the past 
rushing at you, overwhelming your senses.

The Creation set captures a time when I was first listening to John Peel, and 
discovering indie music. Hearing these groups whose role in the Creation story 
has long been forgotten is a stern reminder that it took a long time for the 
label to become the UK’s champions of alternative guitar music – when the set 
ends, we’re still two years from the House of Love’s first single, let alone 
Screamadelica, Loveless or Definitely Maybe. But it’s a more honest portrayal 
of the label than one that simply journeys from landmark to landmark: those of 
a certain age might remember John Peel playing the sixth single on Creation, Do 
the Ghost by the X-Men, and remarking that it was the label’s best single to 
date.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_fQsTyh4xA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_fQsTyh4xA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG_fQsTyh4xA&media=>
As the set moves into its second disc, you hear the identity of Creation 
starting to cohere, as Upside Down is followed by Up the Hill and Down the 
Slope, then by Gid Bless by the Bodines, All Fall Down by Primal Scream, What’s 
Happening by Jasmine Minks and Don’t Slip Up by Meat Whiplash. You can feel the 
threads of 1966 and 1976 gradually becoming entwined into the rope that would 
be the C86 scene – or indiepop, or shambling, or whatever you want to call it. 
I found listening to it a peculiar experience, because it captured both the 
limitations of early-80s and its bottomless sense of possibility: you can hear 
both the belief of these groups that one day they could make their own Forever 
Changes and also, in their often clanging incompetence, the impossibility of 
their ever achieving that dream. It took me back to my teenage bedroom, so 
vividly that I half expected the tracks to be punctuated with Ivor Cutler or 
the Unknown Cases or Sudden Sway, as they were when Peel played them on the 
radio.

The Ork set is a similar journey, both rewarding and uneven. For all the 
moments of greatness, it serves as a reminder that most New York punk wasn’t 
terribly interested in revolution, either musical or social. For every early 
version of a song that would take its place in the US alternative pantheon, you 
get some unspectacular powerpop or tight-trousered rock’n’roll of a sort made 
by men more concerned with getting high and getting laid than getting somewhere 
new with their music. Yet you also get those little missing jigsaw pieces that 
add to a picture you thought you knew – in this case the single Girl/Every Time 
I Close My Eyes by Prix, a Memphis band, with involvement from all the main 
players in the Big Star story – Alex Chilton, Chris Bell, and Big Star 
producers Richard Rosebrough and Jim Dickinson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmusic-box-set-artifact-dawn-of-creation-ork-records-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cb77252c3fb7fbc01a394cef46258cc19f4a70e%2F87_72_727_860%2F727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Straight-talking%2C%20honest%20music%3A%20why%20I'd%20rather%20listen%20to%20a%20warts-and-all%20box%20set&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmusic-box-set-artifact-dawn-of-creation-ork-records-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Straight-talking%2C%20honest%20music%3A%20why%20I%27d%20rather%20listen%20to%20a%20warts-and-all%20box%20set&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F06%2Fmusic-box-set-artifact-dawn-of-creation-ork-records-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cb77252c3fb7fbc01a394cef46258cc19f4a70e%2F87_72_727_860%2F727.jpg>
 New York rocker … Richard Hell onstage at CBGBs in 1976. Photograph: 
GODLIS/Publicity image 
Taken as a whole, though, the box serves as a reminder, that as in real life, 
revolutions aren’t all about storming the Winter Palace and raising the red 
flag. There’s also a good bit of tedium. There are people who hitch themselves 
to the cause but are really only along for the ride. There are people who have 
joined in because they fancy a ruck, regardless of what the cause is. It’s 
unvarnished, and that’s where the value is – if it were just Ork’s Greatest 
Hits, it might be more fun, but it would be less interesting. And it would be 
less honest.

I realise I’ve made both these sets sound like reference books, but that’s 
because they are, after a fashion. Only the most obsessive would listen to 
either over and over and over again, but anyone who truly wants to understand 
either label, the times that created them and the artists who gravitated 
towards them should hear them at least once.

 * Artifact: The Dawn of Creation Records is out now on Cherry Red. Ork 
Records: New York, New York is released on 30 October on Numero Uno.  