
It’s absurd that students still apply to university and receive initial offers 
based on their predicted A-level grades, rather than their actual results. This 
situation causes uncertainty and stress for applicants, families and 
universities alike. With students applying well before they sit their exams, 
they potentially aim their pitch at the wrong universities, while admissions 
officers are realising they could be missing out on students with the best 
grades.

The chancellor George Osborne and universities minister Jo Johnson talk of 
fairness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/05/university-places-restriction-lifted-student-loan-george-osborne>
 within admissions – universities are now able to recruit freelywith the cap on 
student numbers removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/sep/18/removing-cap-student-numbers-six-questions-hepi-report>
, and this year, for the first time,clearing opened early 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/clearing/11720384/Clearing-2015-Russell-Group-universities-with-vacancies.html>
 to attract students on International Baccalearate results day. Over half of 
Russell Group universities entered the annual university sales earlier this 
month.

Sort out FE – education's middle child is crying out for attention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/20/sort-out-fe-educations-middle-child-is-crying-out-for-attention>
Times are changing and so the system must too. As choosing to go to university 
is a big financial decision nowadays, the least the government could do is make 
the application process less of a gamble. I think that post-qualification 
applications (PQA) offer a fairer future.

I have personal experience of what can go awry with predicted grades. In 1999 
I applied to university with the expectation that I would get BBC at A-level, 
but I actually achieved higher. “What A-level grades did you get?” I asked my 
fellow Sheffield Hallam student during fresher’s week. “One E, you?” came the 
reply, “Three As” I respond, our surprise and confusion shared.

I fared better than my predicted BBC but I chose universities with entry 
requirements in that ball park, as students still do. A year later I 
transferred to the University of Manchester, but that came at real financial 
and psychological cost: thousands in debt and a year wasted. I’m still picking 
up the tab.

The system failed me then and it’s failing others now. Applicants who 
overachieve face deferring, attending a university below their potential, or the
adjustment 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/results/adjustment-%E2%80%93-if-you%E2%80%99ve-done-better-expected>
 process – where you get the chance to do a last minute trade up. Only 1,200 
acceptances chose to do this last year (out of nearly 700,000 applicants). 
That’s 60 less than 2013. While the lifting of the cap on student numbers is 
meant to open up places to students, the decision around course size ultimately 
lies with the universities, meaning that competitive course are likely to be 
full by the time adjustment is available for those students. Halls of residence 
too.

Last month, a University and College Union (UCU) report 
<http://www.ucu.org.uk/7556> surveying staff involved in the admissions 
process, showed that 70% of responses backed PQA– and that included Les Ebdon 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/03/story-how-universities-opened-their-gates-disadvantaged-students-and-challenge-lies>
, director of the Office for Fair Access.



Academic subjects alone won't 'set every child up for life'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/17/academic-subjects-alone-wont-set-every-child-up-for-life>
But universities have shown reluctance 
<http://www.cambridgeassessment.org.uk/insights/university-admissions-overhaul-the-pqa-debate/>
 towards a system where admissions occur after grades have been achieved. Some 
fear its potential effect on widening participation and the time in takes to do 
a fair assessment.

Labour’s plan to change the system in 2006 was rejected 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/education/5003366.stm>, a 2011 Ucas proposal was 
too. Universitiesreiterated concerns 
<http://russellgroup.ac.uk/russell-group-latest-news/151-2012/5243-ucas-admissions-process-reforms/>
 about the impact of an abridged assessment period on widening access, while 
the idea of a shorter summer term to enable earlier exams went down badly with 
schools and colleges.

The model Ucas proposed had three applicant windows based on individual 
circumstances. Students already qualified would apply in the first window up to 
the end of June, then students who have just found out their exam results would 
apply. Objections to this model appear flimsier now with the effects of 
marketisation on admissions.The rise in unconditional offer making 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/aug/15/record-number-students-university-women-deprived-areas>
 to applicants depresses admissions officers and cheapens our product.


 Ucas data last year shows 12,000 unconditional offers were made to 18 year 
olds, with incentives like iPads beingdangled in front of them 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/universityeducation/11297453/Top-universities-ignoring-final-A-level-grades-in-race-to-sign-up-students.html>
. UCU argue these practices, as well as immoral ones like cold calling 
applicants with unconditional offers in exchange for acceptances, would stop 
occurring if decisions were made after results were awarded .



Universities must be more flexible, slightly shifting back term start dates if 
needed to allow PQA – a system that offers fairness, transparency and could 
help in widening access with students able to apply to their most appropriate 
destination. Universities would benefit from processing fewer applications, and 
from having more certainty over students’ calibre and a potential dropout 
reduction. As students pay top dollar it should be at a university and on a 
course befitting their actual ability. This offers them the best possible 
future and potential to pay off the debt we all shoulder.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.

 