
A 27-year-old Sudanese refugee held on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> has died following “a 
fall and seizure” inside the Australian-run detention centre.

It is understood the man, who had reportedly been unwell for several months, 
collapsed and suffered head injuries inside the detention centre on Friday. He 
was then evacuated to Royal Brisbane and Women’s hospital, where he died on 
Saturday.

The Guardian understands the man’s name was Faysal Ishak Ahmed. He was born in 
Khartoum in June 1989 and had been held on Manus since October 2013.

The judge who unmade Manus Island on why offshore detention has no future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/the-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future>
A source on Manus told Guardian Australia that Ahmed had been sick for more 
than six months and other detainees had alerted the organisation responsible 
for care on the island, International Health and Medical Services (IHMS), to 
his sitaution.

“Last night he collapsed in Oscar prison and injured his head seriously,” the 
source said. “It was not the first time that he had fainted. A few days ago the 
refugees wrote a complaint against IHMS about his situation.”

According to the Refugee Action Coalition, the letter was signed by more than 
60 refugees on Manus last week.

They said he had suffered numerous blackouts and collapses over the past 
several months.

“Faysal is yet another casualty of the systematic neglect that characterises 
Manus Island and offshore detention,” said Ian Rintoul, spokesman for the 
Refugee Action Coalition.

A media statement from the Department of Immigration and Border Protection 
confirmed the death of the 27-year-old man from “a fall and seizure” at the 
detention centre.

“The department is not aware of any suspicious circumstances surrounding the 
death and expresses its sympathies to his family and friends,” it said. “The 
death will be reported to the Queensland coroner. No further comment will be 
made at this time.”

Rintoul said: “The government should stop playing with refugees’ lives and 
bring them to Australia, where they can get the protection and medical 
attention they need.”

Hamid Kehazaei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/28/delay-to-treatment-of-hamid-kehazaei-before-he-died-revealed-in-leaked-files>
, an Iranian asylum seeker, died in a Brisbane hospital in September 2014 after 
delays in moving him from Manus. Kehazaei, 24, had originally presented with a 
small infection in his leg that developed into sepsis and eventually caused a 
series of heart attacks.


Hamid Kehazaei inquest exposes failures of Australia's secretive immigration 
regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/10/hamid-kehazaei-inquest-exposes-failures-of-australias-secretive-immigration-regime>
The coronial inquest into his death heard that the Manus Island medical 
facilities were inadequate, doctors’ clinical instructions were ignored and 
critical medical equipment was not working. Requests to urgently transfer 
Kehazaei from the island were ignored, then refused, before he was finally 
flown on an air ambulance, first to Port Moresby and then, ultimately, to 
Brisbane.

Several other asylum seekers and refugees have died in immigration detention 
or on detention islands.Reza Barati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reza-barati> was murdered by guards 
inside the Manus detention centre in 2014, and in 2016,Omid Masoumali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 died after dousing himself in lighter fluid and setting himself alight on 
Nauru, in protest at being held indefinitely on the island.

Other refugees suffering serious medical complaints, including pregnant woman 
facing complex births 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/06/doctors-plead-for-pregnant-refugee-to-be-sent-from-nauru-to-australia-for-caesarean>
, orsuspected cancerous growths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/06/refugee-with-growing-breast-lump-has-medical-transfer-from-nauru-cancelled>
, have been denied medical transfers from detention islands.

 