
With the government recently launching the second round of G-Cloud procurement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/may/24/g-cloud-gii-procurement-cabinet-office>
, cloud services remain a hot topic.

After purchasing Jadu's Weejot mobile app publishing network through the 
Cloudstore in the last few weeks, the subject is very much on Suffolk county 
council's agenda. Havingrolled out a cloud-based project management system last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/jan/19/suffolk-county-council-cloud>
, the authority is no stranger to the cloud.

Mark Adams-Wright, chief information officer at the local authority and 
self-confessed cloud enthusiast, believes that the Weejot application will 
offer citizens alternative channels to communicate with the council, while 
alleviating some of the pressure on other services.

The product will allow the council to develop and deploy mobile apps in real 
time using basic web development skills or non-technical skills. Suffolk can 
also take content and data from their existing systems to publish apps to 
mobile devices.

To develop the apps, Suffolk plans to talk to its service providers and 
citizens to find out what council-related information people want on their 
smartphones. Part of this plan includes a mobile hack day at the end of this 
month, where people can generate ideas about what apps should be available.

"There are lots of messages that we're trying to get out, and there are lots 
of things that we think are valuable and pertinent to help us engage with 
citizens, but also to help us manage our information more effectively," says 
Adams-Wright. "But equally we have to recognise that smartphone users have a 
view of what they want and how they want to consume it."

He envisages that the ideas people will come up with will centre around 
standard information sets of council services, including timetables and 
transport information.

Adams-Wright says: "We don't want to be draconian about what the answers are. 
We want to allow people to help design what they really want to use and what is 
important and relevant to them. Doing it this way launches the product, and 
gets us into the market place quicker than we would usually and allows us to 
engage with citizens in Suffolk."

Multiple channels

Getting information out through multiple channels is something that the 
council believes is important, particularly during hazardous weather such as 
heavy snowfall, for example, when people are trying to find out what is going 
on in their area.

"It gives people another channel of choice and gives the opportunity to take 
the weight off our existing channels," he says. "But I'm also mindful of the 
fact that when you open up a new channel, sometimes you have to see it and feel 
it before you can really recognise what value you can truly derive from it."

The council plans to manage the apps process on a "risk and reward" basis, 
with people submitting their ideas for consideration.

Suffolk has signed a one-year deal with Jadu for the application. Adams-Wright 
believes that this is the right length of time for a cloud services contract as 
it is long enough to fully exploit the services on offer, but comes without the 
burden of being locked in to a lengthy contract.

The Cloudstore process was simple, according to Adams-Wright, and there were 
no issues. He says he would procure through the service again, providing that 
there are products there that meet the local authority's requirements.

"I have a view of where I want to go and so does my organisation. Some of the 
services I need may or may not be in G-Cloud," he says. "But if they are then I 
will use them. We act here on a very commercial basis, so we look at things for 
the money that it costs and make very genuine commercial decisions. So I'd have 
no problem using it again if it was the right commercial model to use."

Although government departments have made some purchases through Cloudstore 
since it went live in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/government-computing-network/2012/feb/20/cloudstore-g-cloud-launch-cabinet-office>
, they have not been substantial deals. However, Adams-Wright believes this 
could happen eventually.

He says: "That may happen in future, but I think you've got to recognise where 
everybody is on their cycles. Large capital outlay is not the easiest thing to 
do when things are quite tight."

PSN

As well as cloud, Suffolk is also focusing on its public services network 
(PSN), which has just finished being deployed. The local authority is keen to 
start the ball rolling around the evolution of networks in Suffolk towards a 
single network under the PSN banner.

"That will obviously go forward now, and we will start to put forward 
governance and we will start to have conversations with people about it. It 
shouldn't be if, it should be when," says Adams-Wright.

He explains that the authority didn't have the luxury of sitting down with all 
partner organisations in the area to conceptualise a single network when 
original plans were drawn up, and that it had to make a decision on the 
implementation "quicker than we could get people around a table".

If the council were to team up with other local public sector organisations on 
a single network for the area in future, he estimates it could save taxpayers 
around Â£2m.

Pushing for the use of cloud and PSN is the right move by the government, 
according to Adams-Wright. He says the next step is to get everyone on the same 
page.

"I come from a cloud background in the private sector and I've always been an 
advocate of cloud as I think it opens huge opportunities because it allows us 
to challenge the old ways of doing things. If we don't challenge some of those 
things, we will simply repeat the processes and ways of doing things in the 
past," he says.

But he recognises that the journey won't be easy.

"Getting people to understand that and buy into that will obviously be quite a 
granular process that takes some time, so I think the education needs to be 
there, but I think that's happening," he adds.

This article is published by Guardian Professional. For weekly updates on 
news, debate and best practice on public sector IT,join the Guardian Government 
Computing network here. 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/gov-computing/start.php>
 