
Profits at Allied Bakeries will fall in the first half of its financial year 
after the maker of Sunblest and Kingsmill became the latest business to be hit 
by the supermarket price wars.

Allied’s owner, Associated British Foods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/associatedbritishfoods> (ABF), said too 
much capacity in the UK bakery business together with retailers using cheap 
bread to demonstrate their value credentials, had hit the breadmaker’s profit 
margins in the six months to 28 February.

“As retailers drive for value and range simplification, already tight margins 
have come under further pressure and Allied Bakeries’ profit will be lower than 
last year as a result,” ABF said in a trading update.

Allied, which also produces Allinson and Burgen, joins Magners maker C&C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/14/magners-cider-owner-issues-profit-warning>
,Majestic Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/19/majestic-wine-boss-steps-down-after-poor-christmas-sales>
 andmany small producers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/25/observer-view-on-supermarket-prices-dairy-farmers>
 caught up in the intense competition between Britain’s big food retailers.

Tesco, Morrisons, Sainsbury’s and Asda are slashing prices to compete with the 
German low-cost chains Aldi and Lidl and demanding lower prices from suppliers.

John Bason, ABF’s finance director, said: “A couple of years ago, a loaf of 
bread was £1.20, a year ago it was £1 and now a lot of it is 80p. It’s always 
an intense negotiation with the retailers but the direction of travel is very 
clear.

“It always has to come to a stop at some time, almost by definition. We’ve 
seen a big move [in price] certainly this year and I would say that is the 
[main] move that has taken place.”

First-half profit at ABF’s grocery division, which includes Allied, will be in 
line with a year ago.


ABF said group first-half operating profit would fall. Profit at the sugar 
business will be substantially lower because of a drop in European sugar prices
that prompted Tate & Lyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/06/tate-and-lyle-profit-warning-oil-sugar-commodities-fall>
 to publish a profit warning earlier this month.

Sales at ABF’s fashion chain Primark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/primark> will be up 16% in the first 
half, excluding currency movements. Revenues rose mainly because the business 
opened new stores over the past year that traded strongly.


Sales at shops open a year or more were held back by warm autumn weather in 
northern Europe but sales have picked up since January.

Bason said: “I think Primark is continuing to win in the UK. People think back 
to the autumn when it was unseasonably warm and like-for-like sales moved away. 
This is a clear demonstration that those like-for-likes were affected by the 
weather and that we are back to Primark performing well.”

Primark opened 10 new stores in the first half, including four in the 
Netherlands and three in Germany. The five shops that opened in France in the 
past year traded exceptionally well, the company said.

“The three stores around the outskirts of Paris are doing sensationally,” 
Bason said. French shoppers knew about Primark from trips to London and word 
has spread quickly, he said.

Retail analysts at UBS said: “We view this as a creditable outturn for 
Primark, particularly given unseasonal weather in autumn and that some of the 
new Primark stores in northern Europe have cannibalised sales at existing 
stores (a temporary phenomenon). We would also highlight the impressive 
performance of the French stores.”


Primark is also on schedule to open in the US towards the end of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/08/primark-launch-200m-bid-us-clothing-market>
 and has signed leases for eight stores in the north-east and a warehouse in 
Pennsylvania.
 