
As a child, Suzan-Lori Parks gained an unusual education in American history 
when her father, a US army officer who reached the rank of colonel, was 
stationed in Germany. She saw the TV dramaRoots 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roots_(1977_miniseries)>, a key moment in 
raising consciousness about slavery, in a German-dubbed version: “I remember 
that scene of the slaves on the ship and they are all shouting ‘Freiheit!’ 
[Freedom!] Often, I was the only black kid in the class and, when they 
mentioned the civil war or slavery, everyone would turn and look at me. I was 
like, ‘Look, I wasn’t there!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fsuzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c17c04012cb48f524decce3272e290482028529%2F1024_177_2699_3375%2F2699.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suzan-Lori%20Parks%3A%20'People%20in%20America%20are%20often%20encouraged%20not%20to%20think'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fsuzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suzan-Lori%20Parks%3A%20%27People%20in%20America%20are%20often%20encouraged%20not%20to%20think%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fsuzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c17c04012cb48f524decce3272e290482028529%2F1024_177_2699_3375%2F2699.jpg>
 ‘The army was the only place a black man could get a fair shake’ … Father 
Comes Home from the Wars. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Parks’s own American history epic, Father Comes Home from the Wars, is 
currently receiving its UK premiere at the Royal Court in London. The trilogy 
of short plays – performed in one evening – is set during the American civil 
war, whose architect, Abraham Lincoln, is a central figure in two of her 
earlier dramas, The America Play andTopdog/Underdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/aug/13/theatre1>. The latter, featuring 
two black brothers named after Lincoln and his assassin John Wilkes Booth 
(played inthe Royal Court’s 2003 production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/aug/13/theatre1> by Jeffrey Wright and 
Mos Def), won her the Pulitzer prize for drama.

Father Comes Home from the Wars features songs written by Parks – she has been 
playing guitar to accompany rehearsals for the Court production – and in the 
originalAmerican production 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/29/theater/father-comes-home-from-the-wars-by-suzan-lori-parks-at-the-public-theater.html?_r=1>
 she took the role of a character called the Musician. “Then it was like: I 
can’t do this every night for the whole run! But it’s kinda fun to get to do it 
in rehearsals.” Her performing streak now finds expression on the lecture 
circuit and, during our interview, in frequent vocal impressions, big gestures 
and whooping laughter.

 The title of her trilogy refers to childhood memories of waiting for her dad 
to come home from either military conflicts or exercises which, in an ironic 
overlap with her own profession, were called “rehearsals”.

When y’all had Brexit we were like, ‘Whaay! We’re not the only stupid ones!’

 “My dad joined the military not because he was a gung-ho patriot,” she 
recalls, “but because at that time the army had just been integrated in the 
States. And it was one of the few industries that offered black people the 
possibility of advancement if you did a good job. Most industries didn’t have 
that then: you were the last hired and the first fired. He was in Vietnam and 
we were sitting waiting, and we were luckier than some because he was able to 
come home and live a pretty good life.”

 Colonel Parks became a university professor and is buried with military 
honours inArlington National Cemetery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/may/23/memorial-day-us-veterans-arlington-cemetery>
. His decision to join an army into which most soldiers had to be drafted is 
reflected in the protagonist of Father Comes Back from the Wars, a slave called 
Hero, who chooses to accompany his Master to fight in the pro-slavery 
Confederate army. Hero is promised his freedom in exchange, but there is a 
possibility that he is being duped. This strand has contemporary resonance for 
the writer: “In America, the promise made to the military has been continually 
reneged upon. Service people have generally fought the wars and then come back 
and been forgotten.”

 She was four when her dad fought in Vietnam, but even later as a student 
never became politicised about the conflict. “I always understood that my dad 
joined the army because it was the only place a black man could get a fair 
shake. The fact that the government was fucked up wasn’t his problem. The 
government has been fucked up since day one. And my dad never gloried in war or 
his military service.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fsuzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69ec222d95d8e274c7cd579ac06f02c197a019c1%2F169_524_4636_2782%2F4636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suzan-Lori%20Parks%3A%20'People%20in%20America%20are%20often%20encouraged%20not%20to%20think'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fsuzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suzan-Lori%20Parks%3A%20%27People%20in%20America%20are%20often%20encouraged%20not%20to%20think%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fsuzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69ec222d95d8e274c7cd579ac06f02c197a019c1%2F169_524_4636_2782%2F4636.jpg>
 Steve Toussaint and Tom Bateman in Father Comes Home from the Wars. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Many external observers are shocked by the extent to which racist rhetoric and 
violence seem to have escalated in the US during the first presidency of an 
African American. Parks grimaces: “This is difficult. All I can say is that 
afterEmancipation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1862/oct/06/mainsection.fromthearchive>, when 
the slaves were freed, there was Reconstruction, which was essentially a lot of 
blowback. So, after Obama’s eight years, there’s serious blowback. People in 
America are often encouraged not to think. The basis of politics is to heighten 
their fears and make them buy something. But, you know, y’all just had Brexit. 
We were like ‘Whaay! We’re not the only stupid ones!’”

She says she will vote for Hillary Clinton, albeit grudgingly: “Hillary’s not 
perfect but I always say: don’t let perfect get in the way of good.”

Father Comes Home from the Wars review – gripping African-American epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/23/father-comes-home-from-the-wars-review-suzan-lori-parks>
The day before we meet, Parks delivered to Amazon Prime a drama about the 
slaves kept by the American president Thomas Jefferson, and she is next heading 
to New York for an attempt to perform, in a continuous loop,365 Days/365 Plays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/nov/15/theatre1>, her 2005 project in 
which she wrote a dialogue or monologue every day for a year. Nobody is sure 
how long the work will take to perform. (“Bring some pillows, some snacks!”) 
She is aware, from actors in the Royal Court production, of the perception that 
the UK remains behind the US in opportunities for non-white actors, and 
remembers the frustration of feeling unrepresented: “Black people have had to 
become great at seeing ourselves where we are not present because that’s where 
we grew up. I see myself in Downton Abbey. Even before they introduced the 
black character, I was right there. Some weeks I was upstairs, some weeks I was 
downstairs! But it is different when you have a character who looks like you, 
so I’m glad to have plugged that gap a little bit.”

 * Father Comes Home from the Wars 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/fathercomeshome> is at the Royal 
Court, London, until 22 October.
 