
In an article for Izvestia, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the Nobel prize winning 
novelist,has condemned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/apr/03/russia.ukraine> claims by 
Ukrainian politicians that the great famine of the 1930s amounted to genocide 
of the Ukrainian nation orchestrated by the Bolshevik leadership. The following 
is a translation.

Since 1917, we, the Soviet people, have happened to hear and humbly swallow 
shameless, although senseless, lies of all kinds.

These lies included that the Constituent Assembly [of 1918] wasn't an attempt 
at democracy but a counter-revolutionary plot (that's why it was dissolved). 
And that the [1917] October Revolution (a brilliant manoeuvre by Trotsky!) 
wasn't an uprising as such but a defence against an aggressive provisional 
government (made up of the cleverest constitutional democrats).

But these monstrous perversions of historical events - neither at the time, 
nor later - didn't reach the inhabitants of western countries. They never had 
reason to develop immunity against the boundless impertinence and scope of such 
lies.

And what about the great famine of 1921, which rolled from the Urals through 
the Volga to the heart of European Russia and which rocked the whole of our 
country? It mowed down millions of people, but the word "holodomor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holodomor>" had not yet been in use then.

The Communist rulers thought it would be enough to explain the famine by 
natural drought and not even mention the cruel robbery of the farmers through 
grain appropriations.

During a similar great famine in Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> and in the Kuban [an area in 
southern Russia] in 1932-1933, the Communist leadership (which, by the way, 
included quite a few Ukrainians), acted as silently and secretively as before. 
And no one was clever enough to realise that the fervent Communist and Komsomol 
activists were in fact planning the extermination of Ukrainians.

This provocative outcry about "genocide" started to germinate decades later - 
first secretly, in the musty chauvinistic minds fiercely predisposed against 
the Moskals [a pejorative term Ukrainian nationalists use to refer to ethnic 
Russians, especially Muscovites], and now it has been elevated to the top 
government level in contemporary Ukraine - does this mean that they have 
outdone even the Bolshevik propaganda mongers with their rakish juggling?

To the parliaments of the entire world: yes, for western ears this is the 
easiest way to put this cunning teaser. They have never really grasped our 
history, and all they need is a ready fable, no matter how loopy it is.
 