
Hot on the heels of ash dieback, it seems that sweet chestnuts are now under 
threat. This week, the UK government announced that it was toban imports 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/environment-secretary-welcomes-taskforce-report-into-tree-and-plant-health>
 of sweet chestnut saplings from foreign nurseries in an effort to stop the 
spread of a fungal blight that is already killing chestnuts across Europe and 
North America and now threatens the UK's estimated 44m specimens. An infection 
of the blight - known as Cryphonectria parasitica - is usually fatal to sweet 
chestnuts. It causes a characteristic bright brown cankered bark, in contrast 
to the greenish colour of normal bark. After it was first detected in North 
America in the 1930s it went on to kill an estimated 3.5 billion trees within 
20 years.

The news comes just months after the government banned the import of ash 
saplings in the – some say – now forlorn hope of preventing the spread of a 
fungal disease known as "ash dieback 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/ash-dieback>". With other tree diseases 
also in the news – the oak processionary moth has been detected in the Greater 
London area and Berkshire – there is a swelling sense that many tree species 
are facing an existential threat.

Owen Paterson, the environment secretary, this week announced 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/environment-secretary-welcomes-taskforce-report-into-tree-and-plant-health>
 that a national plant health risk register is to be established, following the 
recommendation of a biosecurity taskforce he had convened in light of the onset 
of ash dieback. But which trees are next in line for some life-threatening 
blight? The taskforce'sreport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/200393/pb13878-tree-health-taskforce-final-report.pdf>
 contains a list of exotically named "potential threats" yet to be detected in 
the UK, including the "eight-toothed Europe spruce bark beetle", citrus 
longhorned beetle, red oak borer, oak wilt, pine processionary moth, plane wilt 
(which has affected 80% of plane trees in some parts of France), pine pitch 
canker and brown spot needle blight. And what elms still remain in the UK could 
be finished off by the zigzag elm sawfly, which has "spread quickly" from Asia 
into continental Europe.

"There are a variety of pests and diseases already in the UK and many more on 
the continent heading our way, but the biggest threat to UK trees could be one 
we don't currently know about," says Austin Brady, head of conservation at the
Woodland Trust <http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/en/Pages/default.aspx>. "It's 
hard to predict how pests and diseases present elsewhere might behave on 
reaching the UK. Sudden oak death is a good example of this as it affects oak 
trees in the US, but it is now spreading via rhododendrons and having a 
devastating affect on Japanese larch trees in the UK."

Variety is the best defence, says Brady. Identifying and planting a single, 
seemingly resistant species might prove futile in the long run: "It is 
important to be vigilant, look after our trees and, when planting, ensure a mix 
of species is used so that we build resilient landscapes that can withstand 
future threats."
 