
Two of News UK's newspaper websites - the Sunday Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sundaytimes> and The Sun - have suffered a 
hack attack by the Syrian Electronic Army (SEA).

For some minutes the websites carried the message shown above. But the company 
kept the disruption to a minimum, restoring their online services after only a 
short hiatus.

A News UK <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational> spokesman said 
its digital team mobilised quickly, pinpointing the area of attack within 
minutes and then shutting the technical window to prevent the attack continuing.

"We were back up within 20 minutes of the attack," he said, "with full access 
to all parts of the site expected to be back up in the near future."

At one point, The Sun tweeted: 
<https://twitter.com/TheSunNewspaper/status/479217983941001216> "Our website is 
currently being hacked by the Syrian Electronic Army. To keep reading the real 
story about Syria, buy The Sun tomorrow..."

And it followed that with a typically cheeky message: 
<https://twitter.com/TheSunNewspaper/status/479220917361721344> "Good news! Our 
website is back up and running, which means business as usual. Kim Kardashian's 
racy pics, anyone?" [She appears on today's Page 3 in a see-through top].

The SEA is a gang of computer hackers who support the government of President 
Bashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad>, although 
it is not known whether there is a formal link to his administration.

They tend to use denial of service (DoS) attacks and have targeted several 
western websites, including news organisations and human rights groups.

The group boasted on Twitter about their attack on the News UK sites 
<https://twitter.com/Official_SEA16/status/479229118236487681>

They have previously claimed responsibility for attacking the Financial Times, 
the Daily Telegraph, BBC News, theAssociated Press 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/associated-press>, America's National Public 
Radio and Al-Jazeera.
 