
In her groundbreaking 1905 novella Sultana's Dream 
<http://www.amazon.com/Sultanas-Selections-Secluded-Feminist-Sourcebook/dp/0935312838>
, the Bengali writer Rokeya Sakhawat Hossain depicted a feminist utopia called 
Ladyland, a place where men are sequestered in purdah and women rule the world 
in peace, power their homes with solar energy, and still find time to plant 
beautiful gardens. This image of women as intelligent, businesslike household 
managers persists, many decades later, and is a main feature of the women's 
movement in post-independence Bangladesh.

From its very inception, the women's movement in Bangladesh has been geared 
not towardssuffrage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/07/women>, but towards 
development. Both movements – the campaign to tackle poverty and the campaign 
for women's equality – have recognised the need for one another.Poverty 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/howwefightpoverty/women.asp> inflicts particular 
violence on women's lives. If a family goes hungry, it is the women and girl 
children who starve; if there is little money for education, it is the girls 
who will be left out. As adults, women perform acts of heroism both mundane and 
dramatic – tricks to make the food last longer, skipping meals so that their 
children can eat. WhenCyclone Sidr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/flash/page/0,,2212365,00.html> hit the coast of 
Bangladesh last November, more women died than men: many were out looking for 
their children when the storm hit.

Recognising, as Hossain did, the ingenuity and mettle of poor women, is what 
characterises the success of development campaigns inBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>.

When Muhammad Yunus <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/south_asia/6047234.stm> 
began givingsmall loans 
<http://www.grameenfoundation.org/what_we_do/microfinance_in_action/> to the 
poorest of Bangladesh's poor in the 1970s, he may not have imagined the effects 
of his actions on women. In the four decades since Grameen Bank began its 
operations, the proportion of women lenders has grown, and is now somewhere 
between 96 and 99%. Putting cash into women's hands is at the heart of the 
bank's success, because women never spend their borrowed money on themselves – 
they sow it right back into the family. The collaboration between women's 
activism and development is so strong in Bangladesh that when theJamaat-e-Islami
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamaat-e-Islami_Bangladesh> suffered a rout in 
the 1996 parliamentary elections, it blamed the feminists and the aid workers 
in equal measure.

But it is not enough to put a measure of economic power in the hands of women; 
there are still legal and structural challenges to equality. The Bangladesh 
constitution – otherwise a secular, progressive document – states that family 
law must be dictated by religion, so that women do not have equal rights to 
inheritance and child custody. There are also no legal safeguards against 
domestic violence; and now that women are entering the workforce, there is a 
need for new labor laws that guarantee better working conditions for women. 
These are the new battlegrounds that the women's movement has staked out.

There is no doubt that Bangladesh is a difficult place to be a woman. But with 
forbearers like Hossain, who imagined a different world long before they were 
given the vote, and with development going into the hands of women, we may yet 
someday build our version of Ladyland.
 