
Should getting a divorce 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3134112/As-easy-applying-television-licence-New-divorce-centres-proceedings-courts-revolutionise-couples-end-marriage.html>
 be made as easy as “discarding an old carrier bag”? I think it should be, 
actually, and I probably know as much about marriage asAnn Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ann-widdecombe>, who has criticised 
proposed reforms that will enable couples to arrange “over the counter“ 
divorces.

Widdecombe was speaking about the move to take divorce out of the court system 
and have it dealt with by a number of regional centres. These measures, called 
for by our most senior family judge, Sir James Munby, are an attempt to free up 
the courts and have the all paperwork done by administrative staff. This 
streamlining of the process could speed things up – particularly in the case of 
uncontested divorces where no children are involved. This seems entirely 
sensible, but critics like Widdecombe who already think divorce is too “easy” 
are upset that getting a divorce will be as simple as gettinga TV licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jun/18/do-you-need-tv-licence>
. Which reminds me …

It is as though the only thing keeping married couples together is a fear of 
paperwork

Actually, divorce is rarely simple. Feelings are complex, and never divided 
fairly or equally when a relationship ends. The divvying up of children and 
home is fraught, but this a separate thing to the legal declaration of the end 
of a marriage. Indeed, it is often only through the process of divorce itself 
that many begin to understand that, whatever they intended it to be, marriage 
is a serious legal contract based on property. Therein so much conflict lies. 
The sheen of romance, the choosing of elaborate wedding favours, the rose-petal 
confetti certainly help to blur any comprehension of what marriage means 
legally, no matter what special and individual vows you have conjured up.

If, after the thrill is gone or the wedding is paid for, a couple without 
children decide to separate, it is sure better to simplify the process by which 
they may unbind themselves legally. Munby is aiming to make the system more 
“honest”, and to decouple the administrative process of divorce from any 
dispute over children or money. Eventuallyhe would like to remove “fault” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/10/lady-hale-blame-divorce-legal-process>
 and the need for couples to cite “unreasonable behaviour”. Anything that 
removes the adversarial nature of divorce is good for our emotional health, if 
not for the lifestyles of some lawyers.

Love, not marriage, gives children a stable home | Charlotte Philby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/28/love-not-marriage-children-stable-home>
Uncontested divorce is a good place to start, but there will always be 
conservatives who see anything that makes divorce “easier” as a fundamental 
attack on marriage. It is as though the only thing keeping married couples 
together is a fear of paperwork. The continual refrain that marriage is the 
ideal and those not in this institution are failures or inferior does not chime 
with the reality. Both ourdivorce rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/jan/28/divorce-rates-marriage-ons>
 and the number of children born outside marriage indicate that family patterns 
are changing, that different choices are made.

There is no threat to the happily married, and good for them. And will the 
unhappily married suddenly rush to get divorced because it may be slightly 
quicker? Of course not. This idea that marriage is undermined by making it 
slightly less time consuming to broker the end of a contract is unrealistic. As 
is the notion that if you make divorce more difficult for people, that they 
might reconcile. By the time many couples have decided to get divorced, many of 
them will have thought longer and harder about this than about the decision to 
get married. It is painful, but what undermines marriage are not reforms to 
divorce law. No, what undermines marriage are married people and the things 
married people do.
 