
Figures showing how many students from poorer backgrounds are now going to 
universitypublished on today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/mar/29/squeezed-middle-universities-lack-of-students>
 should make us proud.

Attracting these students, and supporting them through university, brings 
benefits not only to them but also to their institutions, and to the country's 
future economic prosperity.

That is why, since 2002, policymakers have set benchmarks for the number of 
students from state schools and working-class backgrounds that institutions 
should recruit. These benchmarks take into account an institution's subject mix 
and entrance scores. Last year, the University of Leicester was the only 
institution among the Times Top 20 universities to meet these benchmarks. The 
latest figures show it has met them again this year.

But, while the government has previously praised inclusion and widening access 
to higher education, it is now putting it at risk.

Its plan to remove 20,000 places and open these up to bids from institutions 
charging lower fees, while allowing unlimited recruitment of applicants with 
two A-grades and a B or better at A-level, rewards institutions that are not 
pulling their weight on inclusion, and means many talented students will lose 
out on places at top universities.

Allowing universities to recruit as many of these students as they want, while 
reducing opportunities for those who just miss these arbitrary grades, opens up 
choice for middle-class applicants from good schools but closes it for many 
others.

Last year's higher education white paper aimed to put students at the heart of 
the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2011/jul/08/higher-education-white-paper-binary-divide?INTCMP=SRCH>
. It assumed that informed students making free choices would drive quality 
upwards and encourage institutions to price their courses competitively.

While many in the sector have mixed views about whether this will be the case, 
it is at least a coherent position.

But, in order for it to work, three things must be in place â€“ better 
information for students, variable tuition fees and the freeing up of student 
numbers so that places follow demand. We largely have the first two, but 
student numbers have only been partially freed. This creates, in effect, a 
half-market that rewards socially elitist institutions while penalising many of 
those who have worked hard to improve students' experiences of university and 
received excellent scores for student satisfaction. The result may well be a 
contraction in the very part of the sector best placed to deliver the white 
paper's core aims.

If the government believes student choice drives up quality, why restrict it 
for some and extend it for just a sub-set of students from more privileged 
backgrounds, who are in no better position to exercise that choice than anyone 
else?

Far from objecting in principle to the idea of a market, or liberalisation of 
student numbers, I believe that liberalisation should go further. The sector 
would be closer to a real market if the range of student places outside of the 
student number controls was extended.

If money is the issue, there is no evidence that allowing institutions to 
recruit unlimited numbers of students achieving lower grades than AAB will have 
any dramatic effect on the student loan book. If anything, data from the
Universities and Colleges Admissions Service <http://www.ucas.ac.uk/> suggests 
that the greatest growth in recent years has been among the AAB students. And, 
if you follow the logic of the government's argument, liberalisation of student 
numbers should drive down price in any case.

Nor do I agree with the argument that the sector needs a period of stability. 
The current arrangements are highly unstable, and many institutions are already 
finding it difficult to plan financially when forced to deal with a policy of 
creating a market that has been only half implemented. The government needs to 
introduce greater liberalisation of numbers now.

Much good work has been done in recent years to extend higher education 
opportunities to a wider group of students, and universities are likely to have 
to work even harder on social inclusion after this year's rise in tuition fees. 
As the latest performance indicators show, some institutions have done much 
better in this area than others. It will be ironic if those universities that 
have been most successful at putting students at the heart of their systems are 
forced to recruit less of them in future.

Professor Sir Robert Burgess is vice-chancellor of the University of Leicester 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 