
“I think I’m going to die. No one is known to survive if they vomit after 
taking DNP. I’m so scared. I’m so sorry for being so stupid.” These were the 
words that 21-year-oldEloise Parry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/23/woman-died-accidental-overdose-highly-toxic-diet-pills-eloise-parry>
 texted from hospital before she died after taking slimming pills that she had 
bought on the internet. The regret in her words serve to highlight the 
completely unnecessary and avoidable nature of her death. Another young woman’s 
life lost in pursuit of an unachievable body image ideal.

How not to talk to people with an eating disorder | Charlotte Samantha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/06/how-not-talk-people-eating-disorder>
We are used to seeing coverage highlighting women’s daily battles with their 
bodies, their slimming obsession and their image anxieties. We live in an 
image-saturated culture and eating disorders are on the rise. Just yesterday, a 
new survey of 6,000 children found that some as young as eight were reporting 
body dissatisfaction, with 38.8% of 14-year-oldsadmitting to regular dieting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/23/basis-for-eating-disorders-found-in-children-as-young-as-eight>
. A fifth felt under pressure from the media to lose weight. I am surprised 
it’s not more. As I read about the survey on one news website, my eye is 
consistently drawn to an advert next to the article. “13 ways to burn fat all 
day” it reads.

Eloise Parry was not stupid; she had a history of eating disorders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/eating-disorders>, and had been binge 
eating and purging. It can be difficult for those who have never entered the 
obsessive spiral that comes hand in hand with disordered eating to understand a 
young woman’s motivation for doing something so seemingly reckless as consuming 
drugs bought online. But as her motherexplained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/23/mother-demands-stiff-penalties-dealers-diet-pills-killed-eloise-parry>
 at the inquest, Eloise had become blinkered, convinced the dangers she had 
read about had been exaggerated, that “being slimmer was worth the risk”.

We see headlines about diet pills once a year or so, and accounts of the awful 
deaths that can ensue. We see stories about young women such as 24-year-old
Natalie Penney 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3097139/Party-animal-desperate-perfect-body-nearly-DIED-taking-diet-pills-bought-Amazon-left-permanent-heart-damage-24.html>
 who, after buying pills online, collapsed at home, and had to attend a 
specialist heart clinic for two years, or of 23-year-old medical studentSarah 
Houston 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/death-of-medical-student-sarah-houston-after-taking-banned-slimming-drug-dinitrophenol-highlights-dangers-of-buying-pills-online-warns-government-8584597.html>
, who died in 2013. Parents and doctors have made repeated warnings, calling 
for better controls of these irresponsible websites which, even when 
suppressed, will pop up again within hours. But they are fighting a monumental 
battle.

When a body image preoccupation has become an obsession, the lure of a quick 
fix can outrun any appeal to reason. Especially when the internet is so ready 
to support your quest for the perfect body. The flat bellies of Facebook; 
queens of the before and after. Theclean-eaters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/27/new-wellness-bloggers-food-drink-hadley-freeman>
, many of whom appear to hide a fraught relationship with food behind the dogma 
of healthy eating. The supplements and vitamins with fake reviews and grandiose 
supporting claims. The pro-ana forums and thinspiration Tumblrs telling you 
that you get used to the hunger, to take cold baths, that “nothing tastes as 
good as skinny feels”.

It can be difficult to understand a young woman’s motivation for recklessly 
consuming drugs bought online.

It can feel like a well, this online world. It’s so easy to fall in, 
especially when you’re in the grip of a serious mental illness, though it can 
happen even when you’re not. Though deaths are rare, diet pill abuse is not 
uncommon. I have otherwise sensible friends who have taken them, likening their 
effect to speed. After the supplements and the laxatives, moving on to other 
tablets doesn’t feel like such a big step. But on some level, these young women 
know of the dangers, which is why they often don’t confide in anyone close to 
them about what they are taking.

I suspect this is further underpinned by the charade maintained by magazines 
and celebrities that weight loss, even when extreme, is smooth and effortless, 
the result of a fast metabolism, kale smoothies, yogalates, and running around 
after the kids all day. This cultural evasiveness, coupled with the secretive 
behaviours that are part and parcel with eating disorders, are why parents 
should speak openly about body image with their children, male and female (diet 
pills are often taken by male bodybuilders, a look that is becoming 
increasingly pursued by young men). You could do it tonight. No parent should 
ever have to hear or read words such as those from Eloise Parry, a young woman 
who wanted desperately to be thin, but did not want to die.
 