
Today Americans of Scottish descent will join pipers, drummers and 
whisky-drinking expatriates in celebrating Tartan Day, an event that, while 
obscure, has been officially recognized in the United States since 1998.

Tartan has long proven useful in decorating and exporting sentimental and 
patriotic images ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, 
especially to Americans in search of their roots. But tartan’s commodification 
belies a complex history that is as rebellious and contradictory as it is 
romantic and traditional.

In the 1970s, when English punks adopted tartan, they did so to challenge 
authority by subverting a textile that had become twee and tainted by 
association with the establishment. Their favorite was the Royal Stewart, 
personal tartan of Queen Elizabeth II, and it has remained a consistent 
presence in Vivienne Westwood’s designs.
 Flora Macdonald by James Macardell. Photograph: National Portrait Gallery, 
London 
But tartan already had a legacy of subversion. Two centuries before punk, the 
Jacobites wore it in a series of uprisings that attempted to restore the House 
of Stuart to the throne – most notably those of 1715, led by James Francis 
Stuart, and 1745, led by his son, Charles Edward Stuart. Theféiladh-mor, a 
length of tartan woolen cloth that could be gathered at the waist into a kilt 
and swung over the shoulder to form a wrap, identified the wearer as a 
supporter of the cause.

The Jacobite Uprisings and their ultimate failure in a final defeat at 
Culloden on 16 April 1746 have become the stuff of romantic tales, most 
recently in Outlander, whose second part of the first season premiered last 
weekend. What followed, however, was far from romantic. As part of a brutal 
crackdown on Jacobites and their sympathizers, and in order to finally crush 
Highland culture, British parliament banned the wearing of Highland dress and 
tartan in the 1746 Dress Act. Punishment was six months’ imprisonment for the 
first offense and transportation to “His Majesty’s plantations beyond the seas” 
for the second.

And yet, stories of people defying the ban abound. In Damn Rebel Bitches, a 
history of the women of the 1745 uprising, Maggie Craig describes Lady 
MacDonald of Sleat, who had “her young sons painted wearing Highland dress 
around 1750”. The painting was unsigned, Craig writes, “because the artist was 
committing a criminal offence, as were the boys for wearing tartan and their 
mother for choosing to dress them in the Highland style”.

Then there was the ambiguous 1749 portrait of John Campbell, who, as cashier 
of the Royal Bank of Scotland, worked for the government, yet wears a tartan 
kilt and jacket. Perhaps most famously, Flora MacDonald, who helped Charles 
Edward Stuart escape after Culloden and was jailed in the Tower of London for 
her efforts, appears in a 1749 portrait painted after her release, with a 
tartan plaid (shawl) over her shoulders.
 John Campbell of the Bank, about 1703-1777, by William Mosman. Photograph: 
National Galleries scotland 
While it’s tempting to conclude that its banning transformed tartan into a 
subversive textile, Brian Wilton from the Scottish Tartans Authority, who I 
spoke to over phone and email, offers a more cautious take. “That may be an 
overseas view among the descendants of Scots,” he told me, “they tend to 
romanticize everything.”

Although “the ban probably acted as an added incentive” for Jacobite 
sympathizers to wear tartan, he says that “there’s quite a bit of confusion 
around what the ban was”, pointing out that it applied only to men and boys. 
“The society ladies in Edinburgh were reveling in wearing it. Quite possibly in 
an act of rebellion, but I suspect it was more because they were fashion 
conscious.”

That said, in the period following Culloden when government forces hunted down 
Jacobite sympathizers, so strongly was tartan associated with rebellion that 
even a woman wearing it was cause for suspicion. In her book, Craig tells of 
December 1746 orders put out to search Edinburgh and Leith and arrest women 
wearing tartan and white ribbons under the suspicion they planned to celebrate 
the Prince’s birthday.
 Highland Rape, autumn/winter 1995–96 by Alexander McQueen. Photograph: Sølve 
Sundsbø 
Tartan’s rebellious roots truly fizzled out when, in 1782, the ban was 
overturned. No longer associated with uncivilized Highlanders, the textile was 
comfortably adopted by royalty and the colonial empire’s military. In an 1822 
visit to Edinburgh – orchestrated by Sir Walter Scott, whose novel Waverley had 
offered a romanticized view of Highland life – King George IV wore full 
Highland dress to present an image of a now-unified Britain and claimed the 
Royal Stewart (a now Anglicized form of Stuart) tartan as his own. With the 
threat of the uprisings now long over, tartan could be used to sell a romantic 
image of the Highlands and there followed a mania (many say dubious) for 
linking tartans to the ancient clan system and a boom in mass production of the 
textile. By the time Victoria and Albert decorated Balmoral Castle in 
wall-to-wall tartan, the pattern’s rebellious connotations had been fully 
sanitized – at least until the punks.

In spite of its contradictory elements, tartan has remained a persistent 
fashion staple – seen recently at Prada and Marc Jacobs. Twenty years ago,
Alexander McQueen <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen> first 
sent models down the runway dressed in his own distinctive red, black and 
yellow tartan, but his use of the pattern was a comment on its murky history. 
His controversial autumn/winter 1995-96 show, named Highland Rape, had 
half-naked and bloodied models staggering down a runway strewn with bracken and 
heather. Accused of glorifying violence against women, McQueen explained that 
the show “was a shout against English designers ... doing flamboyant Scottish 
clothes … about England’s rape of Scotland”.

Though born and raised in London, McQueen, who died five years ago, felt a 
deep connection to Scotland. His Scottish father’s roots were on the Isle of 
Skye, where McQueen’s ashes were scattered – his memorial lies close to Flora 
MacDonald’s in Kilmuir Cemetery. In a 1999 interview with the Independent, he 
said he felt patriotic about Scotland “because I think it’s been dealt a really 
hard hand. It’s marketed the world over as, you know, fucking haggis, fucking 
bagpipes. But no one ever puts anything back into it. I hate it when people 
romanticize Scotland. There’s nothing romantic about its history”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuzzjFvJhpLA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuzzjFvJhpLA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuzzjFvJhpLA&media=>
 Widows of Culloden, his autumn/winter 2006-7 collection, forms a second act 
to the drama of cultural annihilation that McQueen began with Highland Rape. 
The collection was a melancholic ode to the Highland clearances and the widows 
of those lost at Culloden who “got on a ship and moved to America” taking the 
embers of Highland identity with them. “What the British did there,” the ever 
anti-establishment McQueen told the Independent, “was nothing short of 
genocide.”

The reappearance of tartan in Widows of Culloden was, writes Dr Jonathan 
Faiers in an essay accompanying Savage Beauty, the ongoing V&A’s McQueen 
retrospective, “a comment … on the inevitable triumph of fashion … McQueen used 
his tartan to suggest how the traditional dress had become commodified and 
Anglicized as fashion”. Given all of the contradictions of the pattern, it is 
perhaps fitting that McQueen used the medium of high fashion to explore its 
commodification.

Tartan changed irrevocably after Culloden. Exiled from the Highlands and 
spread throughout the diaspora, it has taken on multiple meanings – subversive 
to some; fashion, or a romantic image of a long-lost homeland to others. 
Although it initially registers as clichéd, perhaps Tartan Day is a fitting 
name for a celebration of Scottish heritage: tartan has a complex and unsettled 
history, much like the country itself.
 