
Having eased us in reasonably gently with Sunday’s collaboration with the 
Adelaide Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/10/tectonics-ilan-volkov-adelaide-symphony-orchestra-review>
, for the second instalment of Tectonics, curatorIlan Volkov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/09/ilan-volkov-classical-musics-super-collider>
 took the gloves off. The concert lasted an astonishing nine hours – almost 
long enough to listen toGötterdämmerung 
<http://www.melbourneringcycle.com.au/ring_cycle/the_operas/gotterdammerung> 
twice – and included some of the most challenging music in the world, from 
Fluxus legendTakehisa Kosugi <http://www.lovely.com/bios/kosugi.html>, playing 
lights and electronics, to Canadian sound artistCrys Cole <http://cryscole.com/>
, whose 25-minute ambient improvisation was so quiet it was barely there.

The MO of Techtonics is to bring together the classical and avant garde 
worlds, but the latter far outweighed the former, and the audience – which 
ranged pleasingly from heavy metal fans here to see the closing performance by
Gravetemple <http://editionsmego.com/release/SOMA015> to elderly classical 
music buffs – were encouraged to come down from the tiered seating to immerse 
themselves in the music. Well, if you could call it music – certainly some 
pieces, likeMarco Fusinato <http://www.marcofusinato.com/>’s TEMA, a 30 
terrifying minutes of feedback which would have made a dentists’ drill sound 
melodious, stretched the definition to its utmost. But then, that was part of 
the point.


While Tectonics was often baffling, scary or comical, despite its great length 
it was never boring, with something bizarre and original rarely more than two 
works away. Highlights included the exhilaratingHammers Lake 
<http://carolyn-connors.com/projects/hammers-lake/>, an Australian trio 
featuring the extraordinary throat-singing of Carolyn Connors, who screamed, 
ululated, made a bandana out of a piece of tinfoil and then rhythmically spat 
into it. The following work, Evraiki by Australian sound artistRobbie Avenaim 
<http://www.robbieavenaim.com/robbieavenaim.com/RA.html>, saw the musicians 
wandering around the audience, who were encouraged to huddle in the centre of 
the venue, modulating from a warm, 3D bath of sound into something more 
oppressive, as Volkov directed the players with strange gestures including an 
X-shape with his arms.

Another immersive piece, Joel Stern <http://www.abjectleader.org/front.htm>’s 
solo carnival 2014 was equally successful, the audience crowding around a table 
on which Stern manipulated electronic equipment attached to coloured lights. At 
one point the flashing of the lights seemed to generate a melody – the only one 
the audience heard that day. Stern followed Kosugi, whose chattering, burbling 
electronic improvisation was made more accessible by the delight the 
75-year-old artist was clearly taking in making it. (HisOrange amplifiers  
<https://www.orangeamps.com/>were great to look at too.)


The two other main strands of the day were, as on the first, the austerely 
beautiful music of Xenakis and Scelsi, mainly played by Adelaide’sSoundstream 
collective 
<http://www.soundstream.org.au/?doing_wp_cron=1394505622.9405128955841064453125>
, and at the other end of the spectrum the oppressive slabs of noise created by 
the various members of Sunn O))) in configurations including Gravetemple and 
Attila Csihar’s acapella projectVoid ov Voices 
<https://myspace.com/voidovvoices>, which he performed in ceremonial robes. 
Last played in the Louvre, the seemingly single-note Criss-Cross showed that 
its performersOren Ambarchi <http://www.orenambarchi.com/> and Stephen O’Malley 
<http://www.ideologic.org/> have got more drones than Obama. The concluding 
performance by Gravetemple, which saw the audience cast their chairs aside in 
order to submit to 45 minutes of glacially slow, doomy metal, seemed more 
ludicrous than impressive.

Gravetemple’s somewhat anticlimactic set highlighted some problems with the 
day – the fact that music of a similar ilk was grouped together, meaning that 
the audience had to concentrate on two long ambient pieces in succession, and 
later on a full hour of pulverising noise. There were few women composers in 
the programme, and no non-white ones. The theatre was also hellishly hot, not 
that much could be done about that. But Tectonics was still an ear-opening and 
mind-altering festival, an incredible collection of visionaries and eccentrics 
of the kind it was a pleasure to experience – even when it seemed they were 
trying to make you run screaming from the building.

 