Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxhtAfIw4qJY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxhtAfIw4qJY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FxhtAfIw4qJY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"I started to write an album that would try to reach out to these kids and, in 
some ways, to be a father to these kids, because they were parentless," said 
Ben Drew, aka singer/songwriterPlan B <https://www.theguardian.com/music/plan-b>
.

The aim of his early music, he added, was to "expose gun culture for what it 
really was – the grim reality. Because 50 Cent is very lucky. The reality is 
that if you are shot once, you are going to be dead."

The controversial actor and soon-to-be film-maker's appearance was one of the 
most eagerly anticipated at the TEDx Observer festival of new ideas at the 
Sadler's Wells theatre in London. Thousands also watched a simultaneous 
broadcast on screens at parallel events around the country.

The forthright performer, who grew up in the East End of London before he 
found musical success as a rapper, was introduced by the DJ Goldie. Explaining 
his creative journey, Drew said: "I got tired of defending hip-hop, the music I 
loved, and I got tired of the politics of it. Although I knew it was the only 
music that would reach these kids."

Footage from Drew's uncompromising film iLL Manors, which is out later this 
year, was screened after the singer explained how a sense of injustice has 
fuelled much of his work. Creative endeavour as a route out of frustration and 
social alienation was not just an appealing idea, Drew suggested, but a growing 
political imperative.

The theme of the day was "where inspiration meets action" and the audience was 
treated to a huge range of variations on it. Whoops rewarded the contributions 
ofPauline Pearce 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/oct/04/london-riots-hackney-heroine-tackles-tories>
, the community worker who walked into London's riots last summer on her way 
home from work and then did her best to dissuade looters.

Barnstorming performances by South African musician Hugh Masekela, Mali's 
Amadou and Mariam <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amadou-and-mariam>, who 
were introduced by singer Cerys Matthews, and later by Lianne La Havas, 
Rosemary Nalden, the choir Only Boys Aloud and Plan B, all won cheers of 
appreciation, while, as befitted the historic London venue, dance also enjoyed 
its moment in the limelight too. There was an uplifting appearance by 
psychologist and dancer Peter Lovatt and Alvaro Restrepo, who brought stories 
of his inspirational work from the barrios of Colombia, where he is using dance 
to build the self-confidence of deprived young people.

Martin Bostock, a London public relations expert said: "The whole TED 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ted> concept is fantastic, I think, but 
I found Giles Duley's talk awe-inspiring. It was a unique story."

The photographer opened the morning session with his extraordinary account of 
his brave, outward-looking response to suffering a terrible injury. Last year 
Duley was on assignment in Afghanistan when he stepped on a land mine and lost 
both legs and his left arm in the explosion. "My body was a living example of 
what war can do to somebody," he said. Duley's response was to focus on the 
difficulties of those around him, something he now felt better able to 
understand.

Robin Dunbar, the director of the institute of cognitive and evolutionary 
anthropology at Oxford University, showed the audience how he had 
scientifically unwrapped the sentiment and cant surrounding modern ideas about 
friendship and the enhancing role of social networking technology. Internet 
tools such as Twitter and Facebook do nothing, it seems, to increase the number 
of people that we interact with in a meaningful way. In other words, you will 
not have more friends simply because you tweet. The maximum number of people in 
an average "social cognition circuit" was 150, a figure now known as Dunbar's 
number. (Ironically, as Dunbar pointed out, it was Facebook that first gave him 
this uninvited kudos).

TED began in California 23 years ago. Speakers address the key themes of 
technology, entertainment and design. Saturday's event also paid a lot of 
attention to new analysis of human behaviour and trying to make it work for 
society, rather than against it.

Observer editor John Mulholland, who presented the Londonevent, said: "One of 
the most important things, it seems to me, that becomes clear from the ideas 
being talked about today is just how vital it is to harness what young people 
can do. And repeatedly, it is the more creative attempts to do this that appear 
to work and to be the most worthwhile."

Many of the speakers had taken their innovative ideas straight out into the 
field, from Lebanese farmer and food activist Kamal Mouzawak to Rosemary 
Nalden, a New Zealander living in London who gave up her flat to go to run a 
music project in Soweto for young children called Buskaid. Nalden calls 
compromise "the dirtiest word in the English language" and she is convinced 
about the value of what she is doing. "Music is a huge agent of transformation."

Some of the younger contingent in the crowd may have been drawn to the event 
by Ben Drew's name, but others were attracted by the idea of TED itself. They 
appeared to go home satisfied by a day of huge variety and stirring debate.

"There is a massive mix of ages and of background here," said student Olivia 
Grosvenor, 22. "I recently got into TED online and I knew my friend would love 
it too, so I persuaded her to come along too, even though she had never heard 
of it."

The Observer TEDx event was supported by venue Sadler's Wells and ethical 
caterers Squid & Pear squidandpear.com
 