
From launderettes 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f4%2f2>
 tojazz clubs 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f10>
,Nigel Slater 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f84>
 toNeil Hamilton  
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f38>
andwomen’s liberation 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f2>
 toinflatable egg cups 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f91>
, the Guardian and the Observer have featured a wide range of settings and 
subjects in their television adverts over the years. The newspapers’ television 
advertising history can now be explored in detail as 168 adverts (or series of 
adverts) spanning the period 1968 to 2006 have recently been made available to 
view in theGNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> reading room. 
Full descriptions of all availableGuardian 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1>
 andObserver 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f91>
 adverts are now included in our online catalogue.


The Observer looks ahead of the times.
Advert strapline, 1970s 
The adverts fall into a range of categories. A large proportion were 
commissioned to promote upcoming one-off features in the paper such as 
exclusive stories, interviews with public figures and special supplements. 
Examples include the serialisation ofNelson Mandela’s autobiography in the 
Observer 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f67>
, the publication of aletter written by convicted murderer Myra Hindley to the 
Guardian while in prison 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f28>
 and the distribution of free copies ofHalliwell’s Four Star Film Guide 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f39>
. A number of adverts promote regular sections of the newspaper and redesigns, 
as illustrated for example by an advert publicising the launch of theGuardian 
in the Berliner format 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f76>
 in 2005. The collection also features many more general adverts for the 
newspapers which utilise a wide range of techniques to help set them apart from 
the competition.


One of the most iconic adverts is the Guardian’s 1986 Points of View 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f6>
 advert, available to view below and on the Guardian’sYouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_SsccRkLLzU>. The advert demonstrates the 
paper’s longstanding commitment to reporting the ‘whole picture.’ This concept 
was more recently represented for a 21st-century audience in 2012’sThree Little 
Pigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2012/feb/29/open-journalism-three-little-pigs-advert>
 advert which imagines how the Guardian might cover the story of the Three 
Little Pigs in print and online.
 Guardian Points of View advert, 1986. 
Among the most memorable of the Observer’s collection is a series of four 
adverts from 1983 which use the fact that the paper was awarded the title of 
Newspaper of the Year to promote the quality of the newspaper’s staff. The
adverts 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1%2f17>
 feature Observer staff including then sports photographer Eamonn McCabe, 
features writer Clive James and others gathered in a room with editor Donald 
Trelford who says: “I’m glad to have such an award-winning team around me”.

The collection is incomplete and thus does not seek to provide a definitive 
list of all adverts created for the newspapers. Nonetheless, it does offer an 
insight into the techniques used to promote the newspapers to prospective 
readers at a time when television advertising was hitting its stride, the 
adverts featuring a wide range of subjects, humour, visual effects and 
straplines that reflected the periods in which they were created and broadcast.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftelevision-adverts-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-march-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc86ee0609758917e40ff1f172b1a6499049575a0%2F1127_229_1837_2302%2F1837.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Television%20adverts%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20March%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftelevision-adverts-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-march-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Television%20adverts%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20March%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Ftelevision-adverts-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-march-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc86ee0609758917e40ff1f172b1a6499049575a0%2F1127_229_1837_2302%2F1837.jpg>
 Examples of VHS tapes now digitised and held in the GNM Archive’s digital 
repository. Photograph: Robin Christian for the Guardian 
Making the adverts accessible to the public has comprised a number of distinct 
stages. Donated to the archive by both internal departments and former staff, 
the recordings were originally stored on a mixture ofVHS 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VHS>, Betamax  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betamax>and U-matic 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U-matic> videocassette tapes. As these are now 
predominantlyobsolete <http://www.obsoletemedia.org/> analogue formats it was 
necessary to digitise and save the adverts in the approved MPEG-4preservation 
standard <http://www.dpconline.org/> format in order to help ensure their 
long-term accessibility. The archivists sourced a VHS player from ebay and were 
able to digitise the VHS adverts in-house, however those stored on Betamax and 
U-matic formats had to be converted externally. The resulting files were 
transferred to the GNM Archive’s digital repository and it is these versions 
that are now accessible to researchers, although the original tapes have been 
retained in the archive storerooms as an extra layer of precaution.


Once transferred to a more stable and accessible format, cataloguing of the 
adverts could begin. This involved viewing each recording and creating a unique 
entry for each advert in thearchive catalogue 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>. Separate series were 
created for theGuardian 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1>
 andObserver 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1>
 adverts and within these the adverts were arranged broadly chronologically, 
although it was sometimes unclear whether the date referred to the production 
or broadcast of the advert or a later compilation.


Full descriptions of the content of each advert were then added to the archive 
catalogue, along with the duration and information about the quality of the 
recording. Any information written on labels on the original tape was also 
transferred to the catalogue along with digital metadata such as the type and 
size of file and details of the preservation activities that had been carried 
out. Agencies involved in the creation of the adverts were identified in the 
catalogue where known, or where implied by the adverts themselves or by labels 
on the tapes, however any further information about the creators would bevery 
welcome <mailto:archives@theguardian.com>. 


The Guardian. Free thinkers welcome.
Advert strapline, 1990s 
During the cataloguing process, it became apparent that the collection 
included a number of duplicates and, more confusingly, several different edits 
of the same advert. While multiple final edits of an advert were sometimes 
intentionally created for broadcast (for example those of different lengths), 
some of those in the collection appeared to be early edits. Unfortunately it 
was not often clear which version (if any) was actually broadcast, therefore 
all edits have been retained and listed within the relevant advert’s 
description.


Details of all television adverts held by the GNM Archive are available on our 
online catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/calmview/>. All adverts are 
available for viewing at our reading room in King’s Cross, London. Please see
this page <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for further 
information on the archive collections and how to access them.

Further reading:

Catalogue descriptions of Guardian adverts 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=GUA%2f9%2f1%2f1>

Catalogue descriptions of Observer adverts 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/TreeBrowse.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&field=RefNo&key=OBS%2f9%2f1%2f1>


Points of View advert <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_SsccRkLLzU>

Three Little Pigs advert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2012/feb/29/open-journalism-three-little-pigs-advert>


Three Little Pigs advert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2012/feb/29/three-little-pigs-behind-scenes?INTCMP=SRCH#/?picture=386693333&index=2>
: behind the scenes
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_SsccRkLLzU>

Guardian and Observer advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/guardian-and-observer-advertising-teaching-resource-from-gnm-archive>

Gallery of Guardian and Observer advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/gallery/guardian-and-observer-advertising-teaching-resource-from-gnm-archive>
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/guardian-and-observer-advertising-teaching-resource-from-gnm-archive>

Lessons from a Guardian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/2016/jan/04/crisis-guardian-marketing-1960s-gnm-archive-january-2016>

 