
A proposal for a Tennessee <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tennessee> 
county to raise the Confederate flag above its courthouse for the first time in 
its history was overwhelmingly voted down on Monday night.


Mississippi flag retains Confederate emblem despite calls for its removal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/17/mississippi-state-flag-confederate-symbol>
The resolution did not pass during the Greene County commission meeting, with 
20 commissioners voting against it and only one – Buddy Randolph, who sponsored 
the resolution – voting for it.


Despite Tennessee being part of the Confederacy during the civil war, which 
was fought between 1861 and 1865, the flag never flew over the Greene County 
courthouse. The area was strongly tied to the Union and opposed secession. It 
was even deemed an “enemy territory” by the Confederate government.

Before Monday night’s vote, Randolph said flying the controversial flag above 
the courthouse had “nothing to do with race”, citing historical significance 
instead.


“It’s part of American history,” he told CNN affiliate WJHL 
<http://wjhl.com/2015/10/18/greene-county-resident-plans-protest-against-confederate-flag-resolution/>
. “Thousands of Confederate soldiers died during the war.”


Debate over the Confederate battle flag surged this summer, after nine black 
churchgoers were killed in Charleston by a man who posed with the flag in 
photographs appended to onlinedeclarations of white supremacist views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/22/charleston-killings-confederate-flag-debate>
.

In July, the South Carolina legislature lowered the flag from the grounds of 
its statehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/confederate-flag-south-carolina-statehouse>
, in Colombia.


In the history of Greene County, Tennessee, the Confederate battle flag 
represents what did not occur. Richard Hood, a Greene County resident and 
retired history professor, said Confederate flags abound in the county today.

“There is an undercurrent of strong pro-Confederate flag sentiment around 
here,” Hood, whodenounced the commission’s proposal 
<http://www.greenevillesun.com/opinion/letters_to_editor/writer-greene-county-was-very-strongly-anti-confederacy/article_0c04ebc0-9bbd-5f8f-ada5-9e397c4d437d.html>
 in a lengthy letter published in the Greeneville Sun, told the Guardian on 
Tuesday.


“My take on it is that they are disaffected, mostly male southern guys who 
resent what they see as their natural privileges being taken away, those being 
white supremacy,” he continued. “They’re not going to say that, so they cook up 
all of this faux history to justify what they’re doing.”


In Tennessee’s referendum on secession, which was confirmed on 8 June 1861, 
Greene County citizens voted against by 2,691 to 733. Tennessee seceded, but 
Union sentiment remained strong in the eastern part of the state throughout the 
four-year war. Also in 1861, Greeneville citizens attempted to separate from 
the state and stay in the Union.


Hood, who spoke against the resolution at the commission meeting on Monday 
night, said modern-day attachment to the Confederate flag was a way for people 
to express an anger based on a fear that the world is ignoring them.

It was, he said, a “last gasp of assertion in a struggle they’ve already lost”.


“It has nothing to do with Greene County history,” he said. “They think they 
are celebrating their heritage, but they know nothing about that heritage.”


During the commission meeting, dozens of protesters stood outside the Greene 
County courthouse. Some waved Confederate flags; others came to protest against 
the proposal.


Donnie Barnett, a Greene County resident who organized a protest against the 
resolution, said he was against raising the flag above the courthouse because 
it had no historical basis in the area and because it was a symbol for hate 
groups.


“Greeneville is famous for being pro-Union,” he told the Guardian. “We don’t 
want those negative connotations.”

Barnett said he was pleased the resolution did not pass, but was unhappy it 
was an issue to begin with.

“It’s crazy we even had to have that protest,” he said. 
 