
Terms and Conditions – Small Business Australian Open Prize Draw

1. The Small Business Australian Open prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to 
residents of the UK aged 18 and over, working at, or owners of, a UK-based 
Small Business. A Small Business is defined as one having a turnover of £15m or 
less.

2. The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw.

3. Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions.

4. To enter the Prize Draw you must complete the form found on this page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/dec/01/small-business-australia-open-prize-draw>
. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or 
otherwise in connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at
ralph.harris-brown@theguardian.com <mailto: 
<ralph.harris-brown@theguardian.com>> with “Small Business Australian Open 
prize draw” in the subject line.

5. Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winner shall be the 
owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent.

6. GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM.

7. The Prize Draw opens at 18:00pm on Monday 30th November 2015 and closes at 
23:59 on Sunday 20th December 2015. Entries received outside this time period 
will not be considered.

8. The winner will receive return Economy flights from London for two people, 
three nights at accommodation for two at the Grand Hyatt Hotel Melbourne, two 
tickets to the Australian Open Men’s Singles Semi-final and airport transfers. 
They will also receive Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no 
responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are not expressly 
included in the prize.

9. The winner will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take 
place on or after Monday 21st December 2015.

10. The winner will be notified by email on or after Monday 21st December and 
given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM 
within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with 
the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to 
notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their 
prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of 
these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to 
select another winner.

11. The prize will be sent to the winner by January 22nd 2016. 

12. The name and county of the winner can be obtained after 22nd December by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Ralph 
Harris-Brown, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London 
N1 9GU.

13. The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for 
cash or any other prize.

14. GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize 
of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available.

15. The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winner consent to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize 
Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name 
for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, 
and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its 
related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize 
Draw, all entrants consent to the same.

16. The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you 
supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above.

17. GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize 
Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal 
injury resulting from its negligence.

18. GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into.

19. GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure.

20. The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts.

21. Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
 