
A British terror suspect, who is wanted in the US for allegedly conspiring 
with the Islamist extremistAbu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>, has been extradited from the UK.

Haroon Rashid Aswat, from Dewsbury, west Yorkshire, is accused by the American 
authorities of having worked withHamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/08/abu-hamza-terror-trial-bomb-explosion-hands>
, in 1999, to set up a jihadist training camp in Oregon.

The home secretary, Theresa May, had been told, earlier in the year, to put 
extradition plans on hold after judges heard that Aswat, 40, was suffering from 
paranoid schizophrenia. But last month two high court judges said they were 
satisfied with assurances given by American officials that the suspect would be 
cared for properly.

Aswat, who was arrested at RAF Northolt on 7 August 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/04/july7.alqaida> by officers of the 
extradition unit of the Met police, was taken from Broadmoor hospital to a 
British airport this morning and handed over to the US authorities.

Hamza was extradited from Britain to America nearly two years ago and found 
guilty of terrorism charges in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/19/abu-hamza-found-guilty-terrorism-charges>
 after a trial in New York.

The warrants issued on behalf of the US authorities allege that, between 1 
October 1999 and 30 April 2000, Aswat conspired with others to control and 
manage people who would be employed for “the use or display of physical force 
in promoting a political object, namely to make hijrah to, and to fight jihad 
in, Afghanistan”.

Aswat’s lawyers argued that he might suffer a relapse if held in an American 
jail pending a trial. And, at a high court hearing in April judges said they 
wanted assurances about the way he would be treated.

After a hearing last month, a Home Office spokesman said: “We are pleased the 
court has upheld the home secretary’s decision to extradite Haroon Aswat to the 
United States. The court agreed that the American authorities had provided 
sufficient assurances over the conditions in which Aswat would be held in the 
US.”
 