
AIM

"To make provision for and about offences relating to conduct carried out, or 
capable of being carried out, for purposesconnected with terrorism 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060011_en_1>."

MAIN PROVISIONS

• Extends police powers to hold terrorist suspects from 14 days to 28 days 
without charge.
• Makes it a criminal offence to encourage terrorism by directly or indirectly 
inciting or encouraging others to commit acts of terrorism. This includes an 
offence of "glorification" of terror – people who "praise or celebrate" 
terrorism in a way that may encourage others to commit a terrorist act. The 
maximum penalty is seven years' imprisonment.
• Grants the home secretary greater powers to ban groups 
<http://security.homeoffice.gov.uk/legislation/current-legislation/terrorism-act-2000/proscribed-terrorist-groups>
 that glorify terrorism and to prevent proscribed organisations from using 
front organisations tocontinue operating 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060011_en_4#pt2-pb1-l1g21>. 
• Creates new offences relating to the sale, loan, distribution or 
transmission of terrorist publications. These can be:
(a) publications that may indirectly or directly induce others to commit 
terrorist acts or
(b) information that could be useful 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060011_en_2#pt1-pb1-l1g2> in the 
commission or preparation of an act of terrorism, eg a bomb-making manual.
• Creates new offences to allow the prosecution of anyone who gives or 
receives training in terrorist techniques and to allow the prosecution of those 
whoattend terror training camps 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060011_en_2#pt1-pb2-l1g6> or are 
believed to be preparing to commit an act of terrorism.
• Amends the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/jan/14/regulation-investigatory-powers-act>
 toincrease the possible jail term 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060011_en_3#pt1-pb4-l1g15> for 
refusal to provide an encryption key from two years to up to five years and 
amends the same act extend the maximum period that intercept warrants can be 
issued for.
• Extends terrorism stop and search powers to cover bays and estuaries, and to 
enable the police to search boats and other vessels.
• Creates new offences relating to making or possessing radioactive devices 
<http://www.opsi.gov.uk/ACTS/acts2006/ukpga_20060011_en_2#pt1-pb3> or material 
and amends theSerious Organised Crime and Police Act 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/libertycentral/2008/dec/16/serious-organised-crime-act>
 to make it a criminal offence totrespass on a nuclear site 
<http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk/about-us/freedom-of-information/released-information/foi-archive-crime/5376-offence-trespass-site?view=Html>
, punishable by imprisonment for up to 51 weeks.
• Sets out new procedures in preparing terrorist cases for trial.

BACKGROUND

Drafted in the aftermath of the London bombings in July 2005, home secretary 
Charles Clarke described this act as an attempt to "close the gaps 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2005-07-20b.1252.8>" in Britain's 
counter-terror legislation. In particular the government werekeen to prosecute 
<http://www.cps.gov.uk/news/pressreleases/112_08.html> those preparing or 
training to commit terrorism 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/jul/16/uk.july71> and to tackle 
extremist bookshops disseminating radical material.

In August 2005, Tony Blair announced a 12-point anti-terror action plan 
<http://www.number10.gov.uk/Page8041> and said: "The rules of the game are 
changing." His plan included proposals todeport foreigners 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2005/aug/05/july7.uksecurity4> who "foster 
hatred", banning radical groups,closing mosques 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2005/dec/16/terrorism.politics> that foment 
extremism, creating new offences to prevent the glorification of terrorism, and 
detaining terror suspects for longer.

Clarke's draft anti-terrorism bill 
<http://press.homeoffice.gov.uk/press-releases/new-terrorism-laws>, based on 
the 12-point plan, was unveiled on 15 September 2005. From the outset, twokey 
elements of the bill 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/sep/16/terrorism.immigrationpolicy> – 
90-day detention and the "glorification of terrorism" offence – attracted stiff 
opposition from many quarters, including Labour backbenchers. However the 
government's agenda had widespread public support – aYouGov survey 
<http://www.yougov.com/extranets/yguk/content/kellnerMain.asp?jID=3&aId=2498> 
in November 2005 suggested that 72% of the public backed government plans to 
allow the police to hold terrorist suspects for up to 90 days.

Blair said the police had presented a "compelling case 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/oct/11/immigrationpolicy.uksecurity>" 
for extending the detention of terror suspects to 90 days. He added: ''We need 
tomake our country safe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1500466/Blair-and-Clarke-at-odds-on-detail-of-Terrorism-Bill.html>
. You can't do it by the rules of the game we have at the moment: it's too 
complicated, too laborious; the police are hidebound by restrictions."

However, opponents of the 90-day measure rejected the nine key arguments 
<http://www.parliament.uk/parliamentary_committees/home_affairs_committee/hacpn051125.cfm>
 made by the police and contended that the internment for three months of 
innocent young men would prove to be a "fertile recruitment ground 
<http://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/news-and-events/1-press-releases/2005/terrorism-bill-rushed.shtml>
 for extremism".

Opposition to the bill strengthened after the leak of two draft letters  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/leak-shows-clarkes-unease-over-plan-to-detain-suspects-507032.html>
to Clarke's Conservative and Liberal Democrat opposite numbers. The draft 
letter appeared to suggest that Clarke himself had some doubts about the 90-day 
limits. The second, final version presented a tougher stance.

Robustly defending the bill during the second reading debate on 26 October 
2005, Clarke declared: "We cannot properly fight terrorism with one hand tied 
behind our back." He insisted the bill was vital to ensure the police had the 
tools to combat new and emerging terror threats. The session was rowdy and the 
home secretary was repeatedly challenged by MPs on both sides of the house over 
both 90 days and the "glorification" ban.

In an interview prior to the commons vote in early November, the prime 
minister accused his critics of "woeful complacency 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2005/11/06/1498735.htm>" and insisted 90 
days was essential because of the complexity and global scale of modern 
terrorism.

Conservative MPs accused the government of embroiling the police in politics 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4436238.stm> and Clarke later admitted 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/letters/3620991/The-Daily-Telegraph-letters.html>
 he had suggested that the Association of Chief Police Officers ask their 
members to lobby MPs.

Despite clear indications 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2005/nov/04/uksecurity.immigrationpolicy> that 
Labour MPs were in a mutinous mood, the government pushed forward. MPs were
undeterred <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4421518.stm> by the prime 
minister's pleas <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4416846.stm> and on 8 
November 2005 Blair suffered his first commons defeat as prime minister – 49 
Labour MPs rebelled and the commons voted instead toextend the time limit to 28 
days <http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2005/nov/09/uksecurity.terrorism>. 

A report by a parliamentary select committee claimed the government lost their 
bid for 90 days because the police hadfailed to build 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmselect/cmhaff/910/91010.htm>
 a compelling case based on "evidence-based analysis 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200506/cmselect/cmhaff/910/91009.htm>
".

Emboldened by their success, for a time it looked like the government's 
"glorification" offence would also run aground. Legal experts lined up to warn 
that the definition of "glorification"was too broad 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&ct=res&cd=7&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.justice.org.uk%2Fimages%2Fpdfs%2FJUSTICE%2520briefing%2520terrorism%2520amndmnts%2520feb06.pdf&ei=UTt0Seu6O5id-gacv4H_Bg&usg=AFQjCNFCg1tngwqWIJO90yZ0HnOyE7QDPg&sig2=zStk1NEyb2zHNDgGND2Uow>
, and some politicians argued it could encompass fighting totalitarian regimes.

The parliamentary debate surrounding the offence of glorifying terrorism was 
given additional heat byprotests against cartoons satirising the Prophet 
Mohammed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2006/feb/06/raceandreligion.muhammadcartoons>, 
printed in a Danish newspaper. At a protest outside the Danish embassy in 
London,one protester <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/4686410.stm> was 
photographeddressed as a suicide bomber 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/feb/06/religion.pressandpublishing> and 
others brandished placards saying: "Europe you will pay,your 9/11 is on the way 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/6904622.stm>". 

Blair argued his measure would enable police and courts to take action against 
exactly that type of protest, but the Lords insteadproposed an offence 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2006/feb/15/qanda.terrorism> of "describing 
terrorism in a way that would encourage people to emulate it". The government 
claimed that was insufficient and the commonstwice reinstated  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/feb/28/uksecurity.terrorism>the 
offence of "glorifying" terrorism. In March 2006 Tory peers finally backed down 
and allowed the government's controversial provision to pass.

CRITICISM

During the passage of the bill a number of groups expressed concerns that the 
act would stifle freedom of expression. Leading human rights lawyer Geoffrey 
Bindman described the law as a "dangerous inroad on freedom of speech 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/feb/15/uksecurity.terrorism>", 
claiming it could be used against people who resorted to violence against a 
repressive regime.

Labour MP Jeremy Corbyn branded the glorification ban "misguided" and "absurd" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2006/apr/13/uksecurity.terrorism>, claiming 
it would prevent legitimate debate. "What some would call a freedom fight going 
on in another country others might term a terrorist offence. Nelson Mandela was 
branded a terrorist by Margaret Thatcher; he was later branded a freedom 
fighter," Corbyn said.

Academics expressed unease 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=199633&sectioncode=26>
 that works of fact or fiction examining terrorist acts might be vulnerable to 
prosecution, while lawyers were concerned that the bill was so broadly drafted 
evenactors portraying a terrorist <http://www.newstatesman.com/200602270006> 
could be accused of glorification.

The United Nations' committee criticised the provisions covering encouragement 
of terrorism as producing a chilling effect on freedom of expression and
interfering with human rights 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2008/aug/15/labour.idcards>. It produced a 
report claiming the act's provisions covering encouragement of terrorism were 
too "broad and vague", and should be amended to ensure that their application 
did not lead to "a disproportionate interference with freedom of expression".
 