Stag beetles spend most of their life underground as larvae, only emerging for 
a few weeks in summer as flying adults. But how long does the larva spend 
underground?  One year  Three years  Seven years Ring-necked parakeets first 
appeared in the wild in Britain in the late 1960s. But how did they get here 
from northern India?  They escaped from the set of the African Queen, being 
filmed at Shepperton Studios  They were accidentally or deliberately released 
by cagebird owners  They were released from a flat in London’s Carnaby Street 
by rock legend Jimi Hendrix Peregrine falcons, now nesting in many of our 
cities, are the fastest living creatures on the planet – but just how fast can 
they fly?  180 mph  242 mph  368 mph Four species of butterfly – the peacock, 
small tortoiseshell, brimstone and comma – regularly overwinter as adults in 
our garden sheds and garages. Recently a fifth species has joined them – what 
is it?  Red admiral  Large white  Painted lady Which summer visitor to 
Britain’s towns and cities will not land at all on its annual journey to and 
from its winter-quarters in Africa?  Swallow  House martin  Swift After a long 
decline in numbers, house sparrows can now only be found at a few sites in 
London. Where are they most likely still to be seen?  London Zoo  Buckingham 
Palace  Oxford Street Which species of deer is regularly seen in our cities, 
including a cemetery in the centre of Glasgow?  Fallow deer  Roe deer  Red deer 
A nightingale may have sung in Berkeley Square, but which songbird regularly 
sings at night in our towns and cities, having been stimulated to do so by 
street lighting?  Blackcap  Song thrush  Robin Which species of songbird, 
originally from mainland Europe, colonised southern England in the post-war era 
by using bomb sites as a substitute for its rocky habitat?  Black redstart  
Rock thrush  Blue rock thrush Which insect, originally from Asia, has recently 
colonised our towns and cities having arrived on plants sold in garden centres? 
 Colorado beetle  Praying mantis  Harlequin ladybird Which Scottish city is 
"border country" between the native red and non-native grey squirrels?  Dundee  
Edinburgh  Glasgow Which water-loving snake is most likely to be seen in towns 
and cities in the UK?  Adder  Grass snake  Smooth snake  You got…  Wow! You 
must spend your days gazing up to the skies above the city and bumping into 
things. You really are a fully-fledged urban wildlife geek.  Wow! You must 
spend your days gazing up to the skies above the city and bumping into things. 
You really are a fully-fledged urban wildlife geek.  Wow! You must spend your 
days gazing up to the skies above the city and bumping into things. You really 
are a fully-fledged urban wildlife geek.  Wow! You must spend your days gazing 
up to the skies above the city and bumping into things. You really are a 
fully-fledged urban wildlife geek.  You are pretty tuned in to the urban jungle 
and its various inhabitants. You probably know your stags from your stag 
beetles and your sparrows from your parakeets. Now it's time to develop your 
interest in city wildlife, to really impress your friends.  You are pretty 
tuned in to the urban jungle and its various inhabitants. You probably know 
your stags from your stag beetles and your sparrows from your parakeets. Now 
it's time to develop your interest in city wildlife, to really impress your 
friends.  You are pretty tuned in to the urban jungle and its various 
inhabitants. You probably know your stags from your stag beetles and your 
sparrows from your parakeets. Now it's time to develop your interest in city 
wildlife, to really impress your friends.  You are pretty tuned in to the urban 
jungle and its various inhabitants. You probably know your stags from your stag 
beetles and your sparrows from your parakeets. Now it's time to develop your 
interest in city wildlife, to really impress your friends.  Oh dear - you 
haven't really connected with urban wildlife, have you? Maybe you live in the 
country. Or on a remote island off the coast of Scotland. Or in outer space. If 
you do live in a city, try looking up more!  Oh dear - you haven't really 
connected with urban wildlife, have you? Maybe you live in the country. Or on a 
remote island off the coast of Scotland. Or in outer space. If you do live in a 
city, try looking up more!  Oh dear - you haven't really connected with urban 
wildlife, have you? Maybe you live in the country. Or on a remote island off 
the coast of Scotland. Or in outer space. If you do live in a city, try looking 
up more!  Oh dear - you haven't really connected with urban wildlife, have you? 
Maybe you live in the country. Or on a remote island off the coast of Scotland. 
Or in outer space. If you do live in a city, try looking up more!  Oh dear - 
you haven't really connected with urban wildlife, have you? Maybe you live in 
the country. Or on a remote island off the coast of Scotland. Or in outer 
space. If you do live in a city, try looking up more!  Challenge your friends 
Submit answers  