
A statue of Jefferson Davis has been removed from its place on the campus of 
the University ofTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> at Austin, 
after a failed appeal by a Confederate heritage group.

FBI investigates website and manifesto linked to Charleston shooting suspect 
Dylann Roof
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/20/fbi-investigates-website-manifesto-charleston-shooting-suspect-dylann-roof>
Crews could be seen on Sunday morning removing the statue of the Confederate 
president from its place near the university’s clock tower. University 
president Greg Fenves recently said the statue would be moved to a museum.

“This is an iconic moment,” said Gregory Vincent, the university’s 
vice-president for diversity and community engagement, according to the Austin 
American-Statesman. “It really shows the power of student leadership.”

The statue has been a target of vandalism as well as criticism that it is a 
symbol of racism and discrimination. Following the shooting dead in June of 
nine members of a black church in Charleston, South Carolina, Confederate 
symbols nationwide are being re-considered.

Dylann Roof faces charges in the Charleston case. In pictures posted online 
with a “manifesto” which espoused racial hatred, he was pictured with a 
Confederate battle flag.

In July, South Carolina removed the flag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/10/south-carolina-confederate-flag-goes-down-as-history-of-hate-meets-modernity>
 from a Confederate monument on the grounds of its statehouse.

In the case of the Jefferson Davis statue in Austin, university officials 
halted earlier plans to move the statue after the Sons of Confederate Veterans 
asked a judge to stop them.

The Confederate group compared the proposal to relocate the statue to the 
Islamic State group destroying artifacts in the Middle East. State district 
judge Karin Crump, however, ruled last week that Texas officials have the 
authority under state law to decide where the statue should stand.

Statues of other Confederate figures Confederate generals Robert E Lee and 
Albert Sidney Johnston, and Confederate postmaster general John Reagan, will 
remain in their places on campus.
 