
A Thai documentary that examines recent political protests and a border spat 
withCambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia> has been banned by 
the country's government as "a threat to national security and international 
relations".

Nontawat Numbenchapol's documentary Boundary zeroes in on a soldier caught up 
in the 2011 "red shirt" protests that paralysed Bangkok and led to the deaths 
of almost 100 people, before following him to his hometown on the 
Thai-Cambodian border. The two countries have long been engaged in a row over 
the 1,000-year-oldHindu Preah Vihear temple <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1224>
 in the Dângrêk mountains region, occasionallyentering into armed conflict 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cambodian%E2%80%93Thai_border_dispute>. A series 
of skirmishes in April 2011 left 18 people dead and thousands of villagers 
displaced. The area is currently the subject of a UN International Court of 
Justice probe to decide its future.

Numbenchapol's decision to flag up two of the most contentious flashpoints in 
his country's recent history has not gone down well with the Thai authorities, 
however. On 23 April, the Thai ministry of culture announced a countrywide ban 
on the film, which premiered at the Berlin film festival in February. 
Boundary's director said he was disappointed and surprised by the move.

"I really didn't expect this film to be banned," Numbenchapol told the 
Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/thailand-bans-local-documentary-boundary-444719>
. "Everyone I've spoken with who's seen it says the film shows the point of 
view of every side, and that the film is neutral. My intention was to let the 
film be a space for the people in the troubled territories to voice their views 
and feelings to the outside world – which they haven't had a chance to express 
in other Thai media."

A statement from the ministry of culture reads: "The film presents some 
information on incidents that are still being deliberated by the Thai court and 
that have not yet been officially concluded."

Few films are banned outright in Thailand, which has no official age-based 
cinema ratings system. Recent exceptions to that rule have included Palme d'Or 
winner Apichatpong Weerasethakul'sSyndromes and a Century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/21/worldcinema.drama> in 2007, 
Tanwarin Sukkhapisit's transexual-themedInsects in the Backyard 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vip1xqyh1IE> in 2010 and Ing K's politically 
charged Macbeth adaptationShakespeare Must Die 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/04/thailand-bans-macbeth-film> last 
year. Numbenchapol said he hoped to appeal to the National Film Board over the 
decision to ban Boundary, but was not holding out much hope of a positive 
outcome.

"Before Boundary, Insects in the Backyard and Shakespeare Must Die were 
banned, and they both went to the administrative court, but they still haven't 
gotten an answer," he said. "I think it's useless to appeal, but what else can 
I do?"
 