
Hip-hop is entering a nostalgia period. Many of the genre’s biggest stars are 
middle-aged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/07/cant-stop-should-stop-do-rappers-get-better-with-age>
, and the “classic hip-hop” format is thehottest new thing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/16/business/media/classic-hip-hop-is-spreading-on-the-radio-dial.html?_r=0>
 going in terrestrial radio. Similarly to how John Lennon, Janis Joplin and 
Kurt Cobain continue dominating rock platforms decades after their deaths, 
hip-hop fans remain fixated on deceased rappers like Tupac Shakur, Eazy-E and 
Notorious BIG. This has spilled into the realm of film; the 2009 Biggie Smalls 
biopic Notorious cost only $20m to make, but doubled that amount in worldwide 
gross. This helped ensure the greenlighting of the NWA biopicStraight Outta 
Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/31/nwa-straight-outta-compton-biopic-trailer>
, due out in August, as well as a Tupac biopic, which will be directed by John 
Singleton and starts production in June.


Expectations for these films should be tempered. After all, like the modestly 
received Notorious, the NWA and Tupac projects are being made under the 
watchful eye of the subjects’ mothers and close collaborators. (Shakur’s 
mother, Afeni, had a protractedcourt battle 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/tupac-biopic-begin-production-june-20150113>
 with the movie’s production company over creative control.) Their producers 
have every incentive to lionize their subjects, potentially at the expense of a 
compelling story. But the flicks nonetheless represent an exciting trend, and a 
wave of hip-hop-inspired films that may reach the genre’s previous peak of the 
early 90s.

The truth outta Compton: why did Suge Knight run over his friend with a truck?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/02/suge-knight-murder-accident-straight-outta-compton>
 The early to mid-1980s saw a wave of memorable, low-budget, time-capsule 
hip-hop-influenced films like Downtown 81, Wild Style, Beat Street, Krush 
Groove and the Los Angeles-set Breakin’ and Enterin’ documentary, which 
inspired the Hollywood film Breakin’. But the hip-hop films that truly captured 
the public’s imagination kicked off in 1989 withDo the Right Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/22/how-we-made-do-the-right-thing-spike-lee>
, segueing into a series of combustible 90s films with strong gangsta rap 
influences. Particularly impactful were New Jack City and Boyz N the Hood, 
released within months of each other in 1991.

Hollywood briefly couldn’t get enough gritty urban stories with a hip-hop 
soundtrack: 1992’s Juice featured Tupac in his first starring role, and he was 
so absorbed into loose-cannon Harlem high school student Bishop that, as noted 
by his one-time friend Biggie Smalls, the character ultimately took over his 
life. Roles in Poetic Justice and Above the Rim further elevated Tupac’s star. 
Meanwhile, the South Central-set Menace II Society was a sleeper hit, and, from 
the end of the decade, Hype Williams’s shiny-suit-era film Belly and the 
RZA-scored Ghost Dog are considered classics by many. Parody movies CB4, Fear 
of a Black Hat and Don’t Be a Menace are all hilarious, as are many of Master 
P’s productions – though not always on purpose. But perhaps the most enduring 
of these 90s rap films (silly or straight) is Friday, Ice Cube’s writing debut, 
a bona fide classic that set out to show the lighter side of inner-city life 
and made both Cube and Chris Tucker into Hollywood franchises.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fhip-hop-golden-age-cinema-do-the-right-thing-dope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423064291926%2F054dc249-b603-47ea-8806-c0b15c491558-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=That's%20a%20rap%3A%20is%20hip-hop%20entering%20a%20new%20golden%20age%20of%20cinema%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fhip-hop-golden-age-cinema-do-the-right-thing-dope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=That%27s%20a%20rap%3A%20is%20hip-hop%20entering%20a%20new%20golden%20age%20of%20cinema%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fhip-hop-golden-age-cinema-do-the-right-thing-dope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423064291926%2F054dc249-b603-47ea-8806-c0b15c491558-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Doing it right: Spike Lee and Danny Aiello in Do the Right Thing. Photograph: 
Allstar/Cinetext/MCA/UNIVERSAL 
The 2000s saw some noteworthy entries into the field – including 8 Mile, 
Hustle & Flow and Dave Chappelle’s Block Party – and demonstrated the enduring 
appeal of rappers turned actors like Will Smith, Ludacris, Queen Latifah, Mark 
Wahlberg, Andre 3000, Common and others. But following 8 Mile’s success, the 
2005 50 Cent vehicle Get Rich or Die Tryin’ slowed the momentum for mainstream 
rap films, earning a miserable16% Rotten Tomatoes rating 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/get_rich_or_die_tryin/> and barely earning 
back its $40m budget.

From Basquiat to Jay Z: how the art world came to fully embrace hip-hop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/15/history-art-hip-hop-art-basel-miami-beach-kanye-jay-z-basquiat>
Things are quickly turning around. High-profile television biopics on artists 
like TLC and Aaliyah were widely watched (though the latter received dismal 
reviews). And a number of small documentaries from recent years have been 
rapturously received, including Beats Rhymes & Life, about A Tribe Called 
Quest, and Ice-T’s Something from Nothing: The Art of Rap. These demonstrate an 
appetite for nerdy, intelligent genre films, none of which sound more exciting 
than Raekwon and Ghostface’supcoming Only Built 4 Cuban Linx documentary 
<http://www.esquire.com/blogs/culture/raekwon-ghostface-killah-documentary-sundance>
, called The Purple Tape Files, which they recently announced at Sundance. The 
Utah film festival also saw the premiere of Dope, a promising drama featuring 
A$AP Rocky. The Ol’ Dirty Bastard biopic Dirty White Boy, starring The Wire’s 
Michael K Williams, remains in the works. (There is apparently no father to
Williams’s style <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ey0FDh444VU>, either.)

Now that both major studios and indie film-makers are devoting their 
attentions to hip-hop, another golden era of rap films could well be in the 
making. At the very least, so long as the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles continue 
making movies without Vanilla Ice, we should be good.
 