
Angela Lansbury is such a good actress that she could strike terror into your 
soulas Mrs Lovett in Sweeney Todd <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gqapHRAqnfk>
, before going on to make a teapot the maternal ideal asMrs Potts, in Beauty 
and the Beast <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZBth69fKSC8>. Yet she will for 
ever be remembered asJessica Fletcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/23/angela-lansbury-murder-she-wrote-west-end-blithe-spirit>
: busybody, mystery writer and crime solver, which is probably why she was 89 
before she won anOlivier award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/12/view-from-the-bridge-scoops-three-olivier-awards>
. She entered the hall of kitsch TV fame and people forgot just how good a 
stage performer she was, and is. She has ruled Broadway many times before, but 
her appearance asMadame Arcati in Blithe Spirit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/23/blithe-spirit-review-angela-lansbury-happy-medium>
 last year brought her back to the London stage for the first time in my life.

There was something spectacular about seeing a woman (aged, at the time, 88) 
hurling herself around the stage and rebounding off the furniture as though 
broken bones were something that only happen to other people. I saw her give a 
less physical performance four years earlier, in New York, inA Little Night 
Music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MKYkExtfp5c>. Her character was in a 
wheelchair, but at the curtain call she sprang on from the wings like a musical 
gazelle, and took a low, elegant bow. Her message could not have been clearer: 
the character was the one enfeebled by time; the actress was as energetic as 
ever.

And that’s the message that ought to be reinforced by her Olivier win. Old 
doesn’t have to mean frail. Actors can rarely afford to retire (though Murder, 
She Wrote would probably have paid for Lansbury to spend the past 20 years on a 
continuous five-star cruise. Lucky she didn’t: imagine the death toll if 
Jessica Fletcher went anywhere near a cruise ship). But they also often prefer 
to keep working for other reasons. Learning lines is proof that your memory 
isn’t going anywhere. Working with a new cast means retaining your adaptive 
skills.

And the energy of a theatre audience is restorative: who wouldn’t feel better 
about themselves if they received a standing ovation from a packed house eight 
times a week?

Have faith, godless Brits 

A new survey reveals what many of us would have guessed: the UK is one of the 
most godless countries in the world. In fact, we were the59th most religious 
country out of 65 countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/12/uk-one-of-worlds-least-religious-countries-survey-finds>
 surveyed, and only 30% of us consider ourselves to be religious. I’m beginning 
to wonder if we stand a chance of getting into the godless top five if we train 
hard, and really commit to the whole idea. To rival the Netherlands, Czech 
Republic, Sweden, Japan and China, we all need to practise not going to church, 
or any place of worship. If some of us are prepared to go the extra mile, maybe 
we could stay in bed on a Sunday morning, reading a good murder mystery instead 
of the Good Book. Or we could take a different tack: encourage more religion in 
the Dutch, our closest rivals (26% religious). Perhaps you might go and start a 
cult there. Either way, I think we have it in us to become a nation of world 
beaters.

And the winner is … me

At the risk of being vulgar (and it’s one I take lightly, of course), at the 
same time as Angela Lansbury was winning her award, I was winning theClassical 
Association <http://www.classicalassociation.org/> prize, which is given 
annually to the person who spends as much time as possible banging on about 
classics. After a novel about Greek tragedy, a radio series about the ancient 
world, and a TV documentary about ancient Greek sculpture, I figured I was in 
with a chance. But still, after years spent judging every prize from the Man 
Booker to the Sony awards, it is lovely to win something instead.
 