
Some countries – the United States and France among them – place legal limits 
on their political leaders’ stay in office. Others, like Britain, have a rule 
of thumb that judges 10 years is as long as anyone should sensibly hold the top 
job. ButAngela Merkel’s decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
 to seek a fourth term as Germany’s chancellor scorns such caution. If she wins 
the 2017 election and stays the full term, she will have governed Germany for 
16 years, making her, alongsideHelmut Kohl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/helmut-kohl>, the longest-serving German 
leader sinceBismarck 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/bismarck_otto_von.shtml>.

On one level, it is understandable that Mrs Merkel should stand again. She 
embodies stability at home and abroad. She is personally popular (a weekend poll
 
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/politik/inland/bundeskanzlerin-die-mehrheit-will-dass-merkel-weitermacht-14536106.html>
 said Germans want her to have a fourth term by 55% to 39%). She has no rival 
in the centre-right CDU (she needs to groom a successor). And these are 
uncertain times. Migration, the Trump presidency, the Russian threat, the 
Brexit vote and the eurozone crisis, now focusing on Italy – all threaten the 
stability that Germans treasure. Unsurprisingly, Mrs Merkel feels duty-driven 
to run again, while German voters seem to likeHilaire Belloc’s advice 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/jim/> to “always keep a-hold of Nurse/ For fear 
of finding something worse”.

There are good reasons for Mrs Merkel’s decision. In uncertain times, it is 
reassuring that the leader of Europe’s most important nation holds to the 
principles of freedom, openness and democracy that have helped to rebuild and 
reunify postwarGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. She got 
plenty wrong about the migration crisis, but her liberal approach contrasted 
with the anti-migrant upsurge elsewhere in Europe. Her decision to stand up to 
Vladimir Putin in Ukraine has checked some Russian ambitions. If Italy is 
forced out of the eurozone or Marine Le Pen is elected in France, Europe may be 
better able to ride out the challenge with her at the helm.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fangela-merkel-confirms-she-will-seek-fourth-term-german-chancellor-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Merkel%20confirms%20she%20will%20seek%20fourth%20term%20as%20German%20chancellor%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fangela-merkel-confirms-she-will-seek-fourth-term-german-chancellor-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Merkel%20confirms%20she%20will%20seek%20fourth%20term%20as%20German%20chancellor%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fangela-merkel-confirms-she-will-seek-fourth-term-german-chancellor-video&media=>
Angela Merkel confirms she will seek fourth term as German chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-confirms-she-will-seek-fourth-term-german-chancellor-video>
Yet Mrs Merkel knows how things unravel in German literature’s most famous work
 <https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Goethe's_Faust> when Goethe’s hero Faust wishes 
aloud that everything could remain the same for ever. That is not possible 
today either. The Germany and EU that Mrs Merkel may lead at the end of this 
decade are very different from the Germany and EU of 2005, when the glow of 
European post-cold-war stability and growth still applied. They must adapt 
again if they are to prosper. That means forms of European cooperation – 
hopefully including Britain – that provide Europeans with hope and security not 
fear and instability. Germany cannot carry the burden of achieving this alone. 
Germany neither offers the security guarantee provided by the pre-Trump US, nor 
can it replicate America’s clout in international finance. If Mr Trump allows 
Mr Putin to have his way in eastern Europe and the Baltics, German coalition 
politics may mean Mrs Merkel will struggle to stand in Russia’s way. Yet 
Germany is essential to us all.

Mrs Merkel is rightly respected. But she is a hesitant politician. She said on 
Sunday it had taken her a long time even to decide to run again – a relatively 
easy decision compared with many she may face in the near future. And while 
many admire her, most would be hard put to define Merkelism. Asked about her 
big ideas on Sunday, she talked about broadband access and pensions, which are 
important subjects but not visionary aims. It is possible her victory would 
lead to realignment on the German left. But her biggest task is to hold Germany 
and the EU together amid rising nationalism. Italian and French voters will 
have large says on that, even before Germans go to the polls. So will the
Turkish government 
<https://www.ft.com/content/ad414ec0-ada8-11e6-ba7d-76378e4fef24>, if the 
European parliament stops her visa-free travel deal.

It may be Mrs Merkel’s fate to stop things getting any worse, not resolve 
them. That is not to be sneezed at. Yet she can do better. She thinks in global 
terms. Since she is running again, she should make use of her practicality and 
trust to offer an achievable vision for Germany and Europe. This needs new 
thinking, not old. But Europe’s leading politician should surely leadEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. If she doesn’t, what is the 
point of running again?
 