
Thanks for all your suggestions on our last gifs blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/blog/2013/apr/06/gifs-tiger-woods-brawls-scared-cheerleader>
. Here are a few highlights from this week.

How to miss a penalty

Poor Emmanuel Adebayor 
<http://www.whoateallthepies.tv/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/1356787065009.gif>. 
At least he isn't alone at Spurs. Scott Parker sentthis sitter 
<http://www.whoateallthepies.tv/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/i0BDV0rpRYqPW.gif> 
wide in the first leg. Adebayor can also take heart from knowinghis shot made 
it to the byline 
<http://farm9.staticflickr.com/8102/8628611303_9c85df5354_o.gif>.

Goals of the week

Matt Lowton's volley deals with the Premier League; Antonio Di Natale's 
back-post finish <http://i.imgflip.com/10cct.gif> is the best Europe has to 
offer; andShinji Ono's delicious chip for Western Sydney Wanderers  
<http://i.imgur.com/NsrPxy9.gif> covers the rest of the world. 

Beautiful backheels

Didier Drogba can still do it on the big occasions. Unfortunately for the 
Galatasaray striker, two goals from Cristiano Ronaldo took Real Madrid through 
to the Champions League semi-finals. Ronaldo's slickest contribution to the tie 
was alovely assist <http://i.minus.com/iOMsFiqC4gHFq.gif>, but the best 
backheel in Europe this week <http://i.minus.com/igJpTmiti5hb8.gif> came from 
Piti for Rayo Vallecano against Celta Vigo.

Andrés Iniesta's the man for turning

Gary Mackay-Steven's drag back <http://i.imgflip.com/10b8p.gif> is every bit 
as impressive as Iniesta's skill, butThiago Silva should probably allow his 
goalkeeper <http://i.minus.com/ibvtA0HZDk8hvk.gif> to take his own free-kicks 
in future.

Direct supporters

The Borussia Dortmund supporters put on quite a show, but Bayern Munich fans 
are no less keen <http://i.minus.com/ibgKWNLpnpWHCv.gif>. Closer to home, 
Newcastle fans enjoyed grappling with Papiss Cissé and Alan Pardew 
<http://cadfael.tv/image/src/1365350479134.gif>. The Newcastle manager lost a 
few buttons <http://i.imgur.com/hq7ixfo.gif>, but at least he held on to his 
marbles <http://i.imgur.com/m3fDL.gif>.

Poetry in automotion

A hit and hope?

Drop your favourites into the comments box below and we'll be back with some 
more next week
 