
Remember when vegetarian restaurants were a novelty? Or even vegan 
restaurants? Now it’s barely worth noting when there are so many other 
free-from options to trumpet.

From chains such as Wahaca, which has announced that it is carbon-neutral 
<http://www.foodism.co.uk/wahaca-goes-carbon-neutral/>, all the way to 
Michelin-starred restaurants, in the last few months an ever-growing number of 
places are accentuating the negatives – the things you won’t find at their 
restaurants – over what you will.

Market researchers Mintel forecast sales of free-from foods to grow 13% to 
reach £521m in 2016, up from an estimated £470m in 2015 
<http://www.mintel.com/press-centre/food-and-drink/free-from-gains-momentum-sales-of-free-from-food-products-forecast-to-surpass-half-a-billion-in-the-uk-in-2016>
. In part, this is because some of us don’t have a choice and have to find 
free-from ways to eat; the growing number of gluten-free restaurants is great 
news for those who are coeliac. But while we clearly need to do more to cater 
for different dietary requirements, is omission a virtue in and of itself?

Gluten-free

Victoria Hall, the owner of gluten-free restaurant 2 Oxford Place in Leeds, 
has found that for many people, it is. “When we opened two years ago, our 
clientele was almost all coeliac diners. Now maybe 60% of our diners can eat 
gluten, but come because it’s more that the food just happens to be free-from, 
but is still great.”

Chef Dominic Teague found the same thing; last year he said that his 
restaurant Indigo had secretly gone both gluten- and dairy-free without anyone 
noticing. “There’s not been one negative comment,” he says. “Our sales have 
gone up 30% since December, which speaks for itself, really.” He believes this 
is because even if most people don’t have an intolerance, they know someone who 
does, and want to be able to eat without the hassle of having to ask. “People 
come because they know everyone can eat anything from the menu. People with an 
intolerance are saying they feel normal, which is wonderful.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-free-from-restaurant-boom-thats-cashing-in-by-stripping-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb001925c4e2113fd23b1a5cb9882891eb5c67e0b%2F0_374_5615_3370%2F5615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20free-from%20restaurant%20boom%20that's%20cashing%20in%20by%20stripping%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-free-from-restaurant-boom-thats-cashing-in-by-stripping-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20free-from%20restaurant%20boom%20that%27s%20cashing%20in%20by%20stripping%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-free-from-restaurant-boom-thats-cashing-in-by-stripping-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb001925c4e2113fd23b1a5cb9882891eb5c67e0b%2F0_374_5615_3370%2F5615.jpg>
 Fine dining … Zilli Green vegetarian restaurant in Soho., London. Photograph: 
Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
Carbon-free

No one would suggest that Wahaca had made a bad move by being the first 
restaurant chain to go carbon-neutral, though it inevitably has had an impact 
on the food it is able to serve. “Where possible, we’ve found English 
equivalents,” says the group’s founder Thomasina Miers. This means 
English-grown Mexican vegetables such as poblano peppers and tomatillos, among 
others. “Of course, we can’t always find a carbon-neutral way to deliver all 
our Mexican favourites, and so there are some things, such as tuna and octopus, 
that are popular in traditional Mexican dishes that we aren’t able to add on to 
our menu. But people care more about where their food comes from, and the 
impact it has on the environment. Because of that, we’ve worked hard to 
minimise our carbon footprint.”

Waste-free

Tom Hunt, the owner and head chef of Poco in Bristol has also had to make 
changes to the kinds of food he serves to become impact-free on the 
environment. Along with restaurants such as Silo in Brighton, his restaurant is 
one of a growing number aiming to be 100% waste-free. “We recycle and compost 
95% or more of all our products,” he says, “and we’re always trying to think of 
new ways to reduce our recycling and compost, working with suppliers and 
getting thriftier in the kitchen. We don’t really see it all as waste any more. 
To us, they’re vital resources.”

Sugar-free

Though there’s clearly an environmental imperative for food that’s 
organic/pesticide-free, and for meat-free eating, what has galvanised some 
restaurants to offer more stripped-back menus perhaps has more to do with the 
current fashion for “clean eating”. “People want to know what they are eating 
is good for them, without having to second-guess what’s in their food,” says 
Lily Simpson, founder of the Detox Kitchen in London.

Noemi Takacsne opened Deserve, a gluten- and sugar-free restaurant in Aberdeen 
after losing 30kg over 18 months by cutting both out of her diet. “I felt so 
energised by it, and I thought people in Aberdeen deserved the chance to eat 
this way, too,” she says. “We get lots of people with intolerances, and 
diabetics, as well as athletes, and people who know we are different and want 
to try it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-free-from-restaurant-boom-thats-cashing-in-by-stripping-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e417e7a1c0b519fcb620f5acb5044baba480815%2F0_374_5615_3370%2F5615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20free-from%20restaurant%20boom%20that's%20cashing%20in%20by%20stripping%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-free-from-restaurant-boom-thats-cashing-in-by-stripping-back%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20free-from%20restaurant%20boom%20that%27s%20cashing%20in%20by%20stripping%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fthe-free-from-restaurant-boom-thats-cashing-in-by-stripping-back%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e417e7a1c0b519fcb620f5acb5044baba480815%2F0_374_5615_3370%2F5615.jpg>
 Inside the kitchen at Zilli Green. Photograph: Teri Pengilley 
Everything-free

But if you strip back food to extremes, what’s left? Newly opened London 
dessert restaurant Yorica! is free from the main allergens, including dairy, 
lactose, gluten, nuts and eggs. “We wanted to offer treats both for people with 
dietary requirements and people looking for a healthier option without 
compromising on taste,” says the manager, Monika Jagielo.

But Yasmine Larizadeh, one of the founders of The Good Life Eatery, which has 
three branches across London, doesn’t believe you ought to exclude things from 
the menu or limiting people’s dining choices to be inclusive. “When we opened, 
we wanted to have places where you can eat vegan, gluten-free, paleo, or none 
of the above, and still eat something delicious and satisfying.”

So if it means small children can enjoy ice-cream, more of your friends can 
sit at a table and share a meal together without anxiety, and that careful 
sourcing makes our food more sustainable, is free-from dining better all round? 
Or is a “free-from” approach a kind of food propaganda that deprives us of 
choice? Let us know below the line.
 