
There is a certain kind of person who just takes to summer. When the mercury 
rises to heatwave proportions, they wholly embrace the scorching rays, casually 
shedding some (though not, all) of their clothes to reveal a glowing body. If 
they are not dark already, an hour in the sun sees their skin immediately turn 
a gorgeous nut brown, dotted with constellations of attractive freckles. They 
glide, scented, through air as thick and sticky as hot soup, exuding cool, 
never wilting. They stop wearing shoes and take wholly to nature, letting their 
salted hair flow untamed and beachy, for they are a child of the seasons. They 
are the gods and goddesses of our endless picnic days. Summer literally becomes 
them.

I am not a summer person. I am the person sitting pink, sweaty and panting on 
someone else’s wall, gulping down water, as my vision goes fuzzy and black in 
the corners. Don’t get me wrong: many of us non-summer people adore summer, it 
is just that summer does not adore us. How and why does it hate us? Let me 
count the ways.

Sunburn

British people are infamous for their strict adherence to the motto “sun’s 
out, buns out”, immediately opting to tear off all their clothes the minute 
there is a hint of hot weather. These people sneer at factor 30, crying: “Pass 
me the baby oil, base tans are for losers!” Flash forward two hours and the 
curse of the lobster is upon them, yet there they are, bravely trying to 
soldier on, sipping on a Grolsch and trying to act casual (note: this is 
impossible when severely sunburnt).

Those of us who have come to terms with the Celtic pallor of our skins have 
usually learned our lessons the hard way and now take preventive measures that 
some may call extreme. We are the people who, on discovering a beautiful, 
unspoilt stretch of white sandy coastline offset by a turquoise sparkling sea, 
will say, “Right, let’s find some shade.” This, despite the fact that we are in 
long sleeves, a sun hat, shades, slathered in sunblock and carrying a parasol. 
In the absence of said shade, we are forced to lie bathed in sweat under a 
towel, groaning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fsweaty-persons-guide-surviving-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42e2b1d0b6b918f120695168ac37998147fe6108%2F554_556_3790_2274%2F3790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20sweaty%20person's%20guide%20to%20surviving%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fsweaty-persons-guide-surviving-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20sweaty%20person%27s%20guide%20to%20surviving%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fsweaty-persons-guide-surviving-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42e2b1d0b6b918f120695168ac37998147fe6108%2F554_556_3790_2274%2F3790.jpg>
 Brits are infamous for their strict adherence to the motto ‘sun’s out, buns 
out’. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Allergies

It’s a glorious summer’s day, but are you able to enjoy it? No, you are not, 
for the pollen count is dangerously high, and your eyes and nose are streaming 
so much that, while you can hear the clink of ice in cider glasses (a conceit 
Brits have adopted entirely uncritically from television advertising), you can 
hardly see all the beautiful people enjoying themselves around you in the beer 
garden, unhampered by pintloads of mucus. On top of this, your eyeballs are on 
fire and you ran out of non-drowsy antihistamines so you’re falling asleep in 
your seat, possibly for ever, because you heard they don’t mix well with the 
copious amounts of rosé you convinced yourself you needed to numb the ache in 
your sinuses.

You dream of spending one of those idyllic summer days pootling along country 
lanes in a vintage car, only to pull over next to a spectacular cornfield 
teeming with wildflowers for picnicking, frolicking, etc. But such cinematic 
moments are sadly denied you, the hayfever sufferer. Quite frankly, you’d 
rather do theBez dance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=43eMCobo15c> through a 
minefield.

Sweating

I am actually shining. I am a reflective surface. You could do cocaine off my 
forehead – only it would stick

“How can it be?” you ask yourself, as you stand in front of the mirror 
glistening. “Summer is supposed to make everyone infinitely more attractive in 
preparation for long, lusty, jasmine-scented evenings of seasonal shagging. 
Instead, I look uglier than I have ever looked. I am actually shining. I am a 
reflective surface. You could do cocaine off my forehead – only it would stick, 
like everything else touching any part of my body. I seem to have developed a 
moustache composed entirely of moisture.”

Sweating is in many ways a form of labour. There’s the cost and annoyance of 
always having to pack a second T-shirt, the time-consuming act of always having 
to check the chair after sitting in it, and the humiliation of asking your 
colleagues whether they have any deodorant. And that’s before you even get to 
other people’s sweat. Anyone who has taken public transport during rush hour in 
August will know the unique horror of being penned in on all sides as a man’s 
forehead drips on to your bare skin like Chinese water torture.

Chafing

For those women without a “thigh gap” (about 95% of us), summer is a time when 
walking anywhere in extreme heat will see your inner thighs rubbing together 
like a pair of oiled, wrestling piglets, resulting in “chub rub” – a 
humiliating condition not unlike nappy rash that results in friction burns and 
searing pain. Along with thrush, chub rub has to be up there on the list of 
Bullshit That Women Put Up With™ that only gets worse in summer.

Insect bites

If you’re the kind of person who wakes up in a room you’ve shared with eight 
other people to find yourself the only one covered in insect bites, then summer 
is a terrible time for you, my friend. And I feel your pain. I don’t know what 
it is they love about us (our skin, our blood, our sheer, winsome chemical 
magnetism), but love us they do, and as a double whammy, we will often suffer 
from a physical overreaction to said bites. I have had bites bigger than my own 
face, on my face. Once, on holiday in Greece, I had a bite on my eyelid that 
made it look as though I had been beaten up, making breakfast in a local 
taverna very awkward for my boyfriend, who was forced to make a quick exit 
before becoming the victim of a vigilante justice mob.

I am that person begging Canadian tourists for antihistamines in a hotel 
lobby, after being told by a Cuban doctor that a pus-filled bite on my thigh 
meant I could develop encephalitis and die. Try putting a hazy Instagram filter 
on that.

Fainting

An Italian friend of mine told me recently that his ideal temperature is 38C, 
a statement the mere hearing of which made me want to go and lie down in a dark 
room in my pants. Take it from someone who has regained consciousness in the 
back of a van full of ripped French firemen (they send les pompiers in very 
tight polo shirts for medical emergencies) and did not enjoy it: there is such 
a thing as too hot, and for me, that is around the 27C mark. Anything higher 
will bring on an attack of the vapours. Pathetic, I know, but there we have it. 
Hot weather turns me into a Victorian lady in need of a six-month convalescence 
on a chaise longue in a stately home in order to feel strong enough to even 
think about getting back on my horse.

Bad hair

You know those summer babes, with their beachy, salt-sprayed hair. All they’ve 
done is gone for a wild swim and run their fingers through their locks 
afterwards, and yet they look as if they have strolled off the pages of a 
siren-themed Vogue photoshoot. Meanwhile, the humidity has turned your barnet 
into a nest of mad frizz, while your now-vertical fringe has developed a 
multitude of strange kinks. Somehow, the weather has resulted in your having a 
cowlick, a perm, and a widow’s peak all at once.

Sleeplessness

You toss, and turn, and sweat, and groan as the temperature refuses to drop 
and the drunks argue outside your window

You toss, and turn, and sweat, and groan as the temperature refuses to drop 
and the drunks argue loudly outside your open bedroom windows. Somewhere in the 
room you hear the buzz of a mosquito, but you’re too tired to get up and deal 
with it, so you cower beneath the sheet in the hope that the thin membrane of 
fabric will protect you from the inevitable bloodsucking. You’ve tried 
everything: cold showers, sleeping under a wet towel, naked, buying a cheapo 
fan from Argos, cotton underpants, but still, the sleep refuses to come. 
Meanwhile, next to you lies a peaceful summer god or goddess snoring lightly. 
Amazingly, they are fragrant in their repose, and dry to the touch, and you 
hate them for it. What dark magic is this?

Booze

You are drunk. You cannot remember a time when you have not been drunk, so 
long have you been drinking. Everyone else is drinking too, of course, the heat 
demands it. “Rosé!” someone shouted, around lunchtime, in the beer garden, and 
a bottle was bought. You drank it, warm, like juice, then moved on to prosecco; 
fluorescent cocktails with umbrellas in; a can or two of Foster’s. You 
protected your Pimm’s from a cloud of wasps by sprinting across a croquet lawn, 
then decided to have another gin and tonic, maybe a cheeky mojito. You feel 
slightly woozy and restless, you can’t remember the last time you had a drink 
of water. You think the midges might have got the backs of your calves. You 
barely slept last night and there’s a heat rash on your shoulders. Sweat pools 
in your bellybutton; you can feel your nose starting to peel. The hayfever is 
back. But it’s OK, because you’re pissed. You ignore that nagging feeling and 
pose for the photographs. When you look at them, later, you see a stranger 
looking back at you. She is smiling, but there is pain behind her eyes. Her 
skin is the colour of deli meat. Her hair looks atrocious. This is what 
summer’s about.
 