
When approached by fundraisers on Christmas Eve to donate money so they could 
“buy the poor some meat and drink”,Ebenezer Scrooge asked 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DvSaDS7M4f8> whether the prisons and 
workhouses no longer functioned. “Many can’t go there, and many would rather 
die,” the philanthropists explained. “If they would rather die,” said Scrooge. 
“They had better do it and decrease the surplus population.”

For much of the last year, the official British attitude towards refugees and 
asylum seekers has resembled Scrooge’s towards the needy. The government 
pointed to the existing and clearly inadequate framework for dealing with 
refugees globally while abdicating moral responsibility for addressing the 
human crisis in our midst. It persuaded European Union partners to cease search 
and rescue missions for sinking vessels, effectively leaving people to drown. 
In much of this they enjoyed considerable popular support. Following 
publication of the picture of thethree-year-old Syrian boy Alan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-friends-and-family-fill-in-gaps-behind-harrowing-images>
, being carried dead from the Mediterranean, a quarter stillbelieved we should 
take “no or fewer” 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/09/06/no-increase-syrian-refugee-numbers/> 
Syrian refugees; after the Paris attacks thatfigure was up to half 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/11/18/brits-less-accepting-syrian-refugees-wake-paris-at/>
. A columnist forthe Sun compared asylum seekers to “cockroaches” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/katie-hopkins-cockroach-migrants-denounced-united-nations-human-rights-commissioner>
; aDaily Mail cartoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2015/nov/18/rats-the-history-of-an-incendiary-cartoon-trope>
 portrayed them as rats.

This is why the success of the Guardian’s refugee charity appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/guardian-charity-appeal-2015>, which has 
currently raised £1.5m – making it the most successful Guardian fundraiser ever 
– has been so important. It is of course good news for the crucial work being 
done by the six charities the paper is backing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/24/guardian-and-observer-refugee-appeal-2015-the-charities>
. But arguably more importantly it illustrates that there is another, more 
compassionate and generous story to be told about this nation’s attitude to 
refugees. It suggests a constituency, orphaned by mainstream electoral 
politics, that is at the very least prepared to weigh concerns about stretched 
public resources and border security with aspirations to common humanity. In 
short it shows there are people out there who see refugees as people in need of 
help and solidarity, ready to share what they have. The pensioners who called 
the Guardian and offered their winter fuel allowance; the children who offered 
their Christmas money.

This mood has been out there for some time, often nurtured by small groups of 
volunteers and activists doing great work with little recognition. Over the 
summer, for a brief moment it spread like a bushfire across Europe. Hungarians 
offered water and toys to refugees on their long march; the Germans welcomed 
them at railway stations; Icelanders opened up their homes after the state 
offered to house just 50 refugees; Britons gathered all kinds of supplies and 
headed for the south coast and Calais. Many have kept going.

This can be overstated. With more than a million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/22/one-million-migrants-and-refugees-have-reached-europe-this-year-iom>
 people reaching Europe through irregular means this year, this has been the 
biggest wave of migration since the aftermath of the second world war. A 
refugee crisis on this scale cannot be solved by individual acts of charity. 
They cannot create a political solution to the crisis in Syria or eradicate 
reasonable concerns about any nation’s capacity to cope. The numbers of donors 
and campaigners do not that suggest a plurality, let alone a majority of the 
country, share this disposition. It is not a solution; but it does offer hope. 
For while it does not necessarily illustrate significant support for more 
liberal immigration and asylum policies, it certainly suggests backing for a 
more humane approach to the issue than we have seen so far.

That is no small thing. It has largely been absent from every political 
calculation thus far. Most politicians look to their right – sometimes their 
extreme right – and bow to fear and bigotry. The success of our appeal and the 
work of volunteers and campaigners across the country indicates that a critical 
mass can be mobilised. Giventhe small-minded and mean-spirited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/12/the-turmoil-of-todays-world-leading-writers-respond-to-the-refugee-crisis>
 standard of much of the public debate so far, that is something to be thankful 
for. And we thank you, dear reader, for being part of it.
 