
Svetlana Alexievich, who won this year’s Nobel literature prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/08/svetlana-alexievich-wins-2015-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, knows a thing or two about the Soviet and the post-Soviet mind. In her books, 
she has beautifully explored the words, anxieties, hopes and life experience of 
those who lived under the communist dictatorship and then saw the end of the 
USSR. She also stands out asthe most powerful voice today relaying the 
democratic aspirations of Belarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/belarus-poll-eu-lifts-sanctions-on-lukashenko-europes-last-dictator>
, the country where she grew up – a society that remains in the grip of 
Europe’s last autocrat, Alexander Lukashenko.

This was not just a wise Nobel prize, but a timely one. It came just days 
before Mr Lukashenko, who has been in power for over two decades, sought a 
fifth presidential mandate for himself. Quasi-Soviet official results were 
announced on Monday,handing him 83% of votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/11/alexander-lukashenko-expected-to-remain-as-belarusian-president>
. Meanwhile, street demonstrations broke out in the capital, Minsk, in protest 
against what all independent observers describe as a fraudulent electoral 
process.

The paradox is that, as Belarus’s electoral masquerade unfolded, the EU 
signalled its intention to ease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/belarus-poll-eu-lifts-sanctions-on-lukashenko-europes-last-dictator>
 some of the sanctions it had imposed 10 years ago in response to Mr 
Lukashenko’s repressive methods. That amounted to ignoring Ms Alexievich’s 
warnings about the vote, which she flagged up by recalling an old Stalinist 
saying: “It’s unimportant who votes for whom, what matters is who counts the 
vote.”

So why does the EU seem set to engage with Mr Lukashenko? He has, it is true, 
released political prisoners before the election, and also avoided the sort of 
violent crackdowns he has been known for in the past. It’s true, also, that 
bringing Belarus in from the cold might be worth a few EU concessions. Russia’s 
aggression in Ukraine has created a completely different strategic landscape. 
One result is that Mr Lukashenko has become very worried that Russian military 
adventurism might one day threaten his hold on power. There are plenty of 
ultra-nationalists in Moscow who might welcome the chance to gobble upBelarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> into a Russian imperial pan-Slavic 
union. Such fears could certainly encourage Mr Lukashenko to seek to break out 
of Russia’s tight embrace, by seeking to end his diplomatic isolation in the 
west.

The EU should not dismiss this hope, but any diplomatic overture should come 
with great caution. The EU should not hand Mr Lukashenko the ultimate prize of 
complete relegitimisation. It’s important to stick to an approach where 
sanction relief comes only in the form of a temporary and partial suspension – 
not complete cancellation. Strict conditions should be attached for further 
European moves: the citizens of Belarus, just as those of Ukraine, are entitled 
to live in a normal democracy. It’s also important to remember that across the 
border, inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, democracy 
activists will be watching closely.

Belarus’s dictator has long mastered the art of carrying out a balancing act 
between aEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that has 
rightly shunned him for years, and Putin’s Russia, which keeps his economy 
afloat and is intent on checking the spread of democracy in the region. This is 
a case where the EU can and must have strong influence. It is in Europe’s best 
interests to make sure the right levers are kept handy, to ensure that good 
behaviour can be rewarded, and that any dictatorial backsliding will come with 
a high price. Svetlana Alexievich is right to say Mr Lukashenko cannot be 
trusted.
 