
It is now time for our national health chiefs and political leaders to 
acknowledge publicly that theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> can 
no longer deliver what is being asked of it for the funding available.

Despite the best efforts of hard-working staff, hospital accident and 
emergency performance is now theworst it has ever been 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/10/nhs-records-worst-ever-performance-in-january>
. In the first three months of this year only four of the 138 large A&E 
departments saw the required 95% of patients within four hours. One in 10 
patients had to wait more than four hours, the highest level at this time of 
year since 2003-04.

Waiting lists for operations, with 3.9 million patients, are now at their 
highest point since December 2007. The three million mark used to be considered 
a line not to cross, but experts have suggested that the waiting list target is 
irrecoverable. There are similar problems of dropping performance against 
cancer and ambulance standards, with mental health and community services under 
similar pressure.

At the same time, we ended the last financial year with trusts reporting the 
largest deficit in NHS history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/nhs-in-england-reveals-245bn-record-deficit>
 – £2.45bn but, in reality, above £3.5bn once you strip out one-off transfers 
and accounting adjustments.

These challenges are being matched by unprecedented staff shortages, including 
nurses, key specialists, GPs and emergency doctors. These have led to closures 
of A&E departments and other services, unsustainable pressure on GPs and, in 
2015-16, an unaffordable extra £3.6bn agency staff bill.

Demand for NHS services also continues to rise much faster than predicted: 
between April and June,A&E attendances and emergency hospital admissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/08/demand-for-nhs-care-is-dangerously-high-says-thinktank>
 were up by more than 6% compared with last year – three times the predicted 
increase. If funding fails to keep up with this demand, the challenge for the 
NHS grows year on year.

These problems are now affecting the whole NHS. In the first three months, 94% 
of A&E departments missed the four-hour A&E standard. At the end of 2015-16, 
nearly two-thirds of trusts, and more than eight in 10 acute hospitals,were in 
deficit <http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/nhs-trusts-deficit>.

It’s no surprise that cutting social care year after year has created major 
problems. Given the lack of capacity in community and mental health services, 
the number of patients waiting for a hospital discharge is now the highest it’s 
ever been. As a result, hospitals are being asked to routinely run at capacity 
levels that risk patient safety and would be unthinkable in France, Italy or 
Germany.

Taken together this means the NHS is increasingly failing to do the job it 
wants to do, and the public needs it to do, through no fault of its own.

This concrete evidence is supported by the testimony of frontline NHS leaders. 
Thanks to the dedication of staff, NHS performance rarely goes off the edge of 
a cliff. As the 1990s showed, instead we get a long, slow decline that is only 
fully visible in retrospect. It’s therefore difficult to isolate a single point 
in that downward trajectory to sound a warning bell.

But NHS trust bosses are now ringing that bell – we face a stark choice of 
investing the resources required to keep up with demand or watching the NHS 
slowly deteriorate. Trusts will, of course, do all they can to deliver 
efficiency savings and productivity improvements. But they are now saying it is 
impossible to provide the right quality of service and meet performance targets 
on the funding available.

Something has to give. This is particularly so since NHS funding increases are 
about to drop from 3.8% this year to 1.4% next year and 0.3% in 2018-19. As 
total NHS demand and cost rises inexorably, by at least 4% a year, this will 
mean even larger gaps after seven years of the deepest and longest financial 
squeeze in NHS history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fimpossible-for-nhs-to-provide-quality-service-something-has-to-give%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bd9cea175e7b3a21e586121a07594f360efb5f6%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20gap%20between%20funds%20and%20delivery%20is%20a%20chasm%20in%20the%20NHS%3A%20something%20has%20to%20give%20%7C%20Chris%20Hopson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fimpossible-for-nhs-to-provide-quality-service-something-has-to-give%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20gap%20between%20funds%20and%20delivery%20is%20a%20chasm%20in%20the%20NHS%3A%20something%20has%20to%20give%20%7C%20Chris%20Hopson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Fimpossible-for-nhs-to-provide-quality-service-something-has-to-give%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bd9cea175e7b3a21e586121a07594f360efb5f6%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 There are unprecedented shortages of emergency doctors and other staff. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Observer 
So what does give? A range of options are now open to political and NHS 
leaders. Additional funding is the most obvious, with the new government’s 
first autumn statement on 23 November providing an immediate opportunity.

If, however, there are is to be no extra funding, the NHS must make some 
quick, clear choices on what gives, however unpalatable these choices may be. 
The logical areas to examine would be more draconian rationing of access to 
care; formally relaxing performance targets; shutting services; extending and 
increasing charges; cutting the number of priorities the NHS is trying to 
deliver; or more explicitly controlling the size of the NHS workforce. These 
are all approaches adopted by other public services such as prisons, local 
government and the police when faced with similar funding challenges over the 
past decade – though they would clearly provoke public unease and ministerial 
anxiety if applied to the NHS.

In reality, individual areas are already having to make decisions like these 
on a piecemeal basis. For example, in the last three months, clinical 
commissioning groups like St Helens and Vale of York have developed proposals 
to suspend all non-urgent care for four months orsuspend non-urgent treatment 
<http://www.thecommissioningreview.com/article/ccg-suspend-non-urgent-gp-referrals-save-money>
 for obese patients and smokers for a year. A number of trusts have had to 
close services on safety grounds and others have announced plans to reduce the 
size of their workforce. Unsurprisingly these decisions triggered local 
opposition and adverse national media coverage.

NHS trust leaders rightly argue that this piecemeal approach is unsustainable. 
It is not tenable to ask local leaders to deliver the impossible, make 
unpopular local decisions as quietly as possible and then carry the can when 
the decisions become public. As the junior doctors’ dispute shows, it is also 
untenable to ask NHS staff to close the gap by simply working harder and harder.

In the absence of extra funding, we need an open, honest, realistic, national 
debate on what gives, translating into immediate clear choices, with national 
leaders explaining why such choices are necessary. Any such debate must extend 
beyond the NHS and involve the public. The earlier that debate starts and the 
more open and honest it is, the better.
 