
John JB Wilson <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1587714/reference> traipses into 
his local library, looking to check out the latest Adam Sandler DVD. He is 
obliged to, for Wilson is something of an authority in matters of bad taste: in 
1980, in a living room in Los Angeles, he founded theGolden Raspberry Awards 
<http://www.razzies.com/>. For 35 years, the annual ceremony has honored the 
worst in American film.

This is a time of considerable strain for Wilson. The latest Razzie nominees 
are to be announced on Wednesday, the day before the Oscar nominations – and 
Wilson, in his capacity as what he calls “Head RAZZberry”, must bear the burden 
of watching as many as he can. The library is a new recourse. “You get the 
movies for a week, so you have seven days to slog through ’em,” the 61-year-old 
explains in his twangy, singsong voice. “And that way the people who made the 
movie don’t get any of your money. So it works for me!”

 He plays up a mock indignation, ever the movie martyr, but Wilson hardly rues 
the slog. He’s too fond of the jokes. “To this day I can’t make it throughThe 
Postman <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/postman/>,” he reminisces to me 
without provocation, “that awful Kevin Costner movie about delivering the mail. 
Every time I get 20 minutes into it and I think, ‘No, you know, I really need 
to go and clean my fingernails!’” If the title of a bad movie comes up, Wilson 
is ready with a guffaw and a go-to jibe: “Talk about ridiculous!” or “talk 
about your unpleasant moviegoing experiences!” Of the talent behind such 
blunders, Wilson always says the same thing: “I don’t knowwhat they were 
thinking.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58d3a126ea03d28265ce12c8f2bb307efb28227%2F0_157_3144_1886%2F3144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20behind%20the%20Razzies%3A%20'Brian%20de%20Palma%20had%20no%20talent'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20behind%20the%20Razzies%3A%20%27Brian%20de%20Palma%20had%20no%20talent%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc58d3a126ea03d28265ce12c8f2bb307efb28227%2F0_157_3144_1886%2F3144.jpg>
 Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2 makes its debut in New York. Photograph: Startraks 
Photo/Rex Shutterstock 
 You probably have a good idea of this year’s Razzie shortlist already: Pixels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/pixels-review-adam-sandler-comedy>
,Jupiter Ascending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/04/jupiter-ascending-review-wachowskis-mila-kunis-channing-tatum>
,Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/18/paul-blart-mall-cop-2-review-segway-sequel-rumbles-through-the-motions>
 – critical and commercial flops. If the Razzies are predictable, it’s because 
they prefer simply to ratify popular impressions of failure rather than single 
them out for the first time. In fact, this ethos is built into the nomination 
process: the organization’s 895 voters – mainly “average moviegoers who pay an 
annual fee”, Wilson says, but also some critics, film-makers and members of the 
industry – are presented a list of candidates and asked to decide the most 
worthy among them.

But the candidates aren’t the product of anyone’s personal distaste. They’re 
decided upon by repute. “We look at budgets and box office,” Wilson tells me. 
“We pay attention to user ratings at the IMDB. The main thing we look at is
Rotten Tomatoes <http://www.rottentomatoes.com/>: if a movie has a score lower 
than 50%, it’s of interest to us. If it’s below 20%, it’s probably going to end 
up listed on the nomination ballot.” Of significance, too, is what Wilson calls 
“Razzie pedigree” – the award’s appetite for losing streaks. “Someone like an 
Adam Sandler, pretty much everything the man’s done for 15 years is Razzie 
eligible.”

The Razzies embody a herd sentiment: they don’t honor bad movies so much as 
movies the public assumes are bad. The trouble, of course, is that this sort of 
automatic response is antithetical to real critical thought.Alice Stoehr 
<https://twitter.com/astoehr?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, an American film critic, derides the Razzies as “an echo chamber of received 
wisdom” more interested in some vague aura of disaster than in weighing 
artistic merit. “The Razzies are totally out of touch with critical sentiment 
outside of a really broad idea of what’s liked or not. Their conclusions aren’t 
based on any consideration of what’s actually in these movies. It’s based on 
reputation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc770bf347b03f9c472d14cff0f7794f1357400d6%2F0_0_2936_1762%2F2936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20behind%20the%20Razzies%3A%20'Brian%20de%20Palma%20had%20no%20talent'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20behind%20the%20Razzies%3A%20%27Brian%20de%20Palma%20had%20no%20talent%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc770bf347b03f9c472d14cff0f7794f1357400d6%2F0_0_2936_1762%2F2936.jpg>
 Michael Caine and Angie Dickinson in Dressed to Kill: worth a raspberry? 
Photograph: Allstar/Cinema 77/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Reputations in Hollywood are insidious and difficult to dispel, though over 
time they may be proven unwarranted or hasty. It’s perhaps unsurprising, then, 
that Razzie errors seem more egregious the further back in their history you 
look, beginning with year one. “In 1980, you haveDressed to Kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/04/dressed-to-kill-palma-dvd> and 
The Shining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/24/the-shining-the-film-that-frightened-me-most>
nominated for awards 
<http://www.razzies.com/forum/1980-razzie-nominees-winners_topic330.html>,” 
says Peter Labuza, host of the film criticism podcastThe Cinephiliacs 
<http://www.thecinephiliacs.net/>. “Now we all know that those are the two of 
the best films not only of 1980 but of all time. So suddenly the received 
wisdom of the Razzies starts to look a little backwards.” We like to think of 
badness as somewhat self-evident. There’s nothing like time to show us that it 
isn’t. “People complain that the Oscars never get it right,” Labuza says. 
“What’s frustrating is that the Razzies can’t get it right either.” Greatness 
is elusive. Badness is too.

Wilson, for his part, stands by his decisions – The Shining included. “There 
was almost no tension in that film,” he says. “Stanley Kubrick … he chickened 
out! He needed to be closer to what the book was. If you have zero respect for 
the source material, go do something else!” Nor, in Wilson’s mind, hasBrian de 
Palma <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brian-de-palma> redeemed himself, after 
five Razzie nominations for worst director. “Oh my God, he washorrible!” he 
says. He tells me that he once saw some dailies from the set of Scarface and 
could tell the man had no talent. “The incompetence of it was astounding.”

The Razzies have long enjoyed the power to certify a fiasco. A Razzie doesn’t 
merely follow but actively underwrites and validates a dismal reputation. The 
most familiar honorees in Razzie history are easy shorthand for a certain kind 
of bad film: Ishtar 
<http://www.moviefone.com/2012/05/21/ishtar-movie-flop-dustin-hoffman/>, 
Heaven’s Gate <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/01/heavens-gate-review>
,Showgirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/mar/19/showgirls-my-guilty-pleasure>
. Over budget, under-grossing, badly received studio epics helmed by obdurate, 
singular auteurs: ready fodder for ridicule, traditionally, though time has 
been kind to the legacies of those three pictures. Ishtar has been reclaimed 
and duly venerated; Heaven’s Gate is a recent inductee into the Criterion 
Collection; even Showgirls has at last been exalted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac58df2159eb99dc46cc803079fefd9e3505b284%2F0_0_1200_721%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20behind%20the%20Razzies%3A%20'Brian%20de%20Palma%20had%20no%20talent'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20behind%20the%20Razzies%3A%20%27Brian%20de%20Palma%20had%20no%20talent%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Frazzies-golden-raspberry-film-awards-brian-de-palma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac58df2159eb99dc46cc803079fefd9e3505b284%2F0_0_1200_721%2F1200.jpg>
 Showgirls: a lost masterpiece? Photograph: Supplied 
Adam Nayman is the author of It Doesn’t Suck: Showgirls 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/books/2014/06/it_doesn_t_suck_adam_nayman_s_defense_of_showgirls_reviewed.html>
, a slim study that aims to reconsider thoughtfully and seriously a 
long-dismissedfilm maudit. In November, he presented a special screening at the 
Key West film festival in Florida, where he was joined on stage by directorPaul 
Verhoeven <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/aug/04/culture.features>. It 
was 20 years ago now that Showgirls was released – and 20 years since Verhoeven 
deigned, with customary gall, to show up in person at the Razzies to accept the 
seven awards presented to his film. The moment ranks among the Razzies’ most 
notorious.

“Verhoeven was thinking about Jesus the whole time,” Nayman tells me. “Turn 
the other cheek and accept with humility what’s happening to you. But he was 
aware that one of the nominees for the first ever Razzie for worst director was 
Stanley Kubrick. If it’s good enough for Kubrick, he thought, it’s good enough 
for me.” Verhoeven recalled to Nayman that from the beginning, he was facing 
down an unkind crowd – one keen to boo the director of a film they fervently 
hated. “They didn’t seem to appreciate how brave it was for him to go,” Nayman 
says. “But he went up time after time, smiling and waving the statuette. By the 
end, the crowd was entirely behind him.”

“A Dutch journalist set that up,” Wilson remembers. “The point I made to his 
spokesperson was that if he was going to enjoy it, go for it. But if he’s going 
to show up and be angry and have his feelings hurt, that’s not what we want to 
do. But he totally embraced it. He won the public’s admiration. He moved beyond 
being a Razzie winner. He was a Razzie winner who embraced the joke.” As for 
the reappraisal of Showgirls … well, Wilson doesn’t quite believe me. 
“Seriously? Is anybody looking at Showgirls as anything but an excellent 
example of cow manure?” I tell him some insist it’s a masterpiece. “It’s a 
piece of something, I’ll give it that.”

Wilson’s disdain for these films is not malicious: he’s too buoyant, too 
amiable a person. I suspect the problem has more to do with incuriosity. Wilson 
does not object to the characterization of the Razzies as a reflection of 
popular sentiment: indeed, that’s the object of the awards. “Opinion tends to 
side with our choices,” he tells me. “We are not in the wilderness with no one 
else agreeing with us.” That doesn’t seem like something to brag about. But to 
Wilson, it’s a sign of how agreeable and good-natured the Razzies are: they 
might mock, but they won’t rock the boat. There’s a presumed righteousness to 
it – a notion that the knocks are deserved. “It seems to me that if you make 
something like Paul Blart: Mall Cop 2, you should have a sense of humor,” 
Wilson laughs. “Take in your stride!”
 