
The new year brings new challenges for some of the highest-profile figures in 
business. Others continue to be dogged by past problems.


For some, such as António Horta Osório, the chief executive of Lloyds Banking 
Group <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group>, 2016 raises 
the prospect of the government selling off its remaining stake in the 
bailed-out banks. For others, such as David Potts, boss of Morrisons 
supermarkets, there is the fear of a takeover. Ben van Beurden, meanwhile, 
chief executive of the Anglo-Dutch oil group Shell, has the task of pulling off 
a £40bn deal with BG first agreed before the oil price crashed.

It is also a critical year for policymakers. Mark Carney, governor of the Bank 
of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, is 
facing questions about whether interest rates will remain at their record low 
of 0.5% by the end of the year.

Here Guardian writers select the figures with most at stake in 2016.

Ben van Beurden
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60002ddd4b9001b203898e53f77cf46ab1f6db32%2F0_171_4727_2838%2F4727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60002ddd4b9001b203898e53f77cf46ab1f6db32%2F0_171_4727_2838%2F4727.jpg>
 Ben van Beurden, chief executive of Shell. Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Few chief executives enter 2016 under as much pressure as Ben van Beurden, the 
Shell boss. Hetook the top job two years ago  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/09/shell-chief-executive-ben-van-beurden>
with a relatively easy brief to chop the underperforming businesses built up 
during a period of high oil prices by his seemingly profligate predecessor, 
Peter Voser.

But after a period of successful cost-cutting the 57-year-old Shell lifer has 
found the price of oil collapsing, expensive exploration in the Arctic going 
nowhere, and his claims to lead a carbon-friendly company ridiculed.

A decision to use low crude prices as an opportunity for a £40bn takeover of 
rival BG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/07/shell-gas-bg-group-takeover>
has left him facing City critics worried that Shell’s sacred dividend is now 
under threat as the price of crude plunges relentlessly downwards.


The UN climate change deal last month may have spelled decline for fossil 
fuels that will play out over decades, but Van Beurden is under the cosh right 
now.Terry Macalister

Mark Carney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f7e27031581f610f9bd171c61bb754b87f155c%2F0_50_4097_2455%2F4097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f7e27031581f610f9bd171c61bb754b87f155c%2F0_50_4097_2455%2F4097.jpg>
 Bank of England governor Mark Carney. Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/AFP/Getty 
Images 
It has been a while since anyone referred to Mark Carney, the slick Canadian 
in charge of the Bank of England, as a “rock star central banker”. One MP has 
even compared his repeated promises of interest rate rises to the empty 
sweet-talk ofan “unreliable boyfriend” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/24/bank-of-england-unreliable-boyfriend-interest-rates>
.

Another of those pledges has failed to materialise in recent weeks. The 
governor predicted at aspeech in Lincoln cathedral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/16/uk-interest-rate-rise-new-year>
 in the summer that the decision about raising rates would “come into sharper 
relief around the turn of this year”. It was part of a strategy of “forward 
guidance” meant to allow markets and consumers to prepare for shifts in policy.

But the final monetary policy committee meeting of the year came and went  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-unchanged>
with only one of its nine rate-setting members voting for an immediate 
increase. And inflation remains at just 0.1%, instead of bouncing back towards 
the Bank’s 2% target.

Carney, hand-picked by the UK chancellor, George Osborne, to drag the Old Lady 
of Threadneedle Street into the 21st century, has blamed outside events, 
including the plunging oil price, for his predictions going awry.

But Bank-watchers are now asking whether rates will remain at their record low 
of 0.5% until the end of 2016: and if so, whether something is fundamentally 
wrong with Carney’s analysis of the economy.Heather Stewart

António Horta Osório
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F304143625f92b8a1a00797fa455e2a1cb54a0d08%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F304143625f92b8a1a00797fa455e2a1cb54a0d08%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 António Horta Osório, chief executive of Lloyds Banking Group. Photograph: 
Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
The Lloyds Banking Group chief executive has had a mantra since taking the 
helm of the bailed-out bank in March 2011: “to fix this bank and help taxpayers 
get their money back”.

Horta-Osório is tantalisingly close to achieving the goal. The taxpayer stake 
has already been reduced from the 43% it stood at when hetook charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/03/santander-uk-chief-joins-lloyds-on-50m-pound-pay-packet>
, to less than 10% as 2016 dawned.

Osborne prepares to pick right moment for Lloyds share sale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/01/george-osborne-lloyds-share-sale-prepares-pick-right-moment>
But the last chunk of shares may also prove to the toughest to shift. George 
Osbornehas pledged to sell £2bn of them to the public  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/lloyds-bank-shares-to-be-offered-cut-price-to-the-public>
at a 5% discount to the prevailing market price. The chancellor has also 
promised that those who hold their shares for a year will be given a bonus 
share for every 10 held, with the bonus capped at £200 per investor.

With the taxpayer breaking even on a sale when the shares are at 73.6p, 
Horta-Osório will be watching the stockmarket even more closely than usual. The 
year 2016 could be his make or break year. Extricating taxpayers from a bank 
they pumped £20bn into amid the 2008 banking crisis could be the evidence that 
the Portuguese banker needs to prove he has fixed the bank. He may then face 
questions about what to do next. Jill Treanor

Carolyn Fairbairn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F199c205d0582415c189695ba5f654b97ccf8e8bc%2F0_0_4628_2774%2F4628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F199c205d0582415c189695ba5f654b97ccf8e8bc%2F0_0_4628_2774%2F4628.jpg>
 Carolyn Fairbairn, CBI director-general. Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Everything is looking good for Carolyn Fairbairn, who became the first woman 
director-general of the CBI last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/23/new-cbi-chief-carolyn-fairbairn-backs-eu-membership>
. The UK economy is growing at a fair lick, unemployment is coming down, and 
the corporation tax rate is coming down.

To be sure, the employers’ group has a few gripes with the government. It is, 
for example, not overly keen on Osborne’s plan for an apprenticeship levy. But, 
generally, Fairbairn would be looking forward to a trouble-free first year in 
the job were it not for one big cloud on the horizon: Europe.

If things go to plan, the prime minister, David Cameron, intends to hold a 
referendum on UK membership of the European Union during 2016, with dates 
already being pencilled in as early as June or July.

Stuart Rose on the EU referendum: 'The sooner we get it done, the better'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/01/stuart-rose-on-the-eu-referendum-the-sooner-we-get-it-done-the-better>
The Brexit debate will be highly charged and hugely divisive for the UK and, 
like the rest of the nation, business remains split on the issue. The CBI’s own 
polling shows that a majority of members in favour of remaining within a 
reformed EU, but there is a small and vocal minority that believes the UK would 
be better off outside.

Those in favour of Brexit will take some convincing that the prime minister 
has succeeded in his attempts to renegotiate the terms of EU membership, and 
Fairbairn’s challenge in 2016 will be to prevent an acrimonious split in her 
organisation.Larry Elliott

Dave Lewis
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbc4efdf88fe6befcfa276873146bc493dc3a8ee%2F0_109_3320_1992%2F3320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbc4efdf88fe6befcfa276873146bc493dc3a8ee%2F0_109_3320_1992%2F3320.jpg>
 Dave Lewis, chief executive of Tesco. Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters 
Dave Lewis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/21/profile-dave-lewis-tesco-unilever>
went into 2015 with all guns blazing, launching a drastic shakeup at the UK’s 
biggest supermarket chain. He announced plans to cut thousands of jobs, close 
stores, abandon long-planned developments, sell off foreign operations and 
slash prices.

But a year on, with much of that work completed, Tesco is still struggling to 
win over shoppers. The supermarket’s share price has sunk to an 18-year low as
sales continue to fall at a dizzying pace, according to the latest industry data
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/sainsburys-lidl-and-aldi-gain-while-rivals-struggle>
.


Tesco is not the only big supermarket chain to endure falling sales. But as 
the biggest of the bunch, there’s a feeling thatTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> could and should be faring better.

Revelations of losses at Tesco subsidiaries including the Dobbies garden 
centre chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/08/tesco-garden-centre-chain-dobbies-48m-in-red>
,Giraffe restaurants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/02/giraffe-restaurant-losses-tesco-supermarket>
 and Harris + Hoole coffee shops have also made clear the breadth of the 
problems that Lewis and his team face.


Lewis’ honeymoon period is well and truly over and he has a lot to prove in 
2016. Impatient shareholders, and the credit rating agencies which have such 
influence over the cost of servicing Tesco’s massive debt pile, want to see 
signs that his medicine is working.


Lewis will also have to carefully navigate the fallout from an accounting 
scandal which broke soon after his arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/22/tesco-investigators-overstating-profit-250m>
in 2014. Might he have to negotiate a deal with the Serious Fraud Office, which 
has been investigating? How will he handle any litigious shareholders?


Tesco will also have to answer questions over its relations with suppliers 
when a Grocery Code Adjudicator investigation reports this month.

Putting past errors safely to bed while fighting to secure Tesco’s future in a 
rapidly changing grocery market should provide plenty of challenges for this 
veteran retailer in 2016.Sarah Butler


Warren East
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c79d9588fb7efbbe485072525a53643b2ae1f66%2F0_71_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c79d9588fb7efbbe485072525a53643b2ae1f66%2F0_71_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Warren East, chief executive of Rolls-Royce. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
When Warren East came out of retirement to run Rolls-Royce in July things were 
obviously awry at the one-time beacon of British engineering. After a series of 
profit warnings before he joined, East, the former boss of the chipmaker ARM 
Holdings, issued his own warning after two days in the job andin November he 
said Rolls was so opaque that financial forecasting was futile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/24/rolls-royce-chief-warns-of-senior-job-cuts-because-engine-maker-needs-fixing>
.

East has promised to cut costs and slash bureaucracy to get Rolls firing on 
all cylinders again. He is due to give more details in February. But Rolls is 
buffeted by falling demand for private jets and for boats and equipment for oil 
and gas production as well as a switch by airlines away from the wide-bodied 
planes that Rolls makes engines for.

Complicating matters further, the low-key but insistent US activist fund 
ValueAct hasbought 10% of Rolls and wants a seat on the board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/19/us-hedge-fund-doubles-stake-in-rolls-royce>
. The government is also involved and has drafted plans to nationalise Rolls’s 
nuclear submarine division or force the division – or all of Rolls – to merge 
with BAE Systems.

East, 53 and already wealthy and respected after running ARM successfully for 
12 years, no doubt thought he had the energy for another challenge – but what a 
challenge.Sean Farrell

David Potts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F689e509e0e7b71b8f416e3105a3929dddc4c33cf%2F245_484_3739_2243%2F3739.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F689e509e0e7b71b8f416e3105a3929dddc4c33cf%2F245_484_3739_2243%2F3739.jpg>
 David Potts, chief executive of Morrisons. Photograph: Toby Melville/REUTERS 
David Potts is running the smallest of the UK’s major supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/25/morrisons-tesco-man-david-potts-chief-executive>
 but arguably he has the biggest turnaround job on his hands.

Morrisons’ northern heartland puts it right on the frontline of the battle 
with discounters Aldi and Lidl, and Potts must find a way to hold on to his 
weekly share of the shopping basket.

He is hoping to score some wins by fixing the basics of service, availability 
and quality neglected under the previous management team.

Potts sensibly sold off Morrisons’ poorly performing M Local convenience store 
chain. He still has work to do to get a better deal out of an online joint 
venture with Ocado.

Improving efficiency and getting the best out of Morrisons’ food processing 
divisions will also prove important in cutting prices for shoppers and so 
making that extra trip to a discounter less enticing.

Takeover rumours circled more than once in 2015, and there is no doubt 
Morrisons is vulnerable after slipping out of the FTSE 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/02/morrisons-g4s-and-meggitt-lose-out-in-ftse-reshuffle>
.Sarah Butler

Mark Carne
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e4cda0bf2816b01fa0e3fc47ace12b95055e29%2F868_282_2029_1217%2F2029.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e4cda0bf2816b01fa0e3fc47ace12b95055e29%2F868_282_2029_1217%2F2029.jpg>
 Mark Carne, chief executive of Network Rail. Photograph: Gallo Images/Getty 
Images 
Mark Carne stepped straight from the oilfields to the top job in the UK rail 
industry in April 2014, taking over as chief executive ofNetwork Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> from one of the golden boys 
of British infrastructure, Sir David Higgins.

Unfortunately for Carne, the latent problems in rail infrastructure swiftly 
became plain. Not least, that his organisation had signed up toan 
overambitious, poorly scoped and costed five-year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/21/cost-to-electrify-great-western-mainline-triples-to-28bn-risking-other-schemes>
plan pushed by Whitehall and lapped up by ministers. It was a plan it could not 
deliver – especially once it could no longer borrow funds to mask inefficiency.

Chaos from over-running engineering works last Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/24/christmas-travellers-road-rail-delays-england>
 also left Carne in the firing line. While new directors have been parachuted 
in, there has been a feeling that Carne, well-liked and highly regarded, has 
inherited too much mess.

He has spelled out a vision for the future, both technological – the digital 
railway – and cultural, with a more diverse and empowered workforce atNetwork 
Rail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail>. But his organisation 
is likely to face calls for radical reform this year, and Carne may no longer 
be given the benefit of the doubt should further calamities occur.Gwyn Topham


Dave Forsey
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37298caa56b77b5a6fb17500afea4c91c4fbfc5e%2F0_437_7195_4320%2F7195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37298caa56b77b5a6fb17500afea4c91c4fbfc5e%2F0_437_7195_4320%2F7195.jpg>
 Dave Forsey, chief executive of Sports Direct. Photograph: Sport Direct/PA 
Running a company with the reputational problems of Sports Direct will always 
be a high-pressure job. But 2016 is promising to be even more so for its bosses 
Dave Forsey, the chief executive, and the founderMike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>.



An investigation by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 prompted MPs to demand Mike Ashley face questions over pay and working 
conditions at the group’s warehouse in Shirebrook, Derbyshire. The company has 
promised £10m to give staff a pay rise, but that was immediately dismissed by 
Britain’s largest trade union Unite as no more than a PR stunt.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F307c407e6fe48230de58961ed8011f81fd7d2f11%2F0_10_1457_874%2F1457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F307c407e6fe48230de58961ed8011f81fd7d2f11%2F0_10_1457_874%2F1457.jpg>
 Mike Ashley. Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA 
Ashley’s summons before the House of Commons and the results of an internal 
review are certain to keep practices at the FTSE 100 firm in the spotlight.

Forsey, meanwhile, is charged with a criminal offence for allegedly failing to 
give the 30 days’ notice required for redundancies under employment law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/09/sports-direct-chief-executive-david-forsey-charged-usc-administration>
, after the group’s subsidiary USC went into administration in January last 
year.

Forsey denies the charge. The next hearing in the case is scheduled at 
Chesterfield magistrates court in March, while a separate civil conduct 
investigation was kicked off by the Department for Business, Innovation and 
Skills (BIS) in October. BIS has the power to ban somebody from serving as a 
director for up to 15 years.Simon Goodley

Ivan Glasenberg
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ef33406d2c9f1a77e38c59db16f57e4d0a6dd48%2F0_0_3044_1827%2F3044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ef33406d2c9f1a77e38c59db16f57e4d0a6dd48%2F0_0_3044_1827%2F3044.jpg>
 Glencore chief executive, Ivan Glasenberg. Photograph: Arnd Wiegmann/Reuters 
It was a humbling 2015 for Glasenberg, the mining industry’s highest-profile 
and most opinionated chief executive. In September, as shareholders grew 
nervous about Glencore’s ability to weather the storm in commodity markets, the 
companybecame the first London-listed big miner to chop its dividend and raise 
new capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/15/glencore-fundraiser-share-placing-shore-up-finances-ivan-glasenberg>
 – around £1.6bn.

Glasenberg dipped into his back pocket to find £138m to take up his slice of 
the new shares. Even that display of confidence didn’t stop the rot. The share 
price is currently 90p – it stood at 530p when it floated in 2011.

Glasenberg needs two things in 2016. First, he has to demonstrate that his 
various plans to reduce Glencore’s debt – via cuts, disposals and deals – can 
be achieved. He has started promisingly, and has already pledged that the 
original $10bn goal can be exceeded by $3bn. But 2016 is about securing the 
targets. Even on the company’s own projections, borrowings will still be 
$18bn-$19bn at the end of 2016, which leaves little room for error.

The second thing Glasenberg needs is some luck. Nothing would restore 
investors’ faith like rising commodity prices, especially copper. That, though, 
is entirely outside his control.Nils Pratley

Christine Lagarde 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2970e6b83027d4d8cd8ec3947c41fa6dc89fd7c%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20business%20figures%20with%20most%20at%20stake%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F01%2F2016-business-leaders-toughest-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2970e6b83027d4d8cd8ec3947c41fa6dc89fd7c%2F0_0_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Christine Lagarde, managing director of the IMF. Photograph: Adam Berry/Getty 
Images 
Christine Lagarde’s day job, running the International Monetary Fund in 
Washington, is unlikely to get any easier in 2016,with what she calls 
“mediocre” global growth expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/imf-chief-christine-lagarde-disappointing-global-growth-economy-2016>
 and a decision looming on whether the IMF should contribute to the latest 
Greece bailout.

The suave former French finance minister may also have hoped to be polishing 
up her CV for a potential run at the Elysée Palace in 2017. Instead she will 
have to prepare herself to face trial.

In September, a French court recommended Lagarde be acquitted over the 
long-running saga of a €400m (£293m) taxpayer-funded payout to controversial 
financier Bernard Tapie during the financial crisis. But last month, the Cour 
de Justice de la République, which tackles allegations of wrongdoing by 
ministers,ruled she must appear in court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/imf-head-christine-lagarde-tfrench-trial-bernard-tapie-affair>
, charged with “negligence by a person in a position of public authority”.

So far, the IMF has expressed confidence in Lagarde’s ability to focus on her 
job; but she may ultimately struggle to combine acting as one of the 
figureheads of the global economy with the public scrutiny of her record in 
office that will inevitably accompany a trial.Heather Stewart
 