
The rush hour is not a good time to be out and about on the A472 as lorry 
after lorry climbs out of the southWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> 
valley town of Crumlin and heads up and over towards Pontypool.

“It’s pretty terrible,” said Deanna Harwick, a mother of two young children, 
who lives in a terrace lining one side of the heaving road. “We can’t have the 
windows open because of the fumes so in the summer the house feels pretty 
airless. I don’t let the children play outside, not just because of the risk of 
a road accident but because of the damage the air may cause to their health. 
I’ve been here 10 years and I’m keen to move.”

Harwick’s concerns are backed by solid evidence. Just up the road from her 
front door a monitor records levels of nitrogen dioxide. According togovernment 
data 
<https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/data/exceedence?f_exceedence_id=S3&f_year_start=2015&f_year_end=2016&f_group_id=4&f_region_reference_id=1&f_parameter_id=NO2&f_sub_region_id=2&f_output=screen&action=exceedence3&go=Gohttps://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/data/exceedence?f_exceedence_id=S3&f_year_start=2015&f_year_end=2016&f_group_id=4&f_region_reference_id=1&f_parameter_id=NO2&f_sub_region_id=2&f_output=screen&action=exceedence3&go=Go>
, the levels here are the highest recorded in the UK outside London (the levels 
areexceeded in England only by a similar monitor on Marylebone Road 
<https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/data/exceedence?f_exceedence_id=S3&f_year_start=2015&f_year_end=2016&f_group_id=4&f_region_reference_id=1&f_parameter_id=NO2&f_sub_region_id=1&f_output=screen&action=exceedence3&go=Go>
 in central London).

The health problems caused by air pollution were highlighted last week in a 
report from the World Health Organisation that documented pollution levels in 
more than 3,000 cities around the world. It found that particulate pollution has
risen 8% globally in the past five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/air-pollution-rising-at-an-alarming-rate-in-worlds-cities>
 with the worst of the problem in developing countries. In the UK, experts 
believe thatabout 29,000 deaths are linked to air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/02/air-pollution-may-cause-more-uk-deaths-than-previously-thought-say-scientists>
.
Map of south Wales, pinpointing Crumlin 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/crumlin-zip/giv-1251584355aJr0i78/>
In Crumlin, the bad air hotspot is caused by something of a perfect storm. The 
road is a main cross route between two valleys and so is always busy with local 
traffic. It is also used by commuters travelling to Newport and Cardiff. Most 
significantly, it is a favourite cut-through for lorry drivers keen to avoid 
the M4, which is often congested, and the Severn Bridge tolls (£19.80 for HGVs).

The geography of this spot in Caerphilly county exacerbates the problem. Even 
if the road happens to be clear, the steep hill slows the trucks down to a 
crawl. And the spot is hemmed in by the terrace on one side and a hill on the 
other so that, especially on a still day, the fumes linger.

George Powell, 70, who has lived here for 15 years, has given up trying to 
clear the black residue that clings to his front door. “It’s horrible the way 
it gathers there. I’ve installed double glazing against the noise but the fumes 
leave your eyes streaming. I’ve got grandchildren. We let them play out the 
back – there’s woods and a stream there – but never on the front.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-welsh-valleys-road-with-some-of-the-uks-worst-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3f65129ee704ee70add40fbd729efe0a646a5b%2F27_115_4302_2582%2F4302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Welsh%20valleys%20road%20with%20some%20of%20the%20UK's%20worst%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-welsh-valleys-road-with-some-of-the-uks-worst-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Welsh%20valleys%20road%20with%20some%20of%20the%20UK%27s%20worst%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-welsh-valleys-road-with-some-of-the-uks-worst-air-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3f65129ee704ee70add40fbd729efe0a646a5b%2F27_115_4302_2582%2F4302.jpg>
 George Powell, 70, has given up trying to clean the black soot off his front 
door. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt for the Guardian 
His neighbour, Clive Dodd, a retired plasterer aged 68 who has lived on the 
road for 12 years, said he found himself getting out of breath now as he walked 
up the hill. “I didn’t used to have a problem. I do now and I blame the road. I 
think they should ban HGVs and vans. That would sort it.”

There may be solid evidence about the levels of nitrogen dioxide but what 
effect the road has on people’s health here is harder to quantify.

According to Asthma UK Cymru <https://www.asthma.org.uk/cymru>, 314,000 people 
have asthma in Wales, including 59,000 children – almost one child in 10.A 
report from NHS Wales and the Welsh government published in 2015 
<http://gov.wales/docs/dhss/publications/160213reporten.pdf> said the 
percentage of patients registered with their GP for asthma and COPD (chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease) was greater than in England – and there had been 
a slight increase in recent years.

A British Lung Foundation map <https://statistics.blf.org.uk/asthma> shows 
that the chance of dying from asthma is higher than the UK average in 
Caerphilly but, actually, the rates are slightly greater in the neighbouring 
boroughs of Blaenau Gwent and Torfaen.

There are no street-level statistics that will show if the problems on the 
A472 are having an impact on residents’ health, but staff at the Mayberry 
pharmacy in Crumlin say they are noticing an increase in the number of people, 
particularly children, who need inhalers.

However, fumes from lorries cannot be blamed for all of the area’s respiratory 
problems – smoking and heavy industry remain a major cause of public health 
problems in the south Wales valleys.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-welsh-valleys-road-with-some-of-the-uks-worst-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc364a9325959b7d9298fa8d555673ee3f06d52e2%2F0_287_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Welsh%20valleys%20road%20with%20some%20of%20the%20UK's%20worst%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-welsh-valleys-road-with-some-of-the-uks-worst-air-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Welsh%20valleys%20road%20with%20some%20of%20the%20UK%27s%20worst%20air%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F16%2Fthe-welsh-valleys-road-with-some-of-the-uks-worst-air-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc364a9325959b7d9298fa8d555673ee3f06d52e2%2F0_287_4928_2955%2F4928.jpg>
 A roadside air-quality monitor has detected the worst pollution levels outside 
London at Crumlin. Photograph: Adrian Sherratt for the Guardian 
Caerphilly council and the Welsh government have tried to make improvements, 
investing in a new road layout. A council spokesperson said the monitor had 
been installed to help it establish what was happening.

“We are aware of the high air-quality readings in this area and have installed 
the air-quality monitor specifically to look at trends in air-quality data,” 
the spokesperson said. “The area has been designated as anair-quality 
management area <https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/aqma/> (AQMA) and the council is 
working alongside key stakeholders to look at options to improve the air 
quality.” It is possible there are more polluted places in the country that 
don’t have a monitor.

The Wales Green party said the solution was improving public transport.

Spokesperson Pippa Bartolotti <http://www.pippabartolotti.net/> said: “Air 
pollution knows no borders and tough limits have been set by the EU to tackle 
this growing problem. Air pollution is a well-known killer.

“The remedy is to invest in a decent public transport network, reopen smaller 
train stations and give people a fast, clean and affordable way to get around.”

She said a plan to build a metro system 
<http://gov.wales/topics/transport/public/metro/?lang=en> – which includes 
heavy rail, light rail and buses working together – in south-east Wales had 
been on the drawing board for years. “Yet the Welsh government is set on 
building more roads like the M4 extension 
<http://gov.wales/topics/transport/roads/schemes/m4/corridor-around-newport/?lang=en>
 that will bring more harmful pollution and more congestion.”

Alan Heaps, who runs a woodwork business from his house on the A472, agreed 
that radical action was needed. “The problem is they’d have to knock this 
terrace down to make a bigger road or just ban lorries completely. Both would 
cost millions. And I don’t think they’ll spend millions here. We’re stuck with 
the problem.”
 