
1. Alghero

Small, but perfectly preserved, Alghero is wealthy enough to have retained its 
ancient charm and Sardinian flavour without resorting to the over-development 
of the island's better-known beach destination, the Costa Smeralda. In its 
medieval, car-free citadel, traditional bars and restaurants retain that 
relaxed Mediterranean buzz. Beyond the marina the relatively unspoilt coastline 
is a haven for the sun-seeker and water-sports fan, the pine forests beyond are 
heaven for the nature-lover and aspiring oenologists can make a pilgrimage to 
theSella & Mosca vineyard (sellaemosca.com <http://www.sellaemosca.com>, 00 39 
079 997 700).

· Stay at Hotel Villa Las Tronas (981 818, hotelvillalastronas.com 
<http://www.hotelvillalastronas.com>), which sits on its own peninsula. Doubles 
from £138. Get there with Thomsonfly (thomsonfly.com <http://www.thomsonfly.com>
) from Birmingham and Stansted.

2. Almeria 

The south-eastern corner of Andalucia was best known in years past as a film 
location for spaghetti westerns such as A Fistful of Dollars. But thanks to the 
stunning, unspoilt beauty of the Parque Natural de Cabo de Gata it's become the 
haunt of the country's trendy creative set.Cabo de Gata, 30 miles east of 
Almeria, has the most pristine beaches and dramatic landscape and is dotted 
with yoga retreats.

· Stay at Hotel Pakyta (00 34 950 611 175, hotelpakyta.es 
<http://www.hotelpakyta.es>). Doubles around £85 per night. Get there with 
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com> from Gatwick or Stansted.

3. Antwerp

Posh frocks with a twist from the Antwerp Six, who include Ann Demeulemeester 
and Dries van Noten, have put this Belgian city on the fashion map. But the 
local haute couture isn't the only draw here for the fashionista. TheModeNatie 
building (Nationalestraat 28) is home to the Flanders Fashion Institute (00 32 
3 226 1447,modenatie.com <http://www.modenatie.com/ffi/home-ffi.htm>) and new 
fashion museumMomu (momu.be <http://www.momu.be>, 470 2770). For cut-price 
outfits by up-and-coming designers, head for theWalter shop (St Antoniusstraat 
12, 213 2644,waltervanbeirendonck.com <http://www.waltervanbeirendonck.com>).

· Stay at stylish B&B Slapen Enzo (Karel Rogierstraat 20, 216 2785, 
slapenenzo.be <http://www.slapenenzo.be>) where a room costs from £89. Get 
there with VLM (flyvlm.com <http://www.flyvlm.com>) from London City.

4. Belgrade

The house music scene exploded in the Serbian capital in the Nineties and 
despite the Nato bombings that shook the city, the clubs went underground and 
the beat went on. Head for the nightspots underneath Kalemegdan Castle or ask 
around at trendy barManhattan (Palmoticeva 27) for the latest happening venue. 
The myriad museums and eclectic architecture betray a past moulded by the 
clashing superpowers of yesteryear, namely the Austro-Hungarians and the 
Ottomans.

· Stay at the Admiral Club (Venizelosova 31, 00 381 11 30 38 260, 
www.hacb.co.yu <http://www.hacb.co.yu>). Doubles from £87. British Airways 
flies to Belgrade from London Heathrow (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>). 

5. Budapest

The Hungarians know a thing or two about staying fresh-faced and trim as 
they've had a sophisticated spa culture for hundreds of years. The capital is 
full of magnificent baths with bags of history and a jovial atmosphere that's a 
million miles from the scented candles, whale music and hefty price-tags we're 
used to in the UK. Head for the famousGellert Baths and Spa (Kelenhegyi út 4, 
00 36 1 466 6166,gellertbath.com <http://www.gellertbath.com>), where the 
entrance is a mere £8.50 with massages starting at £6; for a more antique 
experience, there's the 16th-centuryOttoman Kiraly baths (Fõutca 84, 1 202 
3688); and to join the locals abluting, swimming and playing chess in steaming 
pools, go toSzechenyi Medicinal Spa and Swimming Pool (Állatkerti körút 11, 1 
363 3210).

· Stay at the Zara Boutique Hotel (Só u 6, 1 357 6170, zarahotels.com 
<http://www.zarahotels.com>). Doubles from around £63. Easyjet.com flies to 
Budapest from London Gatwick and Luton.

6. Catania

Sicily's second city has a famously good local cuisine, baroque palaces and 
impressive Roman ruins that put the capital Palermo in the shade. It's also 
located at the foot of the active volcano Mount Etna which makes for an 
excellent daytrip and, as the city is wedged between mountains and the coast, 
in early spring (snow permitting) you can even ski in the morning and be on the 
beach in the afternoon.

· Stay at Una Hotel Palace (unahotels.it <http://www.unahotels.it>). Doubles 
from £87. Get there with xl.com from Gatwick.

7. Copenhagen

Danish design set the tone for slick, functional Fifties modernism and the 
look that's been so fashionable since the Nineties, so if the shape of a chair 
or the curve of a coffee cup sets your heart racing, head to Copenhagen where 
it all began. Check out the work of Poul Henningsen and Arne Jacobsen at the 
national art and design museumKunstindustrimuseet (Bredgade 68, 00 45 33 18 
5656,kunstindustrimuseet.dk <http://www.kunstindustrimuseet.dk>) and then start 
your own collection by shopping at the city's design emporia. Moderna 10 
(Ravensborggade 10a),Kolmorgen (Bredgade 10, kolmorgen.com) and Retrograd 
(Gunlogsgade 7) are among the best.

· Stay at Hotel Fox (Jarmers Plads 3, 3313 3000, hotelfox.dk 
<http://www.hotelfox.dk>, from £100), where each of the rooms has been designed 
by young locals. Fly sterling.dk from Edinburgh and Gatwick.

8. Deauville

Coco Chanel opened her first boutique in this chic Normandy resort almost a 
century ago and its glamorous ambience has stuck as every September it's awash 
with Hollywood starlets flocking here for the Americanfilm festival. But for 
the less wealthy and well-connected, it's also a perfect place to spend a 
weekend full of fresh air and exercise.

· Stay at the Du Golf Hotel Barriere (00 33 231 142 400. lucienbarriere.com 
<http://www.lucienbarriere.com>. Doubles from £120), which overlooks two golf 
courses. The concierge can arrange horse-riding on the beach, quad-biking and 
kayaking. Ryanair.com has just launched a new route from Stansted.

9. Helsinki

This Baltic capital has Scandinavian charm with a Russian twist. Its 
architecture is a mix of neo-classical, elegant austerity and the cutting-edge 
modernist marvels created by its most famous resident Alvar Aalto. For a tour 
of the best of its built heritage, take a turn along the waterfront and visit 
theLutheran Cathedral on Senate Square, then move on to the new Opera House, 
Finlandia Hall and the fanastical art nouveau train station. The excellent 
collection at theKiasma Museum of Contemporary Art is proof that the Finns 
produced more than the Moomins, and the delicious contemporary Scandinavian 
fare atDemo (Uudenmaankatu 9-11, 00 358 9 2289 0840, restaurantdemo.fi 
<http://www.restaurantdemo.fi>) shows that they're not half bad cooks either. 

· Stay at Klaus K (Bulevardi 2, 20 770 4700, klauskhotel.com 
<http://www.klauskhotel.com>), the city's latest designer hotel with rooms from 
£55.Sterling.dk <http://www.Sterling.dk> from Edinburgh or airberlin.com 
<http://www.airberlin.com> from London Stansted.

10. Ljubljana

Bijou, beautiful and cheap, Slovenia's charming capital makes for a perfect 
weekend break. Head for the tourist office on Krekov trg 10 and pick up a 
rental bike which is free for the first two hours. Visit the castle for its 
spectacular views of the city and then the modern art museumModerna Galerija 
(Tomsiceva 14, 00 386 1 241 68 00, mg-lj.si, closed Mon) stopping for lunch and 
a browse in the design bookshop atVale Novak Concept Store (Tavcarjeva ulica 5, 
230 9572,zidovska@vale-novak.si <mailto:zidovska@vale-novak.si>). Kick off the 
evening at chic lounge barMinimal (Mestni trg 4, 426 0138) in the Old Town, 
continue on toBacchus Centre Club (Kongresni trg 3) and then detox at 
super-cheap spa centreAtlantis (Smartinska 152, 585 2100, atlantis-vodnomesto.si
 <http://www.atlantis-vodnomesto.si>). 

· Stay at Hotel Mons (Pot za Brdom 55, 470 2700, hotel.mons.si 
<http://www.hotel.mons.si>) with rooms housed in coloured glass. It is the 
coolest crash-pad in town, despite the 10-minute drive from the centre. Doubles 
are around £100. Get there witheasyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com> from 
Stansted.

11. Rimini

The birthplace of film director Federico Fellini has become a bucket-and-spade 
mecca for Italian families, but neighbouring Riccione is the clubbing capital 
of Italy, attracting ravers from as far as Rome. Pack your most fabulous outfit 
(the Italians are a well-turned-out crowd, even on the dance floor) and head 
straight forParadiso (Via Covignano 260, 05 4175 1132) on the Friday night. 
Byblos (Piazza Castello 24, Misano Monte, 05 4169 0252. byblosclub.com 
<http://www.byblosclub.com>), a Mediterranean-style villa in the hills which 
offers a Latin vibe, is your best bet for Saturday night.

· Stay at Sixty Hotel (Via Milano 54, 05 4169 7851, sixtyhotel.com 
<http://www.sixtyhotel.com>), a suitably trendy establishment (it's owned by 
Miss Sixty) with artist-designed rooms from around £80. Get there with
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com> from Luton.

12. Rotterdam

Flattened during the second world war, Rotterdam has risen from the rubble 
phoenix-like to become a Blade Runner-style iconic city for innovative, 
contemporary architecture. In fact, it's been dubbed City of Architecture for 
2007. The city's more iconic bridges and skyscrapers are brought to life via 
podcasts (seerotterdam2007.nl <http://www.rotterdam2007.nl>) and the National 
Photography Museum(nederlandsfotomuseum.nl <http://www.nederlandsfotomuseum.nl>
) opens in a new location with an architectural theme in April.

· Stay at Stroom Hotel (Lloydstraat 1, 00 31 10 22 14 060, stroomrotterdam.nl 
<http://www.stroomrotterdam.nl>). Studio suite from £95. Transavia (
transavia.com <http://www.transavia.com>) flies from Stansted to Rotterdam from 
just £41.99.

13. Split

The vast palace of Roman emperor Diocletian stands at the heart of the 
Dalmatian capital, but rather like the city itself, it has been reinvented as a 
thriving hub full of shops, offices and buzzing bars. As Split is one of the 
sunniest cities in Europe, the handful of sites including the gallery and 
former home of sculptor Ivan Mestrovic (Setaliste Ivana Mestrovica 46, 00 385 
21 340 800) play second fiddle to the simple pleasures of catching some rays, 
tucking into fresh fish and enjoying an evening passeggiata. The best nightlife 
can be found on Bacvice beach, where you'll find the fine restaurantStellon 
(+385 (0) 21 000 000,stellon-split.com <http://www.stellon-split.com>), owned 
by local football star Goran Vucevic who played for Barcelona and Cologne. 
After dinner, follow the trendy crowd on to theTropic Club Equador (202 772). 

· Stay at Hotel Park (Hatzeov perivoj 3, 406 400, hotelpark-split.hr 
<http://www.hotelpark-split.hr>). Doubles from £90. Flybe.com 
<http://www.Flybe.com> from Birmingham or Wizzair.com <http://www.Wizzair.com> 
from London Luton.

14. Stockholm

If you trek to Tate Modern at every opportunity, why not spend a little more 
and indulge your passion for modern art in the city that has a museum housing 
one of the largest collections of 20th-century works in Europe. TheModerna 
Museet (Slupskjulsvägen 7-9, 00 46 8 5195 5200, modernamuseet.se 
<http://www.modernamuseet.se>) also has an excellent collection of Nordic 
sculpture and if you're craving more, head for theMillesgarden sculpture park 
(Herserudsvägen 32, 446 7580,millesgarden.se <http://www.millesgarden.se>). 
Carl Milles' fantastical bronzes grace fountains and seem to fly off tall 
pedestals, while spectacular views of the city make for an impressive backdrop. 
After your arty excursions, tuck into the delicious grazing menu atCamera Club 
(Norrmalmstorg 4, 440 3880,lacamera.se <http://www.lacamera.se>) right in the 
heart of town.

· Stay at super-central Hotel Esplanade (Strandvägen 7a, 663 0740, 
hotelesplanade.se <http://www.hotelesplanade.se>) with doubles from £115. Get 
there with Sterling.dk from Edinburgh and London.

15. Thessaloniki

Greece's second largest city has a handful of great museums and a good 
selection of shops and boutiques, but the nightlife is the major attraction.
Modiano Market is packed with trendy bars and restaurants, and the former 
industrial area ofLadadika is a hot spot for the club scene. Ask around to get 
the low-down on the hottest venue of the moment as they find (and fall from) 
favour at an alarming rate in this town.

· Stay at Daios Hotel (Nikis Avenue 59, 00 30 231 025 0200, daioshotels.com 
<http://www.daioshotels.com>). Doubles start from £100. Get there with 
Thomsonfly (thomsonfly.com <http://www.thomsonfly.com>) from Birmingham, 
Bristol, Gatwick, Luton, Newcastle, Manchester and Nottingham.

16. Trieste

Perched on the strip of Adriatic coastline just below Slovenia, Trieste has a 
Slavic flavour, a dash of the culture and canals of nearby Venice and a grand 
Habsburg architectural heritage thanks to its glory days as a prosperous port 
of the Austro-Hungarian empire. At the turn of the 20th century, it became a 
magnet for artists and writers.Ask the tourist board for information on 
literary tours of the city and go for coffee at theCaffe Pasticceria Pirona 
(Largo Barriera Vecchia 12, 040 636 046,pirona.it <http://www.pirona.it>), 
where regular patron and Trieste resident James Joyce wrote Ulysses, and Caffe 
San Marco (Via Cesare Battisti 18, 040 363 538) which was a favourite of Italo 
Svevo and Umberto Saba.

· Stay at Hotel Greif (Viale Miramare 109, 040 410 115, greifgroup.net 
<http://www.greifgroup.net>). Doubles from £112. Get there with Ryanair.com 
from Stansted.

17. Turin

The first capital of modern-day Italy is steeped in history. But it's also a 
smart modern city with cutting-edge contemporary museums includingCastello di 
Rivoli(Piazza Mafalda di Savoia, 956 5222, castellodirivoli.org 
<http://www.castellodirivoli.org>) with works by Richard Long, Joseph Beuys and 
Sol LeWitt, and theFondazione Sandretto Re Rebaudengo (Via Modane 16, 379 7600, 
fondsrr.org <http://www.fondsrr.org>) which celebrates the avant-garde 
movement. Turin also spawned a string of famously fast cars - visit theMuseo 
dell Automobile (677 666, museoauto.org <http://www.museoauto.org>) to gawp at 
Ferraris and Maseratis from years gone by. It hosted last year's Winter 
Olympics and you can enjoy one of the event's legacies by dining in great style 
at restaurantP (Piazza Castello 165, 432 3531), which was designed especially 
for the Games. The city is the home of the Slow Food movement, and there are so 
many good places to eat that it's worth just following your nose.

· Stay at Art Hotel Boston, (Via Massena 70, 500 359, hotelbostontorino.it 
<http://www.hotelbostontorino.it>), which has a modern in-house art collection 
including work by Lucio Fontana, Roy Lichtenstein and Andy Warhol. Doubles 
start at around £80.Ryanair.com <http://www.Ryanair.com> from London Stansted.

18. Valencia

Often overlooked in favour of Barcelona up the coast and Ibiza across the 
water, Valencia has become a hot destination hosting, as it is, the Americas 
Cup this year. Famous as the birthplace of paella, its excellent restaurants 
now play second fiddle to the futuristicCity of Arts and Sciences cultural 
complex built by local architect Santiago Calatrava. Make time to visit the 
ostentatious palace that houses theMuseu Nacional de Ceramica and the modern 
art museum (Guillem de Castro 118, 00 34 96 386 3000,ivam.es 
<http://www.ivam.es>) and at night head for the buzzing bars of the El Carmen 
district.

· Stay at Ad Hoc Monumental Hotel, (C Boix 4, 391 9140, <a 
href="http://www.adhochoteles.com). Doubles from around £120. Get there with
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com> from Stansted.

19. Warsaw

For all their baroque magnificence, the Polish capital's palaces, churches, 
burghers' houses and grand Royal Castle aren't quite as old as they seem, as 
they're replicas of the originals destroyed in the second world war. Other more 
contemporary cultural attractions, including theZacheta National Gallery 
(Malachowskiego 3, 00 48 22 827 5854, zacheta.art.pl) and theCentre for 
Contemporary Art (Al Ujazdowskie 6, 628 1271, csw.art.pl <http://www.csw.art.pl>
), reflect a prosperous recent past as Warsaw is one of the big boom towns of 
Eastern Europe. See this new side of the city at glitzy lounge barThe Cinnamon 
(Pl Pitsudskiego 1, 323 76 00.thecinnamon.pl <http://www.thecinnamon.pl>), 
where the local media/model/millionaire crowd down fancy cocktails and dance on 
tables until the early hours.

· Stay at Hotel Rialto (Wilcza 73, rialtowarsaw.com 
<http://www.rialtowarsaw.com>). Doubles from £115. Get there with 
centralwings.com <http://www.centralwings.com> from Edinburgh, Gatwick or 
Stansted.

20. Zurich

If you thought that Zurich was just a boring city full of bankers, think 
again. Lenin once lived here and the founders of the Dada art movement made it 
their home. Book a guided half-day bicycle tour with Guide Experience 
Switzerland (00 41 43 243 4243) to get the inside line on the latest 
counter-culture and then head for up-and-coming Seefeld district for dinner at
Nine (Seefeldstrasse 40, 44 253 7070, nine.biz <http://www.nine.biz>). 

· Stay at the super-slick Hotel Greulich (Herman-Greulich-Strasse 56, 43 243 
4243,greulich.ch <http://www.greulich.ch>) in the edgy, cultural district of 
Aussersihl. Weekend rates from £147.Airberlin.com <http://www.Airberlin.com> 
from Stansted and Manchester.

· Jeroen Bergmans is travel editor of Wallpaper*

· Prices based on a double room per night
 