
In the end it was the internet which killed the Independent newspaper  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/11/independent-owner-considering-closing-national-print-titles>
and not Rupert Murdoch. Hit by a price war launched by the News UK owner in the 
1990s, the Indy was a casualty of an industrial revolution which has changed 
the economics of the newspaper business for ever.

The Independent ceasing to print would be the death of a medium, not of a 
message | Brian Cathcart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/independent-ceasing-print-death-medium-not-message>
After almost 30 years of losing money, it was the cost of publishing a 
newspaper for so few daily readers – just 40,718 once free or discounted copies 
are stripped out – that had simply become unsustainable in an age where so much 
information is free online.

Before the leak of takeover talks for the i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/11/evgeny-lebedev-in-talks-to-sell-i-newspaper-to-johnston-press>
, the owners of the Independent had hoped to present any decision to make the 
title online only as a positive one. Evgeny Lebedev and his team are understood 
to have wanted to suggest that the death of print was simply “making the step 
that everyone else was too scared to make”.

In doing so, Lebedev and the management team had looked to the spin put on the 
BBC’s decision to close its BBC3 television channel and put its content online 
only. Simply put, this arguments says that as the future is online, we will be 
too.

The problem for the Independent is that it was relatively late to the 
internet, only taking it seriously with its website relaunch in 2008, and a 
succession of owners have never invested enough in web content. With 2.8m daily 
unique browsers, according to December’s audited circulation figures, its 
online figures have never really threatened its old rivals, lagging behind 
rivals ranging from the Daily Mail, the Guardian, the Daily Telegraph and the 
Mirror.

It wasn’t meant to be like this. Back in March 1990, sales of the then 
four-year old Indy had reached an all-time high of 423,000, eclipsing the 
Murdoch-owned Times.


Without a proprietor in the early years, the Independent was immediately seen 
as a fresh voice when it launched in 1986. Recognising the power of a brand and 
of the ad market before many others its clever ad line, provocatively asked 
readers, “The Independent: It is, are you?”.


Once the paper took off, Murdoch’s reaction was to cut the cover price of his 
then broadsheet title and start a price war which hit profits for decades to 
come. Ultimately, the Murdoch manoeuvre of the 1990s proved the financial 
benefits of a rich owner with seemingly endless pockets in the increasingly 
cut-throat newspaper market of the period.

Having become smaller than its rivals, the Independent was forced to innovate. 
It was the first to switch from broadsheet to a tabloid format in 2003, 
prompting the Times (again) to follow suit, it later became a “viewspaper” with 
opinion on the front page.

In 2010, its owners launched the i, a cheaper spin off for a younger audience, 
priced initially at 20p and which quickly found an audience. Thei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/i> now has a circulation of 268,431, 
although 67,752 of those are bulk copies. Cheaper than the paper it depends on 
for much of its content, it soon outstripped its older sister with strong 
demand in universities and other cost-conscious parts of the country.

Yet the success of the i sustained the Indy. Charlie Burgess, sports editor at 
launch who became managing editor in the 1990s, said: “If it wasn’t for the i, 
the Independent would not have lasted this long.”



The launch of the i  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/oct/18/independent-new-newspaper-i>came 
after the 12 years of full ownership by Ireland’s Tony O’Reilly, who spent tens 
of millions of pounds on the paper.

Launched in the wake of the Wapping print strike, the Independent newspaper 
got rid of its “We’re independent, are you?” tag in 2011, a year after its 
purchase for just £1 byAlexander Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev>. The billionaire former 
KGB boss and his son Evgeny have proved ready to try new things at the title 
although during their tenure the paper also dropped the taglines “free from 
party political bias” and “free from proprietorial influence”.

Although it will continue as a digital only brand, the loss of the Independent 
as a visible presence on the newsstand raises all sorts of questions about 
media plurality in a market in which rightwing titles dominate. While a 
cacophony of voices exists online, the loss of a groundbreaking newspaper which 
was once considered radical and anti-establishment is likely to be keenly felt 
at a time of political upheaval and discontent. .
 