
Behind the Lourdes Matha church in Idinthakarai, a fishing village at the 
southern tip ofIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, five women have 
abandoned their chores to protest at the Kudankulam nuclear power plant. Today 
is day 1,754 of their relay hunger strike, which began when the plant was 
fuelled in 2011.

Celine, 73, is among the five protestors, who take it in turns to go without 
food. “Not a single government, not a single political party is willing to take 
up our cause,” she says. “Only Mother Mary can save us now.”

The villagers of Idinthakarai, in Tamil Nadu state, have been protesting 
against the plant since the late 1980s, when it was proposed. But theirs is a 
lonely struggle. Few people inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> 
have even heard of their village, let alone support their protest.


In the next few months, a second unit of the plant will be fuelled. “What’s 
the point of starting a second unit when there are so many problems with the 
first?” Celine says, referring to intermittent technical faults at the plant.

As India develops, its energy needs are growing rapidly. More than 300 million 
Indians are still without electricity, a statistic Narendra Modi, the prime 
minister, has vowed to cut throughan ambitious electrification programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/21/electrifying-india-the-day-the-light-came-to-rural-hotasar>
. The promise of cheap labour and utilities has drawn major manufacturers to 
the country in the past two decades.


India consumes a whopping 872m tonnes of oil equivalent for power 
<https://yearbook.enerdata.net/>; only China and the US use more. Its annual 
energyimport bill is $120bn 
<http://qz.com/247218/how-india-can-cut-its-120-billion-annual-energy-import-bill/>
 (£83bn), which will grow to $1tn by 2040, according to aWorld Energy Output 
report <http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/weo2015/>. Pressure to adopt cleaner 
forms of energy has been mounting from foreign governments. The Indian 
government presentsnuclear energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/nuclearpower> as part of the solution 
to its looming energy crisis. TheNuclear Power Corporation of India 
<http://www.npcil.nic.in/> was set up, according to its mission statement, to 
“produce nuclear power as a safe, environmentally benign and economically 
viable source of electrical energy to meet the increasing electricity needs of 
the country”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127e8ba85f42c7ea7c64768f771003993838a6a2%2F0_0_6036_3623%2F6036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lonely%20struggle%20of%20India's%20anti-nuclear%20protesters%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lonely%20struggle%20of%20India%27s%20anti-nuclear%20protesters%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127e8ba85f42c7ea7c64768f771003993838a6a2%2F0_0_6036_3623%2F6036.jpg>
 SP Udayakumar is an anti-nuclear activist from the nearby town of Nagercoil. 
He ran in the recent state elections as a single-issue candidate. Photograph: 
Vidhi Doshi 
“People ask us, why are you against science? Why don’t you want India to 
develop?” says Sundari, an anti-nuclear activist from Idinthakarai village. “We 
want to tell them – we’re not against electricity … We’re against nuclear 
power.”

Despite India’s billions of dollars of investment in nuclear power, the latest 
figures from the Department of AtomicEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> (DAE), obtained by the 
Guardian, suggest nuclear plants produced 37,456m units of electricity, about 
2% of the country’s annual consumption.

SP Udayakumar, an anti-nuclear activist from the nearby town of Nagercoil, ran 
in May’s state elections as a single-issue candidate. “If India was getting 
half or a third of its energy from nuclear plants, then maybe there would be an 
argument for it,” he says. “But after all this, after years of crushing the 
peoples’ protest at Idinthakarai, is it really worth it?”

Udayakumar sees the nuclear programme as a costly prestige exercise that 
endangers the lives of millions. Plus, he points out, villagers are still 
living in the dark, since most of India’s energy is used by the industrial 
sector. “Who really benefits from the nuclear plants in the end, except the 
foreign companies that are building these plants in India?” he says.

In 1986, Mikhail Gorbachev, Soviet leader at the time, made his first state 
visit to India. Two years later, he and Rajiv Gandhi, the incumbent prime 
minister, signed an agreement for two nuclear plants at Kudankulam.

Protests began a month later. The 1986 Chernobyl accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/chernobyl-nuclear-disaster> and the 
1982Bhopal gas disaster  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/dec/04/bhopal-25-years-indra-sinha>
 were of concern to the local fishing communities. How could the governments 
that had shown such catastrophic negligence be trusted to build a nuclear plant 
in their neighbourhood?


The end of the Soviet Union in 1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/jul/14/soviet-union-collapse-in-pictures>
 and theassassination of Rajiv Gandhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rajiv-gandhi> in 1991 derailed the 
Kudankulam plans until 1997, when Indian’s HD Deve Gowda and Russia’s Boris 
Yeltsin renewed the agreement. Construction of the plant began in 2002.

Many countries have taken a slice of India’s budding nuclear energy market: 
the UK, Canada, the US, Australia and Japan have all offered expertise and 
resources, andnuclear plants, backed by foreign governments, are dotted around 
India’s coasts and in central states 
<http://mospi.nic.in/Mospi_New/upload/Energy_stats_2015_26mar15.pdf>.


Yet foreign governments have shirked responsibility. When President Barack 
Obama visited India last year,he signed a deal limiting the US’s legal 
liability in the event of an accident at a nuclear plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/25/obama-modi-limit-us-liability-nuclear-disaster>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15125d367d0064ddf15da86f930951703fd6b29%2F0_15_5536_3323%2F5536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lonely%20struggle%20of%20India's%20anti-nuclear%20protesters%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lonely%20struggle%20of%20India%27s%20anti-nuclear%20protesters%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa15125d367d0064ddf15da86f930951703fd6b29%2F0_15_5536_3323%2F5536.jpg>
 The Russian-built nuclear power plant at Kudankulam, about 700km south of 
Chennai. Photograph: Rafiq Maqbool/AP 
At Kudankulam, a joint project with Russia 
<http://www.power-technology.com/projects/kudankulam-nuclear-power-plant/>, 
four more units are planned.


The resolve of the five protestors remains unshaken, but many of the villagers 
who supported them initially have realised the futility of resisting. The 
village chief’s husband, Sagayaraj, speaks on behalf of his wife. “The protests 
have destroyed our village,” he says. “I supported the protests at first, but 
now I’ve realised that we just need to take what we can get. This is not just 
about Idinthakarai or Kudankulam – it is an international issue. If they close 
the plant here, there will be protests to close nuclear plants all around the 
country. Now people realise the scale of what we’re trying to do. It’s like 
we’re protesting against Russia – against all the foreign governments. How can 
our small village take on international powers?”

When the plant was planned, the government promised windmills, running water, 
schools, colleges, hospitals, a harbour and more. So far, none of these have 
been delivered, partly because the villagers refuse to cooperate.


The protests in Idinthakarai were reinvigorated after the Fukushima disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fukushima> triggered by the tsunami in 
Japan. The accident alarmed people in tsunami-prone coastal villages, and 
hundreds came to Lourdes Matha church, which became the focal point of 
resistance.


Police were dispatched to Idinthakarai to keep the protests in check. They 
used tear gas and fired into the crowd, killing five people.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc568de1c5169e8aeeaa252b42ac99b2ecad8502%2F0_92_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lonely%20struggle%20of%20India's%20anti-nuclear%20protesters%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lonely%20struggle%20of%20India%27s%20anti-nuclear%20protesters%20%7C%20Vidhi%20Doshi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Flonely-struggle-india-anti-nuclear-protesters-tamil-nadu-kudankulam-idinthakarai%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc568de1c5169e8aeeaa252b42ac99b2ecad8502%2F0_92_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Kudankulam nuclear power plant is in the fishing village of Idinthakarai, 
at the southern tip of the country. Photograph: K Vigneshwaran 
Many of the residents, including the village chief, have been arrested on 
sedition charges. Passports have been seized and bank accounts of protest 
leaders scrutinised. “The government is treating us like terrorists,” says 
Sundari.


The Guardian tried many times to contact the local police and visited the 
Kudankulam police station, but no one was available to comment.


A spokesperson from the DAE, speaking about the protests at Idinthakarai, 
said: “All the matters are being addressed amicably.” The spokesperson said the 
National Disaster Management Authority has “put in place all the measures in 
the event of nuclear and radiological emergencies”.

None of the villagers interviewed, including the chief, had ever seen the 
government’s disaster plans or heard of any evacuation exercises in the village.


The government has given out mixed messages on nuclear power. Minister of 
power Piyush Goyalspoke against it at the India economic summit in 2014 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/govt-cautious-on-westdiscarded-nuclear-technology-says-piyush-goyal-at/article6570575.ece>
, saying Europe and America had stopped building their own nuclear capacity. 
“This government would like to be cautious so that we are not saddled with 
something only under the garb of clean energy or alternate energy,” he said.


Yet Modi has signed deals and held talks with countries including the UK 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/narendra-modi-uk-visit-india-britain-sign-over-137b-deals-finalize-civil-nuclear-2182779>
 andJapan 
<http://www.firstpost.com/world/implications-of-a-deal-what-the-india-japan-nuclear-agreement-really-means-2543274.html>
 in the past two years. The deals are in line with Modi’s predecessors’ 
ambitions for nuclear expansion. India has signed nuclear energy deals with at 
least 10 countries, including Namibia and Kazakhstan.


A spokesperson from the DAE said: “Nuclear power is a clean and green source 
of energy [that] does not contribute to increases in carbon emissions in the 
environment. Right at the design stage itself, necessary safety features are 
incorporated for safe operation of the plant. Post-Fukushima these safety 
features have been augmented and strengthened to address any beyond design 
basis incidents.”

 