
Alexandra Pringle, editor-in-chief, Bloomsbury

The book that made my year: The Song of Achilles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781408816035/the-song-of-achilles>
 by Madeline Miller. Bloomsbury occupied half the Orange shortlist and this was 
the winner. It's a novel I fell desperately in love with and pre-empted 
half-wildly. Its publication has been a dream from beginning to end.

The book that deserved to do better: It has to be David Park's humane and 
beautifulThe Light of Amsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/04/light-of-amsterdam-david-park-review>
. Yes, it was chosen for the Fiction Uncovered promotion; yes, it was 
shortlisted for the Irish Novel of the Year award. But it and its author 
deserve more. His day will come.

I wish I'd published: Zadie Smith's NW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241144145/nw> (Hamish 
Hamilton) because she is, quite simply, the bee's knees.

Richard Beswick, publishing director, Little, Brown & Abacus

The book that made my year: After a long and occasionally twitchy gestation, 
the publication of Tom Holland's epic retelling of the clash of ancient empires 
and the rise of Islam,In the Shadow of the Sword, was 90% joy and 10% sheer 
relief. The book deserved its near-universal praise (with the exception of a
rather crotchety man in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/04/in-shadow-of-sword-tom-holland>) 
and reached number 3 in the bestseller list.

The book that deserved to do better: Jennie Erdal's brilliantly witty novel 
The Missing Shade of Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/13/missing-shade-blue-jennie-erdal-review>
 sold very respectably and had glowing reviews. But in my dreams she was 
"podiuming" at the Guildhall.

I wish I'd published: I loved John Lanchester's Capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780571234608/capital> 
(Faber), which managed to be clever, funny, moving and informative. One of 
those on its own is pretty good for a novel.

Simon Winder, publishing director, Penguin Press

The book that made my year: I was particularly proud to have published Steve 
Roud and Julia Bishop'sNew Penguin Book of English Folk Songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2012/jun/01/royalty-english-literature-folk-song-podcast>
. Every copy we have sold has added to the sum of human happiness.

The book that deserved to do better: The Nolympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/sportandleisure/9780718197612/the-nolympics-one-mans-struggle-against-sporting-hysteria>
 by Nicholas Lezard. The author and I were talking at the beginning of the year 
about the usual topic of the time: how the London Olympics was a disgusting 
nazified honeypot, from which some of the worst people in Britain were helping 
themselves to billions of pounds of public money, hiding behind the pointless 
actions of some monomaniac oddballs who ran about for a while or threw stuff. 
We thought it would be a fun idea if Nick wrote a day-by-day account of this 
outrage. Everything went exactly as planned – billions of pounds were taken off 
in sacks, glasses clinked and everyone geared up to move on to the financially 
extractive opportunities in Rio. The only unexpected event was that in the 
opening ceremony the letters "NHS" very briefly flashed up. This so completely 
disoriented liberals that they suddenly fell into line and went all Leni 
Riefenstahl for a fortnight. This, sadly, leftThe Nolympics, a very funny and 
engaging book, high, dry and unreviewed.

I wish I'd published: Chris Ware's Building Stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/21/building-stories-chris-ware-review>
 (Jonathan Cape). The serious publishing work on this unbelievably complicated 
and wonderful cardboard box filled with magazines, fold-outs, a diary and 
various bits of paper– all adding up to one of the great graphic novels – was 
done in New York and the Far East. But I would like to have been able to abuse 
the traditional editor's privilege of phoning an author up to burble about how 
much I admire, cherish and actually love him.

Robin Robertson, deputy publishing director, Jonathan Cape

The book that made my year: I was pleased for Sean Borodale, whose strange, 
intense and disarming first poetry collection,Bee Journal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780224097215/bee-journal>, 
has been shortlisted for many prizes, including the Costa and the Eliot in 
January. It's encouraging to see a fresh talent being noticed in an environment 
that is currently so fractured and factional.

The book that deserved to do better: Light Lifting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/02/light-lifting-alexander-macleod-review>
 by Alexander MacLeod is a first book of stories, set largely in Windsor, 
Ontario. The styles and settings of these pieces couldn't be more different 
from his father Alistair's, but they are almost as good: honest, elegant, very 
powerful. Shortlisted for the Giller prize and already a Canadian bestseller, 
it received an extraordinary number of positive reviews comparing him to great 
Canadians such as Atwood, Munro and Ondaatje. Despite all this – and a series 
of very successful UK readings – the book did not sell in significant numbers, 
which can only be the result of the trade's prejudice against short stories.

I wish I'd published: John Banville's Ancient Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/22/ancient-light-john-banville-review>
 (Viking); Denis Johnson'sTrain Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/13/train-dreams-denis-johnson-review>
 (Granta). Two very different novels by two masters of the form.

Roland Philipps, managing director, John Murray

The book that made my year: Patrick Leigh Fermor: An Adventure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/21/leigh-fermor-adventure-cooper-review>
 by Artemis Cooper. Because Paddy was the greatest prose writer of the 20th 
century on the John Murray list, and because Artemis worked over so many years 
to produce her superb book, which summons the man in all his glory (and 
failings too). I was anxious that it would not appeal down the generations, but 
all ages of reader have taken the book up in huge numbers.

The book that deserved to do better: The Illicit Happiness of Other People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781848543096/illicit-happiness-of-other-people>
 by Manu Joseph. Joseph's second novel confirms him, to my mind, as one of the 
leading new Indian novelists – he tells great truths about modern India while 
being thoroughly entertaining. It got great reviews in a few places, but not 
enough, and not enough sales in a very tough environment.

I wish I'd published: Bring Up the Bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780007315093/bring-up-the-bodies>
 by Hilary Mantel (Fourth Estate) – an electrifying novel, eclipsing evenWolf 
Hall – and Robert Macfarlane's The Old Ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780241143810/the-old-ways-a-journey-on-foot>
 (Hamish Hamilton): travel writing, history, nature and people all beautifully 
woven together. Prose style aside, it reminded me of Patrick Leigh Fermor's 
best work. AndPulphead by John Jeremiah Sullivan (Vintage) had some of the most 
exciting prose and erudite insights of any book I read.

Chris Hamilton-Emery, director, Salt

The book that made my year: Without doubt the book that had the biggest impact 
on Salt was Alison Moore's Man Booker-shortlistedThe Lighthouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781907773174/the-lighthouse>
, a novel that transcends genre while playing with genre motifs, providing dark 
humour as well as a deliciously transgressive view of fate and the horrors of 
recursive human experience. It transformed our finances for 2012 and put us on 
the map as a fiction publisher.

The book that deserved to do better: Susan Wicks's third novel, A Place to Stop
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781907773075/a-place-to-stop>
, is a revelatory morality tale and Wicks is an extraordinary prose stylist, 
well known for her award-winning poetry as well as a terrific memoir. This book 
puts all her strengths on show. It certainly deserved more critical approval.

I wish I'd published: Swimming Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781908276025/swimming-home>
 by Deborah Levy, a triumph for another terrific small publisher, And Other 
Stories. As a subscriber, I'd read this before the Man Booker prize 
shortlisting, and it's a wonderful, sly page-turner that plays around with 
expectations. We bought Levy's backlist immediately after reading this.

Suzanne Baboneau, publishing director, Simon & Schuster

The book that made my year: Karen Thompson Walker's The Age of Miracles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780857207234/the-age-of-miracles>
. A beautiful, understated debut to which I keep returning. It works on so many 
levels, making the reader stop and think about the rhythms of our lives and the 
enormous impact of one tiny twist of nature on the world, a community and a 
family.

The book that deserved to do better: Tim Lott's Under the Same Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847373052/under-the-same-stars>
 is the dazzling story of two brothers who go on a road trip to the US looking 
for their missing father. Their relationship is strained at the best of times, 
the search for a father who deserted them long ago striking to the very heart 
of their rivalry. Reviewers were all over this, his first novel for five years; 
had their excitement translated to book sales, we would certainly have seen a 
major bestseller.

I wish I'd published: Gillian Flynn's Gone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780297859383/gone-girl> 
(Weidenfeld & Nicolson). I would have loved to have taken this extraordinary, 
one-of-a-kind thriller by the scruff of its neck and tried to publish the hell 
out of it here, to emulate even some of the incredible success it has had in 
America. The paperback deserves to be huge on word-of-mouth alone.

Jamie Byng, publisher, Canongate

The book that made my year: Richard Holloway's memoir Leaving Alexandria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780857860736/leaving-alexandria-a-memoir-of-faith-and-doubt>
 is the sixth book we have published together and the first to hit the 
bestseller lists. He deserves all the stunning responses he has had for this 
wise and generous and rewarding book. He is also a joy to know and work with.

The book that deserved to do better: James Meek's The Heart Broke In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780857862907/the-heart-broke-in>
 is a major book in every sense by one of the most entertaining novelists 
writing today. I had hoped it might do even better thanThe People's Act of Love
, and it has a lot of fans, but it never got any prize luck. It's been 
nominated for the Costa Novel of the Year award, though, so perhaps it will end 
up getting the wide readership it deserves.

I wish I'd published: Always hard to pick, but for financial reasons, Fifty 
Shades (Arrow); for pure entertainment, Rod: The Autobiography (Century); and 
for quality, Ben Lerner'sLeaving the Atocha Station (Granta).

Philip Gwyn Jones, executive publisher, Granta Books & Portobello Books

The book that made my year: Katherine Boo's Behind the Beautiful Forevers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/society/9781846274497/behind-the-beautiful-forevers-life-death-and-hope-in-a-mumbai-slum>
 (Portobello). Who would think that a book about poverty in India could capture 
so many readers and bag so many prize nominations (including the Guardian's)? 
To see great literature triumphant is always energising. It proves again that 
publishing can be surprising, and that masterpieces can still sell to the many.

The book that deserved to do better: Keith Ridgway's Hawthorn & Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847085269/hawthorn-and-child>
 (Granta). This gave me my first experience of the publishing power of Twitter. 
While booksellers failed to order the book in any quantity, up stepped the 
network of really superb critics who commune about contemporary lit on Twitter 
to rally round. It has been picking up some "book of the year" mentions, so 
things are looking up for one of the best novelists on these islands.

The book I wish I'd published: If I must single one out, I'll go for Zadie 
Smith'sNW <https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241144145/nw>
. People complain that she leaves things incomplete, takes liberties, should be 
edited more and so on, but, dammit, she remains by far the most natural and 
most challenging novelist contemporary Britain has at hand to help imagine 
itself into what it's becoming.

Stefan Tobler, publisher, And Other Stories

The book that made my year: Swimming Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781908276025/swimming-home>
 by Deborah Levy. It was so gratifying to see it chosen for the Man Booker 
shortlist. Levy is finally achieving the recognition she has long deserved – 
and her imminent book of stories,Black Vodka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781908276162/black-vodka-ten-stories>
, will now reach the audience it deserves.

The book that deserved to do better: Lightning Rods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781908276117/lightning-rods>
 by Helen DeWitt. The novel, a hilarious "what if …" book about corporate 
culture and cliché, hasn't done badly, but she's such a unique writer, it's 
disappointing that it hasn't reached more readers.

I wish I'd published: Sombrero Fallout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780857862648/sombrero-fallout>
 by Richard Brautigan, a gem of a book in Canongate's Canon series. The 
slapstick is a hoot but then the lyricism takes you to a much more delicate 
place. At a punishingly busy time of the year, reading this book was a pure 
pleasure.

Nicholas Pearson, publishing director, Fourth Estate

The book that made my year: Best not dream that the first two instalments of a 
trilogy will both win the Man Booker.Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> should have been read in huge 
numbers for the past 20 years, but it is never too late for everyone to catch 
up.

The book that deserved to do better: Ian Sansom's Paper: An Elegy. As we enter 
a world beyond paper, Sansom tells us just how the white stuff has shaped us up 
to now. Non-fiction at its very best.

I wish I'd published: I didn't have the nerve in the vicious auction for Kevin 
Powers'sThe Yellow Birds (Sceptre), which recently won this paper's First Book 
award. It is full of a strange poetry and a fierce honesty, and deserves the 
high praise that has come its way.
 