
Our grassroots campaign is fighting NHS bursary cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline/2016/jun/20/grassroots-campaign-fighting-nhs-bursary-cuts>
At what point is a qualified nurse – who entered the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> expecting long hours and low pay – 
pushed so far that they can no longer carry on? For Stacey, a 27-year-old nurse 
from Liverpool, it was when she had become so broken that she felt she had lost 
every one of the “five Cs” that are instilled in nurses during their training: 
commitment, conscience, competence, compassion, and confidence.

Stacey worked in A&E for five years. When she started, there were 20 nurses on 
the emergency ward; by the time she left last month, there were 11. Meanwhile, 
there has been a dramatic increase in patients going to A&E: a rise of 400,000 
in a decade. Stacey, like many other nurses across the country, felt she had 
reached breaking point.

“With A&E, you never know what is coming through the door,” she says. “It has 
to be very organised. We had three wards – majors, minors and observation – and 
each is supposed to have at least two nurses. But when I left, we were so 
stretched that there was often only one. There’s a reason you need at least 
two.”

She thinks back to her most stressful nights, on the observation ward, which 
admits patients suffering from problems such as overdoses or brain injuries, 
who are then observed over 24 hours.

“It was impossible to keep my eye on everyone, and there were times when 
someone would rapidly deteriorate and I would be too busy with other patients,” 
she says. On really busy nights, the observation ward became a “dumping ground” 
for patients with complex medical problems who could not get a bed anywhere 
else. “It was really tough. There were cases where patients were just put 
there, and I hadn’t been trained to deal with their problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94fece7af55d31ba2131e723f08c7ed1217edd1f%2F0_0_4496_2698%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20other%20NHS%20crisis%3A%20the%20overworked%20nurses%20who%20are%20leaving%20in%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20other%20NHS%20crisis%3A%20the%20overworked%20nurses%20who%20are%20leaving%20in%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94fece7af55d31ba2131e723f08c7ed1217edd1f%2F0_0_4496_2698%2F4496.jpg>
 Nurses’ public demonstrations have barely made a ripple in the media, but if 
more keep leaving the profession, shortages will become impossible to ignore. 
Photograph: Matthew Chattle/Rex/Shutterstock 
“If you’re on your own and you turn your back for one moment, you could miss a 
crucial point, and those are the moments when you feel very unsafe. I can look 
back at that with hindsight – there were times I was in very dodgy territory. 
But if I didn’t do it, who would? It was often life and death.” There were 
senior doctors and nurses around, but sometimes they were just too busy to ask. 
When it all got too much, Stacey would take herself to the toilet and cry for a 
few minutes – and then go back to work. In the end, it all just got too much. 
And so she left. She wants to continue as a nurse, if she can – but the 
emotional weight of A&E had become too much.

Stacey’s experience is by no means isolated – but it is barely noticed. Last 
week, Britain’s junior doctors started to vote on therevised contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/26/junior-doctors-leader-urges-stop-scaremongering-online-abuse>
 that was offered to them after their long-standing dispute with the 
government. If they accept it, the saga will finally come to an end early next 
month. But as the country has learned about the enormous pressure that doctors 
are under, another vital link in the medical chain has continued to be put 
under more strain.

NHS nurse shortages 'to last another four years'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/nhs-nurse-shortages-to-last-another-four-years>
Despite record numbers of nurses taking time off because of stress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/17/nurses-nhs-stress-leave-staff-breaking-point>
, their public demonstrations have barely made a ripple in the media – but many 
have been voting with their feet. Now, as people like Stacey conclude that they 
can no longer work under current conditions, the NHS faces a chronic nursing 
shortage. Soon, experts fear, everyone will be aware of what that means. “The 
consequences could be catastrophic if we don’t address the situation soon,” says
Alison Leary 
<http://www.lsbu.ac.uk/about-us/news/lsbu-professor-alison-leary-awarded-royal-college-nursing-fellowship>
, a registered nurse and professor of healthcare and workforce modelling at 
London South Bank University. “The simple answer is we need to train more 
nurses.”

In some parts of the UK, politicians are responding to that concern. Earlier 
this year, a law was passed in Wales making minimum staffing levels a legal 
requirement; this week, Nicola Sturgeon promised that Scotland would follow 
suit. But while the Royal College of Nursing welcomed that announcement, it 
stressed thatextra investment would be required 
<https://www.rcn.org.uk/news-and-events/news/welsh-government-announces-additional-investment-in-nurse-training-places>
 to make it work. In England, there is no equivalent law in place.

There are currently 23,443 nursing vacancies in England, Wales and Northern 
Ireland –equivalent to 9% of the workforce 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-35667939>. Many trusts are reportedly running 
on nursing numbers that break safe staffing guidelines.

Leary worries that nurses simply don’t represent their needs as effectively as 
their doctor colleagues, which means that the problem goes unaddressed. 
“Nursing is seen as primarily a service-only job,” she says. “But it’s actually 
a safety-critical profession. There is a lot of risk in caring for the very 
unwell, and registered nurses manage that risk.”

The problem, she explains, is that nurses “are not good at articulating their 
own value. Decision-makers see nurses as a service role with little or no 
decision-making ability … but if you’re forced to cut your staffing quality, 
people will suffer. The pendulum has swung towards cutting costs and away from 
patient safety.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7b1f3bc73e7e95d99dc410e1a8dafa4e4bbce2e%2F0_0_3500_2501%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20other%20NHS%20crisis%3A%20the%20overworked%20nurses%20who%20are%20leaving%20in%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20other%20NHS%20crisis%3A%20the%20overworked%20nurses%20who%20are%20leaving%20in%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7b1f3bc73e7e95d99dc410e1a8dafa4e4bbce2e%2F0_0_3500_2501%2F3500.jpg>
 Nicola Sturgeon at the Royal College of Nursing (RCN) congress in Glasgow, 
where she guaranteed to retain free tuition and bursaries for Scotland. 
Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
One way to fill the gaps is to recruit agency staff, which in the past year 
cost NHS trusts £23.5m. “A lot of time is taken up filling in the gaps with 
agency nurses who are completely new to the job, and there are many jobs they 
can’t do – for example, intravenous jobs,” says Lisa, a nurse who works in 
acute medicine. “This means more work, as you may have six allocated patients 
in one shift, but you end up actually having more than ten. This isn’t 
officially recorded – you just do it. But most of the time the gaps aren’t even 
filled.”

Lisa has seen patients left in pain for hours, or waiting outside with 
paramedics due to a lack of beds and nurses in A&E triage, or going too long 
without important drugs such as insulin or antibiotics. “It could all be 
avoided if there were just more of us.”

She paints a grim picture of what her profession has become. “On the worst 
days, I feel like I’m getting pissed on all the time,” she says. “That is what 
it feel like. I’m full of self-doubt.” She, too, is looking to get out of the 
wards.

Major hospital incidents becoming year-round occurrence, nurses warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/21/hospital-major-incidents-year-round-occurrence-nurses-warn>
Even the story of the most feted nurse in British history is rooted in the 
perception of the job as dispensable. In January 1867,Florence Nightingale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/century/1910-1919/Story/0,,126410,00.html> wrote a 
letter to Sir Thomas Watson, president of the Royal College of Physicians, 
saying she was shocked to find nursing was often left to “those who were too 
old, too weak, too drunken, too dirty, too stupid or too bad to do anything 
else”. But this idea of nurses was transformed during the Crimean war, when 
Nightingale, along with her 38 volunteer nurses, carried out dramatic 
improvements in the sanitation of hospitals and the nutrition of soldiers, 
reducing death rates by two thirds and starting a worldwide health reform.

There are plenty of nurses who still take satisfaction in their profession, 
and who describe well-staffed wards, good training and the rewards of teamwork. 
Phoebe Coghlan, a nurse at a central London hospital, remains optimistic. 
“I want to stay in the NHS because I love it,” she says. “It is a huge 
privilege to be a nurse, and to see people at the most important moments of 
their lives.” But she also sees the critical problems. “It is tough,” she says. 
“I know a lot of nurses feel despondent. But I’m lucky to have a fantastically 
strong and supportive team around me. It’s really tough and shifts can be 
unbearably busy, but I am a happy nurse.”

But as discontent becomes more widespread, things are coming to a head. Last 
week, a coalition of more than 20 charities and professional bodies, including 
the Royal College of Nursing and the British Medical Association, sent an open 
letter to David Cameron voicing their opposition toa new round of cuts that 
they describe as “reckless” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/18/government-reckless-axing-student-nurse-funding>
: plans to remove the student bursaries paid to nurses and replace them with 
loans. If this happens, says the trade union Unison,nurses will face debts 
of more than £50,000 after three years’ training 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/news/press-release/2016/01/axing-nhs-bursaries-will-saddle-nurses-with-debt-until-retirement-warns-unison>
, and shortages will get worse. Last month, nurses and midwives from across the 
country gathered at Westminster to lobby MPs. Many accused the government of 
silencing the profession by not providing a full consultation and failing to 
debate the issue fully in parliament.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e0ffb08c15439d725290ad52fb4cb3b0761abf%2F599_1527_3393_4242%2F3393.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20other%20NHS%20crisis%3A%20the%20overworked%20nurses%20who%20are%20leaving%20in%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20other%20NHS%20crisis%3A%20the%20overworked%20nurses%20who%20are%20leaving%20in%20despair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fthe-other-nhs-crisis-the-overworked-nurses-who-are-leaving-in-despair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39e0ffb08c15439d725290ad52fb4cb3b0761abf%2F599_1527_3393_4242%2F3393.jpg>
 ‘There is no way I could have trained without a bursary, and that’s true for 
so many people today’ … nurse Linda Hobson. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for 
the Guardian 
Among the 80 or so people present was Linda Hobson, a nurse at Newcastle 
Hospital and a regional chair at Unison. “I qualified as a nurse in 1997 and I 
trained on a bursary. It wasn’t a huge amount of money, but it allowed me to 
train,” she says. “I wasn’t living at home, I had no one to depend on 
financially. There is no way I could have trained without it, and this is true 
for so many people today.”

Nurses aren’t like other students. Their average age is 29, and 40% of them 
already have families. Hobson says many feel they are not able to take out 
loans, and she worries that the new system would push the NHS into further 
debt, as it is unlikely that many nurses would be able to pay the loans back.

She echoes Leary’s point about the need for a PR offensive. “Nurses are very 
good at advocating for their patients, but not as good at sticking up for 
themselves. Nurses need to start challenging how they themselves are being 
treated. Too many think no one will listen and nothing will change. If the 
whole of the nursing profession got behind the campaign demanding legally 
enforced safe staffing levels, that would be a good start, and I believe it 
would encourage more nurses to return to the profession, as well as preventing 
others from leaving.”

The government sees things differently. “We are putting a record £1.4bn into 
transforming the support available to young people in every area of the 
country,” a spokesperson told the Observer last week. The Department of Health 
argues that the plans to move to loans will “mean up to 10,000 more training 
places by the end of this parliament, with student nurses getting around 25% 
more financial support while they study”.

But nurses say that the solution is inadequate – and time is running out. 
Alison Leary’s main worry is the ageing of the current workforce, and the fact 
that the retirement age for many of them is 55. “Many nurses are retiring 
as soon as they can because they are exhausted. Many of the current issues are 
a result of a workforce planning strategy, based on what the government is 
willing to spend, not the demand from patients. This has meant that England has 
not trained enough registered nurses, and the current workforce of experienced 
nurses is ageing.”

Recalling her early training, consultant nurse Angela sips her tea while on 
a five-minute break from her A&E shift. “I don’t think I would still be here if 
it weren’t for this stuff,” she says, pointing to a mug saying “Got 
Painkillers?”.

The future of nursing: bursaries versus loans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/feb/23/the-future-of-nursing-bursaries-versus-loans>
“The tea, I mean, not the painkillers – although they were definitely needed 
at times!” She is in her 30th year in the profession, and laughs nostalgically 
when looking back at her training. “It’s mad, I had no idea I would ever have 
the level of responsibility I do now. I remember seeing one nurse fit a cannula 
when I was starting out and thinking it was the most impressive thing ever, but 
nurses do this all the time, no problem. Look at advanced practitioner nurses – 
they do jobs many doctors cannot do. Some even do surgery. I love my job, but 
I’m tired. These staffing shortages are felt from the bottom to the top, and my 
body tells me I need to retire as soon as I can. If you have the stamina, it’s 
a great job, but you seem to need a lot nowadays.”

The worry is that when nurses like Angela retire, their wisdom and experience 
will not be replaced. Rachael Hayes is a junior doctor who has recently 
completed six months on A&E; she says nurses are a critical part of her 
learning. “When you see an experienced nurse who knows what they’re doing, it’s 
quite amazing,” she says. ”They know the wards inside out and make the 
department run so much more efficiently. As a junior doctor, I feel much much 
calmer when I’m surrounded by good nurses, and I have learned so much from 
them. If this is lost, we’d be in trouble.”

As Hayes’s experience suggests, when nurses like Stacey leave the profession, 
the work remaining for those left behind, doctors and nurses alike, will only 
get harder. But when Stacey looks back on her time in A&E, it’s not the load on 
her fellow professionals that gets her down the most. It’s the consequences for 
patients – and the human connection at the very heart of nursing. “We have 
to hold the hands of dying patients, speak to bereaved relatives, speak to 
people feeling the worst pain they will ever suffer,” she says. “How can you 
show compassion when you’re doing the work of several other people?”
 