
The streets are suddenly full of people ignoring obvious obstacles and dangers 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/2016/07/13/pokmon-go-addict-stabbed-while-playing-refuses-to-get-treatment/>
 because they are playing a collective game on their smartphones. Pokémon Go 
requires players to walk around looking through their smartphone cameras, 
waiting for them to show an image of a Pokémon superimposed onto the real 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/7/12/12158372/pokemon-go-ios-android-game-questions>
-world scene. The aim is to capture them with a phone gesture: there are 150 
different varieties, some more common than others. The game has been a 
sensation in a sensational world (the games market worldwide grossed $6bn in 
May), putting 25% on the value of Nintendo, the company that owns Pokémon, and 
downloaded so often in its first week that it is now on more smartphones than 
thedating app Tinder and has as many active users as Twitter 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/pokmon-gobigger-than-tinder-overtake-twitter-similarweb-data-stock-price-nintendo-niantic-2016-7>
. Yet, technically, it is unremarkable: what’s interesting is what it tells us 
about ourselves, and about the economy that we work and play within.

To overlay reality with an imagined meaning, to blur the boundary between real 
and virtual worlds, is something we have always done. The technology has 
changed, but in London, for example, there is usually a queue at King’s Cross 
station for the sign marking “Platform 9¾”, from where the Hogwarts Express is 
supposed to leave – a collective fantasy almost entirely driven by print. 
Augmented reality has long been imagined in science fiction, written about and 
filmed. The smartphone gives it another technological expression but it can 
hardly be said to give it a new reality. What isnovel about Pokémon Go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-addictive-game-shares-much-with-religious-devotion>
 is that it has taken an existing game framework and plugged into a story, or a 
game, that many of the players have been familiar with since their childhood: 
the young adults playing on their smartphones now are those who played Pokémon 
with cards and game consoles in their schooldays.

Play is by definition an activity undertaken for its own sake, with no other 
reward. Marketing childhood games changed something fundamental. The game was 
no longer the property of the players. The rules could no longer be altered to 
suit them. In some ways this led to better and more interesting games. But it 
also means that the players’ joys were increasingly some companies’ profits. 
With the emergence of computer games, the distinction between play and commerce 
vanished almost entirely and with the present dominance of massive multiplayer 
games, in which people play with each other spontaneously inside an imaginary 
world which canhave considerable cash value 
<https://www.superdataresearch.com/blog/us-digital-games-market/?mc_cid=7ebaa0e28f&mc_eid=7c265c760f>
, the old rules of childhood have almost disappeared.

Pokémon Go offers the players a chance to revert to the pursuits of their 
childhood. It seems to have little appeal to people who never played the 
original game. But it offers the owners much more. Google has recruited an army 
of pedestrians who will map the urban world for it. By designating some places 
as important to the game it can draw players there, and it is only a matter of 
time before it starts selling to businesses the ability to draw in potential 
customers like that. After that will come location-based advertising, where the 
phone in your hand will try to sell you things depending onyour physical 
location <http://www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2008/09/endorphin-branding>, 
just as it presently does depending on your travels across the web. The 
ultimate goal of Pokémon Go is to make shopping the only game in town. If that 
happens, we will all be the poorer.
 