
Marks & Spencer is not dying: it owns more than a thousand stores, often in 
prime high street sites. Last year, it mademore than £600m profit 
<http://annualreport.marksandspencer.com/#our-performance>. Its revenues are 
huge: over £10bn, which is about the equivalent ofthe GDP of a country the size 
of Malta <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_GDP_(PPP)>. So 
there is plenty of life in it yet. But it is wounded, and trying to heal it is 
turning out to be much harder than even Marc Bolland, the smooth-talking Dutch 
chief executive expected. On Thursday, along with disappointing clothes and 
homeware sales figures,he announced his unexpectedly early departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/marks-spencer-chief-executive-marc-bolland>
.

If restoring this behemoth of the retail economy to robust good health was 
going to be easy, it would have happened years ago. Mr Bolland is 
well-regarded. The company’s share price has been on an erratic but generally 
upward trajectory ever since he took over more than five years ago. He appears 
to have cracked the worst glitches in the digital sales business, and the food 
side continues to grow at a steady rate. But the old staples ofknickers and 
knitwear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/07/can-steve-rowe-save-ms-fashion>
 are floundering and the search for the perfect homeware offer goes on. Retail 
analysts think his successor, Steve Rowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/steve-rowe-new-m-and-s-marks-and-spencer-boss-profile>
, will have an easier task than Mr Bolland did. There are plenty of reasons why 
he won’t.

M&S blames its disappointing results on the weather. So does Next, another 
high street titan famed for its retail genius that floundered over Christmas. 
But the latest figures from the mid-market business analysts BDO show high 
street retail overall is down by more than 5% across the board; it doesn’t 
sound very plausible that the lack of a few frosty days has precipitated a 
crisis in traditional retail (although wet days are the enemy of outdoor 
shopping). Nor can it all be blamed on the failure of no longer novel wheezes 
like November’s Black Friday, nor savvy consumers now well-educated in the 
pricing strategies of their high street favourites. The economy has been 
growing more strongly than at any time since the 2008 crash. And although on 
Thursday , in a speech widely interpreted as an attempt to get his explanation 
for a likely economic slowdown by next year accepted before it happens, the 
chancellor, George Osborne, warned against complacency about the recovery, 
there is no sign that retail generally is suffering. Car sales are atan 
all-time high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/uk-record-car-sales-driven-rising-consumer-confidence>
, John Lewis did well in December and consumer spending and borrowing are big 
drivers behind current economic growth. China’s slowdown and the collapse in 
commodity prices may take their toll in the future, but their impact is not 
being felt yet.

So it seems a particular kind of retail is feeling the pressure the most: the 
mid-market, mid-range, store-based variety. And maybe M&S, symbol of postwar 
prosperity, is hard hit for a very particular reason: its business model may be 
past its use-by date. In the same way that the universal appeal of the BBC is 
undermined by the transformation in TV consumption patterns now we can watch 
what we want when we want – threatening, in the eyes of some, the justification 
for the licence fee – and just as an under-resourced NHS is feeling the 
pressure of the demand for a health service which is always available at a time 
and place that is convenient to us, so, maybe, the basic M&S model of quality 
high-volume mid-range fashion has had its day.

In inverse proportion to the soaring appeal of ready-to-eat curries and boeuf 
bourgignon in a mini M&S from round the corner, the attraction of going out to 
pick a winter coat off a rail of identical winter coats has slumped. When the 
world’s markets are available from the warmth and comfort of the kitchen, and 
the online success stories such asAsos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> and Net-a-Porter offer hundreds of 
brands and easy returns from a single website, the glamour of an outing in the 
rain to the high street has faded. There will be no easy options for Mr Rowe as 
he starts his new job in April at the company where he first had a Saturday job 
as a teenager. And he can’t rely on the power of principle that still upholds 
the BBC and the NHS.
 