
Reading some of the coverage around the high court decision on PrEP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/nhs-england-reconsiders-decision-over-hiv-prep-drug>
 felt like going back to the dark old days of the 1980s, where any and all 
coverage of gay and bi men was negative, scrutinising and alienating. In the 
two decades Stonewall has spent campaigning for lesbian, gay, bi and trans 
equality, we have seen bans lifted on openly gay and bi people serving in the 
military, protection from discrimination, same-sex adoption has been legalised 
and, most recently, same-sex marriage introduced.

NHS England reconsiders decision over HIV PrEP drug
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/nhs-england-reconsiders-decision-over-hiv-prep-drug>
But the fact that the Daily Mail still feels able to report the high court 
ruling like it didon Wednesday 
<https://twitter.com/hendopolis/status/760586909726957568> shows just how much 
more we need to do before LGBT people are fully accepted.

For the last few months the NHS has defended its decision to refuse free 
distribution of pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP), a drug treatment that could 
save thousands of people from contracting HIV. The reasoning behind this? It 
boils down to a legal loophole. TheNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 claims it is “legally” blocked from doing so and, in fact this is someone 
else’s problem, namely that of local authorities.

But on Tuesday a ruling from the high court in a case brought by the National 
Aids Trust <http://www.nat.org.uk/> determined that the NHS in actual fact 
faces no legal barriers to provide PrEP for free. This fantastic news was 
celebrated all over social media by groups who have campaigned hard to make the 
NHS understand their health and wellbeing is important.
Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) 
MAIL: What a skewed sense of values #tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> #bbcpapers 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcpapers?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/ZRm8mFy8vp 
<https://t.co/ZRm8mFy8vp>
 <https://twitter.com/hendopolis/status/760586909726957568> August 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/hendopolis/status/760586909726957568> 
But not everyone was celebrating. A few news outlets had a different take on 
this groundbreaking new tool in the fight against HIV infection. “Lifestyle 
drug” were the words chosen by the Daily Mail to describe PrEP on its front 
page. Contracting HIV is not a “lifestyle choice”. Nor is being gay or bi. But 
choosing to dredge up stereotypes from the past to ostracise a group of people 
who have been oppressed, mocked, and attacked by society like this in the past 
certainly was a choice theDaily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> made.

Of course, not all potential users of PrEP are gay or bisexual men. Nor are 
all of those who contract HIV. However, men who have sex with men are the group 
it affects most. This was targeted vitriol, and it grouped us as “other” and in 
turn denigrated us and implied we have less right than others to have our 
health and wellbeing supported by the NHS.

Though many accept LGBT people for who they are, others still reject our right 
to be ourselves and love who we love

Now we have a situation where the NHS is appealing against the decision and 
continuing to refuse to take responsibility for this major public health issue. 
Even if it loses the appeal, it will only make PrEP available if it is proven 
“cost-effective” enough. That leaves a space wide open for journalists and 
other commentators to jump on top of those who might be affected by HIV and 
victim-blame them for being so.

While the NHS has approached this with a cost-cautious lens, early stage 
research has shown that in fact PrEP could save the NHS money in the long run 
by reducing infections and the cost of lifelong treatment for HIV. As we wait 
for this to be evaluated further, all we can hope is that more people 
understand PrEP for what it is and see the potential it has alongside condom 
use to fight HIV, rather than use this debate as an opportunity to sideline and 
reject gay and bi men.

We already live in a world where gay and bi men are often mocked, attacked, 
isolated and bullied for being who they are. Being labelled as careless and 
undeserving of HIV prevention is unacceptable, irresponsible and disgraceful 
behaviour that we should have left far behind with Benny Hill, shoulder pads 
and Bros.

The NHS must show it cares about gay men’s lives – and roll out PrEP HIV drugs 
| Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/02/nhs-prep-hiv-drugs-gay-mens-lives>
The problem is that what seems retro is sadly still current. Though many 
accept LGBT people for who they are, many others still reject our right to be 
ourselves and love who we love. Each of us, LGBT people and our allies at work, 
in our families, communities and schools need to call out unacceptable 
attitudes like the ones displayed by the Daily Mail for what they are. None of 
us can afford to be a bystander when many still want to return to an era marked 
by prejudice and discrimination.

And the government has a role to play too, in this case by taking positive 
action to make PrEP available in the fight against HIV infection, and 
committing to mandatory sex and relationship education for schools that is 
inclusive of lesbian, gay, bi and trans people. This will of course include 
issues around HIV and HIV prevention.

Until these attitudes are genuinely a thing of the past, we’ll continue to 
work for a world where all lesbian, gay, bi and trans people are accepted 
without exception.
 