
Marin Alsop, conductor
The Rite of Spring <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DD4iVQayoRE>: Stravinksy 
(1913)


Igor Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring is revolutionary even by today's 
standards. There's a brutality, an edginess, a primal quality that 
instinctually appeal to us, while tapping into a measure of fear. It 
anticipates and prophesies the looming 20th century. Like all great art, the 
piece is filled with paradox and ambiguity. It is the most complex music ever 
conceived and yet it appeals directly to our basic animal instincts. Its theme 
of humanity shows us that no matter how advanced we become, we can't deny our 
basic human nature – we remain fundamentally tribal animals. The ability to 
show us the past and the future simultaneously is precisely what great art 
does.The Rite of Spring is a snapshot of who we are, why we are, what we are, 
where we have come from and where we are heading. With an orchestra of 120 
musicians and a score filled with huge challenges, it is a conductor's dream 
come true.

Edmund de Waal, ceramicist/writer
Serenade for Tenor, Horn and Strings: Britten 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0lgNLiHlag> (1943)


This piece came out of an extraordinary moment in British cultural life. 
Written during the war, at a moment of enormous peril, it's about Englishness, 
full of pastoral poetry and English astringency, yet there's a toughness right 
from the opening notes. The voice, poetry and horn come together in an 
incredible series of songs, settings of poems by British poets. Poetry is 
behind almost all my ceramic work, and this idea of bringing different kind of 
poems together in a cycle that have such a powerful connection with each other 
is something I try to do in my own work. I can remember hearing it for the 
first time as a boy in the 70s in Lincoln Cathedral and being absolutely 
transfixed and also bewildered – I couldn't understand what was happening. It 
was probably my earliest musical memory of something being completely different.

Fay Weldon, writer
The Unanswered Question: Charles Ives  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tbArUJBRRJ0> (1906)


Charles Ives' The Unanswered Question is short but numinous, the lyrical tonal 
music of the past fighting it out with an atonal future. Over an ethereal 
background of strings, what Ives called "The Perennial Question of Existence" 
is repeated in a five-note phrase trumpet phrase, answered each time by 
increasingly cacophonous chaos from the woodwinds. The last time, the trumpet 
remains unanswered and the strings fade into silence. Ives was a modernist 
despite himself, though no iconoclast – grounded as he was in anEmersonian 
belief in the benevolence of the immanent 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ralph_Waldo_Emerson#Lifestyle_and_beliefs>. He 
delighted to include snatches of popular song, traffic noise, the sound of two 
Sousa bands each playing different tunes in his music, and wrote to his 
publisher in 1905: "Please don't try to make things nice! All the wrong notes 
are RIGHT. Just copy as I have – I want it that way." It took a while, but 
today's audiences affectionately agree.

Will Gregory, member of Goldfrapp
Gesang der Jünglinge: Stockhausen  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XfeWp2y1Lk>
(1955-56)


This work is now 57 years old, but it still sounds untarnished by age and 
diamond-like in its purity and sheer ambition. I like to think future 
generations will wonder at how a man armed with nothing but a tape machine and 
a few oscillators journeyed so far.

Nico Muhly, composer
Music for 18 Musicians: Steve Reich 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xU23LqQ6LY4> (1974-76)


This is one of the most important things that happened in music last century. 
It undid, in a very stylish way, the whole notion of romantic structure in 
music, and while it wasn't the first of Reich's pieces to explore this idea, it 
expands from a simple structure presented at the beginning like a concentrated 
paste. It employs a great combination of notated music with a somewhat 
free-form structure (it can last a variety of lengths), as well as needing a 
community of musicians listening to one another to really make it "go". It's 
music for, by and about friends playing together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXEDrO35p7Hs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXEDrO35p7Hs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXEDrO35p7Hs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Rufus Wainwright, singer-songwriter
Saint François d'Assise <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y2cKMv0Ca1I>: Messiaen 
(1975-83)


This opera encompasses the entire 20th century: it is very avant garde but at 
the same time tremendously romantic. There is an incredible spirituality at its 
base which gives it a timeless quality. I'm not a religious person, but I 
certainly appreciate it when music strives for the heavens. Also, what's more 
20th-century then having a part for a theremin?

Vladimir Jurowski, conductor
The Rite of Spring <http://www.youtube.com/view_play_list?p=8B572976288776C9>: 
Stravinsky (1913)


The Rite of Spring is at the heart of the revolutionary process that was going 
on throughout Europe at the time. It's the piece where the west finally meets 
the east, and probably the first work in the history of European music that has 
been unanimously recognised as equally seminal to the development of both 
eastern and western music. In many ways it anticipated the cataclysms of the 
20th century and the horrors of the first world war and the Russian revolution. 
You can hear everything in it. Its musical language might seem almost 
simplistic to us today, having been through the entire development of 
20th-century music, but the main issue with the piece is the never-ceasing 
power of its rhythmic inventions. To my mind, Stravinsky's artistic achievement 
in this work is equal to any of the 20th century's scientific achievements. 
It's a cornerstone of contemporary music and hopefully always will be.

Martyn Brabbins, conductor
Symphony No 7: Sibelius <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XEDrO35p7Hs> (1924)


Of the 20th century's numerous symphonic composers, Jean Sibelius is an 
unparalleled genius. His symphonic utterances are so profoundly individual, and 
yet, despite their inherent Finnish quality, speak a universal musical truth. 
His seventh and final symphony is perhaps as close to symphonic perfection as a 
mortal can achieve. The organic unfolding of the musical argument is unerring 
in its inevitability. The 23-minute span – brief in comparison to most 
20th-century symphonies – encapsulates a musical journey of such concentrated 
perfection that I feel awed and slightly terrified when I conduct it. It is 
perhaps not altogether surprising to learn that despite living for a further 30 
years, Sibelius never felt the need to complete another symphony after this one.

Barbara Hannigan, soprano
Lulu: Berg <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SqSdG5VLD-A> (1934)


Berg's opera came from the end of decadent Romanticism and at the beginning of 
the new 12-tone world. The complex score is lush and rich with colours: 
lyrical, mad, sometimes jazzy, sometimes evoking Bach in its architecture. It 
remains vital today. Each time it is performed, it asks: "Let's look at the 
protagonist again, let's not make her a caricature of a harlot and 
manipulator." She is a person with a past who is damaged and hurt and who is 
doing everything she can to survive.

The opera was groundbreaking, too, in terms of its portrayal of the people and 
society around Lulu. Look at the lesbian character, Countess Geschwitz. The 
sympathy with which Berg treats her is touching: he never ridicules her. It 
feels as if Berg was working out so many issues for society and for the musical 
world in his harmonic searching.

Everyone in the opera falls in love with Lulu, and, having sung the role for 
performances in Brussels, I also fell in love with her. My way of gauging what 
are the most important pieces for me is how hard it is to let go of them when 
they are over. I wake up every morning and I'm still with Lulu.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOPXOG4zpG_A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOPXOG4zpG_A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOPXOG4zpG_A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Nicholas Collon, conductor
First Chamber Symphony: Schoenberg <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgFTLquN8eI>
 (1906)


This work plunges us headlong into the sensual, vibrant and brilliant melting 
pot of early-20th-century Vienna. And yet, written for a chamber ensemble of 15 
musicians and lasting only 25 minutes, it rejects the grand canvasses of the 
late-19th-century composers and daringly launches a new aesthetic, setting a 
precedent for the comeback of the chamber orchestra as a vital and expressive 
vehicle for 20th-century music. The music explodes into life with a horn 
sounding a fanfare to the new century, and weaves an exhilarating journey that 
harks back to Brahms, yet looks forward almost to Boulez. A performance in 
Vienna in 1913 caused a near riot, a month before the more infamous Rite 
of Spring premiere.

Annie Freud, poet
West Side Story: Bernstein  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EO82t4ViZl4>(1957)


It just has to be the 1961 version of West Side Story, directed by Robert Wise 
and Jerome Robbins, starring Natalie Wood, Richard Beymer, Rita Moreno, George 
Chakiris and Russ Tamblyn. The music has such an extraordinary emotional range 
and depth – curiosity, excitement, passion, worship, anger, hatred, terror, 
sarcasm, contempt, charm, grief, despair, emptiness – and yet the whole is so 
tightly woven; every single song is a masterpiece. Just writing these few words 
of admiration about this great work makes my heart beat faster and fills 
my eyes with tears.

Marcus du Sautoy, mathematician
Quartet for the End of Time <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zYpBHc8px_U>: 
Messiaen (1941)


Our concept of time and space were totally disrupted by Einstein's 
breakthroughs at the beginning of the 20th century. No longer was there a 
single timeline, or a fixed frame of reference. Time could go at different 
speeds. Space could contract. For me, the Quartet for the End of Time captures 
some of the spirit of that scientific revolution.The story of its composition 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quatuor_pour_la_fin_du_temps> reflects one of the 
major historical events of the century: the second world war. But it is the 
music that resonates with this new view of the universe. The opening movement 
exploits the mathematics of two prime numbers to create a sense of destabilised 
time. The piano part plays a 17-note rhythmic sequence against a 29-note 
harmonic sequence. The two different primes create a sense of two different 
timeframes that never quite get in sync.

Alex Ross, critic and author of The Rest is Noise 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2008/mar/15/music>
Six Pieces for Orchestra: Webern <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OPXOG4zpG_A> 
(1909)


In the history of painting and literature, the shattering of artistic norms at 
the threshold of modernism is celebrated almost as a sacred moment: the 
explosion of abstraction in Picasso and Kandinsky, the eruption of interior 
consciousness in Joyce and Woolf. In music, the incursion of the alien is 
nowhere more intense than in Webern's Six Pieces for Orchestra, composed in the 
wake of Schoenberg's break with tonality. At the end of the fourth piece – a 
tenebrous funeral march, written in memory of the composer's mother – massed 
percussion creates the first great sonic maelstrom in musical history. Wisps of 
lyricism surround that central crisis, like circling birds. "Everything 
hovers," as Webern once said. These, too, are sacred emblems: radical icons 
of a nameless new religion.

Patricia Kopatchinskaja, violinist
Violin Concerto: Ligeti <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hSykk-2O3p8> (1990)


Ligeti's Violin Concerto is the best violin concerto after Beethoven. Ligeti 
is one of the most impressive figures of recent times. Like a scientist in a 
laboratory, he never did anything routinely, but for every single piece he 
invented new methods and solutions. While his fellow Hungarian Bartók used the 
eastern European folklore as material and inspiration, Ligeti uses anything he 
can find – for example, in the violin concerto there are several okarinas, 
instruments that are more than 10,000 years old. He wants them deliberately 
out-of-tune, which produces an exhilarating effect. He also uses elements of 
the Notre-Dame choir school of the 12th century, Hungarian folk melodies and 
complex Bulgarian rhythms. The orchestra consists of only two dozen musicians, 
but they do not provide just an accompaniment – everybody is challenged to 
their musical and technical limits, as is the soloist. This might sound very 
intellectual, but Ligeti is like a child at play, with humour, cheekiness and 
temper tantrums. And if everybody meets the challenge, this concerto becomes a 
big spaceship: complicated, luminous and nonsensical, taking off and flying to 
Neverland.

Mark Elder, conductor
The Rite of Spring <http://www.youtube.com/view_play_list?p=8B572976288776C9>: 
Stravinsky (1913)


I have to choose the Rite of Spring. Due to its ritualistic subject matter, 
aAs the chosen girl dances herself to death, Stravinsky found a musical 
language that broke all the barriers in terms of what an orchestra can sound 
like. The severe pagan ritual that the music describes so eloquently demanded a 
new sort of beauty. The ballet's birth in Paris in 1913 after weeks and weeks 
of tense rehearsals was a famous disaster. Yet it wasn't only the unfamiliarity 
of the musical style that was found so shocking but also the extraordinarily 
unexpected and crude choreographic style that Nijinsky designed. It was only 
later as the piece began to be heard in the concert hall that audiences could 
begin to appreciate how powerful, elemental and beautiful this score is. To me 
there are two overwhelming elements in the Rite's achievement: its use of 
rhythm and its astonishing orchestral colours. It has had an enormous impact on 
musicians and should continue to astonish 100 years after its premiere. The 
complex rhythmic structures that occur throughout its 35-minute length released 
a rhythmic freedom in Stravinsky's music, and for other composers too. Indeed, 
it's difficult to imagine the soundworlds of some of the later giants of the 
century – Harrison Birtwistle, Steve Reich, György Ligeti or Pierre Boulez – 
without the Rite's intense and courageous influence.

Gillian Moore, head of classical music at the Southbank Centre
Amériques: Edgard Varèse <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4hupNWVMuPI> (1918-21)


My contribution to the soundtrack to the 20th century would be Amériques by 
Edgard Varèse. This is Varèse's New World symphony, written shortly after he 
arrived in New York from Europe. But where Dvorak's late-19th-century America 
sang folk tunes and spirituals, Varèse, just 25 years later, was dancing to a 
new music of the machine age: the clanking of overhead railways, the hooting of 
foghorns on the Hudson river, the wail of police sirens all find their way into 
this huge urban symphony. But, even with its supersize lineup (130 orchestral 
musicians), it's not all sound and fury: there are sinuous melodies, seductive 
jazz-tinged dances and a nod or two to Debussy and Stravinsky.

Shara Worden, singer with My Brightest Diamond
Symphony No 3: Górecki <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVITZUQ_uIU> (1976)


While the 20th century held wondrous feats of innovation and discovery, the 
invention of the internet and trips to the moon, as well as new musical 
languages created by composers such as Debussy, Schoenberg and Stravinsky, we 
also see it as the century in which we learned how to destroy ourselves with 
the invention of the atomic bomb. For this, I would like to offer Górecki's 
Symphony No 3, Symphony of Sorrowful Songs, perhaps not as the greatest piece 
of music from the last century, but as a meditation upon the value of all life, 
and the imperative that we restrain ourselves from making the same grave errors 
in the coming centuries that we made in the last.

Oliver Coates, cellist
Mortuos Plango, Vivos Voco <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TxEGPIEraFA>: 
Jonathan Harvey (1980)


This masterpiece of organised sound is derived from a spectral analysis of the 
tenor bell at Winchester Cathedral. Harvey forged the sound of the bell with 
the pure treble voice of his son, then a chorister in the cathedral choir. The 
effect is heartbreaking. The purity of Harvey's concept synthesises the heavy 
tolling of history with his optimism for the future.

James Blake, songwriter
Three Elegies for Nine Clarinets 
<http://soundcloud.com/noah_jones/three-elegies-nine-clarinets-l>: Gavin Bryars 
(1994)


This piece is, for me, a celebration of the timbre of the clarinet. Taking a 
magnifying glass to this instrument, we can enjoy in detail the clicks and 
breath, and even multiphonics that make the clarient so sonically rich. Three 
Elegies also celebrates restlessness in harmonic progression. Just as you relax 
into a chord, one clarinet arrives to challenge it, and the others tend to 
yield. I like the way the nine instruments all play a distinct role, at times 
pairing up and at other times swinging into pendulous sync. Here Bryars is not 
afraid to "change scene", as in film.

Michael Clark, dancer/choreographer
The Rite of Spring: Stravinsky (1913)


There really is no other choice. Not only did Stravinsky fearlessly dare to 
venture into a new, undiscovered sonic landscape, anticipating what we would 
spend the rest of the century trying to catch up with, he also the world a 
piece of music that could only be completed by dance – the sacrificial dance. 
Through total disregard for most of the established conventions of 19th-century 
classical music, his radical use of tonality, dissonance, metre, stress and, 
most of all, rhythm (he elevated rhythm in itself to the dignity of art), 
Stravinsky created music that sounded like what people were feeling. Stravinsky 
foresaw the real conflict of war and revolution, life or death confronted on a 
daily basis – the willingness to die for one's beliefs. The notion of 
self-sacrifice for the greater good: art. This work is the soundtrack to the 
20th century, a map of the internal, psychological world we were to inhabit for 
the forseeable future. A bleak terrain. A battleground of contradictory 
impulses, ideologies and desires.

Simon Callow, actor
Il Tabarro <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jdY6zEIgcJM>: Puccini (1918)


Puccini, something of a musical magpie, and not exactly progressive, 
nevertheless had his finger on the pulse of the 20th century to an astonishing 
degree – sentimentality, cruelty, hedonistic abandon, alienation. Many of these 
elements are to be found in his works – Madama Butterfly, Turandot, Tosca – but 
for me his one-act opera Il Tabarro, part of the Trittico, gives us as 
concentrated a dose of 20th-century blues as you can find: even the love-making 
in the big duet is edgy, tense and unfulfilled, and the scattered, fragmentary 
scene of people supposedly having fun is dry and grim, while the great tenor 
aria is an almost unbearable cry of pain on behalf of the underclass.

Jeremy Pritchard, bassist with Everything Everything
Koyaanisqatsi  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GO1nYk8ErUc>: Philip Glass 
(1981-82)


This was Philip Glass's score for the Godfrey Reggio film of the same name. 
Koyaanisquatsi translates from Hopi language as "Life Out of Balance". It seems 
apposite for the 20th century: cinema itself is the quintessential 20th century 
medium, and this film depicts the exponential acceleration of technology and 
human development, and the gradual ecological and spiritual erosion, and loss 
of control inherent in that. There is no dialogue or plot, just a kind of 
scintillating multimedia tone poem. Glass's compositions for massed brass, 
voices, organs and synthesisers are by turns tense, portentous, frightening, 
gloriously exhilarating, curiously beautiful and utterly desperate, reflecting 
Reggio's various plateaus; cave paintings, clouds, the frenzy of 
mass-production, a nuclear plant on a pleasure beach, the thronging streets of 
American cities, the slow motion explosion of the Atlas-Centaur rocket in 1962. 
The whole piece has a century-wide feel to it.

Jude Kelly, artistic director, Southbank Centre
Quartet for the End of Time <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UeSVu1zbF94>: 
Messiaen (1941)


"There shall be time no longer" . This haunting phrase from The Angel of the 
Apocalypse is inscribed by the composer, Messiaen on his score for a piece that 
grips and shakes me whenever I hear it. Messiaen was among the thousands of 
French soldiers rounded up by the Germans in 1940 and transported to Stalag 
VIII-A, a Prisoner of War camp near Dresden. A catastrophe of civilisation was 
unfolding across Europe and this musical response, written and performed in the 
camp by four survivors is hauntingly elegant, agonisingly tense but shot 
through with love and pity. How can the barbaric, the merciless, the 
unfathomable be expressed? Messiaen finds sounds, form, and pattern that 
vanquish any thought that the soul can be destroyed. The beauty of this music 
stands regardless of its origins but its particular history also reassures us 
that art offers a way to transcend despair.

The Guardian is a media partner for the Southbank Centre's year-long The Rest 
is Noise festival, which starts on 19 January 2013. Details:
therestisnoise.southbankcentre.co.uk 
<http://therestisnoise.southbankcentre.co.uk/#1>
 