
The adventurers

Bear Grylls - expedition leader and Chief Scout

This August, as the summer melt comes to the Arctic, I'm leading an expedition 
to explore theNorthwest Passage – which links the Atlantic to the Pacific – in 
an open Rib (rigid inflatable boat). It is a journey of 2,500 miles through 
fragmenting pack ice. I am nervous. Will the ice close in around us? Will we be 
able to endure weeks of frozen sea spray in sub-zero temperatures? But nerves 
are part of high adventure. In 1845, while on the hunt for this elusive trade 
route, Captain Sir John Franklin disappeared in the Arctic, along with two 
ships and 128 officers and crew. Some 40 expeditions were launched in search of 
his party. The only findings were human bones. I grew up with this story, and 
the chance to explore this wasteland has been a dream ever since. (For more on 
Bear's travels seebeargrylls.com <http://www.beargrylls.com>.)

• How to do it: Tailor Made Travel (0800 988 5887; tailor-made-travel.com 
<http://www.tailor-made-travel.com>) offers a 12-day trip through part of the 
passage, albeit in a much bigger boat, from Resolute to Cambridge Bay, from 
£3,460, not including flights.

Colonel John Blashford-Snell - explorer 

A few years ago I visited the Cofan tribe in north-east Ecuador, near the 
Colombian border, and I've been itching to go back ever since. The trip 
involved a long drive over the Andes from Quito to Lago Agrio on the Aguarico 
River, from where I travelled by canoe to the village of Zabalo. The Cofan are 
just beginning to welcome visitors and have built a handful of huts for guests. 
They live a traditional life, canoeing, breeding and hunting turtles, and 
venturing into the jungle to see wildlife and flowers. (
johnblashfordsnell.org.uk <http://www.johnblashfordsnell.org.uk>)

• How to do it: See cofan.org <http://www.cofan.org> for details of tours led 
by the Cofan ($95 a day, including accommodation and meals). For information on 
Ecuador seevivecuador.com <http://www.vivecuador.com>.

Gary Arndt - travel blogger 

I'm looking forward to returning to the Yasawa Islands, a small archipelago on 
the west side of Fiji's main island of Viti Levu, and where the moviesThe Blue 
Lagoon and Castaway were shot. I was there in 2007 on a round-the-world trip, 
and it was one of the highlights. A boat from near the airport at Nadi goes up 
and down the archipelago daily, delivering passengers to any of approximately 
20 locally run resorts. You can findbures (bungalows) for $20-$30 a night, 
including all meals. I'm looking forward to hiking, scuba diving in some of the 
clearest water in the world, and drinkingkava [a potent herbal drink]. (
everything-everywhere.com <http://everything-everywhere.com>)

• How to do it: Air New Zealand (0800 028 4149; airnewzealand.co.uk 
<http://www.airnewzealand.co.uk>) flies from London Heathrow, via Los Angeles, 
to Nadi from £950. It's a 20-minute taxi ride to Port Denarau Marina, from 
where the Yasawa Flyer departs daily. For accommodation seeyasawaislandsfiji.com
 <http://yasawaislandsfiji.com>.

Guy Grieve - adventurer and author of Call of the Wild: My Escape to Alaska 
(Hodder & Stoughton)

I've made myself a promise that this year I will return to Alaska. It's been 
five years since I lived alone for one year in the great boreal wilderness. 
Sometimes I am haunted by memories – my dog team pulling my sled as I travelled 
up the frozen Yukon River, beneath the flickering aurora borealis; the sound of 
wolves calling across the frozen rivers and lakes that surrounded my cabin. 
There are people there I miss: the wily old woodsman who taught me so much; and 
my dog, Fuzzy, who was in his prime then but must be reaching the end of his 
life. Time with these old friends would be my best possible trip this year.

• How to do it: Frontier Canada (020 8776 8709; frontier-canada.co.uk 
<http://frontier-canada.co.uk>) offers a 15-night Classic Yukon and Alaska 
self-drive trip from £1,584, including accommodation, a Yukon River walk and 
four wildlife tours. Flights and car hire extra. For information on Alaska see
travelalaska.com <http://www.travelalaska.com>.

Benedict Allen - explorer and TV presenter 

I am hoping to reach the remotest jungle on the planet, which seems to be in 
southernGuyana. Here, jaguars roam without fear of man, and there are lengthy 
anacondas and other great beauties and beasts. For me, exploration is about 
immersion in the environment, so none of those groovy sat phones and GPSs and 
other gadgets that keep you connected with the outside world and are nowadays 
the norm for "adventurers". Of course, the risks increase, but so do the 
rewards – and just think: we are perhaps the last generation who have the 
privilege to be able to trek off into the great unknown like this. (
benedictallen.com <http://benedictallen.com>)

• How to do it: Steppes Travel (01285 880980; steppestravel.co.uk 
<http://www.steppestravel.co.uk>) offers tailor-made packages to Guyana: a 
16-day tour of Guyana's highlights, including jungle treks, costs from £3,350, 
with flights, guides and some meals. Seeguyana-tourism.com 
<http://guyana-tourism.com>.

The critics

Deyan Sudjic - director of the Design Museum 

If there's one city in the world that doesn't need an expo to persuade you to 
go, it'sShanghai. It has skyscrapers with tops like giant pineapples, a Maglev 
train from the airport that can cruise at 300mph, and a riverfront lined with 
art deco towers that feel like one of JG Ballard's more hallucinogenic 
writings. But, if you go between May and October, you will find the biggest 
Expo of all time, Shanghai's answer to Beijing's Olympics architectural 
fireworks (en.expo2010.cn <http://www.en.expo2010.cn>). More than 20,000 events 
will be held during the 184-day Expo, at venues both inside and outside the 
site. Plus, the £13m British pavilion is reason enough to visit: it will be
Thomas Heatherwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/may/27/thomas-heatherwick-artist-b-bang>
's most elaborate structure yet, like a giant plant, studded with antennae 
gently waving in the breeze, and decked with 60,000 acrylic rods. (
designmuseum.org <http://www.designmuseum.org>)

• How to do it: Virgin Atlantic (virginatlantic.com <http://virginatlantic.com>
) has flights from London Heathrow to Shanghai from £569 return. For 
accommodation seecnto.org <http://cnto.org>.

Anonymous - The UK Michelin Guide inspector 

The London Olympics will shine a light on East London, but why wait until 
2012? The area is a microcosm of London: it mixes the old with the new and 
offers colour, variety, style and choice. For many, Canary Wharf means 
modernity, but it also has some great old pubs, such as The Gun (020 7515 5222;
thegundocklands.com <http://www.thegundocklands.com>), which dates from the 
18th century but is today a real foodie pub, and The Dockmaster's House (020 
7345 0345;dockmastershouse.com <http://www.dockmastershouse.com>), a 
three-storey converted Georgian house offering contemporary Indian cooking. 
Spitalfields offers a wide range of dining options celebrating our culinary 
heritage, from British beef at Hawksmoor (020 7247 7392;thehawksmoor.com 
<http://www.thehawksmoor.com>) to rediscovered recipes at St John Bread and 
Wine (020 7251 0848;stjohnrestaurant.co.uk <http://www.stjohnrestaurant.co.uk>
). To really witness how the area has changed, try Wapping Food (020 7680 2080;
thewappingproject.com <http://www.thewappingproject.com>). This 
ahead-of-its-time restaurant and gallery is in a converted hydraulic power 
station and you eat surrounded by the old turbines.

• How to do it: For more information on restaurants in East London, and for 
details of accommodation seevisitlondon.com <http://www.visitlondon.com>.

Guy Woodward - editor of Decanter magazine

Slovenia has yet to make it on to the itineraries of many wine lovers, but its 
astonishing performance in the recent Decanter World Wine Awards suggests that 
this could be the year the Yugoslavian offshoot starts to gain prominence. 
Sweet whites are currently its forte, although the dry whites aren't far behind 
and the country is already well set up for wine tourists, with several tasting 
rooms, guest houses and restaurants in and around the main wine regions of 
Primorska and Podravje. (decanter.com <http://www.decanter.com>)

• How to do it: Fly to Trieste, Italy, with Ryanair (ryanair.com) from 
Stansted, Bristol or Birmingham and rent a car (auto-europe.co.uk) for the 
50-minute drive over the border to the Primorska region. For accommodation and 
information on the wine regions, seeslovenia.info <http://www.slovenia.info>.

Caspar Llewellyn Smith - editor of Observer Music Monthly

Next year, all attention will be on South Africa because of the World Cup, but 
music lovers are better advised to check out what's happening in its long-time 
rival as the continent's musical powerhouse,Nigeria. Lagos is maddening as a 
travel destination, but while 2009 saw the closure of the Shrine, the nightclub 
once home to the legendary Fela Kuti, there are plenty of other Afrobeat nights 
at venues like Motherlan' in Ikeja. The city is also home to a thriving hip-hop 
scene, involving stars such as the country's hottest rapper of the moment, MI.

• How to do it: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) has flights from 
London Gatwick to Lagos from £520. For accommodation and more information see
tourism.gov.ng <http://tourism.gov.ng>.

The travel insiders

Jonny Bealby - managing director, Wild Frontiers 

The centuries-old idyll of Kashmir is back on the traveller's map, offering 
pristine trekking, amazing skiing, extraordinary accommodation, exquisite 
shopping and unsurpassed relaxation. But is it safe? Not yet, according to the 
FCO: militants, they say, still harbour aspirations of an independent state, 
which gives rise to sporadic violence. Although that is undoubtedly true, I 
believe these risks have now reduced to acceptable levels. Since 2003 my love 
for the region has seen me visit every year. In that time I have never felt any 
threat or danger, and have found the Kashmiri people to be among the most 
hospitable I know. (wildfrontiers.co.uk <http://www.wildfrontiers.co.uk>)

• How to do it: Virgin (virgin-atlantic.com 
<http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/en/gb/index.jsp>) flies from London Heathrow to 
Delhi from £411 return; Jet Airways (jetairways.com <http://www.jetairways.com>
) has flights from Delhi to Srinagar from £86 return. For details of 
accommodation in the Kashmir region seejktourism.org. <http://jktourism.org>

Constantin Peyfuss - editor-in-chief, city guide site Unlike.net 
<http://www.unlike.net>

All eyes are on South Africa this year, as it gears up for the 2010 World Cup. 
Shaking off its reputation as a "surf and safari" destination, the nation is 
undergoing a cultural renaissance. Nowhere is this more apparent than inCape 
Town. Already home to Infecting the City – a week-long festival of street 
theatre (infectingthecity.com <http://www.infectingthecity.com>; 2010 dates to 
be confirmed) – and the Cape Town International Jazz Festival (
capetownjazzfest.com <http://www.capetownjazzfest.com>; 3-4 April), the city is 
now a melting pot for the cultural and creative industries. The East City 
Design Initiative (creativecapetown.net <http://www.creativecapetown.net>) is 
currently transforming a collection of rundown factories, office blocks and 
government buildings into a design hub, peppered with art galleries, clubs, 
museums and studios. (

unlike.net <http://unlike.net/>)

• How to do it: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) has flights from 
London Heathrow to Cape Town from £695. For accommodation choices and what's 
on, seecapetown.travel <http://www.capetown.travel>.

Tom Barber - co-founding director of Original Travel 

We're extremely excited about the first Beirut39 festival (
hayfestival.com/beirut39 <http://www.hayfestival.com/beirut39>), because it 
encapsulates what's exciting about the Lebanese capital right now. Organised by 
the people behind the Hay Festival, it runs from 15 to 18 April, bringing 
together 39 writers from across the Arab world, all under the age of 39. Beirut 
is all about youth, and it's one of the most vibrant places on earth. April is 
also the perfect time to visit the city, because there's still snow in the 
swanky ski resorts, such as Mzaar, and the braver visitor can take a dip in the 
Mediterranean on the same day. (originaltravel.co.uk 
<http://www.originaltravel.co.uk>)

• How to do it: Bmi (flybmi.com <http://www.flybmi.com>) has flights from 
London Gatwick, London Heathrow and Manchester to Beirut from £546 return. For 
accommodation seelebanon-hotels.com <http://www.lebanon-hotels.com>. For 
information on visas visitlebanon-tourism.gov.lb <http://lebanon-tourism.gov.lb>
.

Amrit Singh - founder of travel company TransIndus 

Something tells me I should keep this to myself, but my tip for this year is 
Pondicherry, on India's south-eastern Coromandel Coast, about three hours' 
drive south of Chennai. It has a history of French rule, and its streets ooze 
French colonial character, with a serene and stylish atmosphere. Its beaches 
are characterful too, and its restaurants small and inviting, serving 
Creole-influenced food. The Dune Eco Village and Spa on the Coromandel Coast, 
between Pondicherry and Auroville, is my favourite place for relaxation. (
transindus.co.uk <http://transindus.co.uk>)

• How to do it: Fly from London Gatwick or Heathrow to Chennai with British 
Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) from £453, and hire a car (hertz.co.uk 
<http://www.hertz.co.uk>) for the 165km drive to Pondicherry. The Dune Eco 
Village (0091 413 2655751;thedunehotel.com <http://thedunehotel.com>) offers 
doubles from £73, including breakfast. For more information on Pondicherry see
tourism.pondicherry.gov.in <http://tourism.pondicherry.gov.in>.

Heidi Hutchinson - marketing manager, Imaginative Traveller 

One of South America's best kept secrets, Colombia is a colourful and vibrant 
country with plenty of highlights, from ancient cities to the jungle-covered 
coast. Discover the magnificent views of Cartagena from the Convent of La Popa, 
laze on one of the stunning palm-fringed beaches nearby, see the salt cathedral 
that lies deep inside the ancient salt mines of Zipaquira and explore Tayrona 
National Park, with its black howler monkeys, iguanas and jaguars. Once 
inhabited by the indigenous Tayronas, this area is now home to the Kogui, 
Arzario, Kankuamo and Arawak cultures, who watch over what they believe to be 
the "heart of the world".(imaginative-traveller.com 
<http://www.imaginative-traveller.com>)

• How to do it: Iberia (iberia.com <http://www.iberia.com/>) flies from 
Heathrow to Bogotá from £673 return. For accommodation and more information see 
colombia.travel/en.

The guidebook gurus

Hilary Bradt - founder of Bradt Travel Guides 

The successful bid by Rwanda to join the British Commonwealth makes it my hot 
tip for 2010. The greatest draw is its mountain gorillas: looking deep into the 
eyes of a silverback has to be one of life's top wildlife experiences, although 
there is a wallet-crunching permit of US$500. Park entry fees ensure the 
survival of the mountain gorillas, but they also fund rural development 
schemes. Other attractions include golden monkeys and 670 bird species. Chill 
out by Lake Kivu, explore Nyungwe Forest, and stay in village homes, and you'll 
be contributing to the country's recovery from the 1994 genocide. Rwanda is 
captivating and beautiful – and tourist income is crucial. (
bradt-travelguides.com <http://bradt-travelguides.com>)

• How to do it: Steppes Discovery (01285 643333; steppesdiscovery.co.uk 
<http://www.steppesdiscovery.co.uk/>) has a five-night gorilla safari from 
£1,245 including accommodation and permits, but not flights. It can also 
arrange extensions to Lake Kivu. Seerwandatourism.com <http://rwandatourism.com>
.

Tony Wheeler - co-founder of Lonely Planet

Tucked away in an undiscovered region of Australian's north-west, the 
Kimberley Coastal Camp is as remote as it gets and comfortably Spartan. There's 
no glass anywhere, toilets and showers are open air and rooms have sand floors. 
The food is also terrific (fishing for your dinner is a big attraction), but 
it's the art that blows me away. The country around is an open-air gallery for 
two schools of Aboriginal art: the colourful Wandjina and the mysterious 
Bradshaw or Gwion Gwion paintings. Remote doesn't come cheap, though – three 
days/two nights, with transfers from Darwin, will set you back £2,200. (
lonelyplanet.com <http://www.lonelyplanet.com>)

• How to do it: Qantas (qantas.com/uk 
<http://www.qantas.com.au/travel/airlines/home/gb/en>) has flights from London 
Heathrow to Darwin from £810. For more information on the camp – which is open 
only during the dry season, March to October – visitkimberleycoastalcamp.com.au 
<http://kimberleycoastalcamp.com.au>.

Martin Dunford - co-founder of Rough Guides

My brother-in-law is from Argentina and he's always raving about it, so this 
year I'm off. It's a good idea to go now before it gets travelled to death – or 
becomes more expensive. There's no more happening city in the world than Buenos 
Aires right now, yet you can eat like a king for a few quid and the nightlife 
is second to none. I fancy tasting the wine in Mendoza, staying on anestancia 
(ranch) and watching locals ride horseback, and then exploring the vastness of 
Patagonia. (roughguides.com <http://www.roughguides.com>)

• How to do it: British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) has flights from 
London Heathrow to Buenos Aires from £874. For accommodation seebue.gov.ar 
<http://bue.gov.ar>. There are overnight bus services from Buenos Aires to 
Mendoza (about 12 hours) – just turn up at Retiro bus station in Buenos Aires. 
A return ticket will cost about AR$200 (£32). For accommodation in Mendoza see
turismo.mendoza.gov.ar <http://turismo.mendoza.gov.ar>.

Johnathan Knight - founder of the Cool Camping guides 

Thanks to the ongoing national love affair with camping, a new generation of 
luxury campsites has spawned some innovative accommodation in the UK. The folk 
at Fforest campsites in Ceredigion, Wales, are putting the finishing touches to 
a beach site at Manorafon, complete with futuristic geodesic domes kitted out 
with a king-size bed, wood-burning stove and outdoor kitchen. For something 
more Dr Livingstone than Dr No, Country House Hideout is a new chain of luxury, 
safari-style tented camps, all within fine country estates, the first at 
Hamptworth Estate in the New Forest. (coolcamping.co.uk 
<http://www.coolcamping.co.uk>)

• How to do it: Domes at Fforest Sea Camp, Manorafon (01239 623633; 
coldatnight.co.uk <http://www.coldatnight.co.uk>) start from £345 for four 
nights B&B (two sharing). Country House Hideout (01420 549150;
countryhousehideout.co.uk <http://countryhousehideout.co.uk>) has tents at 
Hamptworth from £265 for four nights (up to eight sharing, tent only).

Juliet Kinsman - editor-in-chief of Mrs and Mrs Smith 

Big on style, low in cost and perched in a tourist-free patch of the south of 
France: incredibly, such a thing does exist. Set on a central courtyard, 
centuries-old Maison de Mons is a collection of six contemporary one-bedroom 
apartments on an outcrop in the Haut Var region, between the Côte d'Azur and 
the Alps. These spacious minimalist suites are heaven for cyclists, walkers, or 
groups of friends seeking boutique chic on a budget. Each individually 
decorated space in this postcard-pretty Haut Var village sleeps two to four. (
mrandmrssmith.com <http://www.mrandmrssmith.com/>)

• How to do it: Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies from 
eight UK airports to Nice (an hour's drive away) from £43. Accommodation at the 
Maison de Mons (numberonemons.com <http://numberonemons.com/>) costs from 
€400-€1,100 a week.

The party people

Pete Tong - BBC Radio 1 DJ 

Forget Goa, Ibiza and Ayia Napa, Los Angeles is the place to be for electronic 
music right now. I'm planning on basing myself there in June to try and hit 
some of the parties. Top of my list, and where I'm DJing, is the Electronic 
Daisy Carnival at the LA Memorial Coliseum and Exposition Park on 26 and 27 
June. It attracts over 100,000 people and features some of the best electronic 
music in the world. Another favourite is the Nocturnal Festival on 25 September 
at the Nos Events Center. (petetong.com <http://www.petetong.com>)

• How to do it: Virgin Atlantic (virgin.com <http://www.virgin.com>) has 
flights from London to Los Angeles from £403. Electronic Daisy Carnival (
electricdaisycarnival.com <http://electricdaisycarnival.com>); Nocturnal 
Festival (nocturnalfestival.com <http://nocturnalfestival.com>). More 
information fromdiscoverlosangeles.com <http://discoverlosangeles.com>.

Keith Drew - editor of World Party: The Rough Guide to the World's Best 
Festivals

Semana Santa may be bigger and the Running of the Bulls better known, but for 
me, few fiestas can deliver quite like Valencia'sLas Fallas. This traditional 
rite of spring, held over three weeks at the beginning of March, is a balmy 
blend of all-night drinking and mind-blowing fireworks, and culminates in one 
of the most spectacular acts of pyrotechnic pandemonium you'll ever see. The 
locals have been setting fire to house-sized effigies (orfallas) for the past 
200 years, and on the final night all hell breaks loose with the aptly named 
Gran Crema, or Big Burn, where the effigies are stuffed with fireworks and 
blown up in the bonfire to end all bonfires. (roughguides.com 
<http://www.roughguides.com>)

• How to do it: Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) has flights 
from London Gatwick and Bristol to Valencia from £50 return. For accommodation 
seeturisvalencia.es <http://www.turisvalencia.es>. For information on Las 
Fallas 2010 seefallasfromvalencia.com <http://fallasfromvalencia.com>.

Nick Stevenson - news editor, Mixmag 

Of all the emerging clubbing locations, Malta is the most surprising. Open-air 
clubs like Gianpula (gianpula.com <http://www.gianpula.com>), with a capacity 
of 4,000, put roofed-up Ibiza clubs to shame, while on neighbouring island 
Gozo, La Grotta (lagrottaleisure.com <http://www.lagrottaleisure.com>) is a 
club built into the cliff face. Big DJs like Tiësto, David Guetta and Deadmau5 
have been adding this venue to their summer circuit.

• How to do it: Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) has flights 
from Gatwick, Manchester, Liverpool, Newcastle and East Midlands to Malta from 
£50. For accommodation and details of ferries to Gozo seevisitmalta.com 
<http://visitmalta.com>.

Jack Steadman - lead singer, Bombay Bicycle Club 

One of my favourite places to play is Brussels. If you're into live music, 
start at the intimate La Botanique (botanique.be <http://www.botanique.be>). 
It's so intimate, in fact, that when we played there I managed to smack a girl 
in the head with my guitar. Once the gig's over, hop on the metro to De 
Brouckère, and ask for directions to Delirium (deliriumcafe.be 
<http://www.deliriumcafe.be>). With around 2,000 beers or more, this is one of 
the greatest bars I've ever been to. If you're after something stronger, head 
next door to the absinthe bar. Next morning, enjoy fresh air at the botanical 
gardens in the suburb of Meise. (bombaybicycleclubmusic.com 
<http://www.bombaybicycleclubmusic.com>)

• How to do it: Eurostar (08432 186186; eurostar.com <http://www.eurostar.com>
) has return fares from London to Brussels from £69. For accommodation see
visitflanders.co.uk <http://www.visitflanders.co.uk>.

William Orbit - musician and record producer 

I'm excited about getting back to Moscow, specifically to the Garage Centre 
for Contemporary Culture. Once a large bus station, it opened as a trendy art 
space last year. It's huge inside, and all decked out in steel. When I last 
visited it had an amazing light show by Dan Flavin, with lots of tubes of neon. 
It was fantastic. The gallery often holds unique and innovative exhibitions. (
williamorbit.com <http://www.williamorbit.com>)

• How to do it: Bmi (flybmi.com <http://www.flybmi.com>) has flights from 
London Heathrow to Moscow from £232 return. There is no official tourist board 
for the city, butmoscow-city.ru <http://moscow-city.ru> is useful for hotel 
listings. For information on the Garage Centre for Contemporary Culture see
garageccc.com <http://garageccc.com>.

The green gurus

Richard Hammond - founder of greentraveller.co.uk 
<http://www.greentraveller.co.uk> and co-author of Clean Breaks – 500 New Ways 
to See the World (Rough Guides) 

I travelled by train to the mountains of South Tyrol to catch the early snow 
in December and can't wait to get back there this summer. Tucked beneath the 
sunny south side of the Italian Alps in the village of Sand in Taufers is 
Moosmair Guesthouse and Naturehotel – whose interpretation of green is all 
about serving fantastic local food and enjoying the outdoors (snowshoeing and 
cross-country skiing in the winter, hiking and mountain biking in the summer) 
followed by a long soak in a herbal sauna. Thanks to the new high-speed train 
line east of Paris, you can now reach Innsbruck (via Zurich) in a day.

• How to do it: London to Paris by Eurostar costs from £59 return, and from 
Paris to Innsbruck via Zurich costs around £240 return through RailEurope (
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>). Moosmair Guesthouse and 
Naturehotel (0039 0474 67 80 46;moosmair.it <http://moosmair.it>) has rooms 
from €58 per person per night, half-board. For more information on South Tyrol 
seesuedtirol.info <http://suedtirol.info>.

Toby Sawday - managing director of Sawdays.co.uk <http://www.sawdays.co.uk>, 
and presenter of BBC2's It's Not Easy Being Green

I did rather a lot of travelling abroad last year so I'm planning to spend 
more time in the UK in 2010. Kate, the editor of our Special Escapes website, 
has been raving aboutAnnie's Cabin, a self-catering eco lodge near Ludlow, 
Shropshire. It's a squeaky green new-build made from Douglas Fir logs from 
mid-Wales. I'll be looking forward to loading up with foodie bits from the 
fabulous shops in Ludlow, doing some walking and not much else. Perfect.

• How to do it: Book on 07977 091928; ludlowecologcabins.co.uk 
<http://ludlowecologcabins.co.uk>; a week from £375, sleeps four (six with 
sofabed).

Kimberly Sanberg - co-founder, Go Green Travel Green 

In November 2004, I took the Trans-Siberian Railway from St Petersburg to 
Listvyanka. The train pulled into the station in the Siberian city of Irkutsk, 
where I hopped on a bus to Lake Baikal, the largest freshwater lake in the 
world, surrounded by stunning mountains. Russia isn't known for being pristine, 
but Listvyanka – a remote, untouched village on the edge of the lake – is just 
that. It may seem crazy to go to Siberia in November, but Listvyanka is 
deserted at that time of year, which means it's just you and a handful of 
locals. There arebanyas (saunas), hotels, a few restaurants, plenty of hiking 
and, in the summer, biking. The top two reasons to visit Listvyanka in 2010? 
Time and money. Like all untouched treasures, its days as a quaint village may 
be numbered, and Listvyanka is also incredibly affordable. (
gogreentravelgreen.com <http://www.gogreentravelgreen.com>)

• How to do it: Russian Experience (0845 521 2910; trans-siberian.co.uk 
<http://trans-siberian.co.uk>) has an 18-day Trans-Siberian trip from St. 
Petersburg to Beijing, via Lake Baikal (two nights in Listvyanka village) from 
£1,805, including some meals and excursions. For more information about Lake 
Baikal, contact the Russian National Tourist Office (visitrussia.org.uk 
<http://visitrussia.org.uk>).

Mark Smith - founder of rail travel website Seat61.com <http://www.seat61.com> 

In April, I'm heading off to Istria, a corner of Croatia nestling on the 
Adriatic that I know virtually nothing about. There's something quite delicious 
in heading off to somewhere unknown, without preconceptions. Naturally, I'll be 
taking the train: Eurostar from London to Paris, a snug sleeper on the 
excellent City Night Line overnight to Munich, then a slow and scenic daytime 
run through the mountains of Austria into Slovenia and Croatia. The journey is 
a treat in itself. (seat61.com <http://seat61.com/>)!

• How to do it: London to Paris by Eurostar costs from £59 return, and from 
Paris to Munich overnight by the City Night Line is £244 return in a sleeping 
car, both bookable through RailEurope (raileurope.co.uk 
<http://www.raileurope.co.uk>). Then Munich to Zagreb (via Ljubljana) costs 
from £50 return on a EuroCity train (bahn.de <http://www.bahn.de>). For more 
information on Istria seeistra.hr <http://istra.hr>.

The family experts

Justine Roberts - co-founder of mumsnet.com <http://www.mumsnet.com>

Mumsnetters' hot tip for a successful family holiday in 2010 is to look no 
further thanlog cabins. Forest Holidays provides cabin holidays in five 
stunning locations throughout Great Britain – Strathyre, Argyll, Cropton, Keldy 
and Deerpark, with a brand new site set to open in the Forest of Dean this 
September. The comfortable cabins fall somewhere between a posh ski chalet and 
an upmarket log cabin – many with luxuries such as a balcony hot tub 
overlooking a lake and a Wii games console. Friendly wardens will organise 
activities such as walks, wildlife spotting and arts and crafts for the 
children, and most sites have bicycle hire too. For a similar, even fancier, 
log cabin experience, try Bluestone, a "luxury holiday village" tucked into a 
green valley in the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park.

• How to do it: Forest Holidays (0845 130 8225; forestholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.forestholidays.co.uk>) offers four nights in a cabin sleeping up to 
six from £115. Bluestone (01834 862 400;bluestonewales.com 
<http://www.bluestonewales.com>) offers two nights in a lodge sleeping up to 
four from £149.

Jeanne Dee - founder of soultravelers3.com <http://soultravelers3.com>

Who would think that my top tip for families in 2010 would be Tuscany? Head 
for the breathtaking Chianti hills, to the four-star luxury – yet affordable – 
camping resort, Norcenni Girasole, near Greve, and preferably in May or June, 
when the weather is usually superb but you can avoid the high-season crowds and 
prices. Choose from a cabin, a caravan or a stone-built apartment, and cook 
your own food or eat out at the excellent on-site restaurants. There are two 
pools plus free activities, children's clubs, horse riding, disco and – for the 
adults – wine tasting, cooking lessons and a health spa. There are endless day 
trip possibilities too: Siena, Lucca, Pisa, San Gimignano and Florence are all 
easy to reach by car or from the local train station, which also connects to 
Rome and Venice.

• How to do it: Thomson Al Fresco (0871 231 3293; thomsonalfresco.co.uk 
<http://www.thomsonalfresco.co.uk>) has seven nights for a family of two adults 
and three children sharing a mobile home at Norcenni Girasole Club from £200, 
accommodation only. The nearest airport is Pisa; flights with Easyjet (
easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) from Gatwick, Luton or Bristol cost from 
£50. Book car hire from Pisa throughavis.co.uk <http://www.avis.co.uk>.

Debi Green - director, babygoes2.com <http://babygoes2.com>

I hope head for the new Mazagan resort in Morocco, on the beach just south of 
Casablanca. Stylish, with excellent facilities including golf, spa and riding 
for grown-ups, and even kids' clubs from three months. It ticks all the right 
boxes – a luxury holiday with family-friendly facilities in an exotic and 
unspoilt destination, and only around three hours from the UK. Completely 
different isEl Caserio Del Mirador: five apartments in a converted house set in 
stunning peaceful scenery near Jalon on Spain's Costa Blanca, around 20 minutes 
from the beach and close to a market town. It's family-run, stylish but very 
child-friendly – lots of baby/child equipment and meals cooked to order for 
parents.

• How to do it: Royal Air Maroc (020 7307 5800; royalairmaroc.com 
<http://royalairmaroc.com>) has flights from Gatwick to Casablanca from £188 
return. Mazagan (00 212 5 2338 8000;mazaganbeachresort.com 
<http://mazaganbeachresort.com>) has a four-night break from £800, half-board. 
Easyjet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) flies from Gatwick to Valencia 
from £32 return. Caserio del Mirador (00 34 965 973 024;villajalon.com 
<http://villajalon.com>) has a week for four people in a family suite from £650.

Emma Barnett - managing director, totstoo.com <http://www.totstoo.com>

Once considered a place strictly for adults, the Maldives is now a perfect 
place for the kids too, and Diva is the ultimate family hotel. There's an 
amazing kids' programme – starting with a creche from six months right up to a 
teen programme – interconnecting beach suites, lots of kids' dining options and 
excellent babysitters. They will also organize for baby supplies to be waiting 
on arrival, so there is no need to take overloaded suitcases full of nappies. 
For older kids, there are ringo and banana rides, wakeboards, jet skis and 
kayaks. There's a spa for the adults on its own private island.

• How to do it: ITC Classics (01244 355550; itcclassics.co.uk 
<http://www.itcclassics.co.uk/>) offers seven nights' bed and breakfast in a 
family beach villa sleeping two adults and two children from £2,260 per adult, 
£1,940 per child, including flights and transfers. It is probably cheaper to 
book a package in Britain than to book direct with Diva (00 230 698 2222;
naiade.com <http://naiade.com>).
 