
Is that the 70s horror classic Rod Stewart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rodstewart> tried to buy up and destroy so 
no one could see Britt Ekland, his then partner, dancing with her kit off?

Yes and no. Britt did show her top half but a "bum double" was used for 
raunchier scenes. And the Rod Stewart stuff is just one of the many rumours, 
ironies and mysteries that surroundThe Wicker Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-wicker-man>.

Which are?

Well, according to Inside The Wicker Man, a new book about the movie's 
disturbing history, the latest rumour is that French company Canal+ is planning 
a remake, with Liam Neeson and Robert Carlyle in the frame as lead. Meanwhile
Anthony Shaffer <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/anthonyshaffer>, who wrote 
the original screenplay (plus Sleuth and Frenzy), has finally found a Hollywood 
backer for the sequel.

 If it was a classic, why the remake?

 The Wicker Man - the story of a Christian copper called Howie who arrives on 
a mysterious Scottish island to investigate the disappearance of a young girl 
from a community of sex-obsessed, fire-dancing, sun-worshipping pagans - has 
not had it easy. As if the shooting wasn't bad enough (it was so cold the 
actors had ice cubes in their mouths to stop their breath showing) the film was 
butchered to 84 minutes, then distributed with a terminal lack of oomph.

Why didn't it disappear?

Christopher Lee, who plays island chief Lord Summerisle, says it's the best 
script he ever did. And the ending, where the Christian-pagan clash reaches a 
vicious climax, is electric: trapped in a giant, faceless, flaming wicker man, 
Edward (The Equalizer) Woodward defiantly belts out The Lord Is My Shepherd as 
the smiling pagans join hands around their human sacrifice and chorus Summer Is 
Icumen In.

Crikey, no wonder it's a horror.

Actually, the film barely fits the genre. It's not so much good v evil as new 
religion v old, Lord v summer god, heaven v harvest. Nor does it feature the 
usual "shag and you die" horror cliches; prudish, stiff-bummed Howie perishes 
precisely because he's a virgin. The ironies just keep coming - but what else 
would you expect from a movie about the dangers of fanaticism that developed 
its own cult following?

 Anthony Shaffer and Allan Brown, author of Inside The Wicker Man, will be 
answering questions after a screening of the movie at the NFT, London SE1 
(020-7928 3232) on May 3 at 7pm. Inside The Wicker Man is published by Sidgwick 
& Jackson (£14.99).
 