
Everything in the world, it is said, is about sex except for sex itself. And 
everything in aGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> speech means something all 
right, it’s just that it’s never the thing the chancellor is actually talking 
about.

There were, to be fair, some parts of his turn 
<http://blogs.new.spectator.co.uk/2015/10/full-text-george-osbornes-2015-conservative-conference-speech/>
 at the Conservative conference on Monday that it didn’t take a cryptologist to 
decode. Being introduced by Andrea Jenkyns, the new MP for Morley and Outwood, 
simply reminded people of how Mr Osborne had routed her predecessor, Ed Balls, 
without him brazenly spelling this out. His veneration of “my friend, our prime 
minister: David Cameron” was a pitch to move next door and pick up where the PM 
leaves off. All this was routine political tact; it was when he turned to the 
detailed policy stuff that the audience was led into a hall of distorting 
mirrors.

Prosperity, he said, would be founded upon budget surpluses, with an 
additional pledge – that “every penny we raise” from selling Lloyds shares 
“will be used to pay off our debts” – thrown in to reaffirm the message of 
rectitude. One might accept or dispute his obsession with prudence, but one 
surely cannot square it with his simultaneous boast that those same Lloyds 
shares “will be offered at a discount”. Selling assets off on the cheap offers 
free money to a minority with cash to spare at the expense of taxpayers in 
general, and indeed of the national debt.

Similar paradoxes bedevilled all the other chief themes. “We are the builders” 
was repeated to the point of risking tedium in the hall. The morning papers had 
lent apparent credence to the pose with the signal that the former Labour 
cabinet minister Andrew Adonis was – asthe Express put it 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/609873/Lord-Adonis-joins-Tory-taskforce-defect-Labour-peer>
 – to “defect” to Mr Osborne’s infrastructure taskforce. In fact, Lord Adonis 
is to hang on to his Labour membership card, ceasing only to take the Lords 
party whip, the apparent price of taking up this apolitical role – so hardly a 
real desertion, still less a defection. Even if it had been, there is a gaping 
mismatch between the Osborne rhetoric about rekitting Britain’s road, rail and 
runways and the Osborne record ofpresiding over a halving of public investment 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/data/>, which has collapsed from 3.2% of 
GDP in 2009-10 to just 1.5% this year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Osborne%3A%20heir%20to%20the%20Tory%20throne%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-party-conference-video&media=>
George Osborne: heir to the Tory throne? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/oct/05/george-osborne-party-conference-video>
To observe these inconsistencies is not to dismiss everything the chancellor 
had to say. Britain’s grip on what the French callgrands projets is often 
feeble, so an infrastructure commission has much to commend it, as does setting 
local government pension funds to work on financing new public buildings and 
bridges. There was some substance, too, in the big announcement on local taxes. 
The old straitjacket on business rates, which Mr Osborne candidly admitted was 
a past Tory error, is to be partially released. And yet this “biggest transfer 
of power to our local government in living memory” was caveated in important 
and weird ways.

Town halls will automatically gain new tax powers only where they use them to 
do what Mr Osborne would like, and cut business rates. Councils who are instead 
interested in raising revenues for the common good face all sorts of obstacles. 
They must embrace the elected mayoral form of governance, whichvoters in most 
big British cities rejected in 2012 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_mayoral_referendums,_2012>. They must 
secure a “majority vote 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-unveils-devolution-revolution>” 
among businesses in their local enterprise partnership, an unprecedented 
extension of the franchise from human beings to companies, from the same 
chancellor who went on to declare “power to the people”. Even after reshaping 
themselves into mayoralties and winning the backing of business ratepayers, 
town halls will still face an absolute cap on rises, probably set at 2p on the 
rate. You can have any colour of local democracy you like, as long as it’s blue.

Mr Osborne also pushed his claim to be a northerner by adoption. But, as the 
IPPR thinktank warned, unless the new devolution is coupled to new 
redistribution of resources, then poorer parts of the country will inescapably 
lose out to those regions with healthier tax bases. George the unlikely 
northerner went on to hail theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> as the unlikely “only true 
party of labour”.

A clever June budget caught everyone by surprise by hiking the minimum wage at 
the same time as slashing tax credits. But as the months go by, as hard-hit 
constituents complain, and asthe Institute for Fiscal Studies explains 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7975> that the overall losses for the 
working poor will be thrice any gains in pay, even some on Mr Osborne’s own 
side are now wondering whether the budget conjuring was “clever” only in the 
pejorative sense. Mr Osborne’s conference speech confounded and surprised in 
all sorts of ways, but it could soon run into the same nagging question.
 