
Early 19th century Manchester was an expanding industrial city with a rapidly 
growing population. Poor social and economic conditions, electoral corruption 
and lack of representation in parliament led to increasing radicalism and calls 
for reform. It was in this environment that a youngJohn Edward Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/john-edward-taylor-peterloo-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 worked initially as a cotton manufacturer and later as a merchant.


John Edward Taylor and Peterloo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/john-edward-taylor-peterloo-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
Taylor took an early interest in reform and public affairs. He regularly wrote 
political articles, most notably for theManchester Gazette 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manchester_Gazette>, one of the few non-Tory 
newspapers in Manchester at the time. By 1815 he was meeting with other 
Manchester based liberals to debate reform for industrial cities. This group 
was known as theLittle Circle <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Little_Circle> and 
included some of the men who later helped Taylor to finance the Manchester 
Guardian. After winning a libel case against the Tory politician John Greenwood 
in March 1819, Taylor was encouraged by his friend John Childs to start a 
newspaper. A few months later in August 1819 he witnessed first-hand an event 
known as thePeterloo massacre,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/john-edward-taylor-peterloo-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
where at least 15 people were killed and hundreds injured after the yeomanry 
entered the crowds of a demonstration for parliamentary reform. Taylor is 
believed to have written an account of the event forThe Times 
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/The-Times> and later served on a committee 
that helped the victims.

As a result of these events and the environment in Manchester at the time, 
Taylor and his 11 friends began looking for opportunities to establish a 
newspaper in Manchester with a liberal reformist voice. They sought advice from 
the editors and proprietors of liberal reformist newspapers such as theLeeds 
Mercury <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leeds_Mercury> and Glasgow Chronicle 
<http://www.nls.uk/collections/rarebooks/acquisitions/singlebook.cfm/idfind/680>
. They then approached William Cowdroy with an offer to purchase his Manchester 
Gazette. This was turned down and Taylor later decided to start his own 
newspaper.

one thousand one hundred parts by eleven equal parts shares and proportions
Manchester Guardian agreement, 28 April 1821 
The loan given to help Taylor set up the Manchester Guardian was arranged 
through a legal agreement dated 28 April 1821. The 11 backers were George 
William Wood, Edward Baxter, George Philips, T. B. W. Sanderson, Robert 
Philips, Thomas Potter, William Duckworth, Thomas Wilkins, Richard Potter, 
Samuel Pullein and Thomas Johnson. All were liberal reformers and worked within 
the textile trade in and aroundManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>. The agreement states that £1100 
would be given to Taylor, with each man paying £100.

The terms of the agreement stipulated that Taylor would be responsible for 
“…establishing, editing conducting and managing a certain newspaper to be 
published weekly in Manchester aforesaid under the name or title ‘The 
Manchester Guardian’.”The terms were favourable to Taylor. He would be the 
editor and sole proprietor of the newspaper, owning all parts of it including 
its copyright. He would not be personally liable for the debt, and repayments 
would be made with interest from the proceeds of the newspaper if and when it 
was in a financial position to do so. This would be after any costs associated 
with running the newspaper such as rents, taxes and salaries had been paid.
 The signatures of the 11 friends who loaned John Edward Taylor the funds to 
set up the Manchester Guardian, 28 April 1821 Photograph: University of 
Manchester 
In return, Taylor was to keep accurate accounts which would be inspected by 
George William Wood, Edward Baxter and Thomas Wilkins twice yearly in January 
and July. They were required to give Taylor two months notice to return any 
monies or interest owed. If he did not pay or died, the three creditors could 
sell and dispose of the newspaper to recover debts owed. Once the debt had been 
repaid, Taylor (or his executors) would be free from the terms of the agreement 
and to receive any profits the newspaper made.

The first edition of the Manchester Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/may/06/archive-first-guardian-editorial-1821>
 was published on 5 May 1821, only a week after the agreement had been signed. 
At seven pence the high cost of the newspaper (due tostamp duty on newspapers 
<http://spartacus-educational.com/Lstamp.htm>) kept the circulation low, so to 
make the paper profitable Taylor turned to advertising. With its detailed 
reporting of parliamentary meetings, trade (particularly the cotton trade) and 
European news, the Manchester Guardian reached out to a wide range of readers. 
The Guardian biographer David Ayerst notes that through his role as a 
commissioner for the Market Street improvements, Taylor worked closely with 
neutral, Tory and Whig businessmen who despite not all sharing his political or 
religious views were interested in reading what Taylor had to say. This made 
the newspaper attractive to advertisers. Between 1821 and 1823 the number of 
adverts appearing in the newspaper increased from 36 to 100 and circulation 
from around 1000 to 1865.


Taylor’s connections with Tory businessmen and the editorial direction of the 
newspaper was not to the liking of some of the 11 backers who wanted a more 
radical newspaper that would attack the Tories at every possible opportunity. 
However, with the terms of the loan stating that Taylor would be sole owner and 
editor, they had no right to a say in what was published. Taylor made the 
newspaper profitable and by May 1824 he had repaid the last instalments of the 
original loan made in April 1821.

The Manchester Guardian agreement (reference number 260/42) forms part of the 
Guardian Archive (1821-1970s) 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/search-resources/guide-to-special-collections/atoz/guardian-archive/>
, which is held at theThe University of Manchester Library 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/special-collections/>. The Guardian 
Archive can be accessed by advanced appointment in thereading rooms of the John 
Rylands Library 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/special-collections/access-the-special-collections/using-the-reading-rooms/reading-rooms-john-rylands-library/>
. Further information about this collection including catalogues and how to 
access it is available onThe University of Manchester Library website 
<http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/special-collections/>. 

More recent records of the Guardian are held in the Guardian News & Media 
Archive (GNM Archive) <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH> in 
London. Further information about these collections is available on theGNM 
Archive website <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive?INTCMP=SRCH>. 



 