
He may have edged out more experienced film-makers such as David Fincher and 
Clint Eastwood for a best director nomination at this year’s Oscars, but The 
Imitation Game director Morten Tyldum is still being forced to defend his film 
againstaccusations that it underplayed Alan Turing’s homosexuality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/17/imitation-game-alan-turing-sexuality-biopic>
.

Ahead of tonight’s Oscar ceremony, Tyldum has finally spoken out on the 
subject in a recently published interview withVariety 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/news/oscars-imitation-game-director-on-why-the-film-didnt-portray-an-alan-turing-gay-relationship-1201438915/>
. The Norwegian director denied that the biopic of the pioneering British 
codebreaker and computer scientist soft-pedalled the issue because of a fear of 
limiting the film’s box office,currently at $160m (£103m) worldwide 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=imitationgame.htm>.

“It was not because we were afraid it would offend anybody,” Tyldum said. “If 
I … had this thing about a straight character, I would never have a sex scene 
to prove that he’s heterosexual. If I have a gay character in a movie, I need 
to have a sex scene in it — just to prove that he’s gay?”

“I’m not shying away from it. His whole relationship, how he falls in love and 
the importance of him being a gay man, was all about secrecy.”

Tyldum admits that Turing was engaged in affairs during the period covered in 
the film but believed that it wasn’t relevant to include any other references 
to this.

“He had some sexual partners, but it was few and far between. The only reason 
to have a sex scene in the film would be to satisfy critics who feels that 
every gay character needs to have a gay sex scene.”

The Imitation Game is up for eight Oscars, including best picture and best 
actor for Benedict Cumberbatch, who has used the filmto support a campaign to 
get other gay men arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/30/benedict-cumberbatch-pardon-gay-men-alan-turing>
 during the same period pardoned for their crimes.

 * Oscars 2015 - follow the action as it happens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/live/2015/feb/22/oscars-2015-live-red-carpet-and-arrivals-ceremony-and-winners> 