
When China does well, the world feels nervous. How high will it rise, and how 
peacefully? When China falters, the world worries. How will we manage if this 
mighty economy slumps, or if political control of this immense society should 
slip gear? Of course every big country, whether it be India, Russia, Brazil or 
Nigeria, generates a few such anxieties, as does the European Union, but not on 
the same scale. Only America has the same degree of truly global importance as 
China. What, for example, links the recent poor performance ofJaguar Land Rover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/07/jaguar-land-rover-cuts-prices-china-after-falling-sales-hit-tata-profits>
, the halving of Tata’s profits, the shrinking exports of Taiwanese phone firms,
the rescue of the Ecuadorean economy 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/ecuador-expects-4-billion-in-loans-from-china-in-2015-1427144435>
 after it defaulted on debts, andthe fall in the price of gold 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/11750522/Why-is-the-gold-price-falling-and-where-it-is-going-next.html>
 last month? The answer is the state of the Chinese market, the policy choices 
of Chinese financial institutions, and the decisions of the Chinese government.

Those decisions have an extraordinary ripple effect across the world. What is 
true in economics is also true in politics and military affairs. More than 100 
Chinese ships, including nuclear submarines, last monthchurned through the 
waters <http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f2f2b394-35bf-11e5-b05b-b01debd57852.html> of 
the South China Sea, firing off missiles and guns and generally behaving as if 
there was a war on. Planes zoomed overhead. The Chinese did this in an ocean 
area they had unilaterally designated as off limits to foreign ships, and they 
did it immediately before a meeting of foreign ministers of the Association of 
Southeast Asian Nations in Kuala Lumpur.

They took the precaution of announcing in advance that Asean was not a proper 
forum for the discussion of competing claims to islands in that sea, including 
the ones they have been artificially building up and equipping with air strips 
and harbours. True, the United States and other nations also stage war games 
and manoeuvres in the South China Sea. But the Chinese base their naval 
activities on the simple proposition that it all belongs to them, that there 
are in reality no “competing claims”, that the clue is in the name. It says 
SouthChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea (or “southern sea” in 
Chinese) so that’s what it is. It’s Chinese. It’s theirs.

The historical arguments that China offers in support of this are fragile, but 
that’s not the point. The point seems to be that the Chinese government under 
PresidentXi Jinping <https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> is even more 
obsessed with control than its predecessors. Whether out there on the ocean 
sweeping aside other countries’ little navies, dealing with the problems of the 
Shanghai stock market by pouring in state funds, or engaging with dissidents by 
arresting and threatening them, this is a government that seems unable to 
tolerate ambiguities, differences, or, in particular, even moderate opposition.

Strange to recall that when Mr Xi came to office two years ago, he was seen by 
some as potentially a reformer who would bring about a more relaxed China. He 
has done the opposite. This is a strategy that brings many dangers. Asean 
ministers, for example,do not accept 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/asean-urged-to-stand-up-to-beijing-over-south-china-sea-1438690560>
 the Chinese line. That does not mean that China won’t prevail, but it probably 
does mean that it has permanently damaged its relations with some of its 
neighbours.

The Shanghai stock exchange crisis, which has seen the Chinese authorities 
dealing with equities as if they were adversaries to be battered into 
submission, shows the same obtuseness in a different area. China should be 
accommodating itself to an era of lower growth, inevitable now that its labour 
is dearer, but the authorities crave the prestige of figures suggesting high 
growth, including stocks. So it is wasting its taxpayers’ money, and eroding 
the rest of the world’s confidence in its economic competence, by trying to 
keep stock prices artificially high.

The worst effect of the all-encompassing obsession with control that Mr Xi has 
brought into Chinese politics is in human rights. The recent arrests of more 
than 200 human rights lawyers was not just an offence against human rights in 
itself, but a foolish capping of a vital safety valve for Chinese society. 
These lawyers would help if your house was illegally demolished, if officials 
ran off with village funds, if your church was harassed, or your wages unpaid.

They were irritating to the authorities but also useful, since they could 
signal where pressure was really building up. Otherwise, as one of themhas 
written 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/01/opinion/chinas-vs-its-human-rights-lawyers.html>
, “Suppression of moderate dissent … could explode into massive and violent 
social unrest.” Nobody envies the Chinese government its difficult choices. 
Reform is inherently risky, but so, and probably more so, is maintaining rigid 
control whatever the cost.
 