
The north’s digital economy is creating jobs at 10 times the rate of the 
region’s non-digital sectors, according to a recentreport 
<http://technorthhq.com/digital-powerhouse-report-launch/>.


To celebrate and promote the emergence of this so-called digital powerhouse, 
Tech North on Thursday night held the grand final of itsNorthern Stars 
competition <http://technorthhq.com/northern-stars/> to uncover the region’s 10 
brightest tech startups.

Twenty finalists, who made it through regional heats, pitched their businesses 
in front of three judges and a crowd of 300 at Manchester’s old Granada studios.

The prize for the 10 winning companies includes a stand at TechCrunch Disrupt 
<https://techcrunch.com/event-info/disrupt-london-2016/> in London, an investor 
pitch event at Bloomberg HQ, also in London, and access to subsidised Tech 
North delegations – such as toSXSW <https://www.sxsw.com/>, the interactive 
media festival held in Austin, Texas.

Tech North, which carried out the report into the north’s digital economy, is 
a non-profit created to support the growth of digital businesses across the 
region. This year, its Northern Stars were:

DueCourse <https://www.duecourse.com/>


Manchester-based DueCourse allows SMEs to release funds tied up in their 
unpaid invoices – taking the stress out of getting paid on time. The FinTech 
company has created a risk and pricing algorithm to assess which invoices to 
offer an advance against.

Judge Harry Davies, from Telefonica’s start-up accelerator Wayra, said: 
“DueCourse offer a very interesting solution in terms of helping small 
businesses grow, thrive and scale in a way that helps them manage their cash 
flow. Small businesses are the lifeblood of the UK so it’s a great problem to 
be solving.”

Is Manchester about to become a global digital leader?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/sep/30/is-manchester-about-to-become-a-global-digital-leader>
SwapBots <http://www.swapbots.co/>

SwapBots are a collectable toy and video game hybrid brought to life by a 
smartphone or tablet using augmented reality. The Liverpool-based business 
offers toys at pocket-money prices and the parent-friendly product has no 
in-app purchasing, meaning children can’t buy upgrades with one click.


Judge Karen Kerrigan, chief legal officer at crowdfunding platform Seedrs, 
said: “This proposition is absolutely captivating. They are using augmented in 
a really appropriate way for the modern child market.”

Ash.TV <https://www.ash.tv/>

Hull-based Ash.TV has created an auto-playing video advertising platform for 
mobile, where advertisers can target audiences by selecting their age, gender, 
location, interests and occupation.

CEO Ash Lewis said: “This award will give us an amazing opportunity to meet 
partners and investors – and to break through from the north to the south of 
England, too. That is really important to a company like ours which relies on 
partners in the media, marketing and advertising industries.”

Judge Karen Kerrigan said: “Video advertising is something I’m naturally 
sceptical about, but Ash.TV is addressing a flaw by optimising muted video. I 
think they’re going to go a long way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ftop-10-tech-startups-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e1c2d048c3c668518de7cb5c85be3a581e8eac%2F0_44_2166_1300%2F2166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%2010%20tech%20stars%20in%20the%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ftop-10-tech-startups-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%2010%20tech%20stars%20in%20the%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ftop-10-tech-startups-north-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e1c2d048c3c668518de7cb5c85be3a581e8eac%2F0_44_2166_1300%2F2166.jpg>
 The winners of Tech North’s Northern Stars competition. Photograph: Tech North 
Dream Agility <https://dreamagility.com/>

Bury-based Dream Agility is designed to help retailers and digital agencies 
that manage campaigns using Google Shopping – automating most of the work 
involved. It offers retailers a cheaper and quicker way for their products to 
get noticed on Google Shopping. Its tech also manages Facebook, Amazon, eBay 
and Affiliate Window.

CEO Elizabeth Clark said the company had been described as the “Rolls-Royce of 
feeds”. Judge Karen Kerrigan said: “I was impressed by Elizabeth’s energy and 
passion. If you have those things, you’re 50% there in terms of running a 
successful startup.”

Radio.co <https://radio.co/>

Based in Manchester’s Northern Quarter, Radio.co is a live streaming platform 
that allows anyone to create an online radio station. It runs entirely from the 
cloud and replaces conventional desktop software that is still commonplace in 
the radio industry.

James Mulvaney, the founder and CEO, said: “Manchester’s an up-and-coming city 
and it’s easy to hire talent here. When I first came to Manchester there wasn’t 
a tech scene as such whereas now it’s very clear there is an emerging tech 
scene, and a culture around startups, which is great.”

Judge Harry Davies said: “This is a really tough market to crack – it’s a 
crowded space – but Radio.co has already got some really good traction.”

Valuechain <https://www.valuechain.com/>

Based in Lancaster, Valuechain has developed a smart manufacturing software 
system that it hopes will become the Facebook of business-to-business 
collaboration – improving competitiveness of global advanced manufacturing 
supply chains. It helps small businesses to improve their systems and collect 
good data, allows businesses to share data with their customers and suppliers, 
and lets big companies look at risk and how to improve the supply chain.

CEO Tom Dawes said: “We’re all engineers from a manufacturing background so 
we’re not in any tech circles. This award will allow us to network with other 
tech startups, meet investors and link up with strategic partners.”

Judge Karen Kerrigan said: “Tom has identified a need that even big 
corporations are prepared to adopt. His projected £50m revenue was very 
impressive, too.”

Living Lens <http://livinglens.tv/>

Liverpool-based Living Lens turns video content into manageable data by 
analysing speech, actions and sentiment. For example a brand could use data 
mined from video to get feedback from its customers, so it can better 
understand them.

CEO Carl Wong said: “The thing we do is in a very embryonic industry. The big 
consumer insight companies and huge brands are just now starting to realise 
that it’s very valuable because the world now talks to each other in video.”

Enterprising startups look beyond London for success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/21/enterprising-startups-look-beyond-london-for-success-rail-journeys>
TopicDNA <https://www.topicdna.com/>

TopicDNA is a social profiling and ad targeting technology that uses a 
classification system to profile every individual’s interests and passions 
across all major social networks. The Liverpool-based firm helps brands to 
profile their social audiences and assists them in targeting potential new 
customers.

Co-founder Jason Binks said: “We’re a really, early stage startup, we’re 
pre-funding, so we wouldn’t be able to attend the prize events on our own 
steam.”

Judge Karen Kerrigan said: “If TopicDNA can deliver on what Facebook has 
achieved in profiling users then they will have the lion’s share of the 
non-Facebook market and therefore a captive user base.”

ProxiSmart <http://www.proxismart.co.uk/>

ProxiSmart’s flagship solution, ParkingPerx, aims to take make city centre car 
parking cheaper and easier. The Newcastle business has created an app which 
allows the user to get free parking by making qualified purchases in nearby 
shops, increasing footfall and spending in declining high streets.

Judge Harry Davies said: “Who wouldn’t want to park for free? Even now in 
2016, parking is a nightmare that hasn’t been solved. ProxiSmart has a unique 
angle in that both the customers and merchants win.”

Airtime Rewards <http://www.airtimerewards.co/>

FinTech startup Airtime Rewards has created a retail reward system for mobile 
users. The Manchester business has developed a new reward currency, giving 
major retailers the capability to reward consumers back to their mobile phone 
accounts – leading to cheaper phone bills.

Co-Founder and CEO Adam Ward said: “For us, exposure is the most important 
thing. I’ve followed the successes of the winners from last year and I’m 
looking forward to our journey over the next 12 months.”

Judge Karen Kerrigan said: “This is a smart company that has engaged an 
impressive suite of retailers, which stands them in good stead for the 
challenges ahead.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 