
A woman in her 20s with severe mental health problems stemming from childhood 
sexual abuse has beenallowed to die under Dutch euthanasia laws after doctors 
claimed she was incurable 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3583783/Sex-abuse-victim-20s-allowed-choose-euthanasia-Holland-doctors-decided-post-traumatic-stress-conditions-uncurable.html>
. In a startling abdication of the psychiatrist’s responsibility to prevent 
suicide and, when necessary, to protect patients from themselves, this woman’s 
psychiatrist declared that “there was no prospect or hope for her”, effectively 
signing her death warrant. With psychiatrists like that, one might ask, who 
needs self-harm?

Anyone who has lived through 10 years of sexual abuse may benefit more from 
being listened to than labelled

According to papers released by the Dutch euthanasia commission, the woman, 
who had been sexually abused from the age of five to 15, had been diagnosed 
with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anorexia and chronic depression. 
Despite “intensive therapy” resulting in some improvement in the woman’s mental 
state, doctors pronounced her incurable. There was, they said, “no major 
depression or other mood disorder which affected her thinking” and she was 
“totally competent” to make the decision to end her life, a judgment which 
seems to me at odds with their own diagnoses.

This is a deeply distressing and disturbing case, but it is not an isolated 
one.The Netherlands has seen a marked increase in the number of psychiatric 
patients ending their lives under euthanasia laws 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/11/netherlands-sees-sharp-increase-in-people-choosing-euthanasia-du/>
. In 2010 there were two such deaths; last year the number had risen to 56.A 
study of 66 cases in which patients were killed for “psychiatric suffering” in 
the Netherlands between 2011 and 2014 
<http://archpsyc.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2491354> revealed that 
70% were women and that most had been diagnosed with personality disorders. Of 
those who died, 56% described social isolation and loneliness.

I wonder what exactly the doctors meant when they pronounced this 
twenty-something woman, who had survived 10 years of sexual abuse, “incurable” 
and killed her. Certainly, she could not be “cured” of her experience. She 
would never be the same as somebody who had not lived through her particular 
trauma; we are all of us moulded by our experience.

I wonder to what extent she found her diagnoses helpful. Some people do find 
such labels help them to recognise their “illness” as an entity distinct from 
themselves. (Though this is harder in the case of personality disorders.) But 
for others they serve to heighten feelings of shame and hopelessness, seeming 
to locate the problem within the individual as opposed to viewing mental 
distress as an understandable response to experience. It seems to me that 
anyone who has lived through 10 years of sexual abuse may benefit more from 
being listened to than labelled.

Assisted dying: how does it work in a Dutch end-of-life clinic?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/11/assisted-dying-dutch-end-of-life-netherlands-unbearable-suffering>
But however we understand mental distress, there can be no doubt that it 
exists within a broader societal context. It is unarguable that factors such as 
properly funded services, welfare provision and decent housing have the 
greatest possible impact on an individual’s capacity, whatever their 
experience, to create a life that feels worth living. So too do societal 
attitudes. The stigma attached to mental ill health, and often to particular 
diagnoses – “schizos”, “borderlines” – is described by many people as being
“worse than the illness itself” 
<http://www.time-to-change.org.uk/sites/default/files/Stigma%20Shout.pdf>. The 
loneliness and isolation described by the 56% of those who opted for euthanasia 
on mental health grounds in the Dutch study, are not inevitable. They are the 
result of choices we make individually and as a society.

According to Dutch psychiatrist, Paulan Stärcke, who has carried out 
euthanasia requests, psychiatrists are “too hesitant” about agreeing to 
euthanasia for patients with “psychiatric diseases”, somethingshe describes as 
“an act of mercy” 
<http://euthanasia2016.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Abstracts-Subsession-2-Medical-2-Starcke.pdf>
. Between 1939-41, a recorded 70,000 people (the actual figure is thought much 
higher) with “incurable” mental or physical illness were alsosent to a “mercy 
death” (Gnadentod), as part of the Nazis’ forced euthanasia programme 
<https://www.ushmm.org/wlc/en/article.php?ModuleId=10005200>. Mercy, it seems, 
is a subjective concept.
 