
There is something about a highway through the wilderness that attracts 
eccentrics. The 1,500-mile Alaska Highway, which crosses British Columbia and 
the Yukon for most of its route, has its fair share. Even the construction of 
the road, which turned 70 last year, was anything but normal.

US soldiers were ordered to build the road – described as one of the greatest 
engineering feats in history – through unmapped territory. They endured extreme 
cold, mud and mosquito-infested forests. The highway, which joined the 
contiguous US with Alaska, was a response to the attack on Pearl Harbor. It 
enabled the Americans to transport planes to Russia to fight the Germans, via a 
chain of airfields and remote airports. Remarkably, it was built in just eight 
months, carved through rock and forest from Dawson Creek in BC to Delta 
Junction in Alaska, providing a wartime morale boost for the US.

The characters who live along the route are every bit as fascinating as the 
story of its construction. Marl Brown, the 80-year-old curator of theFort 
Nelson Heritage Museum <http://www.fortnelsonmuseum.ca/> in northern BC, sports 
a long white beard because, he says, he hates shaving. The former mechanic's 
collection of vintage cars was the inspiration for the museum. His favourite is 
the 104-year-old McLaughlin Buick with its "mother-in-law seat" that can tip 
the rear passenger out the back.

At Double G Services <http://www.doublegservice.com/> near Muncho Lake, three 
hours west, truckers share road tales of bobcats, lynx and grizzlies. There are 
shelves of fresh bread and an Alaska licence plate with a picture of Sarah 
Palin, which reads: "Where the air is cold and the governor is hot!" They agree 
both caribou and tourists are stupid, and discuss the merits of a moose bumper.

More than 300,000 people drive the Alaska Highway every year between May and 
September and, as the last US frontier, it is on the to-do list of many 
Americans. There are bears, wild sheep, bison and moose to photograph, against 
a backdrop of increasingly spectacular mountains as you travel north and west.

At Liard Hot Springs RV Park <http://www.liardhotspringslodge.com/rv_park.html>
 on the eastern edge of BC, we had soaked in the waters with full-time RVers – 
people who have sold their homes in retirement and are on the move constantly.

"You have to really get on well with your partner to do this," warns one.
 Alaska Highway Sign, Dawson Creek. Photograph: Patrick Bennett/Corbis 
Many have their dogs along for the ride – yorkshire terriers and pomeranians 
are being exercised all along the highway.

A woman named Button (her mother loved the actor Red Buttons) oversees the 
Signpost Forest Visitor Centre atWatson Lake 
<http://www.watsonlake.ca/our-community/sign-post-forest/>, over the border in 
the Yukon. In 1942, a lonely GI working on the highway started the tradition of 
leaving a sign pointing the way home. More than 70,000 signs have since been 
left here by travellers on the road.

Every road trip needs good snacks. Look out for cinnamon buns at Tetsa River 
RV Park <http://www.campscout.com/campground/BC1514/> , west of Fort Nelson, 
and the Canadian favourite "butter tarts" at the Yukon'sRancheria Lodge 
<http://www.karo-ent.com/rancheria.htm>. The lodge has a long history of 
sheltering travellers from storms. It hosted 100 unexpected guests last year 
when the road was washed away in a flash flood. Stories from the 1940s tell of 
strangers having to sleep two to a bed.
 Marl Brown, curator at the Fort Nelson Heritage Museum Photograph: Anne 
Kostalas 
There is a quirkiness to road-stops here. At the Toad River Lodge 
<http://www.toadriverlodge.com/> in northern BC, you can eat a toad burger 
(which comes with a hot dog, too) under a ceiling covered in baseball caps, or 
drink a coffee while a stuffed wolverine watches over you at theYukon Motel 
<http://www.yukonmotel.com/index.htm> on Teslin Lake.

We spot a moose at Sikanni River RV Campground 
<http://www.sikannirivercampground.ca/>. Campsite owner Jackie says it is 
called Dandelion, and appears every summer. Soldiers from black regiments built 
a bridge in record time here, an achievement credited with helping end 
segregation in the US army.

John Rusyniak, who runs the Wilderness Lodge in Tok 
<http://www.logcabinwildernesslodge.com/>, Alaska, got a taste for the north 
when he rode his motorbike up the highway in the 1970s and moved there. Many 
have similar stories.

There is plenty to do along the way – fishing in holes, panning for gold at the
MacBride Museum in Whitehorse <http://www.macbridemuseum.com/>, daring to walk 
the Pouce Coupe trestle bridge, theAlaska Highway House 
<http://www.tourismdawsoncreek.com/alaska_highway_house.php> museum in Dawson 
Creek and the sausage rolls at Johnson's Crossing Bakery – but it is the memory 
of people of the Alaska Highway that will stay with me.
 