
The ancient Greeks were very good at writing thrillers. Sophocles’s Oedipus 
Rex fits the whodunnit mould, with the audience way ahead of the protagonist, 
who is unwittingly investigating his own guilt. The absurdist playwrightEugène 
Ionesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/michael-billington-s-a-to-z-of-modern-drama+ionesco>
 believed that all plays were thrillers, every one an “investigation brought to 
a successful conclusion” as if playwright and audience were looking for clues 
and considering the evidence as they played detective together.

Thrillers are enjoying a boom on TV, in the movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/03/the-girl-on-the-train-review-emily-blunt-paula-hawkins>
 and on the bestseller lists, but theatre often seems wary of the form, even 
though it can lay claim to inventing it via the Greeks through to that early 
piece of detective theatre, Arden of Faversham, and the 17th-century 
thriller-chillers and beyond. I grew up on a diet of Agatha Christie shows 
touring to the suburban theatres near where I lived, and maybe it is, 
paradoxically, the box-office success of that kind of stage suspense whodunnit 
that has made many contemporary playwrights reluctant to harness the thriller 
for their own ends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fred-barn-theatrical-thriller-national-theatre-david-hare-simenon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b2266f3d03f4964e3c0101b85e7ba135405ccb%2F0_214_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Red%20Barn%20is%20a%20rare%20theatrical%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20why%20aren't%20there%20more%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fred-barn-theatrical-thriller-national-theatre-david-hare-simenon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Red%20Barn%20is%20a%20rare%20theatrical%20thriller%20%E2%80%93%20why%20aren%27t%20there%20more%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fred-barn-theatrical-thriller-national-theatre-david-hare-simenon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19b2266f3d03f4964e3c0101b85e7ba135405ccb%2F0_214_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 Mocking the form … Una Stubbs and Derek Griffiths in The Real Inspector Hound 
at the Minerva theatre, Chichester, in 2010. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
The thriller is a terrific form for exploring human nature, as novelists from 
Ruth Rendell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/02/ruth-rendell-obituary-crime-writer>
 toSophie Hannah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/19/sophie-hannah-agatha-christie-poirot-interview>
 have proved. So why don’t psychological thrillers appear more often on stage? 
Huge hits such as Ariel Dorfman’sDeath and the Maiden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/14/death-maiden-relevance-play>
 andTracey Letts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/14/death-maiden-relevance-play>
’s Killer Joe buck the trend, but just as female novelists from Christie to
Gillian Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/01/gillian-flynn-bestseller-gone-girl-misogyny>
 have made the crime novel their own, so it is often female playwrights who 
have reinvented an often discredited stage genre in plays as widely different 
as Sharon Pollock’s Blood Relations and Phyllis Nagy’s The Butterfly Kiss.

Mostly, though, we just don’t seem to take the form seriously. Or we actively 
make fun of it as Stoppard did so brilliantly inThe Real Inspector Hound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jul/11/the-real-inspector-hound-critics>
. David Hare is an exception. His 1974 play Knuckle, about an arms dealer 
looking for his missing sister, employs all the tropes of the hard-boiled 
detective story, transposed to a seedy postwar suburban England. His latest 
play,The Red Barn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/18/the-red-barn-lyttelton-theatre-review-david-hare-georges-simenon-mark-strong-elizabeth-debicki>
, based onGeorges Simenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/25/georges-simenon-david-hare-la-main-red-stage-national-theatre-maigret>
’s first-person novella La Main, fits very much into the psychological thriller 
mould. Like Oedipus Rex, The Red Barn’s Donald Dodd is involved in excavating 
his own guilt. What he discovers about himself – or rather what he discovers 
about how others see him – is unbearable. Like Oedipus, this is a production 
about about blindness and its fatal consequences. It’s no surprise that The Red 
Barn’s director Robert Icke so recently stagedOresteia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/07/oresteia-almeida-review-lia-williams-angus-wright>
.

David Hare: the genius of Georges Simenon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/25/georges-simenon-david-hare-la-main-red-stage-national-theatre-maigret>
There is a continuous play on the idea of a character (as in a role you play) 
and character in the sense of knowing who you are and what your values are. 
Icke, employing many of the techniques used by experimental theatre-makers such 
asPete Brooks 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/research/ual-staff-researchers/a-z/pete-brooks/> and 
Imitating the Dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/22/the-train-review-lancaster-arts>
, but with a massively bigger budget, also plays on the idea of seeing and not 
seeing. It has been suggested that Bunny Christie’s designs try to turn theatre 
into cinema, but rather than that they constantly explore how theatre itself 
manipulates how we see and what is and is not revealed to us. The tension is 
continually ratcheted up in what becomes a teasing and extended two-hour reveal.

 * The Red Barn is at the Lyttelton 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/red-barn>, London, until 17 January. 
Box office: 020-7452 3000.
 