
Alexander Solzhenitsyn's anti-Sovietism was heroic and influential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.usa>, but its other 
side became clearer upon the Union's collapse.

The death of the literary colossus and anti-Soviet dissident has, quite 
rightly, been greeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/solzhenitsyn.dies> with an 
outpouring of praise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.russia> for his 
principled and brave unmasking of the horrors of the Soviet regime. His 
literary achievements, closely connected with his dissident activities, have 
also justifiably received much attention.

But there is another side to Solzhenitsyn – one which most obituaries have 
mentioned <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/04/nobelprize.russia2> 
only in passing, if at all. Solzhenitsyn's analysis of Soviet communism was 
based on the notion that the Bolsheviks imposed a totalitarian system on Russia 
that had no basis in Russian history or character. He laid the blame on Marx 
and Engels and the Bolsheviks.

Russian culture, he argued, and particularly that of the Russian Orthodox 
Church, was suppressed in favour of atheist Soviet culture. Persona non grata 
in the Soviet Union, Solzhenitsyn lived in exile in the US from 1974, butfound 
western culture 
<http://www.columbia.edu/cu/augustine/arch/solzhenitsyn/harvard1978.html> 
equally to his distaste.

His historical writing is imbued with a hankering after an idealized Tsarist 
era when, seemingly, everything was rosy. He sought refuge in a dreamy past, 
where, he believed, a united Slavic state (the Russian empire) built on 
Orthodox foundations had provided an ideological alternative to western 
individualistic liberalism.

The break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, Solzhenitsyn hoped, as he wrote in a 
Russian newspaper at the time,would lead to 
<http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9C0CE7D6153BF93AA2575AC0A966958260&scp=32&sq=solzhenitsyn&st=cse>
 the creation of a united Slavic state encompassing Russia, Ukraine and Belarus 
in which this alternative culture would flourish.

On returning to Russia in 1994, Solzhenitsyn opposed the excesses that went 
with the introduction of capitalism in Russia during the 1990s. In addition, he 
vociferously opposed Ukrainian independence. But the rise of Putin and the 
resurgence of nationalism, and the notion of Russia as "unique" and "different" 
from western liberal culture, gave new currency to his views. Recently, he 
claimed in an article in a pro-Kremlin newspaper, whichwas reprinted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/apr/03/swallowingshamelesslies> 
widely in the west, that to call the 1932-33 Holodomor genocide in Ukraine was 
a "loopy fable" made up by Ukrainian nationalists and picked up on by 
anti-Russian westerners. This article came at the same time as the State Duma's 
ruling to the same effect.

His article contained no serious historical analysis. Holodomor, in fact, 
coincided with 
<http://www.amazon.com/Harvest-Sorrow-Soviet-Collectivization-Terror-Famine/dp/0195051807>
 an attack on Ukrainian culture and nationalism, which were considered a threat 
by Soviet leaders in Moscow. They were frightened of the Ukrainian national 
movement, terrified of many in the country's desire for independence, and acted 
to bring it into line. "If we lose Ukraine," Lenin had said, "we lose our 
head." They, like Solzhenitsyn, considered Ukraine a part of their empire.

The parallels with contemporary Russian leaders' attitudes are striking, and 
Solzhenitsyn's pan-Slavism, alongside his powerful dissident credentials, made 
him an ideal ally for those who continue to seek to restrict Ukrainian 
independence. Ironically – disturbingly, in fact – the self-same unmasker of 
Stalinist terror with its sacrifice of human lives to a future ideal exhibited 
a desire to ignore people's desires (Ukrainians voted overwhelmingly for 
independence in 1991) in favour of an equally fictitious ideal.

Solzhenitsyn's importance as the writer who stripped bare the Soviet regime to 
reveal its true essence cannot be underestimated. His writings inspired people 
throughout the Soviet Union and the world with their unflinching revelations. 
But his credentials as a historian are dubious to say the least, and the 
fantastical, backward-looking political idealism that led him to support 
Putin's project is a dangerous relic. Like many of those disillusioned with 
western liberalism, inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the 
west, he fancied that "Putin's path" provided an alternative. The reality of 
this "alternative", involving, for example, the pilfering of resources by 
Kremlin-backed "businessmen" and the silencing of the media by censorship and 
killing, is less than promising.
 