
‘NO! YES! GET IT! WHOA!” I can hear the shouts before I reach the studio. When 
I then do walk into ITV’sWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> base in Rio, it feels 
a lot like arriving at a mate’s flat and finding him on the sofa with three 
blokes, all screaming at the football on TV.

“Oh my GOD! Look at THAT!”

It’s early Saturday afternoon and Adrian Chiles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/adrian-chiles>, Fabio Cannavaro, Patrick 
Vieira and Martin O’Neill, all wearing the requisite sports commentator uniform 
of a buttoned-down long-sleeve shirt and smart trousers (often too tight on the 
English commentators, for some reason), are supposed to be researching the 
Argentina v Iran match for their upcoming live show. But they are all just 
bellowing at the telly.

“I hope Iran win or draw. It would be such a great story,” says Chiles. Vieira 
looks at him as if he’s the biggest dork he’s ever encountered: “No! Argentina, 
of course!” he says with an extreme “like duh” expression on his face and 
hammily rolls his eyes at me. Therein lies the difference between the newsman 
and the athlete: one’s looking for the story and one’s looking for the best 
sportsmen.

“Oh my GOD!” All four men make shouts of varying volume (Chiles is, 
unsurprisingly, the most voluble) and reel back in their chairs as Lionel Messi 
saves his country’s honour in added time. And then they all lean forward to 
make notes.

Stretching across the lovely Copacabana beach boulevard is a gigantic metallic 
structure, interrupting the road like a belch. This monstrosity is the somewhat 
unlikely base for some of the biggest TV networks covering the World Cup, 
including the BBC and ITV. Those familiar slick studios that you see on TV are 
housed inside a giant carbuncle that, until I went in, I assumed was a 
half-finished building site. And until you get to the studios, that’s pretty 
much how it looks on the inside, too: whenTom Jenkins, the Guardian’s 
photographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/jun/15/world-cup-2014-world-cup-football>
, and I visit the BBC studios, we ride with a larky Alan Hansen and a cool and 
silent Thierry Henry in a lift that looks more like a safety hazard on a 
construction site than something befitting Mr Va-va-voom (Hansen, on the other 
hand, doesn’t look wildly out of place among loose cables and metallic rafters.)

By the time I visit the TV studios in Rio, a week into the World Cup, stories 
generated by the presenters have included ITV’s studio being shot at by 
protesters,Phil Neville’s monotone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/16/phil-neville-apologises-world-cup-commentary>
, Henry’s cardigan,Hansen’s retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/05/alan-hansen-bbc-motd-retired>
, Ian Wright’s family being burgled,Jonathan Pearce’s difficulty in 
comprehending goalline technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/jun/15/world-cup-2014-world-cup-football>
,Glenn Hoddle’s camel toe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/13/itv-glenn-hoddle--world-cup-camel-toe>
 (don’t ask) and various alleged spats among them all. Many papers have already
published lists rating the presenters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/17/world-cup-2014-bbc-itv-pundits>
, much as they’ve done of the teams.

Sports presenters in England have always attracted cheers and jeers from 
audiences, but never before have the commentators been quite so commentated on, 
thanks to an increasingly celebrity-led approach by the TV stations and 
newspapers, and, of course, the internet. Where once TV viewers would mock the 
presenters to their friends on the sofa, now they do so to everyone on social 
media, and the TV people listen: at theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> and ITV producers mentioned to me, 
through gritted teeth, what people on Twitter are saying about their shows and 
presenters.

I’m not sure when Brussels issued a decree saying that British coverage of 
sports events must always consist of one host and three guests (men, ideally, 
and, in the case of the World Cup coverage, only) sitting round a low table, 
and the men must always wear the previously mentioned uniform, but rest 
assured, EU bureaucrats: the BBC and ITV adhere to that law religiously in 
their World Cup coverage. Yet despite the surface similarities, there are 
definite differences between them, and I wondered if this just came down to a 
difference between the hosts: self-consciously everyman Adrian Chiles on ITV 
and boyish smoothie Gary Lineker on the BBC. Walking into ITV’s studio, that 
supposition appears to be accurate – it is as scruffy and relaxed and, yes, 
blokey as Chiles. They haven’t even replaced the bullet-scarred glass. They did 
order a special pane of replacement glass and had it transported all the way 
from São Paulo, shut off the road beneath the studio so the work could be done 
– and then someone dropped the glass and it shattered.

“So we now see it as a battle wound,” says Niall Sloane, ITV’s controller of 
sport. “We’re showing the people at home, look how we suffer for you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403532822718%2F6090b99c-8939-465a-a264-f84f5b7b6215-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20World%20Cup%20TV%20duel%3A%20ITV%E2%80%99s%20Men%20Behaving%20Badly%20v%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Death%20Star%20%7C%20Hadley%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20World%20Cup%20TV%20duel%3A%20ITV%E2%80%99s%20Men%20Behaving%20Badly%20v%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Death%20Star%20%7C%20Hadley%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403532822718%2F6090b99c-8939-465a-a264-f84f5b7b6215-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Adrian Chiles enjoys a cuppa next to Fabio Cannavaro in the ITV studio. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
When Tom and I arrive, Martin Keown has popped downstairs from the BBC studio 
to visit his former Arsenal team-mate Vieira. “We have a healthy rivalry, but 
it’s all very friendly. All the pundits know each other,” one BBC employee 
tells me later.

So do they all stay in the same hotel together? “Er, no. That would be going a 
bit far.”

In terms of ratings, ITV is winning the rivalry this time: their screening of 
England versus Uruguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/19/england-uruguay-match-report-group-d>
 got a peak of 20m viewers whereas the BBC’s screening ofEngland-Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/15/england-italy-world-cup-2014-group-d-match-report>
 got 15.5m. This is really because of the timing of the games – the Italy game 
kicked off at 11pm (BST) – and, after the BBC got first dibs on which game it 
wanted it to cover in the European Championship, it was ITV’s turn to baggsie 
the best game first this time.

There is a loosey-goosey air inside the ITV studio, and not just from the 
busted window pane. Tom is asked not to take a photo of Keown in the ITV 
studio, but other than that we’re allowed to climb all over the place and do as 
we please. O’Neill intently watches the Argentina v Iran match and does his 
best to pretend we’re not there, Vieira and Cannavaro gleefully tweet away on 
their phones and Chiles beckons me over for a chat.

So that must have been pretty scary when protesters shot at him the first 
night? “Oh yeah, for sure. We could see them coming down the street and I 
thought they were just going to be waving banners, but then there was a bullet! 
Then I was led away to make-up.”

Even offscreen, Chiles talks in that studiedly blokey tone that seems to 
afflict English male TV presenters when they move into football coverage. 
Viewers can be cruel about Chiles (Stewart Lee memorably described him 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pfHWtq14inc> as a talking Toby Jug full of 
steaming hot piss), but he seems relaxed and open. He jokes about how Vieira 
and Cannavaro like to tweet but he never does and, considering some of the 
things I’ve seen written about him online, that may be for the best.

“You want to have a bit of fun – you don’t want it to feel like a royal obit. 
It’s a mix of analysis and punditry, and you have to enjoy it and take it 
seriously. It’s like being a football fan, really. You know it doesn’t mean a 
hill of beans but West Brom governs my life, my relationships – GET IT!”

Speaking of relationships, does he think there might ever be a woman on the 
panel? He blinks before answering: “Depends how big the team is. I don’t think 
you could replace any of the pundits – maybe you could replace me! Certainly 
some of the most knowledgeable football fans I know are women. But there are 
only so many seats round the table and you wouldn’t drop any of the pundits. 
WHOA!”

When I ask Sloane about the lack of women, he says they’d “consider” having a 
female pundit. The BBC later answer this question a little better, saying that 
they want pundits who have had experience in the sport, and this being men’s 
football, that means men. But it’s still ridiculous, of course, that neither 
ITV nor BBC have any female commentators for the whole of their World Cup 
coverage. But then, I am the only woman from the whole of Fleet Street who was 
sent out to Brazil so it’s not like TV is the only one with a gender bias when 
it comes to sport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403532934907%2Fcceb7d4f-8753-45fd-b74f-e0de6f9ceafc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20World%20Cup%20TV%20duel%3A%20ITV%E2%80%99s%20Men%20Behaving%20Badly%20v%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Death%20Star%20%7C%20Hadley%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20World%20Cup%20TV%20duel%3A%20ITV%E2%80%99s%20Men%20Behaving%20Badly%20v%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Death%20Star%20%7C%20Hadley%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403532934907%2Fcceb7d4f-8753-45fd-b74f-e0de6f9ceafc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Patrick Vieira, left, and Fabio Cannavaro enjoy the Argentina v Iran match in 
the ITV studio. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
Chiles runs out for a pre-show loo break and I settle into his chair (turns 
out a woman can fit round the table, even with my enormous child-bearing hips 
and all.) Vieira tries to tease O’Neill into joining the conversation but he’s 
having none of it. Cannavaro’s English can generously be described as patchy – 
“I learned three years ago, and in Dubai!” – and he is sweetly nervous, 
deferring frequently to Vieira who he describes as “my best friend”: 
“[Commentating] is tough sometimes, because of the language, and it’s strange 
because we were once on the pitch but now we’re outside it. But for [Patrick 
and me], it’s important because we want to be coaches so we can learn a lot 
doing this,” Cannavaro says.

So coaching is his real ambition? “Yes, certainly.”

Is he competitive with the other footballers-turned-commentators on the BBC? 
“Oh no, not competitive – they can’t compete with us!”

Vieira is the more practised hand at this World Cup commentating lark and is 
more confident for it. He looks for all the world like a man who can’t believe 
that he somehow lucked into this job: “Am I enjoying this? Are you kidding? It 
gets easier [with time] because I’m getting more comfortable in myself and can 
find my own space. Having Fabio here makes it more fun.” And the two return to 
tweeting.

If walking into the ITV studio felt a bit like coming on to the set of Men 
Behaving Badly, then entering the BBC’s is like approaching the Death Star. It 
is slick, black and absolutely enormous. There is none of the sense of relaxed 
fun found in the ITV studio – it’s all deeply serious tunnel vision and I am 
strictly forbidden from talking to what is referred to as “the talent” and, no, 
talking to them the following morning isn’t really possible either so don’t 
bother. (In fact, Lineker comes over and engages in a bit of friendly chat with 
Tom before going on air, but that, apparently, is a one-off.)

The aforementioned talent – in this case, Lineker, Hansen, Henry and Clarence 
Seedorf – sit silently and stare at the TV that’s weirdly embedded into the 
table, making them look even more remote and internalised (at ITV, the TV is 
set up beneath one of the cameras, so the four men stare in front of them, like 
normal TV watchers). Maybe it feels more serious up here because we’re closer 
to transmission time. But it wouldn’t have made any difference if I’d come to 
the studio earlier as the men don’t arrive until the very last minute, so there 
is none of that sense of camaraderie found downstairs (indeed, in the lift 
Henry didn’t even look at Hansen). Whereas ITV let me listen in on a headset to 
the planning of the show and stay around while Chiles talked with the guests 
about the running order, Tom and I are firmly ushered out of the BBC’s studio 
as soon as all four men are in their seat, as though we were going to leak 
details of their tactics.

There is an edginess to the BBC visit besides the issue of whether or not I 
can chat with the talent. Questions about any dismay in the corporation about 
the (extremely overblown)reaction to Neville’s appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/16/phil-neville-world-cup-bbc-complaints-england-italy-commentary>
 are dealt with sensibly (“bad night”, “Twitter frenzy”, etc) Yet it is 
stressed repeatedly that the only reason that the BBC have a bigger and much 
better studio is because they claimed it from Fifa first. It is also most 
insistently repeated that the reason the BBC have more than twice as many 
people in Rio as ITV (272 to ITV’s 125) is because ITV are “just producing 
television”, whereas the BBC have online, news and so forth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403532726295%2F191da70b-7be1-49b3-9227-dccae0f777ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20World%20Cup%20TV%20duel%3A%20ITV%E2%80%99s%20Men%20Behaving%20Badly%20v%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Death%20Star%20%7C%20Hadley%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20World%20Cup%20TV%20duel%3A%20ITV%E2%80%99s%20Men%20Behaving%20Badly%20v%20BBC%E2%80%99s%20Death%20Star%20%7C%20Hadley%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fjun%2F23%2Fworld-cup-itv-bbc-tv-studios%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F23%2F1403532726295%2F191da70b-7be1-49b3-9227-dccae0f777ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The BBC TV World Cup studio at Copacabana beach with (from left) Clarence 
Seedorf, Thierry Henry and Alan Hansen preparing for Germany v Ghana. 
Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
So maybe the BBC have just been burned by stories in the past about how many 
people they bring to these events, and how much money is spent. Or maybe their 
nerviness stems from the fact they’ve received the brunt of the criticism this 
time. Or maybe this seriousness is what it takes to make a slicker programme, 
and the BBC’s coverage is definitely slicker, and probably better.

It’s a shame as it would have been interesting to hear from Hansen about his 
retirement, from Henry and Seedorf about making that transition from sportsman 
to commentator, from Lineker about hosting men he used to play against on the 
pitch. But before I can plead a third time, we are back out on the Copacabana 
beach. And with that, we’re back off the air.
 