
We are sitting in a restaurant above the wide, grey river Scheldt in the heart 
of Antwerp. The rain is coming down in Belgian buckets but we don't care. We 
have only been here half an hour but have already sensed that this an ancient 
city at ease with itself.

The rain stops. We walk and keep walking: Antwerp has trams and buses but 
ambling is preferable, if only to enjoy the solid and varied architecture (and 
don't miss Antwerp's glorious version of art nouveau in the mansions of the 
Zurenborg district).

We keep walking at night from our base in Keizerstraat, a street so quiet you 
feel as if you ought to walk it in carpet slippers. Like so many of the lanes 
that run away from Antwerp's heart, it is discreetly rather than glaringly lit. 
Down those lanes, you will find good restaurants, almost too many to choose 
from. Antwerp likes its food and we like both the homely bistro atmosphere of 
Pottenbrug (Minderbroedersrui 38) and the more formal elegance (but cheaper 
menus) of Le Zoute Zoen (Zirkstraat 15 / 17).

Both are a mere stroll from the Aan de Keizer B&B, a discreet place of 
considerable comfort. We have the emperors' room at the top of the tall house: 
67 steps to get there, but worth it. Three wise Chinese ceramic gentlemen (the 
emperors) keep watch over the four-poster bed, Chopin is available on the CD 
player and the bathroom has a shower that squirts horizontally as well as 
vertically, which can be a bit of a surprise.

There are just three rooms, with continental breakfast served in three 
different locations to stave off boredom over the coffee and croissants. Quiet, 
convenient, comfortable.

It is tempting to lounge about but there is more walking to do. At the heart 
of the city is the cathedral of St Mary, completed in 1518. Its lacy tower, 
with bits of structure seemingly chipped away until collapse seems inevitable, 
floats over the city and acts as a landmark when you lose your way down those 
alluring byways.

On one side of the cathedral is the Grote Markt, with its noble, many-storeyed 
guild houses, each trying to out-skyscrape the other, and the solid 
16th-century stadhuis (city hall). Today the great space has been filled with 
hay bales and a selection of fine cattle. We can't quite work out why.

On the other side of the cathedral is the rather bleaker Groenplaats square, 
from which the shops of Meir - a version of London's Oxford Street or 
Manchester's Market Street - are an easy wander. From there it is not far to 
the trendier streets (Antwerp prides itself on its fashion almost as much as 
its diamonds) such as Lombardenvest. We window-shop and then stumble on a 
market overflowing with spices and olives. We end up back in Groenplaats where 
the huge statue of Peter Paul Rubens, Antwerp's most famous son, reminds us 
that we are here to do culture.

Antwerp was European city of culture in 1993 so the vague plan is to learn how 
Liverpool might benefit from its year as capital of culture in 2008. We 
discover that Antwerp wears its culture lightly, perhaps as a result of its 
history as one of the most powerful mercantile cities of northern Europe. It 
has had plenty of time to appreciate Rubens, who was hard at work when 
Liverpool was not much more than a hamlet.

We walk south from the medieval quarter and into Het Zuid, with streets laid 
out, with due deference to geometry, in the 19th century. Here lies the Royal 
Museum of Fine Arts, where a grand divided staircase leads to the Rubens 
gallery at the centre of the building: vast, lofty, top-lit; a special place 
for the great man's mighty canvasses, so big that your neck aches if you stand 
too close.

We have the place to ourselves. We look in silence at The Incredulity of 
Thomas and The Adoration of the Magi, admiring the scale and the composition of 
both and realising Rubens's role as PR man for the counter-reformation. On the 
way back, we drop into the cathedral to see his intense triptych known as The 
Raising of the Cross. It's huge.
But, over dinner, we decide that if we were to pinch one painting from the 
Royal Museum it would have to be Lucas Cranach's Eve: thin, blonde, 
fair-skinned and rosy-cheeked, she seems untroubled by a feeble-looking serpent 
and is making only rudimentary attempts to cover her nether-regions' nakedness 
with half-a-dozen leaves. Eve would fit in our sitting room; a decent Rubens 
would go through the ceiling.

We keep bumping into Rubens over the next couple of days that are spent mostly 
concerned with the period 1550-1650. Just along Keizerstraat from our B&B is 
the home of Nicolaas Rockox, nine times burgomaster of Antwerp and friend of 
Rubens. That's him on the left in The Incredulity of Thomas: he commissioned 
the picture (and several others too). The KBC bank bought the house, restored 
it, filled it with pictures and furniture of Rockox's time and opened it to the 
public. It tells its story well and has a stillness all to its own.

Rubens also hangs out in Antwerp's pride and joy, the Plantin-Moretus Museum 
in the stylish home of Christoffel Plantin, who in 1555 established a printing 
business that lasted for more than 300 years. Rubens was here too, painting a 
posthumous portrait of Plantin's son-in-law Jan Moretus. The company's offices, 
foundry, printshop and library remain as they were and anyone who has worked in 
hot metal will recognise a lot of the kit on show. It is hard to resist the 
temptation to set a few lines of moveable type.

If you seek a Rubens-free zone, try the Zwarte Panter (black panther) gallery, 
which has been around for less than 40 years but has already become an 
institution, thanks to the passionate enthusiasm of its director Adriaan 
Raemdonck. The gallery, in a former hostel for pilgrims on the road to Santiago 
(spot the trademark cockle shell on the wall), houses exhibitions by 
contemporary artists, with work hung upstairs, downstairs, in the cellar and in 
the former chapel - which would suit Rubens were he still around. Liverpool 
could do with something like this to complement the Tate and the Walker.

Time ran out, with plenty of culture, walking and eating still to be done. And 
when we return we will try not to hire the only taxi driver in Antwerp who 
doesn't seem to know the city has an airport.

Getting there:

VLM Airlines offer six return non-stop flights each weekday between London 
City and Antwerp, with one return flight every Saturday and two on Sundays.
VLM Airlines also has two return non-stop flight each weekday between 
Manchester and Antwerp, with one return service every Sunday. Prices start from 
Â£25 per person one-way (excluding taxes and charges).


For information and reservations, call 0871 666 5050 or visit flyvlm.com <>

Tourism Antwerp <http://www.antwerpen.be/eCache/BEN/52.html>. 

Aan de Keizer B&B. Room cost 110 to 125 euros per night, including breakfast. 
aandekeizer.be <http://www.aandekeizer.be/>; (+32) (0)3 225 22 96
 