
The first world war was not only the principal news topic for the Manchester 
Guardian between 1914 and 1918, but also a first hand experience for the 
newspaper's staff members who served in it. This month we have been using the 
roll of honour to try and take a broad look at staff lives shaped and lost in 
the war.

The wooden plaque, broken in two, was unearthed in 2008. It was found lying in 
a Manchester warehouse alongside other Guardian assets put into storage when 
the newspaper left itsCross Street offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/cross-street-journal-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
 in 1970. Repaired and restored, it now hangs on the wall of the current London 
offices at Kings Place. It carries the names of 127 Manchester Guardian 
employees who served in the 1914-18 conflict, 12 of whom were killed.

First world war memorial plaque: transcript of names 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1406824738009/GNM-Archive-Roll-of-Honour-.pdf>

Some of the names will be familiar to those interested in the Guardian's 
history: Edward Taylor (Ted) Scott was the youngest son of editorCP Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/collection-in-focus-cp-scott>. He 
joined the Royal Field Artillery in 1915, survived the war and went on to 
become editor of the Manchester Guardian when his father retired in1932 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/interactive/2011/may/16/moments-that-made-guardian-interactive>
. Sadly he died in a boating accident later the same year.Charles Edward 
Montague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/02/sp-first-world-war-manchester-guardian-uk-neutrality>
 was CP Scott's son-in-law, a well-known journalist and leader writer who was 
acting editor of the newspaper between 1895 and 1906. At 47, he was too old to 
enlist when the war began, but dyed his greying hair and joined up anyway. 
Robert Howard Spring had only been at the Manchester Guardian for a few months 
when he enlisted in 1915, but he returned after the war and went on to become a 
successful journalist and the author of several popular novels.

Uncovering the stories behind the less well-known names listed on the plaque 
is more difficult. The GNM archive contains very few records of Manchester 
Guardian staff members at this time, and these men do not feature in published 
histories of the newspaper. The bulk of records documenting the Guardian's 
history before it moved to London in the 1960s are held atThe John Rylands 
Library <http://www.library.manchester.ac.uk/rylands/> at The University of 
Manchester and many of these men, including six of the fallen, have proved 
untraceable in our records.

The material we do hold for staff members at this time is made up of financial 
records, including a staffsalary ledger book 
<http://calm.guardian.co.uk/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f4%2f2%2f1&amp>
 and staffindex cards 
<http://calm.guardian.co.uk/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=GMG%2f4%2f1%2f1%2f1&amp>
 giving contact details and some brief information about individuals' careers 
at the newspaper. These include an unfortunately incomplete set of cards for 
deceased staff members, compiled from the 1930s onwards.
 Salary record book for staff of the Manchester Guardian and Manchester 
Evening News. Photograph: Robin Christian for the Guardian 
These types of records can be very useful historical sources, particularly for 
genealogists, but they also tend to be terse and impersonal. Sections for 
family details in the staff cards have been left blank, and a man's death might 
be recorded in the ledger with nothing more than a strikethrough line across 
his salary entry. Nevertheless, this is enough to give us an idea of the 
working lives these men left behind when they joined up, and of the kind of 
jobs available at a newspaper in 1914.

Relatively few of the men listed were journalists. HF Clark, who joined the 
Manchester Guardian from the Bristol Times in November 1913, was a sub-editor. 
He worked for the newspaper for less than a year before enlisting. JH Lethar 
had been a reporter for the Guardian since 1910, and took four weeks salary 
with him when he joined up in December 1914. FWH Singfield, who worked in the 
London office, may have been a junior reporter. Sadly none of these men 
returned from the war to continue their journalistic careers.

Far more of the men were employed in proof-reading, producing and distributing 
the newspaper. Before enlisting (at the very beginning of the war) JH Heddle 
worked for two months in the summer of 1914 as a Manchester Guardian canvasser, 
or salesman. RH Savage and AW Dean were also part of the canvassing team and 
also enlisted swiftly once the war began. Both men returned in 1916 with 
injuries. Dean came back to work part-time in October but Savage's wounds 
rendered him 'no good' according to a note in the ledger, and his name does not 
appear on the following page.

P Gleave worked in the readers and copyholders department, a large quality 
control team responsible for spotting inconsistencies between the proof and 
copy versions of journalist's work before it went to press. Readers like JW 
Yates (whose first names were John William) would have read the typeset version 
of an article aloud while a copyholder, perhaps J Bergin, checked through the 
text originally submitted by the author.
 Index cards for deceased Manchester Guardian staff members. Photograph: Robin 
Christian for the Guardian 
 AFW Spencer was a composing room operative in 1914. By 1917 he had enlisted, 
gone to war and been killed. Other composing room employees listed left jobs as 
overseers, day hands, apprentices, mechanics, Linotype operatives and makers-up 
to join up and fight in the war. As both a Linotype printer and maker-up, 
Harold Armstrong would have spent his days typing lines of text into the 
Linotype keyboard to produce dismantle-able moulds. These were used to create 
metal 'slugs', which Armstrong would then have assembled, line by line, to get 
each page of type ready for printing. He started out as a composing room 
apprentice in 1913, returned after the war and continued to work for the 
Manchester Guardian, and for theManchester Evening News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/09/manchester-evening-news-theguardian>
, until retiring on sick pay in 1959.

Most of the remaining names listed belonged to mechanics, messengers, 
supervisors, counting house workers, telegraph operators and machine minders. 
All the information we have gleaned about them has been added to ourarchive 
catalogue <http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>, so that each man 
has an 'authority' record sitting alongside those for the Guardian's managing 
editors, directors and leader writers. These can be searched online using the 
catalogue'spersons search 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/advanced.aspx?src=CalmView.Persons> 
function. The snippets of information they contain, pulled from ledger pages 
and index cards as well as the memorial itself, give glimpses of the men's 
lives and of life at the Manchester Guardian as it was a century ago.

Next month's resource will consider the Manchester Guardian's coverage of the 
war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/first-world-war-history-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
.

Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers> page.
 