
Give Up Your Dreams is the sixth album from New Zealand’s The Phoenix 
Foundation. If the name sounds pessimistic then wait until you hear the lyrics 
of the title track: “Don’t let anyone tell you that the world is your oyster,” 
they intone. “The world is not an oyster. The world is a cold, dark planet.”

Yet the album itself is full of Technicolor pop sparkle – great melodies 
carved out of synths, drums and guitar. You can hear it using the player below 
– do let us know your thoughts in the comments. Beneath that is a 
track-by-track guide to the album from the band.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fsoundcloud.com%2Fthe-phoenix-foundation%2Fsets%2Fgive-up-your-dreams%2Fs-FjzcP&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsoundcloud.com%2Fthe-phoenix-foundation%2Fsets%2Fgive-up-your-dreams%2Fs-FjzcP>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsoundcloud.com%2Fthe-phoenix-foundation%2Fsets%2Fgive-up-your-dreams%2Fs-FjzcP&media=>
Give Up Your Dreams: A track-by-track guide

Mountain 
This was very much an organic band composition, slowly evolving over a few 
months. Lyrically it’s supposed to be about those who believe the market will 
fix society (“I control the future with magical numbers”), those who believe in 
spirituality (“I control the future with magical ritual”) and the righteously 
apathetic pretending it’s not even happening (“I control the future by falling 
asleep”). The latter one is me, I guess. (Lukasz Buda)

Bob Lennon John Dylan 
This one was mixed by David Fridmann, who is someone we’ve wanted to work with 
since we started the band. The way The Flaming Lips threw their formula out of 
the window for The Soft Bulletin and made a record like no other is still a 
huge inspiration to us. The pace, energy and fun of this track set up a 
blueprint for where the band had to go with the album. (Sam Flynn Scott)

Playing Dead 
Definitely one of the more difficult songs to record – and play live. It has a 
power, though, like an incantation. Our drummer, Chris, is very interested in 
symbolism and magic and that permeates the grooves but also the lyrics. The 
lyrics in this case are essentially the photo captions from a 1950s Time Life 
essay on the Ona people of southern Chile and their ghost rituals. (SFS)

Jason
When we toured [fifth album] Fandango in New Zealand, Sam had a slipped disc 
and a pinched sciatic nerve and was in constant chronic pain, only able to do 
the gigs through masses of painkillers. Not long after he recovered, my partner 
went through the same thing. So I wrote to Jason about how we take it for 
granted that our bodies will work properly in the morning when we get up, and 
how easily they can go wrong. Finished with a little bit of defiance: “I’m 
tired and unfit but I’m still up for it!” (LB)
Celestial Bodies
This one contains all the elements that the band have built on over the years. 
It is both pretty and mystical and also funky and driving, mostly due to an 
incessantly strict bass line from Tom Callwood. The vocal samples take it right 
to the edge of silliness but it never quite tips over, just hanging in there 
between the honest and the absurd. We were very happy with the recording but 
laboured over each sound, trying to make every element just perfect, without 
smoothing it out. (SFS)

Silent Orb 
Originally entitled Annus Horribilis, this song went through many different 
forms. The lyrics are inspired by my son Ralph telling me he was sick of the 
Christmas shopping crowds and that he just wanted to go into a world of white 
light with no time and no space and exist forever in silence with his mum and 
dad. That seemed appropriately epic for the tune. Me and Luke were really keen 
on layering up some more vocals but it didn’t seem right to add more lyrics, so 
Luke sings a few things in Polish. I think the wonderful thing about putting 
other languages into a song is that it takes the content away from a lot of the 
listeners. You’re forced to just listen to the sound of the voice, so it 
becomes more spatial and confusing. (SFS)

Sunbed 
It’s about the human obsession with UV light and what a powerful and 
destructive thing that can be. From turning orange with a fake tan, to melting 
on a tanning bed, to destruction on a macro level, like Andromeda crashing into 
the Milky Way. It’s also quite a catchy tune. (SFS)

Give Up Your Dreams
In many ways, this is the central theme of the record. Essentially based on 
our friend Lawrence Arabia’s advice to Luke and me that we give up on our 
aspirations in order to enjoy making our art. It’s basically impossible to do 
this, but nice to keep in the back of your mind. It’s sort of the opposite to 
that American idea of excellence. “Don’t let anyone tell you that all your 
dreams will come true” … because they won’t. I’m screaming “I’m a loser and I’m 
losing my belief” but the pitch-shifted wiser version of myself assures me 
“you’re not a loser, you’re a human … and I love you’. Ultimately it’s a really 
positive and uplifting song. (SFS)

Myth 
I asked Conrad [Wedde, multi-instrumentalist] for lyrical inspiration and he 
sent me some writings by St Isidore of Seville, the “patron saint of the 
internet” who attempted to compile all human knowledge in the 7th century. The 
works were called theEtymologiae <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etymologiae> 
and I think there were 20 volumes. For a time they were used as the reference 
point for everything, but from what I gather, much of the knowledge in them is 
made up. So in a way they were the first Wikipedia. The strange words about the 
shape-shifting beasts are actually from his writings: “Bees from calves as 
beetles from horses, locusts from mules, scorpions as crabs, wolves and owls”. 
(LB)

The album can be pre-ordered via iTunes <http://smarturl.it/GUYDitunes> and on 
gold-coloured vinyl <http://smarturl.it/GUYDLP> and CD 
<http://smarturl.it/GUYDCD>. 

 