
Simon Kelner has had a good run at The Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent>. To use the Fleet Street 
clich√©, he has been a survivor.

He took over as editor in 1998, having been appointed by Tony O'Reilly, the 
chief executive of the then owners, Independent News & Media.

It says something of Kelner's character that O'Reilly later joked: "I thought 
I was interviewing him to see if he would make a good editor of the paper while 
he thought he was interviewing me to see whether I'd make a good proprietor."

They built a strong personal relationship, founded to an extent on a shared 
sense of humour.

But life at The Independent proved testing for both men. The paper lost 
millions and it lost circulation.

Though the same could be said of many newspapers over the same period, the 
problems for the lowest-selling paper were always bound to be more acute. 
Trying to cope engendered several changes of direction.

There was also a strategic blindness in the failure to grasp the implications 
of the digital revolution. O'Reilly was fond saying that a printed newspaper 
was the most perfect of browsers.

Kelner echoed that head-in-the-sand viewpoint, pouring scorn on online 
innovations. He often said: "Who listens to podcasts?"

But Kelner can certainly point to having been at the forefront of a couple of 
dramatic print innovations as he and O'Reilly sought for a way to reverse their 
paper's downward slide.

In so doing, Kelner pioneered the changes in quality newspaper print formats, 
Under him, in 2003, the Indy gave up its broadsheet shape to become a compact 
(aka tabloid). That led to a similar change by The Times and the adoption of 
the Berliner shape byThe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian>.

He also introduced poster-style front pages that took strong editorial 
positions, happily acknowledging that he was turning a newspaper into aviews
paper.

Those views tended by left of centre, reflecting that most - though not all - 
of the leading columnists and contributors were drawn from the left too.

Kelner's third major initiative was to be the launch editor of the Indy's 
jazzier, populist sister title, called i. It followed the acquisition of the 
titles byAlexander Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev>
 and his son, Evgeny, and it has doubled the overall sale of the daily 
Independent brand.

Throughout his time at the helm - as editor, editor-in-chief and a brief 
period, from 2008 until April 2010, as managing director - Kelner has made the 
most of a difficult task.

He has been criticised, sometimes by staff, for being too egotistical and too 
much of a self-publicist. But he would defend his public profile as necessary 
to the task of keeping the Indy afloat.

He has also made some appointments along the way that have raised eyebrows, 
none more so than the decision to give theIndependent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> editorship to Janet 
Street-Porter for a while.

There have been rows too, most notably falling out with his former close 
friend,Roger Alton <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rogeralton>, after 
appointing him as editor of The Independent in 2008.

But that kind of thing goes with the territory of being an editor. It is not 
that unusual.

The other major criticism of Kelner has centred on his penchant for the good 
life, particularly his one-time engagement with the country set around News 
International's chief executiveRebekah Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade>.

That came to a spectacular end in April last year when Brooks accompanied her 
boss,James Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch>, in a 
surprise visit to Kelner's office, leading to a shouting match.

The News Int pair were expressing their displeasure at an Independent 
publicity campaign using posters that attacked Rupert Murdoch.

It was just one example of the colourful 13 years Kelner has enjoyed at The 
Independent and, as far as I can tell from the records, he is the first 
journalist to have achieved such high editorial office after starting as a 
sports reporter.

Kelner worked as a sports reporter at the Kent Evening Post in the early 80s, 
before joiningThe Observer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theobserver> in 
1983 as assistant sports editor.

He was in at the launch of The Independent in 1986 as deputy sports editor, 
staying until 1989 when he became sports editor of the ill-fated Sunday 
Correspondent.

He waved sport farewell to edit The Observer magazine, and then the Mail on 
Sunday supplement Night and Day, where he won plaudits for his work.

That led to The Independent, where he picked up editor of the year awards in 
2004 and 2010.

So why has he gone? Well, it is clear that Evgeny Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev> is the driving force at the 
operation nowadays and quite obviously Kelner did not manage to forge as good a 
relationship with him as he had done with O'Reilly and his son, Gavin.

Kelner, previously renowned for being adept at internal office politics, 
finally lost out.

At 53, his career is surely not over. He is still, at least in name, 
editor-in-chief of the Indy titles. And, as I said at the start, he is a 
survivor.
 