
This week, Jeremy Corbyn suffered one of the largest backbench rebellions of 
his tenure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/labour-call-for-uk-to-withdraw-support-for-saudi-led-coalition-in-yemen-fails>
, as about 100 Labour MPs failed to supporta motion 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-10-26/debates/61DFF92D-1BE0-4909-8020-76FC80CA5136/Yemen>
 moved by shadow foreign secretary Emily Thornberry. Some, likeAngela Rayner 
<https://twitter.com/AngelaRayner/status/791583638328582144>, were away for 
legitimate reasons. But scores of others apparently couldn’t bring themselves 
to support the leadership’s demand that Britain stop backing a brutal Saudi-led 
military campaign in Yemen. That was the point of principle on which they felt 
compelled to take this stand.

Labour call for UK to withdraw support for Saudi-led coalition in Yemen fails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/labour-call-for-uk-to-withdraw-support-for-saudi-led-coalition-in-yemen-fails>
Although the UN places it in the same category of severity as the crisis in 
Syria 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/yemen-crisis-un-declares-a-level-3-humanitarian-emergency-as-situation-worsens-10359208.html>
, Yemen receives a good deal less coverage. In March 2015, a Saudi-led coalition
intervened in Yemen’s civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/26/saudi-arabia-begins-airstrikes-against-houthi-in-yemen>
 in support of the country’s recently deposed president. The move was backed by 
a deeply slanted UN security council resolution, which the Saudis and other 
regional monarchies took a leading role in drafting, and which was then 
rubber-stamped by their western allies. Leadingexperts on Yemen condemned the 
resolution 
<http://www.merip.org/two-resolutions-draft-constitution-late-developments>, 
warning that what the country needed wasnational dialogue, not military 
escalation 
<http://www.merip.org/open-letter-yemen-scholars-protesting-war?ip_login_no_cache=3cd8bed18629dfadf5cf0bfd26dff007>
. Subsequent events have vindicated that judgment entirely.

Now 18 months on, much of Yemen lies in ruins. Schools, hospitals 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/10/27/yemen-coalition-airstrikes-hit-hospital>, 
homes 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2015/09/the-ugly-truths-of-yemens-war-must-not-stay-buried-in-the-rubble/>
 and other civilian infrastructure have beenbombed repeatedly 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/06/30/targeting-saada/unlawful-coalition-airstrikes-saada-city-yemen>
 by the coalition. At least10,000 people have been killed 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/observations/2016/10/conflict-yemen-civil-war-numbers>
, including about 4,000 civilians, mostly by coalition airstrikes. A UN report 
documented more than 100 strikes on civilian targets in the first nine months 
of the intervention, describing a pattern of such attacks that was “widespread 
and systematic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/un-report-into-saudi-led-strikes-in-yemen-raises-questions-over-uk-role>
”. The world’s leading human rights organisations andhumanitarian NGOs 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/resources/online-library/nowhere-safe-yemens-children>
 all agree with that assessment. In testimony to a parliamentary select 
committee, one Unicef representative described“double-tap” strikes 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmintdev/532/53206.htm>
, where a second bomb would hit after the emergency services arrived. Foreign 
secretary Boris Johnson has condemned this tactic as “unquestionably a war crime
 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1887484/vladimir-putin-is-slaughtering-innocent-civilians-in-syria-on-purpose-claims-boris-johnson/>
” when referring to its use in Syria.
The Times of London (@thetimes) 
Tomorrow's front page: Heathrow overvalued by £86bn #tomorrowspaperstoday 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/tomorrowspaperstoday?src=hash> 
https://t.co/9WYGsT8yjJ <https://t.co/9WYGsT8yjJ> pic.twitter.com/WOzxJZkilI 
<https://t.co/WOzxJZkilI>
 <https://twitter.com/thetimes/status/791391709997436928> October 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/thetimes/status/791391709997436928> 
The cost of the blockade imposed on Yemen, the region’s poorest country, by 
the Saudis and their oil-rich friends, was dramatically illustrated on the 
front page ofThe Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/millions-starving-as-saudi-bombs-tear-yemen-apart-xdxb23cbb>
 on Friday, in a shocking photo of 18-year-old Saida Ahmad Baghili, whose body 
is so emaciated that one can scarcely believe she’s alive. Baghili lives near 
Hodeida, where a third of local infants suffer from acute malnutrition, and 
where residents were reduced to eating grass and drinking seawater after the 
coalition bombed Hodeida itself, Yemen’s major entry point for aid and food 
imports.According to the UN World Food Programme 
<https://www.wfp.org/countries/yemen>, 14 million Yemenis are going hungry, 
half of them now tipping into outright starvation, an outcome long predicted by 
aid agencies. UN officials report that the coalition often blocks or delays 
deliveries of even explicitly UN-approved food and medical supplies.

What is happening in Yemen and how Saudi Arabia's airstrikes are affecting 
civilians - explainer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/16/how-saudi-arabias-airstrikes-have-hit-civilian-life-in-yemen>
All sides in the conflict have been guilty of siege tactics and indiscriminate 
attacks on civilians, but the coalition is responsible for the vast majority of 
the suffering, and the coalition is the side that Britain is actively 
supporting. Indeed, Whitehall has approved£3.3bn of arms exports 
<https://www.caat.org.uk/resources/export-licences/licence?region=Saudi+Arabia> 
(including bombs and missiles) to Saudi Arabia since the intervention began, a 
huge rise on the equivalent preceding period. Calls to suspend those arms sales 
have been made by theUN secretary general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/05/ban-ki-moon-yemen-war-uk-arms-sales-saudi-arabia>
,Save the Children 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/resources/online-library/nowhere-safe-yemens-children>
,Amnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/mde31/2548/2015/en/>, and Human Rights 
Watch 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/11/25/yemen-coalition-used-uk-cruise-missile-unlawful-airstrike>
.

So you might think the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
leadership’s demand that British support should be suspended, until the Saudis 
can be shown to be acting in accordance with international law and basic 
morality, would be an uncontroversial one. Apparently not.

Presenting the motion in the Commons, Thornberry was subjected to a series of 
ill-judged interruptions from Labour MPs such as Kevan Jones, Toby Perkins and 
John Woodcock. Indeed, Thornberry received more vocal support in the chamber 
from the SNP contingent than from her own supposed comrades. According to
subsequent reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/labour-mps-face-backlash-over-failure-to-vote-on-yemen-campaign>
, some Labour members even tried to work with their Tory counterparts in order 
to defeat their own party’s motion.

How many Yemenis need to die before we stop selling arms to Saudi Arabia? | 
Kate Allen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/yemenis-die-uk-arms-saudi-arabia>
Woodcock, a former chair of Progress, claimed that British support is 
“precisely focused on training Saudis” to improve their targeting, so as to 
“create fewer civilian casualties”, parroting the official government line. The 
idea that the Saudis’ “widespread and systematic” attacks on civilian targets 
are just a series of well-meaning errors is one that, to put it as gently as 
possible, lacks credibility. And if decades of training provided by the British 
to the Saudi pilots hasn’t prevented these supposed errors by now, it seems 
rather unlikely that it will in the near future.

In any case, this misrepresents the true nature of the British role. When the 
intervention began, then foreign secretary Philip Hammond pledged to “support 
the Saudis in every practical way short of engaging in combat 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/middleeast/yemen/11500518/UK-will-support-Saudi-led-assault-on-Yemeni-rebels-but-not-engaging-in-combat.html>
”, including “spare parts, maintenance, technical advice, resupply” and “
logistical support 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/british-technical-support-saudi-op-yemen-hammond-210205762.html?soc_src=mail&soc_trk=ma&ref=gs>
”. The reality is that the Saudi Air Force, roughly half UK-supplied and half 
US-supplied jets, could barely function without this ongoing assistance from 
Washington and London.

If there is Yemeni blood on the hands of the Saudi-led coalition, then that 
blood is also on the hands of the coalition’s western backers, enablers and 
apologists. The Saudis and their allies can only wage this war because the 
Anglo-American suppliers of their air forces are providing active, material 
support. And British and American politicians can only collude in these 
outrages because the political cost on them so far has been low. However, it is 
in the gift of their constituents – you, the reader – to change that equation.
 