
I'm four months pregnant but I'm keen to keep running for as long as possible. 
Should I go on how I feel or is there a sensible time to stop?

Health bodies recommend two and a half hours of moderate exercise per week 
during pregnancy, and evidence suggests that this will increase your chances of 
a healthy term, a healthy baby and a good recovery after birth. Further regular 
exercise can reduce the chances of diabetes and high blood pressure, while 
improving your mood, strength, physical capacity and possibly the birth weight 
of your baby. Your birth may also be less complicated.

So can you run to achieve this? If you are a regular runner then yes, but if 
not then start with walking. Either way, exercise needs to be moderate. High 
intensity and prolonged exercise such as racing, running for more than 40 
minutes and exhaustive training can all, in theory, stress blood flow to the 
baby and raise the body temperature excessively, which has potential 
consequences of premature labour and bleeding.

If you are intending to run, make sure you warm up properly and start out 
steadily. After your first trimester – ie from three to four months onwards – 
your body shape will be changing, putting extra strain on your back, pelvis and 
joints. Furthermore, your cardiovascular system will have to cope with the 
extra load. Therefore, consider switching to lower-impact exercise such as 
power walking, static cycling, cross-training, low-impact aerobics and 
swimming, and avoid weights and activities that dictate you need to lie on your 
back.

Pregnancy can become complicated so you should check with your doctor that 
your circumstances are suited to running. A starting point for advice can also 
be found from theAmerican College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. 
<http://www.acog.org/publications/patient_education/bp119.cfm>
 