
It's a startling thought that Britain's regional rep movement owes its 
existence to groceries. In 1908, Annie Horniman created theGaiety theatre in 
Manchester 
<http://www.arthurlloyd.co.uk/ManchesterTheatres/GaietyTheatreManchester.htm> 
with money from the family tea business. And in 1913 Barry Jackson used the 
fortune made from his father's provisions firm to build theBirmingham Rep 
<http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/>. As that theatre celebrates its centenary 
with a production ofPhilip Pullman's I Was a Rat! 
<http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/event/i-was-a-rat/>, one hopes funding cuts 
won't mean regional theatre will once again be forced to depend on private 
philanthropy.

Jackson was a progressive idealist. When he built the 440-seat, steeply raked 
Birmingham Rep in Station Street, he said it was founded "to serve an art 
instead of making that art serve a commercial purpose" – and he was as good as 
his word. In 1923, the Rep pioneered modern-dress Shakespeare with a Cymbeline 
that had Imogen sporting knickerbockers and a cap. That same year the theatre 
premiered Shaw's epicBack to Methuselah. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/sep/01/artsfeatures> ("Is your family 
provided for?" Shaw asked the Rep's founder, overlooking the fact that Jackson 
was discreetly homosexual).And in 1945, Jackson invited a 20-year-oldPeter Brook
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Sx2qHHFS5Yk>, who arrived in a tomato-coloured 
suit, to direct three productions, all starring a youngPaul Scofield 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvPIjzp9NPc>.

As a teenage theatre nut going to the Rep in the mid-1950s, I can testify to 
the fact that it gave you an education in world drama. Over a five-year period 
I saw plays by Aristophanes, Shakespeare, Jonson,Wycherley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wycherley>, Goldsmith, Shaw and Schnitzler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/mar/17/la-ronde-scandal-stage>
. It was also a place where actors honed their craft. I knew its alumni 
included Laurence Olivier,Ralph Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2000/may/28/featuresreview.review>, 
Peggy Ashcroft,Edith Evans <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0262725/>. What I didn't 
know was that I'd have the luck to watch a future star at work.

His name was Albert Finney <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001215/>, and I first 
saw him in 1956 in a weird piece of Irish whimsy called Happy as Larry. He was 
one of a chorus of dancing tailors, and there was something about this stocky, 
square-shouldered figure that instantly drew the eye. He was a 19-year-old 
fresh out of Rada; it was fascinating to see him mature with every production. 
He was a superb Henry V, with the wary watchfulness of a young king conscious 
of the weight of the crown. While Finney was hinting at future greatness in 
Birmingham,Peter O'Toole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jan/21/awardsandprizes.oscars> was doing 
the same in Bristol. he kind of two-year learning process in rep that young 
actors then enjoyed is no longer possible.

But reps have to move on, and Birmingham was no exception. In 1971, the 
company moved into a brand-new 900-seat building in Broad Street, which it has 
occupied for more than 40 years – and which will reopen in September as part of 
a major redevelopment. In those four decades the Rep has enjoyed moments of 
glory, many of them taking place in the smaller studio theatre (rechristened 
The Door in 1998). I vividly remember David Edgar'sMary Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/jul/13/guardianobituaries.books>, which 
dramatised a Laingian experiment in communal living, and a terrific 1988 
Shakespeare season (Hamlet, As You Like It and Much Ado About Nothing) from
Kenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/nov/14/kenneth-branagh-macbeth-church-manchester>
's Renaissance Theatre Company. The main stage, which sometimes resembles an 
aircraft hangar, has had its successes, too.Indhu Rubasingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/19/tricycle-theatre-director-diverse-audience>
 staged a vivaciously physical version of The Ramayana, and Jonathan Church 
offered a startling reassessment of theDavid Hare trilogy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/apr/23/theatre.artsfeatures> of Racing 
Demon, Murmuring Judges and The Absence of War. Controversy erupted in 2004 when
Gurpreet Kaur Bhatti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/15/gurpreet-kaur-bhatti-behud-behzti>
's Behzti (Dishonour), which depicted rape, abuse and murder inside a Sikh 
temple, was abruptly cancelled after public protests. We're still living with 
the after-effects of the Behzti saga, though I'm assured it hasn't dented the 
Rep's commitment to multicultural Brum.

The Rep's new director, Roxana Silbert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/apr/18/roxana-silbert-director>, now 
has the tricky task of managing a massive expansion at a time of economic 
gloom. The redevelopment will see the Rep sharing frontage, a foyer and several 
facilities with Birmingham's new library. Common to both will be a 300-seat 
Studio theatre that will complement the Door. All this will have to be run on 
grants of £1,865,323 from the Arts Council and £908,500 from Birmingham City 
Council, amounting to 42% of the Rep's total revenue.

But Silbert is optimistic. "The whole dynamic of the Rep is changing," she 
says, "because of our relationship with the new library. We'll look like 
Siamese twins, and my blueprint is London's South Bank – I want to make the Rep 
even more of a seductive space to go and hang out. Each theatre will also have 
its own character. We also have a duty to make the classics available to a new 
generation and I plan to use the 300-seat studio to explore writers like Ibsen 
and Chekhov in intimate detail. And in the Door I want to focus specifically on 
nurturing West Midlands talent." The theatre will reopen with the National 
theatre's tour ofPeople 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/02/courting-cat-hold-theatre-attention>
 by Alan Bennett.

With 1,500 seats a night to fill, Silbert admits that at first it will be 
possible to have only two of the three spaces open at any one time. But she 
claims that Birmingham, because of its transient population, looks outwards 
rather than inwards and has an appetite for experiment, such as the work of the 
adventuruous Catalan, Calixto Bieito. As the Rep notches up a glorious century, 
incorporating 3,000 productions over two venues, I just hope Silbert remembers 
the basic principles of the Barry Jackson era. He allowed Brum to see the 
world's greatest plays, gambled on youth and believed passionately in the need 
(it bears repeating) "to serve an art instead of making that art serve a 
commercial purpose". Wise words, even today.
 