
To the Palace of Westminster, where the evolution of Alex Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alex-reid> from Jordan's cagefighting 
ex-husband to Campaigner For Stuff continues. Hitherto, Alex has seemed a bit 
of a public intellectual without a cause, and on Wednesday he pitched up to 
parliament on another hazily defined mission. "Let's get this country sorted!" 
ran one of his tweeted dispatches, while another inquired: "So Mr Cameron, wot 
do u think about …? Just about to sit in the House of Commons PM question time. 
Must keep quiet must keep quiet."

Who can say for certain, but some clarity might have been provided by a later 
message reading "Let's get school dinners in this country sorted! 
<http://twitter.com/only1alexreid>" Mm. I can't help feeling confused if Alex 
has indeed picked school dinners as his big idea. After all, it's not as if 
a much bigger-hitting celebrity has turned their much more considerable 
attentions to the subject.

Of more concern, however, is a photograph of Labour MPs Sharon Hodgson and 
Roberta Blackman-Woods cosying up to Alex 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2098414/Alex-Reid-considers-running-local-council-discusses-school-meals-MPs.html>
 at a "lunch meeting", in the apparent belief that it will get them useful 
publicity, as opposed to the type that merely cheapens Westminster even 
further. Lost in Showbiz can only conclude we're going the way of the US, where 
lawmakers will even carve out meeting time for the likes of Geri Halliwell in 
the belief it will do something for their profile. (FYI, Sharon and Roberta: in 
the case of a couple of congressmen, it secured them walk-on parts in Hello! 
and OK! photospreads in which Geri got dolled up like Jackie Kennedy and posed 
around Washington while talking mostly about herself.)
 