
In not quite two weeks Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
has moved from a moment of compassion and empathy with Syrian and other 
migrants striving to reach our shores back toward a reassertion of the fortress 
mentality that aims to stop them, sort them and return them, save for a 
proportion deemed to have a real claim on our hospitality. The reasons are both 
reprehensible and understandable.

Europeans pity the people on the move and fear them – or, rather, fear the 
consequences of their arrival in such numbers. The balance between those two 
emotions varies wildly from week to week and from country to country. After 
littleAlan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/shocking-image-of-drowned-syrian-boy-shows-tragic-plight-of-refugees>
 was found dead on a Turkish beach, Germany took the extraordinary step of 
casting aside regulations and opening its doors to the refugees who were, 
literally in some cases, tramping toward its borders. It was morally courageous 
but not entirely wise. What was meant to be a generous humanitarian response in 
an immediate emergency inevitably became a signal which was interpreted by 
large numbers of people in the Middle East and Africa that Europe, and 
particularly Germany, was now ready and willing to receive them.

The numbers coming rose, but what was more worrying was the suddenly clear 
prospect that many millions might come. By Sunday, the Germans, overwhelmed by 
practical problems of reception, and scared at the sheer scale of what was 
happening, hadreimposed border controls 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/14/world/europe/germany-emergency-measures-european-migrant-crisis.html>
, they say on a temporary basis. Other countriesfollowed suit 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-34242123>. The shift in attitude was 
also evident on Monday as European interior ministers discussed plans that may 
include the creation of new refugee camps in Italy and Greece and outside of 
the EU, as well as a strengthening of external controls.

We may, and we should, swing back from positions like these. But it is the 
“we” in that sentence that is problematic. It is easy to say that Europe has 
failed to develop a fair and coherent way of dealing with migrants and 
refugees, but this failure is hardly surprising. Countries have different 
attitudes and interests, as do the migrants themselves. Indeed their 
preferences are critical, which is why Germany’s increasingly sharp demands for 
burden-sharing are less reasonable than they seem at first sight.

To say this is not to pander to reactionary attitudes evident in, although not 
confined to, central and eastern Europe. It is instead to recognise that it is 
highly unlikely that migrants will stay in countries like Lithuania, Poland or 
Greece, were they to be assigned there bya quota system 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-34193568> of the kind recently proposed 
by the European commission. If past experience is a guide, migrants resent 
being sent hither and thither, and quickly find ways to go to the places they 
wanted to go to in the first instance – places where they think conditions are 
better, where they feel more welcome, or where there are established 
communities from their countries of origin. That is why the debate about 
burden-sharing is to a considerable extent a non-debate.

It might be instituted, but it would not work unless there was compulsion. 
Thomas de Maizière 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/13/germany-to-close-borders-exit-schengen-emergency-measures>
, the German interior minister, may say, as he did on Monday, that asylum 
seekers must understand that “they cannot choose the states where they are 
seeking protection”, but that is precisely what they want to do. If Germany’s 
burden-sharing thesis is defective, so is the argument put forward by leaders 
like David Cameron who say the only real solution is to end the Syrian war. In 
principle, everyone would agree. But the problem is that the war is winding 
toward an end at its own dismally slow speed, one very hard to influence. At 
some point the balance of forces will allow a settlement to emerge – as it 
finally did in Lebanon, the country Mr Cameronwas visiting 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34242346> on Monday. But we can’t just dictate 
that point.

He went to demonstrate concern for the people in the camps there and to stress 
that Britain’s formula of more spending there, and increased diplomatic and 
military efforts, is the right one. Again, this is not wrong. But it fails to 
recognise the reality that life in the camps was tolerable when an early return 
to a peacefulSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> seemed possible, 
but miserable beyond words when it is not. The difficult conclusion must be 
that neither burden-sharing nor diplomacy will end this crisis, that migrants 
will continue to come in very substantial numbers, and Europe will continue to 
blunder along, torn between concern about their suffering and fears about a 
future different from the one we had until now imagined. We are in desperate 
need of a solution, but we have not found it yet.
 