
Barely a week goes by, it seems, without some new attack on science. For 
years, oil and coal lobbieshave orchestrated assaults on climate scientists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/nov/02/climate-change-michael-mann-emails>
, while the religious right continues to oppose the teaching of evolution in US 
schools, questioning the basic tenets of evolutionary biology.


Denialism does its damage by driving a wedge between science and society, 
undermining public understanding of science with misinformation and confusing 
pseudo-debate. The effects can be seen not just in climate change mitigation 
efforts, but in peoples’ health – witness therecent US upsurge in childhood 
measles 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/cdc-says-u-s-measles-cases-have-risen-over-past-week-1423508551>
 concentrated in areas where there is opposition to vaccines. No wonder the 
latestsurvey of scientists by the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/29/public-and-scientists-views-on-science-and-society/>
 found scientists increasingly pessimistic about how their work is viewed in 
the wider society.

In the latest organised attack on science, 14 senior US scientists are being 
targeted by anti-GM lobby group US Right to Know (USRTK) 
<http://www.wired.com/2015/02/anti-gmo-activist-seeks-expose-emails-food-scientists/>
, an offshoot of the failed California GM labelling campaignYes on 37 
<http://www.carighttoknow.org/>. USRTK is using the Freedom of Information Act 
(FoIA) to demand access to years of private emails and other correspondence of 
these scientists, undoubtedly aiming to undermine their credentials and sully 
their names in public.

As three former presidents of the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science, we know how important it is for scientists to engage meaningfully in 
societal debates about their work. But we also know how important it is for 
scientists to be able to speak freely in conducting their work, both publicly 
and privately. USRTK’s attack is reminiscent of‘Climategate’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/jul/07/climate-emails-question-answer>
, where the release of private emails did immense, unwarranted damage to the 
reputations of climate scientists. Now the vocal anti-GM lobby appears to be 
taking a page out of the Climategate playbook.

The facts are clear: the scientific consensus on the safety of foods derived 
from GM plants is equivalent to that on global climate change driven by human 
activities. TheAAAS <https://www.theguardian.com/science/aaas> has issued 
statements on both subjects, underscoring that climate change is real and that 
GM technology is safe. Numerous other learned societies and public bodies have 
reached the same conclusions and continue to be attacked by science deniers on 
both issues.

USRTK’s statements are unambiguous – it views any scientist with the temerity 
to speak out in public on biotechnology as part of “the PR machine for the 
chemical-agro industry”. Hence its FoIA requests focus on any email exchanges 
with biotech companies such as Monsanto, Syngenta, and DuPont, as well as other 
organisations, including the Grocery Manufacturers Association and the Council 
for Biotechnology Information. These researchers have denied receiving hidden 
funding from these groups, yet a good deal of damage can be done with private 
communications quoted out of context.

Ironically, USRTK is less eager to reveal its own agenda and funding. Its 
website reveals only one donor, theOrganic Consumers Association 
<https://www.organicconsumers.org/> (OCA), a group that seeks to turn US 
agriculture 100% organic and eliminate GM crops. It is clearly promoting the 
interests of the organic food business, now a $63bn (£42bn) dollar industry.

The OCA has a clear game plan – to drive increased sales of higher-priced 
organic produce by convincing consumers that conventionally farmed foods are 
swimming in pesticide residues, that GM crops are dangerous, and that 
biotechnology companies that sellGM <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gm>
 seeds are evil. But OCA does not restrict its anti-science activities to 
agriculture. Its website is also riddled with anti-vaccine misinformation, for 
example that “it is important to know how to protect your children and yourself 
with homeopathic and natural alternatives to vaccines to build your natural 
immunity” and other such dangerous nonsense.

Moreover, OCA’s assertion that we can feed the world organically and without 
modern technology is nothing short of delusional. We live on a finite planet 
with a human population of 7.2bn, a number that is increasing by almost 100,000 
per day. Our ability to minimise the effects of famine has depended on the 
application of science and technology to agriculture since the time of the 
Industrial Revolution two centuries ago. The key innovations have been in 
genetics and plant breeding, synthetic fertilisers, and farm mechanisation.

A recent meta-analysis 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0111629> 
concluded that adoption of GM crops since 1996 has reduced chemical pesticide 
use by 37%, increased crop yields by 22% and increased farmer profits by 68%. 
Moreover, the gains were larger for developing countries than developed 
countries. We need more science, not less, if we are to feed the coming world 
of 9.5bn in 2050 without further destroying fragile ecosystems and driving more 
species to extinction.

Hostile challenges to intellectual enterprises such as universities and the 
people who practice science within them are hugely detrimental to our ability 
to make rational, evidence-based decisions in free societies.

If we allow ideologically-motivated campaigners to harass and threaten our 
leading thinkers and intellectual institutions, there will be less progress 
than we could otherwise achieve. Our civilisation can do better than that. We 
want to be able to vision a healthy, sustainable and vibrant future. But we 
can’t get there without science.

• Nina Fedoroff is an Evan Pugh Professor at Penn State University and science 
adviser to OFW Law; Peter Raven is Director Emeritus of the Missouri Botanical 
Garden and Phillip Sharp is Institute Professor in the Koch Institute for 
Integrative Cancer Research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
 