
It was after Alexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>’s Banshee show at Café 
de Paris in 1994. Lee, as his friends called him, had asked me to shoot the 
shows backstage and I was making a little Super 8 home movie for him for 
a launch event in New York. So I filmed backstage at the shows as well as at
Isabella Blow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/nov/19/isabella-blow-fashion-journalism-exhibition-hats>
’s house, which Lee used as a studio, on Elizabeth Street. Lee took a camera 
and filmed his family himself over a weekend.

I had met Issy a few weeks earlier. She asked what else I was up to and I told 
her I was trying to photographMalcolm McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/malcolm-mclaren>, but he was giving me the 
runaround. The deadline was approaching. So she just put her hand up to stop me 
talking and phoned him straightaway. And then he called me half an hour later 
to organise the shoot. I had been chasing him for ages. That’s typical of her – 
she would just make things happen.

We decided to shoot Issy at her house in Gloucestershire, so we went up to 
Hilles House for the weekend. It was me, Lee,Isabella and her husband Detmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/oct/03/isabella-blow-fashion-hats-biography>
, and we drove up from London. Detmar was driving. Lee and I were in the back. 
It felt like being taken away by your mum and dad for the weekend, with Lee 
cracking jokes and being naughty. He had such a wicked sense of humour.

Isabella was really excited about hanging out with Lee and wanted to tell 
people about him – whoever they were. We walked into a baker’s to buy a loaf of 
bread, and she was there making a big deal about this new fashion designer. 
They were just like: “Do you want brown or white?” But she was so excited about 
him – she even introduced him to the guy putting petrol in the car, saying: 
“This is Alexander McQueen!” and Lee was just completely embarrassed about the 
whole thing. She wanted everybody to know how good he was.

We spent two nights there filming Isabella running around in the orchard in 
McQueen dresses – just messing about, getting little snippets for the film. She 
was really playful. Every time with Isabella Blow was memorable because she was 
a unique spirit. That weekend she was fully glammed up the whole time. I took a 
picture of her when we got back to London and were unloading the car at 
Elizabeth Street. She fell asleep with a Philip Treacy hat she had taken off 
and put on the floor next to her and she had a big monkey coat on just to 
travel in the car.

The annoying thing is that I never saw the film again after I gave it to Lee. 
I know where it is – it’s in a friend’s storage lock-up in London, but he works 
in LA. I’ve been chasing him for years to get it back. I’d really like to watch 
it again one day.

Gary Wallis is a photographer and a lecturer at Central Saint Martins. His 
latest book isMcQueen: Backstage – The Early Shows (bigsmilepublishing.com 
<http://www.bigsmilepublishing.com/>, £55)
 