
Back in January, the Carolina Panthers and the Arizona Cardinals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/arizona-cardinals> faced each other in the 
NFC Championship game for the right to represent their conference in the Super 
Bowl. After what happened on Sunday, a playoffs rematch looks highly unlikely. 
On Sunday both teams saw their records fall to 1-3 following brutal losses 
where they lost their franchise quarterbacks, at least temporarily, to possible 
concussions.

London proves lush habitat for Jaguars and Pumas hunting cash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/london-jacksonville-jaguars-argentina-pumas-marquee-sports>
Arguably no single player is more important to his team than Cam Newton is for 
the Panthers. So, when Newton suffered a head injury during a failed two-point 
conversion attempt, it didn’t bode well for their already slim chances against 
the red-hotAtlanta Falcons <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atlanta-falcons>. 
The Panthers replaced the reigning MVP with Derek Anderson, who last started in 
2014.

To be fair to the surprisingly-not-retired Anderson, he did throw two 
touchdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/10/nfl-2016-predictions-panthers-seahawks-patriots>
 in about 10 minutes of game time (along with two interceptions). Also, it also 
might not have mattered even if Newton played for the entire game: the Falcons 
absolutely feasted on the Panthers’ defense, racking up numbers in
record-setting fashion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/nfl-wrap-patriots-bills-falcons-shred-panters?CMP=twt_a-sport_b-ussports_c-us_g-1>
. Quarterback Matt Ryan threw for 503 yards, a Falcons record, and four 
touchdowns. Meanwhile, Julio Jones went off for 300 receiving yards, not just a 
Falcons single-game record but thesixth highest yardage 
<http://www.thefalcoholic.com/2016/10/2/13140474/julio-jones-has-6th-highest-yardage-game-in-nfl-history-with-300>
 game ever for a wide receiver.

The Falcons won 48-33, improving their record to 3-1. No other team in the NFC 
South, including the Panthers, has won more than once. It’s early, but the 
Panthers have already lost ground, and it’s going to be very difficult to make 
it up if Newton isn’t at least close to the player he was last season.

Newton’s concussion diagnosis 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/sports/football/cam-newton-carolina-panthers-atlanta-falcons.html>
 reduces the likelihood of that happening, especially since he’s already taken 
some hard hits to the head this season. The Panthers were already heavily 
criticized for leaving their star quarterback in the game during their season 
opener against the Denver Broncos. Newton suffered several hits to the head 
which noticeably affected his playing ability and, as Newton would admit in his 
post-game comments, had caused at least some memory loss. Despite all this, the 
team and playerinsisted 
<http://www.sbnation.com/nfl/2016/9/9/12861100/concussion-cam-newton-nfl-spotters-neurologists>
 that he had passed the concussion protocol.

This time around, Newton did not pass the test, making his status a huge 
question mark. Newton could return just fine next game and look like his 
fantasy football breaking self. It’s also possible that he could miss 
considerable playing time or that he returns but isn’t quite the same player. 
One expects, or at least hopes, that the Panthers, learning from the week one 
fiasco, proceed with an abundance of caution.

The same goes for the Cardinals and Carson Palmer,. Palmer was taken off the 
field 
<http://www.nfl.com/news/story/0ap3000000714163/article/carson-palmer-being-evaluated-for-concussion>
 after taking a sack in the fourth quarter of a 17-13 loss to the 
should-be-dreadful-on-paper LA Rams. Palmer doesn’t have the same recent 
history of head injuries that Newton does, but the 36-year-old veteran has been 
through more career-threatening health issues than maybe any other active 
player. The Cardinals are going to need to be careful with him.

At the very least, it’s hard to imagine the team’s medical staff clearing him 
in time for Thursday’s game against the San Francisco 49ers. It feels a little 
cruel that the Cardinals have to play again so soon after this painful (in all 
ways) loss, but maybe the quick turnaround will help them losing to a team that 
didn’t score its first touchdown until week three.

Quote of the week

“I missed 40 meetings? I owned up to the only one I missed. Clearly I’m 
America’s most hated. None of my teammates would say anything like that. 
Everything between us is nothing but love.”

– Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Dez Bryant on reports 
<http://sportsday.dallasnews.com/dallas-cowboys/cowboys/2016/10/02/dez-bryant-denies-report-late-missed-40-meetings>
 that he missed as many as 40 team meetings.

Bryant is in trouble with the Cowboys for missing a scheduled MRI last 
Tuesday, the wide receiver ended up being diagnosed with a hairline knee 
fracture the next day, along with other mandatory meetings. While “America’s 
most hated” is a classic Bryant line, one of his teammates should inform him 
thatColin Kaepernick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/mike-ditka-colin-kaepernick-get-the-hell-out-anthem-protest>
 has (unwittingly) stolen than dubious title from him.

Stat of the week

Zero. That’s the number of points the New England Patriots scored against the 
Buffalo Bills on Sunday. It was the first time the Patriots had been shutout at 
homesince 28 November 1993 <http://sports.yahoo.com/news/154450-202308861.html>
. It turns out that Jacoby Brissett was not, in fact, an adequate replacement 
for Tom Brady. Still, the Patriots can’t complain too much about going 3-1 
during Brady’s four week suspension.

Fantasy player of the week

Julio Jones, wide receiver, Atlanta Falcons. Yes, we know we mentioned Jones’s 
12 reception, 300-yard game earlier in this column but it’s one of those feats 
that deserves to be mentioned twice.
Adam Jacobi (@Adam_Jacobi) 
Congratulations to everyone who wasn't facing Julio Jones in fantasy this 
week, big week for you
 <https://twitter.com/Adam_Jacobi/status/782674286637043712> October 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Adam_Jacobi/status/782674286637043712> 
Gif of the week
SB Nation GIF (@SBNationGIF) 
This cameraman has practiced his technique for avoiding football players. 
https://t.co/xrqyV3TPZY <https://t.co/xrqyV3TPZY> pic.twitter.com/fo1qq7KoaX 
<https://t.co/fo1qq7KoaX>
 <https://twitter.com/SBNationGIF/status/782645162627338240> October 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SBNationGIF/status/782645162627338240> 
That was the smoothest move we saw from a non-professional on Sunday. What was 
the least smooth, you ask? Well this:

SNF on NBC (@SNFonNBC) 
Attention: Please don't throw helmets at Jerry Jones. (h/t @EdwardEgrosFox4 
<https://twitter.com/EdwardEgrosFox4>) https://t.co/bXL7BkeyWt 
<https://t.co/bXL7BkeyWt>
 <https://twitter.com/SNFonNBC/status/782694754949758977> October 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SNFonNBC/status/782694754949758977> 
Elsewhere around the league

• The Chicago Bears have finally won a game! They beat the Detroit Lions 
17-14. Crazier still, it was the Bears’ first home win in nearlya full calendar 
year 
<http://chicago.suntimes.com/sports/bears-top-lions-17-14-claim-first-home-victory-in-almost-a-year/>
. So congratulations Chicago, you’re officially out of “the worst team in the 
NFL right now” conversation. For now.


• Also out of that conversation: the New Orleans Saints. The Saints picked up 
theirfirst win of the season 
<http://www.nola.com/saints/index.ssf/2016/10/saints_chargers.html> despite 
being down 13 points to the San Diego Chargers with 7 minutes left in 
regulation. Then Chargers fumbled twice, on two consecutive drives, and in each 
case the Saints were able to recover the ball and eventually score a touchdown. 
Thanks to these giveaways, New Orleans ended up winning 35-34.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRjfqZcfGTrw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRjfqZcfGTrw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRjfqZcfGTrw&media=>
• Just from the way they lost that game against New Orleans, you would think 
that the 1-3 Chargers would have established themselves as the worst team in 
the league right now. However, the standings will show that it’s the Cleveland 
Browns, who dropped to 0-4 after Washington beat them 31-20, making them the 
NFL’s sole remaining winless team. Don’t feel too bad Cleveland, there’s only a 
few more weeks until the NBA starts up again.

• This weekend saw several undefeated teams fall to the wayside. As we 
mentioned, the Bills blanked the Patriots in their last Brady-less game of the 
season (assuming that he doesn’t get hurt and/or does something to embarrass 
Roger Goodell again). Later, the Oakland Raiders were able to just barely pull 
off a 28-27 victory over the Baltimore Ravens, dropping their record to 3-1.


• This means there are only three undefeated teams left in the NFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>. The Denver Broncos improved their 
record to 4-0 by beating the Tampa Bay Buccaneers 27-7 despite losing 
quarterback Trevor Siemian to a shoulder injury and having to wait out a 
lengthy weather delay. The 3-0 Minnesota Vikings will play the New York Giants 
on Monday Night Football tonight and the 3-0 Philadelphia Eagles were on their 
bye week (which is by far the least stressful way to keep up an unbeaten 
streak).
 