
In the bowels of Kings Place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2008/dec/15/theguardian-pressandpublishing>
 lies a small coffin. It bears the inscription “R.I.P. The Guardian, 1961-1987, 
‘Dissed off in haste’, WAS HOT, NOW GONE COLD”. It is one of the more unusual 
items in theGNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive>.

The inscription refers to the end of hot metal printing 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hot_metal_typesetting> at the Guardian. This was 
the method used to set the pages and create the plates from which the paper was 
printed. It involved casting the words in the stories and headlines out of 
molten lead, usingLinotype <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8mFtroOIv3o> and 
Ludlow 
<http://britishletterpress.co.uk/type-and-typography/the-ludlow-typograph/> 
machines.

The coffin, containing copies of the final edition of the Guardian printed 
using the old system, was used in a mock funeral procession in the composing 
room of the Guardian’s offices in Farringdon Road on 11 May 1987.


The mock funeral involved members of the compositors chapel (printing union) 
acting as pall bearers for the coffin, dressed in suitable mourning attire, 
including top hats and black ties. A saxophone player led the procession, and a 
white floral tribute was laid on top of the casket.

Fred Grayden <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/12/fred-grayden>, 
retired deputy head printer from the London composing room, came back to see 
the final hot metal edition printed. He started working for the Guardian when 
it first began printing in London in 1961, leaving just before lead-setting 
did, in 1985. In the memoirs he wrote for the archive he describes the last hot 
metal paper being sent to press “with great pomp and ceremony.” His photos of 
the funeral show the mass of people from all over the paper who attended to pay 
their respects.
 The coffin used in the mock funeral to mark the demise of hot metal 
typesetting for production of the Guardian. Photograph: Robin Christian/Guardian
Grayden points out that the event marked the end of composing rooms, which had 
“lasted for two to three centuries”. This was the place where type was prepared 
and manufactured, set into pages and corrected before being sent to press. The 
paper was not actually printed in here though: at this time, the Guardian 
shared printing with theSunday Times <http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/> at 
Gray’s Inn Road, so each day, after all the typesetting had been completed, the 
composing room sent over theflongs <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flong> 
(cardboard moulds from which the plates for the final pages were cast) to the 
press room there.

The composing room was also where editorial and printing staff met: production 
and subeditors worked with compositors to fit the stories into the pages on the 
composing stone. There were strict rules about who was allowed to do what. The 
way of life that ended when the hot metal machines stopped running had been 
fiercely defended by the print unions. A different type of printer had 
responsibility for each skilled process, and no one else was permitted to do 
that job. This extended to the editors being forbidden from touching the type, 
and having to remain on their own side of the composing stone while the 
compositor made up the page.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fend-of-hot-metal-printing-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424952848707%2Fa47b60fc-6ec6-4fc8-ad40-814605532fb7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20hot%20metal%20printing%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fend-of-hot-metal-printing-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20hot%20metal%20printing%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fend-of-hot-metal-printing-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424952848707%2Fa47b60fc-6ec6-4fc8-ad40-814605532fb7-1020x612.jpeg>
 Banging down page one of the final hot metal edition of the Guardian. 
Photograph: Fred Grayden/Guardian News & Media Archive 
Two people on either side of that stone were Chris Dodd 
<http://www.doddsworld.org/Doddsworld.org/About_Chris_Dodd.html>, a production 
editor, and Peter Postance, a compositor. Both contributed their stories to the
Guardian and Observer oral history project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/oral-history-collection>.


Both men give vivid descriptions of the composing room, and how the atmosphere 
differed from the rest of the building. Dodd explains there was “a lot of noise 
[…] you’re definitely in a factory, not in an office.” Making all the noise 
were the Linotype machines “like giant typewriters fed with ingots of lead” and 
compositors banging down the type on the stone with mallets. Postance describes 
it as “like something out of Dickens […] it was dirty, it was smelly.” But 
there was also romance in the industrial setting: Dodd remembers the sense of 
it being “like a liner leaving port, the whole place has given birth again on 
another night, starting from nothing.”


Dodd also mentions that “one of the great traditions [in the composing room] 
was banging people out.” This was the long-established send-off for retiring 
printers and involved everyone grabbing the nearest piece of metal and banging 
the stone ( itself in fact made of metal) rhythmically for five to 10 minutes. 
This symbolic ceremony also took place for the coffin, to bid farewell to 
lead-setting.

Dodd and Postance talk about the camaraderie within the composing room. While 
Dodd says that “being on the stone was often a battle,” Postance says that he 
enjoyed the close contact with journalists: “you were talking to them across 
the stone on a sort of one-to-one basis […] you knew the people who wrote the 
yarns and you could relate to them.” Dodd remembers that the whole of editorial 
came down to observe the funeral on 11 May; “there were grown men crying” he 
says.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fend-of-hot-metal-printing-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424953099422%2F1cf529d9-fdfc-4106-8cb9-bb9d06d48e28-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20hot%20metal%20printing%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fend-of-hot-metal-printing-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20hot%20metal%20printing%3A%20GNM%20Archive%20teaching%20resource&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnmeducationcentre%2F2015%2Fmar%2F03%2Fend-of-hot-metal-printing-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424953099422%2F1cf529d9-fdfc-4106-8cb9-bb9d06d48e28-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pulling a proof of the front page of the last hot metal production. 
Photograph: Fred Grayden/Guardian News & Media Archive 
Postance was one of the youngest people on Fleet Street when he came to work 
in the Guardian composing room in the late 1960s. He had completed a six year 
apprenticeship, and had over four years working in “general trade” - the 
minimum set by the unions before being eligible to work for a newspaper.


Guardian working reports: teaching resource from the GNM Archive November 2014
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/guardian-working-reports-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
The strength of the printing unions meant that by the 1980s the UK was one of 
the last places to still use hot metal. It was complex and required highly 
skilled labour, but was also old fashioned, expensive and inefficient. Papers 
in America and Australia had already moved over to computerised systems. The 
end of hot metal printing at the Guardian followed theWapping dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/27/rupert-murdoch-wapping-25-years> 
in 1986, when Rupert Murdoch shut down News International’s print operation and 
moved to a new east London plant overnight, with 6,000 people losing their jobs 
in the process.


In the Guardian Working Report  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/guardian-working-reports-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
for 1986, The Guardian’s managing director HJ Roche says “everybody has got to 
change because Wapping and after has caused a situation where certain titles, 
both quality and popular, now operate on a much lower cost base.” The following 
year, the Working Report for 1987 records the hot metal funeral procession.

While the end of hot metal was ceremonially commemorated and mourned, the new 
systems were not rejected by the printers. Subeditors had begun to take up the 
jobs that had previously been done in the composing room, but printers who did 
not opt for voluntary redundancy stayed on at the Guardian, using their 
production skills alongside the journalists. Peter Postance explains that he 
got a warmer reception than he expected when he moved up to the editorial floor 
as one of the new systems operatives, as the journalists were grateful for his 
expertise in using the new electronic Atex system.

After computerisation, production costs became far cheaper and designing a 
page became much more flexible. Making the most of this new technology, the 
Guardian was completely redesigned byDavid Hillman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-february>
 in 1988.

Guardian redesigns: teaching resource of the month from the GNM Archive, 
February 2012
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-february>
Fred Grayden describes the last day of hot metal printing as “the end of an 
era”, but ends his memories of the event with an enthusiastic note about the 
new technology: “cut and [paste] production commenced next day, that progressed 
to the next stage of photo production, a great success!!”

Guardian and Observer oral histories can be consulted in the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> reading room by appointment. The 
catalogue for the archive is available to browsehere 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/default.aspx>. Please see this page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for further information 
on the archive collections and how to access them.


Past teaching resources of the month from the GNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/series/resource-of-the-month>

More teaching resources can be found on our resources for teachers page 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/resources-for-teachers>.
 