
There are very few issues in Washington that can enthusiastically unite a 
Republican congressman like Jason Chaffetz and a Democratic one like Elijah 
Cummings. But this week, one womanhas managed 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/mylan-ceo-heather-bresch-house-oversight-committee-hearing-epipen-2016-9>
 to get them both on the same page: Heather Bresch, the CEO of Mylan, maker of 
the EpiPen, a life-saving drug for those who have severe allergies. Both 
lawmakers questioned the ethics of Mylan’s pricing and dismissed Bresch’s 
attempts to defend the company.

Bresch, who made $18.9m in 2015, is weathering some justifiably sharp scrutiny 
right now due to the fact that her company hiked the cost of EpiPens to $608 a 
pack, or almost 600%, in a few short years. This despite the fact the product 
has been on the market for decades and contains an active ingredient that costs 
about $1. The consequences of the price hikes are very real, restricting access 
to lifesaving medicine forfamilies like mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/25/epipen-price-increase-mylan>
, who have a child with a life-threatening allergy.

Who is to blame for the EpiPen hike? Drug monopolies – not evil CEOs | Colin 
Holtz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/epipen-price-drug-monopolies-mylan>
Public officials were aghast at learning of the extent of Mylan’s greed. Many 
blushed at Bresch’s audacity in recent weeks as she refused to lower the 
inflated price by even a dollar and dared to go straight to the corporate 
crisis playbook of muddying the waters and claiming that outraged consumers 
were simply “confused”. As the parent of a child who relies on this lifesaving 
medication, I would like to assure Ms Bresch that I understand the situation 
quite clearly.

Lawmakers responded by calling for Bresch to testify to explain her company’s 
actions, whichshe did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/epipen-price-hike-mylan-ceo-congress-heather-bresch>
 Wednesday afternoon before the House oversight and government reform committee.


She began her defense by asserting her company’s right to make a profit, which 
is not in dispute. She is resolute that Mylan is elegantly threading a needle 
of corporate responsibility,saying 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/adc4ba3d8d9f4228b7f9faa6e0625d8f/mylan-ceo-set-defend-epipen-prices-amid-public-outcry>
: “Price and access exist in a balance, and we believe we have struck that 
balance.”

I’m not sure the American families reliant on the EpiPen feel that way. After 
the news of EpiPen’s price inflation hit last month, many parents shared their 
families’ stories of straining to meet the growing cost of their child’s 
essential medication. Some said that they send their children to school with 
expired syringes, hoping that the medication is still effective, a practice one 
parent compared to playing “Russian roulette 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/mylans-epipen-price-increases-highlight-its-grip-on-the-market-1472154769>
” with her child’s health. Others told of making the difficult decision about 
whether to pay themortgage 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/as-epipen-prices-skyrocket-consumers-and-emts-resort-to-syringes-for-life-threatening-allergies/>
 or for their child’s EpiPen. Mylan’s version of “balance” has nearly knocked 
many families off their feet.


Bresch went on to suggest that her company, which has full discretion and 
autonomy to make any pricing decision it wants, is raising the cost of EpiPens 
because of forces out of its control. “The irony is the system incentivizes 
high prices,”she said 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/mylans-epipen-price-increases-highlight-its-grip-on-the-market-1472154769>
, blaming insurance companies and drug benefit managers. This is a bogus 
defense, considering drug price hikes like the ones she has presided over are 
very much part of the equation that raises the costs in the entire health 
sector for consumers.

For instance, even if the point-of-purchase price is subsidized by insurance 
providers, those companies do not simply eat the cost in an act of charity. 
They pass it on to consumers in the form of higher premiums or copays. Bresch 
can throw up her hands if she wants, but actions like hers are exactly what 
makes the American healthcare system so distorted.

Bresch has also tried minimizing the gains made from selling the EpiPen, 
saying that her company only makes $50 a syringe. That may be the case, but the 
profits are still obscene, unfettered by the coupons the company makes 
available to some consumers or their plan to suddenly innovate a generic 
version of the drug. Mylan produces hundreds of products, but EpiPen drives a 
full10% of the company’s profits 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/epipen-maker-mylan-tied-executive-pay-to-aggressive-profit-targets-1472722204>
.

Some of the largest swings in price have occurred since Mylan was given the 
gift of a monopoly over the market when Sanofi was recently forced to pull its 
alternative from market shelves. This is clearly not a company doing what’s 
necessary to keep its doors open while it recoups the cost of research and 
development. The company did not even create the EpiPen and expects to reap
$1.1bn 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-23/how-marketing-turned-the-epipen-into-a-billion-dollar-business>
 in profits in 2016.

I called our pharmacist before the start of school this year, to see if my 
kindergartener could use an alternative product to one made by Mylan. I was 
told that none were available. So I hung up the phone, defeated, along with 
countless other parents across the country who have our backs against the wall 
as we continue to line Bresch’s pockets to keep our children safe.
 