
The economy is returning to health. Manufacturing output 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2014/jul/01/manufacturing-data-industry-strong-pound>
 is growing fast and predicted to grow faster. An overview of the national 
picture allowsplenty of room for optimism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2014/jul/01/manufacturing-data-industry-strong-pound>
. Only one indicator still looks sickly. Productivity is 16% below where it 
should be if growth had continued at pre-crash trend and, in the first quarter 
of 2014, actually fell in terms of both output per hour and output per worker. 
Add in the boost given to these numbersby output in London and the south-east 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/regional-trends/regional-economic-analysis/sub-regional-productivity--march-2014/art-subregional-productivity-march-2014.html>
 and, to a lesser extent, productivity hotspots like oil-rich north-east 
Scotland, and see the outlines of the great growth divide begin to emerge that 
causes such a big political headache. Already, the Conservatives havealmost no 
urban seats <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/election2010/results/region/11.stm> 
outside southern England. Labour's hold on its heartland cities in the northis 
threatened too by the Ukip challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/23/local-elections-conservatives-labour-lib-dems-brace>
. No surprise that all the parties see rebooting regional growth as a core 
objective.

This is a generational challenge. The north has been in decline for a century, 
and starved of investment in both the long and the short term. Last year, the 
think-tankIPPR North reckoned that over a five-year period,  
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/still-on-the-wrong-track-an-updated-analysis-of-transport-infrastructure-spending>
for every £2,500 spent on transport for a Londoner, a mere £5 was spent on a 
Geordie. What investment there has been has gone to creating vulnerable public 
sector jobs, or the even more fragile cultural sector. Yesterday's Arts Council 
England funding announcement was a telling illustration. A boost for some 
regional theatres and galleries, good for the local economy, but hardly,as John 
Tusa has written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/01/wise-arts-policy-arts-council-england-money-organisations>
, a determinant of national prosperity – and too vulnerable to short-term 
prejudice, low-hanging fruit for councils fighting to protect services. Even the
BBC's £877m investment 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/bbc/9031837/Media-City-Can-the-BBC-save-Salford.html>
 in Salford's MediaCity is not inviolate when cuts need to be made. Woman's 
Hour is reported to bereturning full-time to London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/01/bbc-radio-4-womens-hour-salford?CMP=twt_gu>
 to save money. Scarce investment means fewer jobs. Fewer jobs means less 
investment: so, on some data sets, four-fifths of the new jobs created between 
2010 and 2012 have been in London and the south-east and even the most 
flattering figures suggest at least a third come in what is already Britain's 
most prosperous region.

The radical option to halt and then reverse this trend would be to construct a 
tax regime that privileged the north over the south, and industry over finance. 
But that is rather too bold an option for a Labour party anxiously trying to 
rebuild a reputation for fiscal rectitude and economic competence. Instead the 
party leader Ed Miliband travelled north to unveilAndrew Adonis's rather more 
modest prospectus for rebalancing the economy 
<http://www.policy-network.net/publications/4695/Mending-the-Fractured-Economy>
. Modest, but not to be lightly dismissed. Shorn of the whimsy of an HS3 
linking Hull with Liverpool at some point in the distant future, it echoes some 
of the proposals Chancellor George Osborne unveiled last week. But then both 
parties are working over the territorystaked out two years ago by localism hero 
Michael Heseltine 
<http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/modevents/item/creating-conditions-for-regional-growth-with-lord-heseltine>
. The shared insight is that 100 years of centralisation must be reversed, 
allowing local government to revert to being an engine for economic growth 
rather than Whitehall's social security administrator. That means restoring 
powers long since sucked away by a Treasury with eyes fixed on the nation's 
bottom line. It means strengthening capacity by encouraging councils to work as 
combined local authorities, allowed enhanced powers over planning and 
infrastructure to tackle housing shortages and transport bottlenecks, and new 
entitlements to hold on to revenue from local taxes. The difference is thatLord 
Adonis wants to devolve real power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/01/lord-adonis-review-backs-devolution-cities-counties-economic-growth>
 to cities, and he is committed to a tripling of funding so that regions can 
develop their own growth strategies. That, Mr Miliband promised, would mean 
£30bn over a parliament. Not enough - the Heseltine plan proposed double that - 
and too circumscribed. Regions need autonomy. They need help too, to rebuild 
expertise drained away by years of neglect. But if Labour and Conservative 
really both accept that it starts with localism, there is a chance that this 
will be a policy that finally makes a difference.
 