
I was interested in food from a young age. It was a hobby and I enjoyed 
cooking and baking with my mother and grandmother. Also, since I was a baby I 
had extreme eczema and asthma, then chronic ulcer problems, although we didn’t 
know at the time that these were food allergies. Later in my teens, doctors 
tried many contact allergies on my skin and it turned out I was allergic to 
shellfish, raw meat, lots of vegetables and almost everything else they tried. 
The only solution was cortisone treatments – injections when it got bad and 
various creams the rest of the time. My hands would bleed terribly. Basically, 
I was told I shouldn’t touch foodstuffs. Cortisone alleviated it but there were 
side-effects – the skin gets very thin, is ruined, and the immune defences, 
too. Gloves weren’t a solution because I was allergic to gloves. It was a 
nightmare.

It was only after many years that I found the appropriate diet for me to be 
able to consume and cook. In the meantime, I’d become a commercial lawyer. 
Mergers, acquisitions, a bit of litigation. Nothing about itreally bored me, 
although airplane leasing was pretty dull. Yet I didn’t work on anything I felt
passionate about. And if you want to feel passionate, why not change profession?

I didn’t lack the entrepreneurial skills or drive needed. I’d started 
businesses since I was a teenager – selling ice cream on the beach in the south 
of Sweden when I was 13, importing computers from the UK and selling them in 
high school, and travelling to Burgundy to collect wines. And me and a few 
other lawyers left one of the largest law firms in Sweden and started up our 
own law firm when we were relatively young. Meanwhile, I was blogging – at
gastroville.com <http://www.gastroville.com/blog> – about restaurants I visited 
while a lawyer or in my spare time. But what especially made it possible to 
have my own restaurant wasdiscovering my palaeolithic diet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2014/sep/02/back-to-roots-ancient-ancestors-paleolithic-diet-food-evolution>
, which meant my eczema, asthma and ulcers disappeared within months. There is 
an appropriate diet for all of us and it’s marvellous to discover. Mine is my 
interpretation of what Cro-Magnon people ate over 30,000 years ago. It’s not 
what food I now eat which caused the allergies to abate but rather the food I 
nowavoid eating, like certain grain-based proteins, sugars and man-made oils 
introduced as little as a few hundred years ago.

'He has to have a life, we have to take that risk': children living extreme 
allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/19/children-living-extreme-allergies>
So, with my health finally in place and aged 44, it started to really grind in 
the back of my head that I should take my home-cooking skills and see how good 
I could become as a chef. I’d always believed that, if you’re able to be 
creative with the stuff you love, real happiness follows. My advice to anyone 
wanting to do the same is to try talking yourself out of it, hard. But then, if 
you can’t, go do it, if you have the stamina, lest you never get the idea out 
of your head. Law is something that was easy to leave for good, because once 
someone gets away from it they can’t really practise any more. But know it’s 
going to be very difficult, because any new business will face unforeseen 
hurdles. You must always expect many problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fchefs-guide-to-life-mikael-jonsson-hedone-how-to-change-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00068235941cf55b9da55fd2071fea4563888e3%2F0_557_4912_2952%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20chefs%E2%80%99%20guide%20to%20life%3A%20how%20to%20change%20career&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fchefs-guide-to-life-mikael-jonsson-hedone-how-to-change-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20chefs%E2%80%99%20guide%20to%20life%3A%20how%20to%20change%20career&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fchefs-guide-to-life-mikael-jonsson-hedone-how-to-change-career%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00068235941cf55b9da55fd2071fea4563888e3%2F0_557_4912_2952%2F4912.jpg>
 Mikael Jonsson shot in his restaurant in April 2013. Photograph: Shamil Tanna 
for Observer Food Monthly 
Hedone began on a shoestring and it’s been very difficult to get it to where 
it is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/sep/23/hedone-london-w4-restaurant-review>
. You’re starting over and it’s possible it’ll be more difficult when older 
than younger. Mainly because of scepticism. When a young chef opens a 
restaurant, people might say, “Oh, it’s new, with a young chef”, but no one 
will say, “Oh, this old Swedish bloke’s opening a new restaurant.”

And there was much to learn, but one of the things I definitely had was 
experience of eating a very large number of meals at top end restaurants all 
over the world, and a good sense of how things should be. And attention to 
detail. That’s a good starting point, but it doesn’t mean copying. My aim was 
to find an original style of cooking and that is extremely difficult.

Educating myself in cookery – in mastering techniques – is something I’ve done 
gradually. Fine dining is a very difficult field within the restaurant 
business. It’s almost madness to open any fine dining restaurant. You’re much 
better off running fast-food businesses, for reasons including higher 
profitability and fewer staff. With fine dining, people say, “Why should I pay 
this much?”, but a few very good reviews can change everything. Then people 
want to work for you.

I don’t understand this notion that you have one career in life and then 
that’s it.

Living above the restaurant has been essential; not least because I’m 
bread-making in the basement and using only natural spontaneous fermentation, 
which is complicated. One needs an eye on things.

You have to be really committed when starting a business but find the right 
tempo. Recently I’ve reduced the number of services – I think the 90-hour weeks 
that are common in the industry have to stop. In another six months, maybe I 
will get, if I wish, a slightly better life, in the sense that you don’t 
actually have any “life” when you’re running a restaurant. But I enjoy every 
minute. I’ve always plated every piece of food, except for at three services 
I’ve missed, due to very pressing circumstances. I told Pascal Barbot, the 
three-star Michelin chef at L’Astrance (in Paris) that I’d only ever missed 
three services and he said, “So what? It took me eight years.”

I’m definitely up for doing something different again though. I’m not thinking 
this is a career I will have until I retire. If I see there’s another passion I 
really want to exercise then I will probably change again. Maybe if I’d been a 
chef earlier, I would now be a lawyer. I don’t understand this notion that you 
have one career in life and then that’s it. Why can’t you be a surgeon and then 
maybe a journalist? And I think schools getting people to decide on their 
career path at 15 is absolutely insane. I think, actually, it’s only at 30-plus 
that you have an idea of what you want to do with your life.
 