
The weekend before the holidays is usually a fairly low-key affair and box 
office played by the book with a somewhat muted performance.The Hobbit: An 
Unexpected Journey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125622/hobbit> led 
the way thanks to an expected hold despite a 57% slide that suggests the saga 
may struggle to cross $225m. The Middle-earth shenanigans are delighting 
audiences outside North America, where the movie has raced to $284m and thus a 
commendable $433.9m global tally after two weekends.

A more complicated question is this: is Tom Cruise getting too old for the 
action game? The rip-roaring success ofMission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145386/mission> might suggest not; 
however the veteran star's latest outing entered the charts with a whimper.Jack 
Reacher <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99730/jack-reacher>, a thriller 
about a gun-toting, hothead former military police officer based on Lee Child's 
bestselling books, opened in second place on $15.6m through Paramount. The 
movie will almost certainly perform better outside North America, partly 
because Cruise's standing remains high and partly because international grosses 
for wide commercial releases tend to outweigh North American figures by a 
factor of 2:1. Maybe the lacklustre debut was down to the fact that this is a 
new movie property that lacks audience awareness. The TV and advertising spots 
were plentiful and certainly lively enough, however, so time will tell.

This Is 40 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150230/this-is-40>, comedy 
factory Judd Apatow's sequel-of-sorts to his 2007 smashKnocked Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/119558/knocked.up>, opened through 
Universal in third place on a modest $12m. Knocked Up opened in second place on 
1 June 2007 on $30.7m and went on to reach $148.8m. At this rate This Is 40 
will finish a long way off that target and international box office may not be 
the saviour here because comedy is a notoriously poor traveller.

The highlight of the weekend, though, was Zero Dark Thirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149492/zero-dark-thirty>, the 
fascinating hunt-for-Bin-Laden tale backed by financier Megan Ellison's 
(daughter to Oracle founder Larry Ellison) that is drawing serious awards heat 
in the US. Distributor Sony Pictures has been wise to launch the movie on a 
limited number of screens, pack out the theatres and create a must-see event. 
The movie grossed $410,000 from five sites for a headline-grabbing $82,000 
per-site average. The running total rises to $639,000 including the two days of 
activity prior to the weekend. Sony will expand the site count in the coming 
weeks and watch the money roll in.

Zero Dark Thirty's awards prospects look healthy, too. Kathryn Bigelow's 
follow-up toThe Hurt Locker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130570/hurt-locker>, which earned six 
Oscars three years ago including best film and director, is a strong candidate 
to garner more top honours come the 85th Academy awards on 24 February and has 
already been feted by critics groups and other awards bodies.

North American top 10, 21-23 December 2012

1. The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey, $36.7m. Total: $149.9m

2. Jack Reacher, $15.6m

3. This Is 40, $12m

4. Rise of the Guardians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150742/rise-of-the-guardians>, $5.9m. 
Total: $79.7m

5. Lincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149491/lincoln>, $5.6m. 
Total: $116.8m

6. The Guilt Trip, $5.4m. Total: $7.4m

7. Monsters, Inc <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90412/monsters.inc.> 
(3D), $5m. Total: $6.5m

8. Skyfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144416/skyfall>, $4.7m. 
Total: $279.9m

9. Life of Pi <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149778/life-of-pi>, 
$3.8m. Total: $76.2m

10. The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149066/twilight-saga>, $2.6m. Total: 
$281.6m
 