
Show you can learn, relearn and learn again

“The recent rapid advances in technology means the ability to constantly learn 
new skills is vital for the workforce of the future,” says David McCall, 
managing director ofHyper Island UK <https://www.hyperisland.com/>, in a blog on
how to apply for jobs without experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/job-career-how-to-sell-yourself>
.

For example, knowing how to code in a specific language may be irrelevant in a 
few years as new forms of coding make it obsolete. So the key thing for 
developers to demonstrate in a CV is that they have the work ethic and ability 
to learn any coding language. “Make sure to view new tools and trends with this 
in mind, you may already have the core competencies in place to master them,” 
adds McCall.

Functional, chronological or creative? Choose the right CV format

“A good CV sells your skills and experience by setting out your background in 
a way that is clear, simple and easy to understand. How you present your career 
history and ambitions are key,” says Bryn Davies, director of theJob Search 
Bible <http://www.jobsearchbible.com/>, in a blog on picking the right CV format
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/aug/17/how-to-choose-the-right-cv-format>
.

Chronological CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv>, for instance, are 
the most common and are particularly useful when you have a solid and complete 
working history spanning over five years. However, if you lack direct work 
experience a functional CV can be used to describe your key skills rather than 
the specific jobs you have worked.

Keep your CV to two pages

With recruiters spending just nine seconds reading your CV 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/employers-sifting-through-applications-likened-to-swiping-through-tinder-as-research-shows-people-9988512.html>
, it pays to keep it short. “Employers can easily sift through hundreds ofCVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> a day, so they simply don’t have time 
to read anything too lengthy. So yours needs to be short and sharp to get your 
message across quickly,” says Andrew Fennell, director ofStandOut CV 
<http://standout-cv.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Cpage&utm_campaign=posts>
, in a blog onthe perfect CV length 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/jul/06/how-to-keep-your-cv-to-two-pages>
.

“One of the easiest ways to shorten a drawn-out CV is to cut descriptions of 
your older roles to a brief summary,” adds Fennell. “Recruiters do not need to 
know about what you did 10 years ago in great detail. If you’ve got a lot of 
experience, you can simply list your oldest roles to save space.”

Five steps to the perfect graduate CV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/may/11/five-steps-to-the-perfect-graduate-cv>
Back up your achievements with numbers

“You should ideally be including some impressive achievements in your CV to 
show the kind of results you’ve achieved for both yourself and your employers,” 
says Fennell in a blog onwriting CV job descriptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/jun/09/cv-advice-how-paint-picture-employment-history>
.

The best way to do this is with facts and figures: “For example, a sales 
executive shouldn’t simply write that they’ve exceeded their monthly targets; 
they should state precisely what the targets were (in monetary or unit terms) 
and exactly how much they exceeded them by in percentage terms.” Quantifying 
your value like this gives employers factual evidence to hire you.

Recognise when it’s time to throw out your CV

“With new technology, online applications and networking websites like 
LinkedIn,CVs <https://www.theguardian.com/careers/cv> are struggling to remain 
relevant in today’s job market,” says Steve Girdler, managing director for
HireRight <http://www.hireright.com/emea/> in a blog on why CVs are becoming 
extinct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/nov/11/why-you-dont-need-a-cv-to-get-your-next-job>
.

“One of the main issues with traditional CVs is that it’s difficult for 
employers to get a sense of a candidate’s personality. If recruiters are 
shortlisting candidates based on their CV alone, they might be missing out on 
someone who is a better fit for the role.”

So it’s a good idea to swot up on online applications, personal websites and 
networking sites to complement – or even overtake – your CV in future.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
 