
Two years is a long time in politics, and it has been a very strange two years 
in higher education policy. First we had aGeneral Election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/apr/20/education-policies-general-election>
 where higher education scarcely featured. Then we had theBrowne review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/oct/12/browne-review-universities-set-fees>
, then the government response, followed by extensive consultation on the 
proposed changes supported by a thorough review of the evidence to build a 
robust case (OK, so I made up the bit about consultation and a robust evidence 
base), then the raising of the cap on fees, followed by universities being told 
what they had to put into their new Offa agreements, thenFE colleges and some 
universities were able to bid for cheaper places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jun/08/further-education-college-degrees>
. And then in March 2012, universities were finally told how many students we 
had been talking about all along.

Finally, this week Sir Alan Langlands 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?sectioncode=26&storycode=419544&c=1>
 has said that Hefce is now trying to deal with "contradictions in the current 
policy environment in higher education".

Some say that policy making is too mechanistic, too linear; however to me this 
policy timeline is a delightful homage to radical postmodernism, with its 
playful approach to structure, narrative, logic and audience.

Somewhere in the middle of all that we had the publication of the white paper 
Students at the heart of the system 
<http://discuss.bis.gov.uk/hereform/white-paper/>, supposedly a blueprint for 
driving down prices and driving up quality.

But this coming year is not going to be the brave new world of student choice 
that the paper proclaimed. There are fewer places in the system overall, there 
are more people chasing those places, and those chasing will be the best 
qualified cohort ever. We have this situation because 10,000 places originally 
introduced by the last government have been removed from the equation 
completely. Another 20,000 of existing places have been shifted to FE colleges 
and institutions charging less than Â£7,500. Many of these will not be BSc/BA 
honours degrees but HND, HNC and foundation degree places. A further 5,000 
places have been removed to create a buffer for the Treasury. And all of this 
at the very point in the cycle that the successfulAimHigher programme 
<http://www.aimhigher.ac.uk/sites/practitioner/home/> was targeted to boost 
aspiration to an all-time high. All in all, as many as250,000 students 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1352173/1-3-miss-university-surge-applications.html>
 are set to be disappointed this year.

But the reduction in choice is not uniform. If you are an 18-year-old mobile 
person, with access to funds for considerable accommodation and travel costs, 
and if you have AAB grades, you already had a lot of choice. If you are not in 
this category, you have less choice.

If the system is to be improved by the device of student choice, then that can 
logically only mean the system will be driven by students with choices. Some 
students have choices, some students do not. Rich students are mobile, poor 
students are not. Young students are mobile, mature students are not. Rich 
students have choices, poor students do not. Young, rich students are at the 
heart of the system.

Quality is important, and it should be driven up, but a narrow demographic of 
consumerist students won't do it. Nor should it. What we actually need is 
quality enhancement driven up by student engagement, engaged irrespective of 
their mobility, age or wealth. We should recognise and build on the success 
that has already been achieved by theQAA  
<http://www.qaa.ac.uk/Partners/students/student-engagement-QAA/Pages/default.aspx>
andNUS 
<http://www.nusconnect.org.uk/campaigns/highereducation/student-engagement/> in 
this area.

If any one group should be at the heart of the system, perhaps it should be 
students. But the white paper, and the associated policy framework that will 
now be driven through without parliamentary scrutiny, does not deliver that.

Perhaps it is better to say that learning and research should be at the heart 
of the system, which is to say that intellectual discovery should be at the 
heart of the system, with academics, administrators, businesses, public 
services, student unions and of course students, working in partnership to that 
end. The HE white paper did not deliver that alliance either. So we will have 
to build that alliance ourselves, and build it before the next election. And 
two years is not a long time in politics.

Professor Patrick McGhee is vice-chancellor of the University of East London 
<http://www.uel.ac.uk/>. He tweets at @VC_UEL <https://twitter.com/#%21/vc_uel>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like 
this direct to your inbox, sign up for free to become a member of theHigher 
Education Network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/higher-education/start.php>.
 