
If Adam Sandler’s career were a rollercoaster, you’d be screaming by now. Of 
his last 10 live-action movies, just four made their money back in the US – a 
statistic that would have mortified the Sandler of yesteryear, a man who could 
draw a cinema audience in the tens of millions with little more than a wave of 
his arm and a twist of his rubbery face. There is, however, one arena in which 
Sandler stills holds sway: online streaming.

Netflix boss defends Adam Sandler deal after failure of Pixels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/29/netflix-boss-defends-adam-sandler-deal-pixels>
Whether it’s because his largely non-verbal brand of humour translates so 
readily into other languages, or because his films make such good background 
viewing while filing a tax return or tidying down the back of the sofa,Adam 
Sandler <https://www.theguardian.com/film/adamsandler> is the undisputed comedy 
king of the home entertainment market, with his oeuvre performing especially 
well outside its country of origin. Ted Sarandos, Netflix’s chief content 
officer, recently told Wired that any Sandler movie from the last 20 years is 
practically guaranteed to go down well with Netflix’s 24 million non-US 
subscribers.

Now, Netflix is seeking to capitalise on this online pulling power with a deal 
that will see four feature-length Sandler comedies debut on its service. As the 
first major star to put his faith in the platform, Sandler has all the power in 
the arrangement, which may explain whyNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> is treating him so well (it 
recently furnished longtime cohort Rob Schneider with his own sitcom Real Rob). 
It may also explain why the first of Sandler’s contracted movies is The 
Ridiculous 6.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqUp7Qgimn38&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqUp7Qgimn38>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqUp7Qgimn38&media=>
First conceived in 2012, the film was rejected by various studios before 
finally winding up with Netflix, who can’t have been entirely delighted to kick 
off their Sandler collaboration with a comedy western (a genre still wallowing 
in the tears of whoever green-lit A Million Ways To Die In The West). With The 
Hateful Eight about to arrive in cinemas, you could almost mistake it for a 
timely proposition but, beyond the title, it’s near impossible to ascertain why 
it’s been made, or for whom.

If anything, the numbingly formulaic film stands in direct opposition to 
everything Netflix’s distribution strategy seems built to accommodate, lacking 
even the moderate narrative daring of last year’s Sandler outing The Cobbler. 
The plot, in which six brothers journey across the old west in search of their 
deadbeat dad, is somehow both insultingly simple and dizzyingly convoluted, 
while the tone lands right in the middle of the gross-out comedy/patronising 
schmaltz Venn diagram that is Sandler’s natural habitat.

The cast, meanwhile, is peopled by names from Sandler’s Christmas card list, 
from Steve Buscemi to David Spade. Loyalty has always been Sandler’s strong 
suit and even now it clearly pays well to count yourself among his friends. At 
least, that’s what the execs at Netflix must be hoping.

Also available this week

 * The aforementioned Sandler oddity The Cobbler belatedly arrives on DVD this 
Monday. 
 * Over on YouTube, one fan has unearthed the true meaning of the Star Wars 
prequels with a canonical reappraisal of Jar Jar Binks (bit.ly/jarjartruth 
<http://bit.ly/jarjartruth>). 
 * You’ve got six more days to see Guy Maddin’s hypnotic “docu-fantasia” My 
Winnipeg on Mubi.  