
(updated below)

The New York Times and the Obama administration have created a disturbing 
collaborative pattern that asserted itself again on Sunday withthe paper's long 
article 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/10/world/middleeast/anwar-al-awlaki-a-us-citizen-in-americas-cross-hairs.html?hp&pagewanted=all&_r=0&pagewanted=print>
 purporting to describe the events leading up to the execution by the CIA of US 
citizen Anwar Awlaki. Time and again, the Obama administration shrouds what it 
does with complete secrecy, and then uses that secrecy to avoid judicial review 
of its actions and/or compelled statutory disclosure under the Freedom of 
Information Act. "Oh, we're so sorry", says the Obama DOJ, "but we cannot have 
courts deciding if what we did is legal, nor ordering us to disclose 
information under FOIA, because these programs are so very secret that any 
disclosure would seriously jeopardize national security".

But then, senior Obama officials run to the New York Times by the dozens, 
demand (and receive) anonymity, and then spout all sorts of claims about these 
very same programs that are designed to justify what the US government has done 
and to glorify President Obama. TheNew York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> helpfully shields these 
officials - who are not blowing any whistles, but acting as government 
spokespeople - from being identified, and then mindlessly regurgitates their 
assertions as fact. It's standard government stenography, administration press 
releases masquerading as in-depth news articles.

Sunday's lengthy NYT article on the Awlaki killing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/10/world/middleeast/anwar-al-awlaki-a-us-citizen-in-americas-cross-hairs.html?pagewanted=1&_r=0>
 by Mark Mazzetti, Charlie Savage and Scott Shane is a classic case of this 
arrangement. It purports to provide "an account of what led to the Awlaki 
strike" that is "based on interviews with three dozen current and former legal 
and counterterrorism officials and outside experts". But what it really does is 
simply summarize the unverified justifications of the very officials involved 
in the killing, most of whom are permitted to justify themselves while hiding 
behind anonymity. It devotes itself with particular fervor to defending the 
actions of former Obama OLC lawyers David Barron and Marty Lederman, who 
concocted the theories to authorize due-process-free assassinations of American 
citizens (those same Democratic lawyers were, needless to say,among the most 
vocal critics 
<http://www.salon.com/2011/10/09/the_awlaki_memo_and_marty_lederman/> of the 
Bush administration's War on Terror policies that denied due process and relied 
on rampant secrecy).

There are many points to make about all of this. To begin with, will the Obama 
administration - which has persecuted whistleblowers with an unprecedented 
fervor and frequency - launch a criminal investigation to determine the 
identity of the "three dozen current and former legal and counterterrorism 
officials" who spoke to the NYT about the classified Awlaki hit, or, as usual, 
are such punishments reserved for those who embarrass rather than glorify the 
president?

Moreover, why can Obama officials run to the NYT after the fact and make all 
sorts of claims about the mountains of evidence supposedly proving Awlaki's 
guilt, but not have done the same thing in a court of law prior to killing him? 
As the NYT notes, when the ACLU sued on behalf of Awlaki's father seeking to 
enjoin Obama from killing his son, the Obama DOJinvoked the "state secrets" 
privilege <http://www.salon.com/2010/09/25/secrecy_7/>, insisting that the 
evidence against Awlaki was so secret that national security would be 
jeopardized if disclosed to the court: the very same alleged evidence that 
Obama officials are now spilling to the NYT. They alsodeliberately refused to 
indict him <http://www.salon.com/2010/09/15/assassinations_6/>, which would 
have at least required showing some evidence to a court to justify the 
accusations against him and would have enabled him to turn himself in and 
defend himself if inclined to do so.

All of this highlights why it's so odious to prosecute and convict people in a 
newspaper after you execute them, rather than in a court of law before you end 
their life. As but one example, the statements about Awlaki from attempted 
underwear bomber Umar Abdulmutallab on which the NYT heavily relies to assert 
Awlaki's guilt would have been subjected to intense cross-examination to see if 
they were simply the results of Abdulmutallab giving the government what they 
wanted - namely, statements that incriminated someone they wanted to kill - in 
exchange for favors as part of his plea agreement. It's so basic, though the 
NYT seems not to have heard, that statements made by accused criminals in 
exchange for favors as part of a plea bargain are among the most unreliable.

But that kind of critical scrutiny only happens in courtrooms, with due 
process. By contrast, asserted government evidence is simply mindlessly assumed 
to be true when it's fed to journalists after the fact without anyone to 
contradict it or any process available to disprove it. As the ACLU and the 
Center for Constitutional Rights jointlysaid yesterday about this NYT story 
<http://www.aclu.org/national-security/aclu-and-ccr-comment-new-york-times-article-killing-anwar-al-aulaqi>
:

"This is the latest in a series of one-sided, selective disclosures that 
prevent meaningful public debate and legal or even political accountability for 
the government's killing program, including its use against citizens.

"Government officials have made serious allegations against Anwar al-Aulaqi, 
but allegations are not evidence, and the whole point of the Constitution's due 
process clause is that a court must distinguish between the two. If the 
government has evidence that Al-Aulaqi posed an imminent threat at the time it 
killed him, it should present that evidence to a court."

Indeed, while the NYT asserts as though it's incontrovertible that he was "a 
senior operative in Al Qaeda's branch in Yemen", Yemen experts such as Gregory 
Johnsenhave long <https://twitter.com/gregorydjohnsen/status/75838992544841729> 
said the opposite <https://twitter.com/gregorydjohnsen/status/75837444557258752>
: "We suspect a great deal about Anwar al-Awlaki, but we know very little, 
precious little when it comes to his operational role" and "Mendelsohn [said]: 
'(Awlaki) played an important role in a string of attacks in the West'. We just 
don't know this, we suspect it but don't know it."

Beyond that, the DOJ officials whose conduct is defended by this story have 
long been important sources to the very NYT reporters writing this article (not 
just during the Obama years but also the Bush years), so it's a typical case of 
journalists using anonymity to serve the agendas of their government sources. 
And it's yet another case where journalistic anonymity is granted not to 
protect whistleblowers from recriminations by the powerful, but to protect 
government officials from accountability so they can justify government 
conduct. And, finally, Marcy Wheeler details several extremely dubious claims 
that were passed off as fact by this NYT article:here 
<http://www.emptywheel.net/2013/03/09/the-nyt-grants-david-barron-and-marty-lederman-a-mulligan-on-18-usc-1119/>
 andhere 
<http://www.emptywheel.net/2013/03/10/anwar-al-awlaki-is-the-new-aluminum-tube/>
.

But I want to focus on one key point. What prompted my opposition from the 
start <http://www.salon.com/2011/06/01/free_speech_4/> to the attempted killing 
of Awlaki was thatit was very clear <http://www.salon.com/2010/01/27/yemen_3/> 
he was being targeted because of his anti-American sermons that were resonating 
among English-speaking Muslim youth (sermons which, whatever you think of them, 
areprotected by the First Amendment 
<http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/historics/USSC_CR_0395_0444_ZO.html>), 
and not because he was a Terrorist operative. In other words, the US government 
was trying to murder one of its own citizens as punishment for his political 
and religious views that were critical of the government's policies, and not 
because of any actual crimes or warfare.

The NYT addresses this concern directly with a long, convoluted explanation 
that the Obama administration refrained from targeting Awlaki when they thought 
he was only a "dangerous propagandist", and decided to kill him only once they 
obtained proof that he was an actual Terrorist operative. The NYT says that 
this proof was obtained in "late January 2010" when Abdulmutallab cooperated 
with authorities and claimed Awlaki participated in his plot. In order to 
validate this explanation, the NYT claims that a December, 2009 drone strike in
Yemen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen> that was widely reported at the 
time to have targeted Awlaki - and which media outlets falsely reported killed 
him - was actually targeting others, and that Awlaki would merely have been 
oh-so-coincidental (and perfectly legal) "collateral damage". Here is the NYT's 
effort to insist that the Obama administration targeted Awlaki for death only 
once it obtained evidence in late January, 2010 that he was more than a mere 
propagandist:


"[Awlaki's] eloquent, English-language exhortations to jihad turned up 
repeatedly on the computers of young plotters of violence arrested in Britain, 
Canada and the United States.

"By 2008, said Philip Mudd, then a top F.B.I. counterterrorism official, Mr. 
Awlaki 'was cropping up as a radicalizer - not in just a few investigations, 
but in what seemed to be every investigation.'

"In November 2009, when Maj. Nidal Malik Hasan, an Army psychiatrist, was 
charged with opening fire at Fort Hood in Texas and killing 13 people, Mr. 
Awlaki finally found the global fame he had long appeared to court. 
Investigators quickly discovered that the major had exchanged e-mails with Mr. 
Awlaki, though the cleric's replies had been cautious and noncommittal. But 
four days after the shootings, the cleric removed any doubt about where he 
stood.

"'Nidal Hassan is a hero', he wrote on his widely read blog. 'He is a man of 
conscience who could not bear living the contradiction of being a Muslim and 
serving in an army that is fighting against his own people.'

"As chilling as the message was, it was still speech protected by the First 
Amendment. American intelligence agencies intensified their focus on Mr. 
Awlaki, intercepting communications that showed the cleric's growing clout in 
Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, a Yemen-based affiliate of Osama bin Laden's 
terrorist network.

"On Dec. 24, 2009, in the second American strike in Yemen in eight days, 
missiles hit a meeting of leaders of the affiliate group. News accounts said 
one target was Mr. Awlaki, who was falsely reported to have been killed.

"In fact, other top officials of the group were the strike's specific targets, 
and Mr. Awlaki's death would have been collateral damage - legally defensible 
as a death incidental to the military aim.As dangerous as Mr. Awlaki seemed, he 
was proved to be only an inciter; counterterrorism analysts did not yet have 
incontrovertible evidence that he was, in their language, "operational."

"That would soon change. The next day, a 23-year-old Nigerian named Umar 
Farouk Abdulmutallab tried and failed to blow up an airliner as it approached 
Detroit. The would-be underwear bomber told FBI agents that after he went to 
Yemen and tracked down Mr. Awlaki, his online hero, the cleric had discussed 
'martyrdom and jihad' with him, approved him for a suicide mission, helped him 
prepare a martyrdom video and directed him to detonate his bomb over United 
States territory, according to court documents.

"In his initial 50-minute interrogation on Dec. 25, 2009, before he stopped 
speaking for a month, Mr. Abdulmutallab said he had been sent by a terrorist 
named Abu Tarek, although intelligence agencies quickly found indications that 
Mr. Awlaki was probably involved. When Mr. Abdulmutallab resumed cooperating 
with interrogators in late January, an official said, he admitted that 'Abu 
Tarek' was Mr. Awlaki. With the Nigerian's statements, American officials had 
witness confirmation that Mr. Awlaki was clearly a direct plotter, no longer 
just a dangerous propagandist.

"'He had been on the radar all along, but it was Abdulmutallab's testimony 
that really sealed it in my mind that this guy was dangerous and that we needed 
to go after him,' said Dennis C. Blair, then director of national intelligence."

So that tortured justification for what the Obama administration did, 
laundered through the NYT, is clear in its claims: (1) we were legally and 
constitutionally barred from trying to kill Awlaki when we thought he was just 
a propagandist; (2) the December, 2009 strike wasn't really targeting him, 
despite what media outlets reported at the time, because we did not yet have 
evidence that he was a Terrorist plotter; and (3) we acquired that evidence 
only in late January, 2010, and only then did we start to target Awlaki for 
execution. Obviously, those claims are necessary to defend themselves from what 
would clearly be criminal behavior: trying to kill a US citizen because of the 
government's dislike for his political and religious speech.

But the first journalist to report on the existence of Obama's kill list and 
the inclusion of US citizens was the Washington Post's Dana Priest. On January 
26, 2010,this is what she wrote 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/01/26/AR2010012604239.html?hpid=topnews>
:


"As part of the operations [in Yemen], Obama approved a Dec. 24 strike against 
a compound where a US citizen, Anwar al-Aulaqi, was thought to be meeting with 
other regional al-Qaeda leaders. Although he was not the focus of the strike 
and was not killed, he has since been added to a shortlist of US citizens 
specifically targeted for killing or capture by the JSOC, military officials 
said . . .

"The Obama administration has adopted the same stance. If a US citizen joins 
al-Qaeda, 'it doesn't really change anything from the standpoint of whether we 
can target them', a senior administration official said. 'They are then part of 
the enemy.'

"Both the CIA and the JSOC maintain lists of individuals, called 'High Value 
Targets' and 'High Value Individuals', whom they seek to kill or capture. The 
JSOC list includes three Americans,including Aulaqi, whose name was added late 
last year. As of several months ago, the CIA list included three US citizens, 
and an intelligence official said that Aulaqi's name has now been added."

According to Priest's reporting back then, the Obama administration was trying 
to execute Awlaki as early as late 2009 - exactly when the Obama officials who 
spoke to the NYTadmit that they had no evidence that he was anything other than 
a "propagandist" and this his targeted killing would therefore be 
unconstitutional and illegal. (That's also a reminder that not only Awlaki, but 
at least two other still-unknown Americans, have been placed on Obama's kill 
list). Priest then added that the cause of Awlaki's being placed on the kill 
list were his "academic" discussions with Nidal Hasan: exactly what the NYT's 
Obama-official-sources now say are protected free speech that could not be used 
to legally justify his killing:

"Intelligence officials say the New Mexico-born imam also has been linked to 
the Army psychiatrist who is accused of killing 12 soldiers and a civilian at 
Fort Hood, Tex., althoughhis communications with Maj. Nidal M. Hasan were 
largely academic in nature. Authorities say that Aulaqi is the most important 
native, English-speaking al-Qaeda figure and that he was in contact with the 
Nigerian accused of attempting to bomb a US airlner on Christmas Day."

Whatever else is true, there is a serious potential contradiction between the 
self-justifying claims of the NYT's sources (we waited until late January, 2010 
when we acquired evidence of Awlaki's involvement in plots before trying to 
kill him) and Priest's reporting (the Obama administration began trying to kill 
Awlaki in 2009, before it had evidence that he had done anything beyond 
"inspiring" plots with his sermons). The reason this matters so much regardless 
of your views of Awlaki is obvious, and is certainly on the mind of the NYT's 
government sources: it would be purely tyrannical, not to mention 
unconstitutional andcriminal (murder) 
<http://opiniojuris.org/2010/04/08/lets-call-killing-al-awlaki-what-it-is-murder/>
, for the US government to try to kill one of its own citizens in order to stop 
his critical speech.

It's possible that there is a distinction in this reporting between being 
targeted for killing by JSOC versus the CIA, although the NYT's government 
sources are clear that any government targeted killing of Awlaki without proof 
of involvement in terrorist plots - based solely on his sermons - would be 
legally dubious, at best (indeed,on Democracy Now this morning 
<http://dncdn.dvlabs.com/ipod/dn2013-0311.mp4?start=1655&end=2980>, the NYT's 
Scott Shane said: "they had in fact decided they could not target [US citizen] 
Samir Khan, because he was a propagandist, and not an actual plotter, but he 
was killed anyway"); when I asked Savage about this, hetold me this morning via 
email 
<http://ggsidedocs.blogspot.com.br/2013/03/email-from-charlie-savage-on-awlaki.html>
 that "the exact date that Awlaki went on 'the list' is one of several issues 
that we dug into at length, and while we were able to mosaic together some 
answers to some previously outstanding questions this one remains murky"). It's 
also possible that Priest's reporting was wrong and efforts to kill Awlaki only 
began in 2010 once the government acquired what it claims is evidence of his 
involvement in Terrorist plots. It's also possible that the NYT's sources are 
simply wrong, or worse, when claiming that abundant evidence exists to prove 
Awlaki's involvement in such plots.

But all of this only underscores why governments of civilized nations don't 
first execute people without charges or due process and seek after the fact to 
prosecute and convict them in a one-sided, non-adversarial process of newspaper 
leaks; these are exactly the kinds of questions that are resolved by 
adversarial judicial procedures, precisely the procedures the Obama 
administration made sure could never take place. It also underscores why 
responsible media outlets should do more than print these unverified government 
accusations as truth, especially about a matter as consequential as the 
government's assassination of its own citizens. That the Obama administration 
and the New York Times did neither of those things in this case is quite 
revealing about the function they perform.

UPDATE

I linked above the email response given to me by Savage, which is here 
<http://ggsidedocs.blogspot.com.br/2013/03/email-from-charlie-savage-on-awlaki.html>
. At his request, I've added a second email he sent which elaborates on one of 
the points he made. I'm content to have the reader compare the above facts 
which Priest reported and make up your own mind about what you think happened 
here.
 