
(updated below)

A new Gallup poll released Monday morning 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/161474/support-drone-attacks-terrorists-abroad.aspx?utm_source=alert&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=syndication&utm_content=morelink&utm_term=All%20Gallup%20Headlines>
 has a surprising finding: amajority of Americans - while supporting air 
strikes in foreign countries against foreign nationals suspected of Terrorism - 
oppose such air strikes when used to target US citizens who are suspected 
Terrorists, whether at homeor on foreign soil:

The reason this is surprising is that when the US actually killed a US citizen 
on foreign soil on the grounds that he was a suspected Terrorist - Anwar 
al-Awlaki - large majorities approved.One poll at the time reported 
<http://www.angus-reid.com/polls/44084/americans-say-government-was-right-to-eliminate-islamist-militant/>
 that "a large proportion of Americans believe the US Government made the 
correct decision in killing a US born Islamist militant in a drone strike last 
month" - specifically, that "69 per cent of respondents think the action taken 
by the US Government to kill Anwar al-Awlaki was justified" (that included 77% 
Republicans and 73% Democrats approving). Anotherpoll at the time reported 
<http://today.yougov.com/news/2011/10/07/killing-al-awlaki-raises-obamas-approval-terrorism/>
 that Obama's approval ratings on national security increased eight points in 
the wake of the Awlaki killing. Meanwhile, Obama aides ran to Politico to boast 
that Awlaki's corpse would be a significant asset in Obama's re-election bid, 
leading tothis Politico headline 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0911/64877.html>:

What can explain this obvious discrepancy? How can it be that a policy which a 
majority of Americans oppose (killing Americans on foreign soil on the grounds 
of suspected Terrorism) was so popular and politically beneficial for Obama 
when it was actually done to Awlaki? I'm not speaking here about those who 
support the US Government's right to kill US citizens on foreign soil without a 
trial: people who believe that and support the Awlaki execution are at least 
being consistent. I'm focusing here on how it can be that a majority of 
Americans say they oppose having Americans so targeted on foreign soil yet 
still support the Awlaki killing.

There are several possible factors explaining this discrepancy. It is probably 
easier to oppose such killings when considered in the abstract than it is when 
asked specifically about a person like Awlaki who had been subjected to such an
intense government and media demonization campaign 
<http://www.gq.com/news-politics/newsmakers/201107/anwar-al-awlaki-profile>. 
It's also possible that intervening events between these polls - particularly 
the Rand Paul filibuster - created unprecedented media debate about the dangers 
of Obama's claimed assassination powers and caused people to re-think their 
wisdom (that was the groundcited by the ACLU's Laura Murphy when she praised 
Paul's protest <http://ggsidedocs.blogspot.com.br/2013/03/aclu-on-ron-paul.html>
: "As a result of Sen. Paul's historic filibuster, civil liberties got two 
wins: . . . Americans learned about the breathtakingly broad claims of 
executive authority undergirding the Obama administration's vast killing 
program").

But it seems clear there is a much more odious factor driving some of this. 
Many Americans can (a) say that they oppose the targeted killings of Americans 
on foreign soil while simultaneously (b) supporting the killing of Anwar 
al-Awlaki in Yemen because, for them, the term "Americans" doesn't include 
people likeAnwar al-Awlaki <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anwar-al-awlaki>. 
"Americans" means their aunts and uncles, their nice neighbors down the street, 
and anyone else who looks like them, who looks and seems "American". They don't 
thinkthose people - Americans - should be killed without charges by the US 
government if they travel on vacation to Paris or go to study for a semester in 
London. But the concept of "Americans" most definitely does not include people 
with foreign and Muslim-ish names like "Anwar al-Awlaki" who wear the white 
robes of a Muslim imam and spend time in a place like Yemen.

Legally - which is the only way that matters for this question - the 
New-Mexico-born Awlaki was every bit as much of an American citizen as the nice 
couple down the street. His citizenship was never legally revoked. He never 
formally renounced it. He was never charged with, let alone convicted of, any 
crime that could lead to the revocation of citizenship. No court ever 
considered revoking his citizenship, let alone did so. From a legal and 
constitutional perspective, there was not a single person "more American" than 
he. That's because those gradations of citizenship do not exist. One is either 
an American citizen or one is not. There is no such thing as "more American" or 
"less American", nor can one's citizenship be revoked by presidential decree. 
This does not exist.

But the effort to depict Muslims as something other than "real Americans" has 
long been a centerpiece of the US political climate in the era of the War on 
Terror. When it was first revealed in 2005 that the Bush administration was 
spying on the communications of Americans without the warrants required by the 
criminal law, a Bush White House spokesmansought to assure everyone 
<http://glenngreenwald.blogspot.com.br/2005/12/administrations-very-bad-people.html>
 that this wasn't targeting Real Americans, but only those Bad Ones that should 
be surveilled (meaning Muslims the Bush administration decided, without due 
process, were guilty):

"This is a limited program. This is not about monitoring phone calls designed 
to arrange Little League practice or what to bring to a potluck dinner. These 
are designed to monitor calls from very bad people to very bad people who have 
a history of blowing up commuter trains, weddings and churches."

Identically, when the Israelis attacked the Mavi Marmara flotilla in 2010 and 
killed 9 people including the US-born teenager Furkan Dogan,some conservatives 
insisted <http://www.powerlineblog.com/archives/2010/06/026449.php> that he was 
not a Real American 
<http://www.balloon-juice.com/2010/06/03/were-nuanced-here-in-the-states/> 
because his parents were Turkish and he grew up in Turkey ("it is silly to call 
him an 'American of Turkish descent'. He, like the other members of his family, 
was a Turk"). Thestark contrast in reactions 
<http://www.salon.com/2011/09/13/turkey_14/> between the sustained fury of the 
Turkish government over the killing of their citizens by the Israelis versus the
support for those killings given by the US government 
<http://freethoughtblogs.com/singham/2010/06/08/when-an-american-is-not-really-an-american/>
 was accounted for in part by the blind US support for whatever Israel does 
(including killing Americans), but also by the belief that Dogan wasn'treally 
an American, not the Real Kind you get upset about when a foreign army kills 
them.

This decade-long Othering of Muslims - a process necessary to sustain public 
support for their continuous killing, imprisonment, and various forms of rights 
abridgments - has taken its toll. I'm most certainly not suggesting that anyone 
who supports Awlaki's killing is driven by racism or anti-Muslim bigotry. I am 
suggesting that the belief that Muslims are somehow less American, or even less 
human, is widespread, and is a substantial factor in explaining the discrepancy 
I began by identifying.

Does anyone doubt that if Obama's bombs were killing nice white British 
teeangers or smiling blond Swiss infants - rather than unnamed Yemenis, 
Pakistanis, Afghans and Somalis - that the reaction to this sustained killing 
would be drastically different? Does anyone doubt that if his overhead buzzing 
drones wereterrorizing Western European nations 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/sep/25/study-obama-drone-deaths> 
rather than predominantly Muslim ones, the horror of them would be much easier 
to grasp?

Does it really take any debate to know that if the 16-year-old American 
suspiciously killed by the US government two weeks after killing his father had 
been Jimmy Martin in Sweden rather than Abdulrahman al-Awlaki in Yemen, the 
media interest and public outcry would be far more substantial, and Robert 
Gibbs would have been widely scorned if he had offeredthis vile 
blame-the-victim justification 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/10/how-team-obama-justifies-the-killing-of-a-16-year-old-american/264028/>
 for killing Jimmy rather than Abdulrahman? It is indisputably true that - just 
as conservatives argued that Furkan Dogan was not a Real American - large 
numbers of Americans believe the same about the Denver-born teenager named 
Abdulrahman. This ugly mindset is not the only factor that leads the US public 
to support more than a decade of US killing and rights abridgments aimed 
primarily at Muslims, including their fellow citizens, but it is certainly a 
significant one.

Amazingly, some Democratic partisans 
<http://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2012/09/an-essay-only-a-white-person-could-write>
, in order to belittle these injustices,like to claim 
<http://tbogg.firedoglake.com/2013/03/06/closing-time-at-cafe-drone/#comment-120091>
 that only those who enjoy theluxury of racial and socioeconomic privilege 
<https://twitter.com/ZaidJilani/status/298890120562630656> would care so much 
about these issues. That claim is supremely ironic. It reverses reality. That 
type of privilege is not what leads one to care about and work against these 
injustices. To the contrary, it'sexactly that privilege that causes one to 
dismiss concerns over these injustices and mock and scorn those who work 
against them. The people who insist that these abuses are insignificant and get 
too much attention are not the ones affected by them, because they're not 
Muslim, and thus do not care.

The perception that the state violence, rights abridgments and expansions of 
government power ushered in by the War on Terror affect only Muslimslong ago 
<http://www.salon.com/2011/08/19/surveillance_13/> stopped being true 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2013/3/5/importing_the_war_on_terror_glenn>. But 
ensuring that people continue to believe that is the key reason why it has been 
permitted to continue for so long.

Domestic surveillance aimed at Muslims

The New Jersey Star Ledger this morning has an excellent interview 
<http://blog.nj.com/njv_editorial_page/2013/03/spying_on_muslims_a_qa_on_the.html?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=t.co>
 with CUNY Professor Diala Shamas, who just co-authoreda new report 
<http://aaldef.org/Mapping%20Muslims%20NYPD%20Spying%20and%20its%20Impacts%20on%20American%20Muslims.pdf>
 on the devastating impact of the NYPD'sshockingly invasive and indsicriminate 
surveillance program 
<http://www.salon.com/2012/02/22/nypd_spying_program_aimed_at_muslims/> aimed 
at Muslim communities in New York and New Jersey. She documents in particular 
how this type of surveillance, aimed at innocent Muslims, creates an intense 
climate of fear and chills political speech. Would anyone tolerate having such 
sweeping surveillance programs infiltrating Jewish or Christian communities in 
the US? Ionce asked 
<http://muckrack.com/link/RYTH/questions-for-speaker-christine-quinn> this 
question of leading New York Mayoral candidate Christine Quinn, whosupports the 
NYPD program 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/metropolis/2012/02/27/speaker-quinn-voices-support-for-nypd-monitoring-of-muslims/>
, and she refused to answer). But the answer is obvious: of course not.That is 
the point.

UPDATE

The ACLU's Jameel Jaffer perfectly summarizes 
<https://twitter.com/JameelJaffer/status/316185530217951235> the point I am 
making from those polls:
 