
For many reasons – starting with complexity – global finance is not obvious 
material for a studio film. Then pile on the distinctly unsexy nature of the 
subject, the fact that theinvestment banks  
<https://www.quora.com/Are-Hollywood-films-ever-financed-by-investment-banks-or-hedge-funds>
increasingly have their hands in Hollywood, and the dislike for 
self-flagellatory inquests in America that sank almost every Iraq-war movie. 
Paramount’s The Big Short, though, is the latest to buck those odds. A haul of 
$68.5m (£48.7m) worldwide, including a healthy $50m from the US, means this 
exposé of the 2008 global financial crash has already met the bottom line on a 
$28m budget. You don’t need megamillions to stage a drama set in a bunch of 
Manhattan boardrooms (especially if, as surely happened here, all your stars 
drop their usual fees). The fiscally circumspect The Big Short doesn’t share 
the big-spending philosophy of 2013’s $100m The Wolf of Wall Street, which is 
the most morally ambiguous of the post-credit crunch films and, interestingly, 
also by far the most successful ($392m).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q&media=>
The Big Short, perhaps with awards season in mind, has been sold more 
conservatively – according to the trailers, it’s a kind of inverted Ocean’s 
Eleven in which the starry ensemble of outsiders games the system – but 
fundamentally it’s a cautionary tale about the US economy. The film, though, 
presents an intriguingly hectic, data-epoch comedy with no clear protagonist 
that builds partly onthe flippant info-asides 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gItQadyA9yk> from The Wolf of Wall Street, but 
with greater purpose. It’s surely this originality that has allowed The Big 
Short to hold strongly in the US since the wide-release debut on Christmas Day 
(its weekly box office dropping consecutively by 14%, 31.9%, 15.8%, then an 
Oscar nominations boost of 1.2% this weekend). Presumably, with a scattered 
rollout, it’s also being drip-fed out internationally – the better to allow a 
tricky proposition to percolate through naturally. The funny-serious tonal 
overload feels in tune with the times, unlike the laboriously traditionalWall 
Street: Money Never Sleeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/07/wall-street-money-never-sleeps-review>
, which plodded to a disappointing $134.7m globally in 2010 on a $70m budget. 
Hardly a winning return. The other major post-crash work, JC Chandor’sMargin 
Call <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/12/margin-call-film-review>, 
was a smaller affair and, like The Big Short, essentially prudent, taking 
$19.5m on a $3.5m outlay. What The Big Short, Wolf of Wall Street and, looking 
further back, the likes ofTrading Places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/08/my-guilty-pleasure-trading-places>
 all tell us is that a little lolz go a long way portraying this most abstract 
and obfuscating of worlds.


Michael Lewis: the scourge of Wall Street
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/17/michael-lewis-big-short-wall-street-crash-book-film>
The war movie 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CJBuUwd0Os&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CJBuUwd0Os>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CJBuUwd0Os&media=>
When Clint Eastwood’s American Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/american-sniper-review-clint-eastwood-bradley-cooper>
 vaulted the barricades and ended up in blockbuster territory with $547.4m 
worldwide at the start of last year, we were promised a flood of patriotic war 
movies. A poor US opening for Michael Bay’s Libya-set action movie, 13 Hours: 
The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi, may put that assault on hold – or at least in 
line for a rethink. It managed a $16m fourth-place debut, compared to American 
Sniper’s $89m. Admittedly, it was always going to tough on paper for Bay’s 
star-less action film to match its predecessor, with the latter’s venerated 
director, rising lead actor (Bradley Cooper), and a release that coincided with 
the initial shock over Isis. American Sniper was also a more nuanced reflection 
on the price of the US’s foreign interventions, enabling the film to connect 
beyond theGuns&Ammo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/07/editor-guns-ammo-regulation-column>
 crowd. Scott Mendelson, writing for Forbes,makes a strong case 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/scottmendelson/2016/01/17/box-office-why-13-hours-the-secret-soldiers-of-benghazi-was-no-american-sniper/#2715e4857a0b57e3e7ff5722>
 that the concerted effort to market 13 Hours to America’s red-state faithful – 
as well as its possible partisan use against Hilary Clinton, secretary of state 
when theBenghazi diplomatic compound was attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/21/hillary-clinton-emails-benghazi-public>
 – has been a turn-off for more moderate audiences. As in life, in art the 
unilateral approach isn’t always best. It’s optimistic to think Bay and studio 
Paramount can rely on overseas audiences to bail them out. That would be ironic 
– another thing that has the director reaching for the big-explosion button.


The endurance test
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQRfj1VCg16Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQRfj1VCg16Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQRfj1VCg16Y&media=>
With a budget that galloped off in the direction of $135m, The Revenant looked 
like it would be taking a long trudge to profitability. Director Alejandro 
González Iñárritu seems, however, to have found the shortcut. Two weeks into 
release, and it’s already on $146.3m worldwide – so, taking into account the 
spend on marketing, roughly halfway to hitting black on a project that had the 
hubris-o-meter flashing like mad. This past week’s 12 Oscar nominations for the 
film, leading the pack of contenders, no doubt helped bump it up in its first 
big international week: the UK ($7.8m) and South Korea ($5.7m), among the 15 
new territories, opened higher than The Wolf of Wall Street and Django 
Unchained, star Leonardo DiCaprio’s last two pictures. DiCaprio, as discussed
last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/11/the-revenant-dicaprio-the-force-awakens-global-box-office>
, looks to be having a similar effect on The Revenant’s box-office clout as he 
did on Django Unchained. The new film is already Iñárritu’s top grosser, a 
clear $50m beyond the director’s lifetime total for Oscar-winner Birdman 
($103.2m). The Revenant is a similar piece of awards bait, but Fox have 
expanded its potential by not only emphasising the kind of virtuosic technique 
on display in Birdman, but by selling it hard as an upmarket action film. That, 
DiCaprio and the awards heat together seem to have smoothed what could have 
been an arduous road – and there are still 53 markets to come.


Ray Mears fact-checked The Revenant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/18/fact-checking-the-revenant-leonardo-dicaprio-ray-mears>
Beyond Hollywood
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8pD_VcrjEUI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8pD_VcrjEUI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8pD_VcrjEUI&media=>
Two Chinese releases stepped into the gap left by the fast-fading Star Wars: 
The Force Awakens;Boonie Bears III <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8pD_VcrjEUI>
, adapted from the TV series and a sequel to 2015’s Mystical Winter, the 
country’s highest-grossing animation ($44.3m). With a look a bit more textured 
and polished than some of the distinctly rough-looking local competition, it 
got off to a $16m start for sixth place globally. In at nine with $11.5m is 
comedy Royal Treasure, retitled fromUltimate Challenge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VjGDqxX5eYE> – about a time-travelling 
princess who makes a beeline for the future to find a husband, accompanied by 
her six royal guards.


The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwyb7fT65Ac&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwyb7fT65Ac>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXwyb7fT65Ac&media=>
With The Hunger Games done for the time being and the Maze Runner and 
Divergent franchises showing inconclusive results, battle resumes on the 
young-adult front. The newcomer is Sony’sThe 5th Wave  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kmxLybfGNC4>– already on deck in 30 
territories, with the US and UK among 15 extra this coming weekend. Kick-Ass’s 
Chloë Grace Moretz stars as a girl trying to save her younger brother in an 
alien-ravaged, post-apocalyptic future drawn fromRick Yancey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/feb/22/red-house-award-winner-2014>
’s novel series.

The US and bits of eastern Europe get Dirty Grandpa 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZSzMIFZT7Q>, in which Robert De Niro teams up 
with Zac Efron as an under-inhibited OAP on a road trip. Another notch for De 
Niro: The Fun Years, there’s definitely a “tragi” component to his latter-day 
comedy work, in the light of his groundbreaking early career. But maybe this, 
directed by Borat screenwriter Dan Mazer, will be funny. Adventurous American 
film-goers with an eye on the future of cinema can also check outMonster Hunt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FbhsvxqoCG4> this weekend; whether by 
box-office skulduggery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/07/china-box-office-record-breaker-monster-hunt-manipulated-figures>
 or hard-headed commercial nous, China’s current highest-grossing film ever. 
Over in Bollywood, 2015’s most ubiquitous actor, Akshay Kumar, gets 2016 going 
with Airlift, a thriller about efforts to evacuate Indian citizens during the 
first Gulf war. Not so pressing a matter that there won’t be time fora bit of 
song and dance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cx83Q2qZPQk>.


Top 10 global box office, 15-17 January

1. Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/star-wars-the-force-awakens-review-a-spectacular-homecoming>
, $72.4m from approximately 75 territories. $1.86bn cumulative – 54.3% 
international; 45.7% US
2. The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/17/the-revenant-review-leonardo-dicaprio-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-tom-hardy-domhnall-gleeson>
, $61m from 26 territories. $146.3m cumulative – 40% international; 60% US
3. (New) Ride Along 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/13/ride-along-2-review-ice-cube-kevin-hart>
, $42.2m from 12 territories – 6.4% international; 93.6% US
4. Daddy’s Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/17/daddys-home-review-will-ferrell-mark-wahlberg>
, $17.1m from 40 territories. $179.7m cumulative – 28.1% international; 81.9% US
5. (New) 13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/13-hours-secret-soldiers-benghazi-review-michael-bay-libya-benghazi-attack-2012>
, $16m from 1 territory – 100% US
6. (New) Boonie Bears III, $16m from 1 territory – 100% international
7. Creed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/creed-review-rocky-sequel-boxing-sylvester-stallone>
, $15.3m from 35 territories. $136m cumulative – 21.1% int; 78.9% US
8. The Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/the-big-short-review-ryan-gosling-brad-pitt>
, $12.2m from 39 territories. $68.5m cumulative – 26.3% int; 73.7% US
9. (New) Royal Treasure, $11.5m from 1 territory – 100% international
10. The Hateful Eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/the-hateful-eight-review-tarantino-triumphs-with-a-western-of-wonder>
, $10.9m from 28 territories. $77.6m cumulative – 38.7% int; 61.3% US


• Thanks to Rentrak <http://www.rentrak.com/>. This week’s figures are based 
on estimates; all historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.
 