
Helen Hewitt lost her mother, her younger brother and her baby son to cancer. 
Having successfully overcome breast cancer herself, she is currently battling 
several tumours in her lungs, and – thanks to an inherited mutation in her DNA 
– is at high risk of developing other cancers as well. Yet Helen, 41, is 
pioneering an unfamiliar approach against this all too familiar foe. Alongside 
conventional chemotherapy, surgery, and radiotherapy, she is taking a cocktail 
of experimental yet well-known medicines. Some of them might even be in your 
bathroom cabinet.

One is the diabetes drug metformin, which besides making healthy cells more 
sensitive to the effects of the hormone insulin may also help to starve 
sugar-hungry cancer cells. The cholesterol-lowering statin and the antibiotic 
she’s been prescribed have the added benefit of dampening inflammation – a 
process cancer cells use to help them grow. Then there’s mebendazole, a common 
treatment for threadworm, which may also inhibit the growth of the blood 
vessels to her tumours.

Helen sought out these drugs after undergoing surgery to remove one tumour 
from her lung, only to discover that a different tumour had set up offshoots 
there as well. “It just made sense to try something that might weaken the 
tumours but wasn’t going to have a big impact on me in terms of side effects,” 
says Helen, an NHS podiatrist who lives inWolverhampton.

An early success story is thalidomide, whose resurrection as a cancer drug 
began in the 90s

Although the jury is still out on whether such drugs really make a difference, 
these aren’t the only medicine cabinet stalwarts undergoing a makeover. From 
aspirin to antacids, beta blockers to ibuprofen, all are being reinvestigated 
and utilised as potential anti-cancer drugs.

Unlike older therapies, which directly target and destroy dividing cancer 
cells, many of these repurposed drugs appear to work by targeting the healthy 
cells that cancers team up with to support their growth. Though widely 
accepted, this view of cancer as a mixture of deranged and healthy cells is 
still relatively new – which in part explains why the anti-cancer properties of 
drugs like aspirin may have been missed the first time around. “When many of 
these drugs were developed, we had a very simplistic view of cancer and all the 
focus was on finding ways of killing cancer cells,” says Pan Pantziarka, joint 
coordinator of theRepurposing Drugs in Oncology <http://www.redo-project.org/> 
project, which aims to identify the most promising medicines for adaptation and 
get them into clinical trials. “But the whole system depends on developing a 
supporting blood supply, subverting the immune system, and producing certain 
growth factors. A lot of these repurposed drugs address these other things that 
cancer is dependent on to survive.”

An early success story is the controversial drug thalidomide. Originally 
developed as a sedative during the 1950s, it was later used to curb morning 
sickness during pregnancy, until it was found to increase the risk of severe 
birth defects and confined to the scrapheap. Thalidomide’s resurrection as a 
cancer drug began in the 90s, following the discovery that it inhibited the 
growth of new blood vessels. A series of case reports also indicated that it 
might suppress the immune system.Angus Dalgleish 
<http://www.sgul.ac.uk/research-profiles-a-z/angus-dalgleish>, a professor of 
oncology at St George’s hospital in Tooting, London, became interested in the 
drug after witnessing the dramatic turnaround of a patient with autoimmune 
disease who was treated with thalidomide. “I started doing some more reading 
and it struck me that here was a gem that had been thrown out with the 
rubbish,” he says. At around the same time, the results of a small trial of 
thalidomide in patients with the bone marrow cancer myeloma were published. The 
patients had failed to respond to standard therapy and were given thalidomide 
as a last resort; a quarter of them saw a reduction in their cancer as a 
result. But thalidomide had other side effects besides the awful deformities it 
generated in foetuses. So working with a startup company called Celgene, 
Dalgleish helped to develop several less toxic analogues, which were put into 
clinical trials. One of them was lenalidomide, today a blockbuster myeloma 
drug, which generates around $4bn in worldwide sales per year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fanti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8647dd7bd368a3c7a97d0fea5260c99a89c2207%2F0_77_1953_1172%2F1953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cancer%20drugs%20in%20your%20bathroom%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fanti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cancer%20drugs%20in%20your%20bathroom%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fanti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8647dd7bd368a3c7a97d0fea5260c99a89c2207%2F0_77_1953_1172%2F1953.jpg>
 The controversial drug thalidomide, now repurposed an an anti-cancer drug. 
Photograph: AP 
For now at least, thalidomide stands alone as a successfully repurposed 
anti-cancer drug. But it could soon be joined by aspirin, which has already 
taken on a new guise as a treatment for heart attacks and stroke. “There’s now 
some very interesting evidence suggesting that it might be a useful anti-cancer 
drug as well,” saysRuth Langley 
<http://www.ctu.mrc.ac.uk/about_us/senior_staff_profiles/ruth_langley/>, a 
medical oncologist at the MRC Clinical Trials Unit in London. She is currently 
recruiting for a clinical trial of aspirin in around 11,000 patients who have 
already undergone the best available treatment for breast, colorectal, 
gastro-oesophageal or prostate cancer. “We are trying to see if, by giving 
aspirin, we can either delay the cancers coming back or even prevent them 
coming back altogether,” Langley says.

Spotlight isn’t bad – but a film on the thalidomide scandal is the real 
must-see journalism drama
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/30/spotlight-isnt-bad-but-film-thalidomide-scandal-real-must-see-attacking-the-devil>
The idea comes from previous observations that people who take aspirin to 
prevent heart attacks seem to have lower rates of cancer than the general 
population, and if they do develop cancer it’sless likely to spread to other 
organs <https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/mar/20/cancer-drugs>. Aspirin 
acts on particles in the blood called platelets and makes them less sticky. 
This reduces the likelihood of blood clots, which is why it’s used to treat 
cardiova scular disease. One theory is that platelets also surround cancer 
cells as they travel around the body, making them less visible to the immune 
system, but they do this less efficiently if someone is taking aspirin. Another 
theory is that platelets help cancer cells to anchor in new sites and set up 
new tumours.

Several trials are under way around the world, investigating the use of the 
beta-blocker propranolol (more commonly used to treat high blood pressure) in 
breast, ovarian and other cancers. These follow the discovery that propranolol 
can be used to treat non-cancerous birthmarks called haemangiomas – also known 
as strawberry marks – in children. “We said to ourselves, if it works in 
haemangioma, these drugs must inhibit the growth of blood vessels, so they 
could be useful to treat cancer too,” says Nicolas André, a paediatric 
oncologist at Hôpital de La Timone Enfants in Marseilles, France, who is about 
to start a trial of propranolol in angiosarcoma – a cancer of the lining of 
blood vessels.

And there are other candidates. The ReDo project has drawn up a list of the 
six most promising drugs <http://www.redo-project.org/drug-candidates/> based 
on their low toxicity, plausible mechanism of action and strong evidence of 
potential efficacy in humans. They are: the aforementioned anti-worm drug 
mebendazole; an antacid used to treat stomach ulcers called cimetidine; the 
angina drug nitroglycerin; a broad-spectrum anti-fungal called itraconazole; an 
antibiotic used to treat chest infections called clarithromycin; the 
anti-inflammatory painkiller diclofenac.

Yet despite the excitement surrounding these drugs, getting them into clinical 
trials is a long and arduous process. Unlike thalidomide, whose anti-cancer 
properties were spotted relatively early by someone with the clinical contacts 
to quickly move things forward, many of these drugs have been ignored, despite 
preliminary human trials with encouraging results.

Should advanced cancer patients always be given drugs to prolong life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/10/-patients-advanced-cancer-drugs-prolong-life>
Why is this? Surely pharma companies should be jumping up and down at the 
prospect of an effective, low toxicity cancer drug – particularly when the 
number of new cancer cases is projected toincrease by 70% worldwide 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs297/en/> over the next two 
decades. In the UK alone, the number of people living with cancer is predicted 
to rise to 4 million by 2030, compared with 2.5 million currently. The trouble 
is that many of the existing drugs showing promise as anti-cancer agents have 
already lost their patents. “A drug company that invests money in supporting a 
clinical trial is not guaranteed to recoup that money if the trial is 
successful because some other manufacturer could come in and sell the same drug 
at a lower price,” says Pantziarka. “It’s a return-on-investment question.” 
Where clinical trials of these drugs have been done, they’ve generally been 
conducted by doctors and small groups of investigators. “They don’t have the 
time, experience or the money to take their positive results and change 
practice,” Pantziarka adds.

Ironically, their low cost is one reason repurposed drugs are such an 
attractive prospect. The average cost of new cancer drugs has increased from 
around £70 per month in the 1990s to more than £7,000 per month today; if this 
trajectory continues then we can expect the first £70,000 a month cancer drug 
by 2035, says Paul Cornes, an oncologist at the Bristol Oncology Centre. Part 
of the reason they’re so expensive is because it takes years of testing to 
ensure that any new treatment is safe and effective. But with repurposed drugs, 
many of these questions have already been answered. “We know they’re relatively 
safe, because they’re widely used,” says André. “Even so, we need sound, 
state-of-the-art clinical trials to confirm they work in cancer, and in order 
to get those we need funding.”

With investment from big pharma lacking, some groups are coming up with 
creative ways of getting these drugs into clinical trials. In November, doctors 
at St George’s hospital used crowdfunding to raise £50,000 to test the benefits 
of the anti-malarial drug artesunate on 140 patients with colorectal cancer. In 
an earlier pilot study of 20 patients, the cancer spread in six of the 11 given 
a placebo, compared with just one of the nine given artesunate. In this case, 
the drug appears to kill cancer cells directly, and it costs just 70p per day.

One of the huge advantages of using repurposed drugs is that you have a lot of 
toxicity information available already

Despite promising results like these, it could still be years before we know 
for sure if repurposed drugs work against cancer, and if so, how best to use 
them. But unfortunately, time is a luxury many cancer patients can’t afford. 
This has prompted some to take matters into their own hands.

One of them is Ben Williams, an experimental psychologist at the University of 
California in San Diego, who was diagnosed with an extremely aggressive brain 
cancer called a glioblastoma in 1995, aged 50. He immediately underwent 
surgery, and then radiotherapy, but his prospects looked bleak: the average 
life expectancy for patients with glioblastoma is just 15 months, with younger 
people more likely to survive. Williams expected to die within the year.

With little left to lose, he started searching for other drugs that might 
complement the chemotherapy he was about to start, using the biomedical 
literature databasePubMed <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed>. This provided 
published studies of alternative glioblastoma treatments, many of which were 
repurposed drugs. When he identified a relevant-looking drug, he’d contact the 
researchers directly, asking for further information and advice about taking 
it. “Part of my strategy was that I needed to make the chemotherapy more 
effective, because it didn’t work most of the time,” says Williams. “If you’ve 
got a lethal diagnosis, then you’re going to have to take some risks to beat 
it.”

As a result, he started taking a cocktail of drugs more commonly prescribed 
for acne, insomnia and high blood pressure, as well as the breast cancer drug 
tamoxifen, which early studies had suggested might help to overcome resistance 
to chemotherapy. His oncologist was unimpressed. “He said, ‘you’re going to 
hurt yourself’, but I knew that I was less likely to hurt myself doing this 
than taking some of the stuff that he was offering,” says Williams, who 
travelled to Mexico to buy some of the drugs he wanted. “I was very much aware 
of the risks. But one of the huge advantages of using repurposed drugs is that 
you have a lot of toxicity information available already, because they have 
been used for such a long time.”

In Williams’s case, his treatment worked; against the odds, he remains 
cancer-free to this day. But even he admits he may have just got lucky and been 
one of the minority who responds well to chemotherapy: “I will never know 
whether any of these things I took made a big difference, and neither will 
anyone else.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fanti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dee35e54763db3b4a3af0f329663d6d75094067%2F0_0_4198_4186%2F4198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cancer%20drugs%20in%20your%20bathroom%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fanti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cancer%20drugs%20in%20your%20bathroom%20cabinet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fanti-cancer-drugs-medicine-cabinet-repurposed-aspirin-thalidomide-beta-blockers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dee35e54763db3b4a3af0f329663d6d75094067%2F0_0_4198_4186%2F4198.jpg>
 A scanning electron micrograph image of two prostate cancer cells in the final 
stage of cell division. Photograph: Steve Gschmeissner/Getty Images/Science 
Photo Library RM 
However, there are good reasons why cancer patients should talk to their 
doctors, rather than self-medicating – even with something as seemingly 
innocuous as aspirin. “Firstly, we don’t know if it works, and secondly, even 
though aspirin is a very common drug, there are side effects,” says Langley. 
“There is a small risk of bleeding from your gut, or more seriously, even from 
your brain. We need to do proper studies and monitor safety very carefully.”

The same goes for other common medicines that may or may not have anti-cancer 
effects. “Even if they are effective, they are drugs that you probably need to 
take for long periods of time to see the effect – otherwise their effects would 
have been recognised before,” Langley adds.

Pantziarka, too, advises patients to work with their doctors rather than go it 
alone – and also certainly not to see repurposed drugs as an alternative to 
conventional treatments. “When we supply information to people, we encourage 
them to talk to their medical teams; we do not encourage them to go off and 
self-medicate.”

But not all doctors are open to new approaches, as Pantziarka knows only too 
well. He first became interested in the idea of drug repurposing when his 
teenage son, George, was diagnosed with terminal cancer in his jaw bone. Like 
Williams, he started researching published trials for his son’s condition on 
PubMed and then directly contacting the clinicians who had run them. The 
suggestions they came back with included a diabetes drug called pioglitazone, 
and another anti-inflammatory painkiller called celecoxib, in combination with 
continuous low doses of chemotherapy.

“My son’s doctor was not very positive,” Pantziarka says. “She said, ‘We don’t 
have any experience of these drugs’, and the argument that millions of people 
take pioglitazone for diabetes had no sway.” Eventually, she suggested a 
different combination of drugs, based on a protocol another doctor at her 
hospital had used previously. It was ineffective, and only made George feel 
worse. He died in April 2011, aged 17.

Doctors are understandably cautious about prescribing drugs for unlicensed 
uses; their peers may think them strange, and they may also find themselves in 
trouble if something goes wrong. But Dalgleish is one of those who is prepared 
to take these risks. He prescribes repurposed drugs for some of his cancer 
patients, and also liaises with their GPs and asks them to prescribe them, 
where appropriate. “I’ve had a lot of hassle for that,” he says. “There’s no 
room for freedom to do the best thing for your patients, just because someone 
hasn’t put up millions of pounds to do a big drugs trial.”

This is something that should at least partly be addressed with the Access to 
Medical Treatments Actwhich gained royal assent in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/29/government-backs-wider-access-to-experimental-drugs>
. It empowers the health secretary to create a database of innovative medical 
treatments, including off-label uses of existing drugs for cancer and other 
diseases. However, doctors still won’t be protected against medical negligence 
claims should something go wrong.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fcancer-research-uk-explains-how-immune-cells-could-tackle-tumours-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F4%2F1457077960883%2FKP_1821465_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cancer%20Research%20UK%20explains%20how%20immune%20cells%20could%20tackle%20tumours%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fcancer-research-uk-explains-how-immune-cells-could-tackle-tumours-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cancer%20Research%20UK%20explains%20how%20immune%20cells%20could%20tackle%20tumours%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F04%2Fcancer-research-uk-explains-how-immune-cells-could-tackle-tumours-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F4%2F1457077960883%2FKP_1821465_crop_640x480.jpg>
Cancer Research UK explains how immune cells could tackle tumours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/mar/04/cancer-research-uk-explains-how-immune-cells-could-tackle-tumours-video>
“It aims to raise awareness of the off-label use of repurposed drugs, to 
combat concerns about prescribing them and to ensure that they are used more 
consistently by clinicians,” says Nick Thomas-Symonds, Labour MP for Torfaen, 
who campaigned for it.

The government has also agreed to have information about the off-label use of 
drugs included in the British National Formulary – the pharmaceutical reference 
book used by doctors when prescribing medicines – and to develop an action plan 
to make it easier to gain new licences for drugs when they’re proven to be 
effective.

Helen Hewitt also found her NHS oncologist unwilling to prescribe the 
repurposed drugs she’d identified, so she found a private clinic in London 
where she could get them instead. She has been taking them since September, but 
last month she received disappointing news: the tumours in her lung have grown 
bigger. The next step is chemotherapy – something she’s been through before, 
but this time she’ll be taking her cocktail of non-cancer medications at the 
same time. “My hope, and the possibility, is that taking these drugs will 
weaken the tumour, so that when I do have chemotherapy there’s a better chance 
of it having an effect,” she says.

Her hope isn’t necessarily misplaced. If repurposed drugs do work, most 
experts agree they’re more likely to do so in combination with other drugs, 
rather than on their own. “I don’t believe in magic bullets; they are going to 
be part of combinations, and since they are fairly non-toxic and inexpensive 
you could use several agents more easily than when using standard drugs,” says 
André.

One of the problems with tumours is that they evolve, and most new cancer 
drugs are directed against a single molecular target. “Basic evolutionary 
biology tells us that cancer is a complex, adaptive system that evolves 
resistance to very closely targeted agents,” says Pantziarka. An advantage of 
these older, repurposed drugs is that they often hit multiple targets. Take 
diclofenac: it is often viewed as a relatively dirty drug because besides 
dampening pain and inflammation, it can irritate the stomach and slightly raise 
the risk of heart attacks and stroke. However, it may also inhibit the growth 
of blood vessels, modulate the immune system, and make the body more sensitive 
to the effects of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. It might be cheap and dirty, 
but that’s a lot of bang for a single tablet. Patients certainly shouldn’t see 
repurposed drugs as a panacea, but they’re at least worthy of hope.
 