
When Antonio Díaz’s 26-year-old son Oscar was kidnapped, beaten and left for 
dead by gang members, the Honduran father decided to send Oscar and his three 
brothers to the United States, fearing that any one of them could be the next 
victim of the country’s swelling wave of violence.


“I sent them away for their safety,” says Díaz, sitting in a comfortable and 
well-furnished three-bedroom home in a town outside San Pedro Sula, where he 
owns a fleet of minibuses. “We’re not bad off here, economically, but I 
couldn’t bear the thought of my sons getting killed,” he says.


A year and a half after Antonio paid the $6,000 coyote fee for each of his 
sons to make the perilous overland journey to the United States as undocumented 
migrants, one of the young men – Ángel – was deported back toHonduras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/honduras>.

A month later he was dead, gunned down on one of his father’s buses by 
suspected gang members.


“After he was sent back here, I was afraid whenever he left the house,” says 
Antonio, who asked that his real name not be used for fear of retaliation from 
the gangs, known here asmaras. “And they killed Ángel just as I’d feared,” he 
says.


Every year hundreds of thousands of Hondurans, Guatemalans and Salvadorans 
flee poverty and violence at home in search of a better life in the United 
States. And every year tens of thousands of undocumented migrants are sent home.


In the 2015 fiscal year, which ended in September, 231,000 undocumented 
immigrants in the United States were reportedly deported, according to the 
Associated Press. In the year to 27 July, 10,333 of those had arrived in 
Honduras.


For deportees such as Ángel who fled their country out of fear for their 
lives, returning home can mean death.


Inside San Pedro Sula – the most violent city in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/15/san-pedro-sula-honduras-most-violent>
No one keeps an official record of how many returnees have been murdered in 
Honduras. But a review of news reports of killings in the country compiled by 
researcher Elizabeth Kennedy at theSan Diego State University shows that at 
least 35 people who were deported from the United States between January 2014 
and July 2015 were murdered within months – or even days – of their arrival in 
Honduras.

One homicide detective in San Pedro Sula told the Guardian he estimated that 
deportees accounted for 10 to 15% of the cases he investigates in the city, 
which for the past three years has beenthe most violent in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/15/san-pedro-sula-honduras-most-violent>
.


Central American migrants face threat of violence after deportation from US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/12/obama-immigration-deportations-central-america>
The Guardian tracked down the families of three men killed in the past year 
shortly after being deported from the United States and also documented the 
murder of one 14-year-old boy forcibly returned from Mexico.


Their stories highlight the risks many deportees face on their return.


‘They killed Ángel’

Despite fleeing that violence, neither Ángel Díaz, 26, nor his brothers 
requested asylum when they arrived in the United States, preferring to keep 
their heads down. Ángel found a job in construction and was settling into his 
new life. But in April 2015 he was arrested following a domestic dispute with 
his girlfriend and – since he had no residency papers – he was sent to a 
detention centre for deportees.

After three months in detention, he was back in the violence-plagued town he 
had fled.

 Angel Díaz the day before he was murdered. Photograph: Sibylla 
Brodzinsky/Courtesy of the Diaz family 
Resigned to his forced repatriation, he asked his father, Antonio, to give him 
a job driving one of his minibuses. Antonio says he feared that Ángel was 
taking a risk. “I didn’t want him to expose himself like that but he needed to 
work,” he says.


Antonio had been paying the maras 300 lempiras (about $13) per bus each week, 
so he hoped there would be no problems.

There was no warning. On July 13, just days after his return, Ángel was gunned 
down in the driver’s seat of his bus.


A few days after Ángel’s funeral, Antonio dropped off his son Oscar, who had 
returned home for a visit; his daughter-in-law; and four grandchildren at the 
border with Guatemala, paying a coyote to get them safely to the United States.


“We are all going. We realized we can’t stay here anymore,” he says, adding 
that he and his wife hoped to join the rest of the family as soon as he could 
sell his business.


Armed with the records documenting his brother’s murder, Oscar and his wife 
requested asylum at the Texas border. Oscar’s wife and her three children were 
given a one-year permit to stay, while Oscar was taken to a detention centre in 
Miami, he says. Antonio’s other grandchild, the nine-year-old boy of another 
son, was taken to New York for processing.


A review by the UN refugee agency (UNHCR) of intake interviews of deportees to 
Honduras in the second half of 2013 found that only 5.3% stated “threats” or 
“insecurity” as their reason for leaving Honduras. However, UNHCR reckons the 
number may be underreported given limitations of the interview process, 
underscoring that the decision to migrate is based on multiple factors.


‘The gang they escaped will kill them’

José Marvin Martínez, known to friends, neighbors and family as El Chele, 
which means “blondie”, probably wouldn’t have cited insecurity as his reason 
for leaving San Manuel, a town near San Pedro Sula, in 2012. He told his oldest 
brother, Hipólito Díaz, that he was tired of being poor and wanted to find work 
in the States.

But the decision came just a few months after another of their brothers, 
Rigoberto, was gunned down by suspected gang members near their parents’ home 
in 2012. “I think it had something to do with that,” says Díaz, sitting in a 
tattered hammock in the back of his home made of rusty sheet metal.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fdeportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7073a0aca7bf2ba1757abc4140735b6632ea7865%2F0_250_2592_1558%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20migrants%20who%20fled%20violence%20for%20the%20US%20only%20to%20be%20sent%20back%20to%20their%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fdeportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20migrants%20who%20fled%20violence%20for%20the%20US%20only%20to%20be%20sent%20back%20to%20their%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fdeportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7073a0aca7bf2ba1757abc4140735b6632ea7865%2F0_250_2592_1558%2F2592.jpg>
 Hipólito Díaz sits in a hammock at his home in July and remembers his 
brother El Chele. Photograph: Sibylla Brodzinsky for the Guardian 
El Chele, who migrated at the age of 16, found a job as a mason’s assistant in 
Houston. By the time he was deported in August 2014, he’d managed to save some 
money and, on returning to live with his brother, bought a motorcycle.


Neighbours say they believed that once he was back in Honduras, El Chele had 
gotten involved with themaras that control the area. “I don’t know if he was 
mixed up in something bad but I wonder what he did on the street all the time,” 
Díaz says.

Díaz had tried to convince El Chele to go back to the family farm in Lempira 
province to try to keep him out of trouble. El Chele promised he would go after 
the Christmas holidays.


But on 14 December 2014, El Chele was sitting in front of a corner store 
chatting with a friend when gunmen in a red truck opened fire on him, killing 
him instantly. “I got there a half hour after he’d been killed. He was lying 
face down in the street,” says Díaz. Police told him they found 20 bullet 
casings at the scene.


For young people in Honduras, joining local gangs – either by choice or by 
force – is one of few life options they have. Detective Jaime Coto says many of 
the minors who leave for the States are trying to escape being forcibly 
recruited into the gangs,or if they’ve already started working with themaras, 
leaving the country may be their only way out.


“When they are deported back here, it’s dangerous for them to go back to where 
they left because the gang they escaped will kill them.


“If a deportee can’t find a place to feel safe, surely he’ll be killed,” says 
Coto, one of an overstretched and underfunded team of investigators who police 
most of Cortés province, which includes San Pedro Sula. Twenty-six detectives 
share one vehicle to police the region, which has a population of around 1.3 
million. Between four and eight murders are reported on their patch every day.

Gredis gunned down

Fewer than 2% of murders in Honduras result in conviction. But in the case of 
Gredis Alexander Hernández – a 14-year-old boy who was gunned down just days 
after being deported from Mexico – police can claim a rare victory.

Hernández had fled Honduras with his 16-year-old sister after witnessing the 
murder of his sister’s boyfriend, according to police. They were both deported 
days after leaving and initially placed in a home for returned minors.

Hernández persuaded authorities to allow him back with his family; two days 
later he was shot twice in the head as he lay in his bed. After his murder, his 
sister escaped the group home and once again left the country, police say.

 In mid-September, police captured three gunmen accused of Hernández’s murder. 
A fourth is still at large.


‘The evil there is tremendous’


Juan Francisco Díaz was also planning to leave Honduras again, after having 
been deported from the United States to the town of Choloma in March. He’d 
lived undocumented for three years in the US before being picked up for drunk 
and disorderly conduct, according to his father, who asked to be identified as 
Héctor.

Juan Francisco, 34, had trouble finding work after being returned to Honduras 
and had already made arrangements to make the harrowing overland journey back 
to the United States in mid-July. On 5 July, he was found dead in an alleyway 
of his parents’ neighborhood. “Neighbors knocked on my door to say they had 
recognized the body as my son,” Héctor says.

After burying their son, he and his wife fled to another part of Honduras, out 
of fear. “The evil there is tremendous. We are afraid to go back,” Héctor says 
in a telephone interview.

At least twice a week, every week, a planeload of new deportees arrives at the 
San Pedro Sula Airport’s Centre for the Attention to Returned Migrants (CAMR) 
where all adults sent from the United States are processed on their return to 
Honduras.


As they file off the plane and into the reception centre they are handed a 
coffee and a bean-filled wheat flour tortilla, a popular local treat called
baleada which translates roughly as “one who’s been shot”. 

There, banners in English greet the men and women whose lives have just been 
upturned offering opportunities to start over. “You can also live your American 
dream in Honduras”, reads one sign, offering them jobs in call centres for US 
companies.

Volunteers at the centre pile up red mesh bags with the few belongings that 
the deportees bring with them. Some come with a several changes of clothes 
while others have nothing but a few scraps of paper, a comb and some plastic 
containers.

On recovering their personal effects, they begin tying their shoes with newly 
recovered laces and looping belts through their sagging pants.


Dora Melara, a legal adviser who works with the recently arrived deportees, 
says most of them will turn right around and go back to the lives they left 
behind in the States. “It’s hard to tell someone who migrated because of 
threats to stay,” she says.

And for those who have been away for a long time, learning to navigate the 
social and criminal landscape of the country can be just as perilous as the 
overland journey to the US border.

On a recent afternoon, Alberto García, 20, seemed a bit stunned at being back 
in a country he barely knew: his mother took him to the United States when he 
was just five years old. But the tattoo on his neck proclaimed his motto – 
“Never lose hope” – and García said he was planning to put his fluent English 
to use at a call centre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fdeportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe913f8077151eed1cdc11758e9ddc086238f9f8d%2F0_0_1936_1936%2F1936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20migrants%20who%20fled%20violence%20for%20the%20US%20only%20to%20be%20sent%20back%20to%20their%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fdeportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20migrants%20who%20fled%20violence%20for%20the%20US%20only%20to%20be%20sent%20back%20to%20their%20deaths&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fdeportation-migrants-flee-honduras-guatemala-salvador%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe913f8077151eed1cdc11758e9ddc086238f9f8d%2F0_0_1936_1936%2F1936.jpg>
 Alberto García, 20, was deported 29 July. Photograph: Sibylla Brodzinsky for 
the Guardian 
García, who worked as a forklift driver in California, said he’s aware of the 
dangers in Honduras, but intends to keep his head down and wait until his 
mother is granted citizenship in the US, so that she can request a green card 
for him as part of a family reunification plan.


But most who have made their lives in the States just want to get back.


Carlos Fonseca was only six when he left Honduras for the United States with 
his mother. Now the 31-year-old, who speaks perfect English and slightly 
accented Spanish, only has some distant relatives left in San Pedro Sula. His 
wife and children are in the US.


When he was detained in California in February, he requested asylum, but after 
six months in a detention centre he decided to accept deportation. “I was sick 
of being locked up,” he says.


Outside the returned migrant centre, he looked nervously for a taxi. “Let’s 
get an old man driver,” he told his companion. “Someone who won’t mess with me.


“The minute I can arrange things, I’m headed back home,” Fonseca said. “I’ve 
heard it’s dangerous here, man.”

 