
When Alex Rodriguez was suspended by Major League Baseball for 211 games back 
in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-suspended-mlb-peds-drugs>
, we knew it was for his involvement with Biogenesis, the “anti-aging” clinic 
accused of distributing performance-enhancing drugs. But, due to 
confidentiality clauses inside theJoint Drug Agreement 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/pa/pdf/jda.pdf>, the document that lays out the protocols 
for suspensions and appeal hearings for those accused of violating MLB’s drug 
policies, the specifics behind the charges against A-Rod were unknown.

Little changed on Saturday, when Fredric Horowitz, the independent arbitrator 
presiding over dispute between A-Rod and Major League Baseball, issued a 
decision reducing the suspension to 162 games. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/11/alex-rodriguez-suspended-for-2014-season-arbitrator-rules>
On Sunday however, we began to learn more about the case against Rodriguez when 
TV news show 60 Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/12/biogenesis-owner-says-he-injected-peds-into-alex-rodriguez>
 broadcast an interview with the former owner of Biogenesis, Anthony Bosch. He 
claimed on the CBS show that he worked with A-Rod for several years in 
supplying – and in some cases administering – PED’s to the New York Yankees 
slugger.

Now the layers on the onion are being pulled back even further thanks to 
Rodriguez himself.

A lawsuit against Major League Baseball and The Major League Baseball Players 
Association has been filed by Rodriguez, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/13/alex-rodriguez-federal-lawsuit-overturn-one-year-ban-baseball>
 one that seeks to overturn the suspension, allowing A-Rod to resume his 
playing career immediately. Exhibit A in thepublicly available complaint is the 
previously confidential 34-page report 
<http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/1004827/ar-complaint.txt>written by 
Horowitz, a document that includes his rationale behind the decision.

MLB has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence there is just cause to 
suspend Rodriguez for the 2014 season and 2014 postseason for having violated 
the JDA by the use and/or possession of testosterone, IGF­­1[insulin-like 
growth factor 1] <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21904293>, and over the 
course of three years, and for the two attempts to obstruct MLB's investigation 
described above, which violated Article of the Basic Agreement. While this 
length of suspension may be unprecedented for a MLB Player, so is the 
misconduct he committed. The suspension imposed by MLB as modified herein is 
hereby sustained.

Horowitz also made it clear that accusations made against Rodriguez were never 
rebutted by the Yankees' third baseman, who did not testify on his own behalf.

Rodriguez’ sentence is well above the 50 games for a first time offender, a 
clause of the JDA known as Section 7.A. Many have wondered how A-Rod, a 
first-time offender, could receive a suspension north of that total. We have 
finally learned that while the MLBPA did employ a similar, but more complex 
version of that argument during the proceedings, thatMLB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> could discipline Rodriguez via clause 
Section 7.G.2 which says that they can be subjected to “disciplinary action for 
just cause…”

That clause allows MLB to create a punishment they believes fits the crime, or 
in this case, crimes.

As we now know, that decision was reached via testimony supplied by Bosch, 
MLB’s star witness, and the key to their case.

We learn that Alex Rodriguez first met Bosch, who is not a licensed physician, 
via A-Rod’s cousin, Yuri Sucart (who Rodriguez admitted was involved with his 
use of PEDs between 2001-2003during a 2009 interview 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DkpaNFYCLQ4>) in a hotel room in Tampa in July 
of 2010. There he described in detail the testosterone creams and other 
substances he would be recommending for his use. A month later, Bosch would 
meet with A-Rod to draw blood in order to assist him in creating a series of 
detailed regiments of performance-enhancing substances, including the below 
list from December of 2011:

 * [Blue] Testosterone Cream PM 4 clicks 
 * L­Glutathione 
<http://www.swansonvitamins.com/swanson-premium-l-glutathione-100-mg-200-caps?otherSize=SW853>
 AM 4 clicks 
 * Troche [lozenge containing testosterone] Prior to workout ­­ 
 * --W--CJC and GHRP .7 AMI .7 Noon/ .7 PM 
 * Th IGF­1 (insulin growth factor) 1.4 via iv 
 * MIC 2 per week 
 * AM Supplements: DHEA <http://www.ironmanmagazine.com/does-dhea-really-work/>
 * Resveratrol 
<http://www.mensfitness.com/nutrition/supplements/6-reasons-to-supplement-with-resveratrol>
 * Melatonin 
<http://www.muscleandperformancemag.com/nutrition-supplements/2011/4/melatonin-for-muscle>
 * Glucosamine <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glucosamine> 
Eventually, Bosch and Rodriguez began communicating without Sucart in the 
middle, and exchanged over 500 BBMs [BlackBerry Messenger messages] between 
March and December 2012. “In addition to the BBM exchanges, the record reflects 
that Bosch and Rodriguez spoke on the telephone 53 times and exchanged 556 text 
messages in 2012”.

The report also says that:

Bosch and Rodriguez used code names in the BBMs to refer to banned substances, 
including referring to banned substances as "food." Once when Bosch sent a 
message telling Rodriguez that he was going to pick up Rodriguez's "meds," 
Rodriguez replied "Not meds dude. Food." The BBMs between Bosch and Rodriguez 
include references to code names for numerous banned substances, such as: 
Gummies (troches containing testosterone); Pink Food or Pink Cream (a 
transdermal cream containing testosterone); Blue or PM Cream (a transdermal 
cream containing testosterone); Liquid Soup or Red Liquid (a melted or 
liquefied form of a troche containing testosterone); and Cojete or Rocket (a 
subcutaneous syringe containing, among other things IGF­1, [insulin growth 
factor].

In October of 2012 A-Rod asked Bosch to come to Detroit where he was playing 
in the American League Championship Series - the peptides and human growth 
hormone he delivered were little help -he had just one hit in nine at-bats as 
the Yankees were swept by the Tigers. 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/postseason/2009_ALCS.shtml>There were other 
meetings, including a rendezvous in Atlanta in June of 2012 when A-Rod asked 
Bosch to "Try to use service elevators. Careful. Tons of eyes." Other meeting 
points included a Starbucks bathroom in his home town of Miami. Bosch also 
claimed to have personally injected A-Rod during the period he was working for 
him.

Bosch became MLB’s witness in June of 2013, and in addition to MLB dropping 
their lawsuit against him, one that was started in order to gain access to his 
Biogenesis documents, they agreed to pay up to $2400 a day for his security and 
“hold him harmless from civil liability from any claim brought by a Player, 
provided Bosch fulfilled his obligations under the agreement.” He also would be 
able to speak with anyone he liked, as evidence by Sunday’s 60 Minutes 
interview, and “would be allowed to discuss with anyone the history of his 
involvement with Players, which could result in book, movie, and/or other media 
deals.”

Rodriguez was also cited for obstructing the investigation and for violating 
theBasic Agreement which is the master document that lays out protocol between 
the Players and Major League Baseball. 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/pa/pdf/cba_english.pdf> The evidence against him included 
an attempt to coerce Bosch into leaving the country and pressuring him to sign 
an a sworn statement “attesting that Bosch never supplied Rodri­guez with PES 
[performance-enhancing substances] and had no personal knowledge that Rodriguez 
had ever used them, state­ments that Rodriguez also knew to be false.”

So thanks to CBS and the availability of the Horowitz' decision, we are much 
farther along in knowing just what Rodriguez was accused and found guilty of in 
August and in the 12 days of appeal proceedings between October and November. 
Now it is up to the federal courts to decide if alleged infractions by MLB, 
which include a violation of confidentiality agreements, and the Union, which 
allegedly failed to “fairly represent Mr. Rodriguez's interests” over the 
course of the nearly year-long saga, warrant a repeal of the suspension.
 