
There is a short-sightedness in this article (Afghans will pay the price for a 
man hellbent on victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/nov/02/afghanistan-karzai-election-un-west>
, 3 November) that seems to think the story started with this election and 
fails to respond to the larger patterns at play. Hamid Karzai was implanted 
initially by the US in the lead-up to the formation of a new government in 
2001. He was meant to raise an enthusiastic resistance to the Taliban and march 
on Kabul. He could not, and had to be airlifted by the US to safety, to be 
implanted later. He was widely regarded as a stooge. Many friends of mine 
joined his government, recognising his position as the best of a series of less 
attractive options. But as time passed, Karzai's position became politically 
untenable with the Afghan people. US atrocities undermined his ability to be 
free-standing, and gradually he started to become less obedient. He began to 
get some local support for his stands against the foreign forces and political 
actors, and consolidated a local affection that he hitherto had not had.

As Karzai's disobedience to the diktats of his erstwhile masters increased, so 
too did American and UN pressure on Karzai to step aside. It was, however, 
clear from the outset that, domestically, Karzai was now getting quite popular. 
So when the UN election procedure was suggested, the Afghan government was 
naturally suspicious and did not want to kowtow more than absolutely necessary.

The election was probably rigged extensively by both sides. But in that the 
very notion of a public election is a new idea for the country, that is hardly 
surprising. The question at hand is not whether the election was done properly, 
but whether the appointment of Karzai is legitimate. I sense that it is, 
because more people want him than want any other. Elections are one way to 
indicate this, but there are others too.

The best we can do for Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> now is to offer a helping hand 
to the new government. To snipe from the sidelines and create the perception of 
illegitimacy because of foreigners' failure to understand domestic political 
patterns can only destabilise further, and make recovery and the quest for 
equilibrium harder.

Stuart Worsley

Nairobi, Kenya

• Your editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/nov/02/abdullah-karzai-afghanistan-election>
 (2 November) on the farce that passes for democracy in Afghanistan is 
opportune. But it does not reach the obvious logical conclusion. The only 
sensible decision now is to pull out UK troops; the only solution to the 
problems of that benighted country is an Afghan one, unencumbered by western 
(American) interference.

Dr Michael Taylor

Leeds

• Hillary Clinton may wish to dismiss the connection between the growing 
terror crisis in Pakistan and the CIA's continuing drone strikes (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/30/clinton-pakistan-drone-attacks>, 
31 October). But, as Pakistan Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud boasted before he 
and his wife were killed in a targeted assassination, each drone strike brings 
three or four more suicide bombers. Targeted killings by the CIA are not only a 
source of great concern to the international community – Philip Alston, the UN 
special rapporteur on extrajudicial killings, has demanded that the US explain 
their legality – but the drone strikes are fuelling hatred of the US and 
eroding goodwill towards America.

Chris Cole

Director, Fellowship of Reconciliation <http://www.for.org.uk/>

• I have written to the head of the UN expressing concern over the possibility 
of "free and fair" elections taking place inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> next January. Repeating the 
much-publicised vote-rigging seen in Afghanistan, since the last national Iraqi 
election in 2005, political factions have placed supporters on the Iraqi 
Electoral Commission to assist them in manipulating the result in the upcoming 
election. This self-interested action must be defused now, and I am calling on 
the UN to replace Iraq's Electoral Commission with fresh faces, unaligned and 
unbeholden to the factions in Baghdad. This could take place immediately, with 
no disruption to the political process, and would give the best possible chance 
of a fair vote in January.

A free, fair and properly supervised election in January is absolutely vital 
for our country's young democracy and the wider region. As has been witnessed 
in Afghanistan, failure to ensure a free vote is too damaging to imagine.

Ayad Jamal Aldin MP <http://www.ayadjamalaldin.com/>

Baghdad
 