
Birdman and Boyhood became the toast of the Oscars not just because of their 
merits as movies, but the extraordinary ways they were made. Together, they 
have upended the form of mainstream cinema:Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/boyhood> was put together in 12 years, while 
Birdman appears to have been shot in one seamless take, with no cuts (a feature 
of the same length usually has around 3,000). The technical and logistical 
challenges of these films aren’t just dry footnotes but key selling points, 
much milked by each film’s marketing campaign.

Boyhood: The College Years - Richard Linklater considering shooting sequel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/25/boyhood-the-college-years-richard-linklater-considering-shooting-sequel>
 Structural innovation can translate into box office – and awards season – 
glory. So might the success of these films, as well as the self-consciously 
constructed Grand Budapest Hotel, mean studios become more amenable to 
narrative ambition?



Typically, movies looking to get made with studio money don’t have much room 
for improv as the system is resistent to the introduction of unpredictable 
elements. For investors, prevailing logic dictates that the more you can pin 
down what a movie will look like before it is actually filmed, the more 
confident you can be of seeing your money again. So in Hollywood, scenes are 
generally planned down to the last degree. Alfred Hitchcock’s quip about how, 
once the screenplay was finished, he found directing boring because there 
weren’t any more creative decisions to make wasn’t just a quip.

Compare this state of affairs to the production of Boyhood, financed by the 
indie company IFC films, where a troublesome state law prohibiting contracts 
over seven years long made it illegal for the actors to sign one. Any of them 
could have just walked out. Birdman, too, looked into the unknown as 
cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki wasn’t able to use the visual techniques of 
any other feature as a template. Although the pioneering film Russian Ark was 
shot in one take back in 2002, it was done in a wide open space and ran for 
only 96 minutes, whereasBirdman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/birdman> is 
set mostly in cramped environments and lasts two hours.

Birdman: the best film about theatre ever made?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/07/birdman-best-film-about-theatre-ever-made>
Is it a coincidence that these two films, with all their logistical challenges 
and structural gymnastics, both gained so much traction? Since roughly the turn 
of the century film-making has been been undergoing an internal revolution and 
the engine behind it is digital technology: with more portable, inexpensive and 
high-quality cameras, as well as non-linear editing software, almost anyone can 
make a low-budget film that still looks filmic. Jean-Luc Godard shot most of 
his most recent film, Goodbye to Language, on a Canon 5D – essentially a 
non-professional camera. The internet has also played its part, allowing money 
to be raised from crowdsourcing sites and sometimes enabling a decent level of 
distribution as well. On the other side of the coin, it has also meant we are 
exposed to many, many more films, for less: a month’s Netflix subscription 
costs about the same amount as a single DVD.

In this context, where visual storytelling is so prevalent, it seems to be the 
films that are technically intriguing and structurally daring that are making 
the biggest impression. This doesn’t mean that storytelling in film is valued 
any less: quite the opposite, it may now increasingly be taken for granted, as 
it surrounds us. The home of storytelling in the 21st century is the HBO-style 
TV series: even acclaimed novelists such as Salman Rushdie and Zadie Smith say 
that TV can be as natural an environment for telling stories as the novel. TV 
shows’ greater length allows writers and producers to develop a far more 
meandering, complex plot than is possible for a single film. So as the internet 
provides a saturation of visual content, and TV-style programmes set the bar 
for storytelling, film is potentially becoming a place where we look for 
something that is both ambitious and ambitiously made. In the past it was only 
critics and film buffs, people who spent the best part of their lives staring 
at a large screen, who would get excited by the “making of” but now, as 
everyone seems to live the critic’s lifestyle, perhaps we have come to expect 
more than just a great story from movies.

Innovative films don’t always translate into better ones. As well as being 
untested, novel methods of film-making are difficult to pull off, meaning 
logistical concerns may be prioritised over creative ones. In Birdman, there 
are moments when it seems as if the director is scrambling around just to 
uphold a concept and you do wonder whether all of it needed to look like one 
epic take. This kind of film-making can feel as if it were cooked up for the 
Guinness Book of Records or worse, construed as window-dressing, or PR.

Yet some directors have chosen to embrace risk almost as a philosophy. The 
most famous example is a young Werner Herzog, who, while making Fitzcarraldo in 
a remote part of Peru, opted to literally drag a large steam boat over a hill 
with a 40-degree gradient, instead of using special effects. For the same film, 
Herzog took the drastic step of bringing his actors and crew 1,500 miles into 
the jungle, away from their base, as he thought the location would “bring out 
special qualities” in them.

In the digital age, sci-fi creeper Under the Skin took a similar approach. 
Many scenes featured Scarlet Johansson in disguise, alongside unsuspecting 
non-actors going about their daily business, so there could be no script. This 
approach also required the invention of new surveillance-style cameras which 
could be strategically hidden from view. Given the entire film took 13 years 
and roughly £8m to make, this was an extraordinary gamble but there was no 
back-up plan.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthe-oscar-winning-experiments-that-might-change-the-future-of-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425483282831%2Ff193b08b-1482-482c-af3c-a12d8b461698-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Oscar-winning%20experiments%20that%20might%20change%20the%20future%20of%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthe-oscar-winning-experiments-that-might-change-the-future-of-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Oscar-winning%20experiments%20that%20might%20change%20the%20future%20of%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fmar%2F04%2Fthe-oscar-winning-experiments-that-might-change-the-future-of-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425483282831%2Ff193b08b-1482-482c-af3c-a12d8b461698-1020x612.jpeg>
 Scarlett Johansson in Under the Skin. Photograph: CA24/Everett Collection/Rex 
Both Jonathan Glazer, the director of Under the Skin, and Herzog seem to have 
thought risk was necessary to bring out a rawer quality in the actors’ 
performances. Their films, in a way, function more like documentaries than 
fictional features, in that the story had to be discovered in production, 
rather than just made. Herzog had no way of knowing whether they would in fact 
manage to haul a steamboat up a hill. Likewise for Boyhood, where the story was 
developed in tandem with the trajectory of Ellar Coltrane’s life.

For Hollywood, this philosophy doesn’t just go against the received wisdom of 
how to turn a profit; 100 years since the first studio was established, it’s 
also set in its ways. Studios were built on the model of a Ford car factory 
assembly line, with a strict division of labour and final creative control in 
the hands of the producer, who managed the money, rather than the director. 
Although there have always been innovators working in Hollywood, they have 
often had tense relationships with their paymasters. David Lynch, after the 
experience of having his feature, Dune, chewed up by executives, decided he no 
longer wanted to make films if he didn’t have final cut.


David Lynch: director of dreams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/17/david-lynch-film-director-dreams> 
Factories are excellent at churning out products, but once established they 
struggle to cope with new ones, and so in Hollywood, films continue to be made 
in genres well past their sell-by dates. EnterAmerican Sniper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-sniper>, a modern war film 
re-packaged as a western under Clint Eastwood’s direction, where the drama 
pivots around a one-on-one sharpshooting contest. As well as gaining five Oscar 
nominations, it’s also been one of the highest-grossing films of recent months, 
making $306m.

Throughout its history Hollywood has been able to rework old genres: in the 
1970s the hugely successful Godfather films were made in the spirit of gangster 
movies from the 1930s. Will all this come to an end in the age of the internet 
and digital technology? One of the strongest rebukes to the happy-go-lucky 
Herzogian method of film-making has come from the legendary cinematographer 
behind the first two Godfather movies, Gordon Willis:


“Some film-makers … thought that if you play a scene in an airplane, the plane 
should be in the air, because the essence of the scene will be different. 
That’s nonsense. The essence of the scene is not going to be different; the 
adversity will certainly be different. I mean, it is make-believe. It is a 
business about re-creating reality.”

While films such as American Sniper, which conform to the tried and tested 
Hollywood conventions, keep pulling punters in to the box office, we can 
continue to expect more of the old and less of the new, for now.
 