
The Observer has published the work of several important writers, including 
George Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/11/georgeorwell.classics>, Arthur 
Koestler, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/21/arthur-koestler-robert-mccrum>
Muriel Spark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/18/muriel-spark-books-martin-stannard>
,Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jan/17/kenneth-tynan-first-observer-theatre-column>
,Clive James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jun/24/clive-james-tv-critic-donald-trelford>
, andJulian Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/03/profile-julian-barnes-new-novel-out-noise-of-time>
. But few were as distinctive asAnthony Burgess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/from-the-archive-blog/2014/oct/10/anthony-burgess-clockwork-orange-drawing-manchester-guardian-1929>
. He was truly a one-man band, a literary maverick, incorrigibly in tune with 
the spirit of the newspaper he always called “my paper”.

The Observer/Burgess prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/observer-anthony-burgess-prize-for-arts-journalism>
, now celebrating its fifth year, is both a celebration of lively and original 
arts journalism and also a salute to a great English literary jack of all 
trades, the author of that dystopian classic,A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2012/may/13/kingsley-amis-a-clockwork-orange-review>
, and an extraordinary body of work in several genres: fiction, screenplays, 
literary criticism, poetry, autobiography and belles-lettres.

He would range from airport fiction (a great love), to a biography of Wagner, 
to a book on linguistics (another passion)

It was at the Observer that Burgess was, perhaps, most himself. Always the 
literary buccaneer, he was an indefatigable man of letters.Blake Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/21/anthony-burgess-book-critic>, 
his literary editor, tells the story of sending out two review copies – a novel 
to Burgess, and a new book on China to an expert sinologist. When the books got 
muddled, the China expert phoned to alert Morrison to the mix-up. But not, 
however, before Burgess had filed his copy.

I remember him as a kind of a dormant literary volcano – projecting a distinct 
air of danger, wreathed in cigar smoke, liable at any minute to erupt with a 
flow of molten judgments. For 30 years, from 1962, he wrote more than 400 
reviews for theObserver. Among his “discoveries” were Sylvia Plath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/sylviaplath> and the late Umberto Eco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/20/umberto-eco-obituary>. Burgess 
on a Sunday would range from airport fiction (one of his great loves), to a new 
biography of Wagner, to a book on linguistics (another passion). He was the 
ideal weekend reviewer: generous, entertaining, witty, informative and wise. As 
a critic, he was what Thomas Carlyle called a “professor of things in general”. 
In 1979, he was duly named critic of the year at the National Press Awards. In 
a moment worthy ofA Clockwork Orange, his trophy was presented by Margaret 
Thatcher. Burgess died in 1993. I think we still miss him, and this prize helps 
fill the gap that he left.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fobserver-burgess-critic-prize-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb236466051cc127be5666da35fa1b2f3b435b2e%2F0_30_2077_1246%2F2077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%2FBurgess%20prize%20for%20arts%20journalism%202017%20%E2%80%93%20call%20for%20entries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fobserver-burgess-critic-prize-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%2FBurgess%20prize%20for%20arts%20journalism%202017%20%E2%80%93%20call%20for%20entries&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fobserver-burgess-critic-prize-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb236466051cc127be5666da35fa1b2f3b435b2e%2F0_30_2077_1246%2F2077.jpg>
 Malcolm McDowell in the film adaption of A Clockwork Orange by Anthony 
Burgess. Photograph: PA 
The Observer/Burgess prize honours the most imaginative and original 
unpublished journalism across the fields of literature, theatre, film, music 
and art. Next year’s prize will have added significance as 2017 marks the 
Anthony Burgess centenary and the award will enter a new phase, in partnership 
withFree Word <https://www.freewordcentre.com/>, the international centre for 
literature, literacy and free expression. As in previous years, we shall focus 
on arts criticism that reflects a lively interest in popular culture, and the 
collaboration with Free Word will bring additional rewards to the winners and 
runners-up: the winner will be awarded £3,000 and have their prize essay 
published in theObserver, as well as being offered a one-to-one mentorship with 
senior editors at theGuardian and the Observer. Two runners-up will each 
receive £500.

Entries will be judged by the writer and broadcaster Kevin Jackson; the 
acclaimed literary critic and historian Lara Feigel; Sarah Donaldson, the arts 
editor of theObserver; and the director of the Burgess Foundation, Andrew 
Biswell.

The Observer/Burgess prize is open to all authors of unpublished journalism. 
To enter, visitanthonyburgess.org <http://www.anthonyburgess.org/>. The closing 
date for entries is 30 November
 