
England are bad at endings. The last Englishman to win his final series as 
captain was Keith Fletcher, who led his side to victory over Sri Lanka in a 
one‑off Test in Colombo and was promptly sacked by Peter May. It doesn’t have 
to be that way. Imran Khan’s Pakistan won his last series as skipper, so did 
Mark Taylor’s Australia, and Anil Kumble’s India. But it seems the best ending 
an English captain can hope for is a defeat, and that their careers, like those 
of our more disreputable politicians, often end in something more traumatic 
still. Nasser Hussain, Michael Vaughan, and Andrew Flintoff all came down with 
depression.Andrew Strauss’s schism with Kevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/sep/01/england-andrew-strauss-retiring>
 split English cricket, as didPietersen’s row with Peter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/apr/07/peter-moores-interview-kevin-pietersen-lancashire-ashes>
.

Alastair Cook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> has been 
leading England for four years now, and 55 consecutive Tests. Which is already 
more than any other English captain, before you add in the two he played as a 
stand-in for Strauss in Bangladesh in 2010. His longevity alone means people 
would likely be thinking about whether and when he will call it quits. Then, in 
an interview with the Cricketer this year, Cook said: “Deep down I don’t know 
how much longer I am going to carry on. It could be two months, it could be a 
year. I do look forward to the day when hopefully I can play a Test match as 
just a batter, there’s no doubt about that.”

Liam Dawson surprised by England call but Keaton Jennings can stake claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/03/england-cricket-india-tour-2016-mumbai>
Cook has since said it was simply an honest answer to a hard question, that he 
only meant he was taking the job one series at a time. But, after two listless 
defeats in India, he and the teamare now addressing questions about his future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/alastair-cook-england-captain-joe-root>
, as if, having turned on the hot tap and turned his back, he now finds himself 
enveloped in steam. There’s an echo here of Strauss’s observation about his own 
career: “What started as a couple of whispers had spread to become the main 
talking point before the game: is Strauss reaching the end?”

It’s not Cook’s captaincy that caused the team’s defeats, rather the 
Englishman’s constitutional inability to cope with Indian conditions. But he 
bears some responsibility for the character of their performances. It’s as if 
he has been encouraging them to play in the same sort of way that brought him 
so much success in 2012. And it was interesting to hear Trevor Bayliss say that 
he felt this was the right timefor the coach to take on a greater role in the 
dressing room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/05/trevor-bayliss-england-batting-india-fourth-test>
, because the batsmen had lapsed into playing too defensively and it is his job 
to remind them to be more positive in their approach.

Cook, of course, has been through similar things before. He said himself that 
he almost resigned after England’s defeatagainst Sri Lanka at Headingley in 2014
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/24/sri-lanka-second-test-one-ball-left-end-england-resistance>
, and he came under intolerable pressure in the following winter and spring, 
before he scored a century – his first in two years –against West Indies the 
following May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/01/west-indies-england-third-test-match-report-alastair-cook-century-jonathan-trott>
. So he has his own past on which to draw. But once this current series is 
over, he would do well to talk to his three predecessors, Hussain, Vaughan, and 
Strauss about their experiences. Because there are lessons to be learned which 
may help him, and the team, in the future.

There are some obvious similarities. All three had lost the ODI captaincy, and 
all three later admitted that they had held the thought of retirement in their 
minds for a long time. If their decisions came as a shock to any of the rest of 
us, they certainly weren’t to the men themselves.

In his autobiography, Hussain wrote that he “knew deep down it had gone” from 
the moment Vaughan took on the one-day side. He offered to resign before his 
final series started, but Duncan Fletcher talked him out of it. Strauss says he 
made “a silent vow” with himself in April 2012 that he would “leave on his own 
terms” later that summer. Vaughan told his wife he would step down “whatever 
happened in those next two games” against South Africain the summer of 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/03/englandcricketteam.englandvsouthafrica2008>
.

More than that, their three autobiographies provide a real reminder of how 
hard the job is, and exactly how much it takes out of a man. In his last 
summer, Hussain came down with stress-induced irritable bowel syndrome. He says 
he was “on edge, physically and mentally”, that he felt as if “the walls were 
closing in”, that he had begun to “hate” the game. Likewise Vaughan. “I felt 
like a zombie inside, and all I wanted to do was sit down and retreat inside 
myself,” he wrote. “I was starting to hate the game, and the appetite for 
battling and fighting that had served me well had left me.”

Both men became paranoid, began to believe that they had lost both the team 
and their touch. “I used to feel that their ears would prick up when I opened 
my mouth, I now thought that they were switching off a little,” Vaughan wrote. 
And “it seemed that whenever I moved a slip out of the cordon, the ball would 
automatically fly through the gap”. Here’s Hussain: “I stood there in the field 
and thought, ‘I’ve lost this side’. There were new players in the team and I 
had to find new energies to lead them. I found I lacked enough energies in 
reserve to rise to the challenge”, and “whatever I tried in the field failed 
to work”.

Strauss saw all that, and promised himself he would not make the same 
mistakes. But even he became weighed down by “mental baggage”, found himself 
“having to confront more weighty and less easily answered questions such as: 
‘Am I experiencing a gradual downward spiral?’ and: ‘Am I still motivated to 
keep doing all of this?’”

In the end he realised: “I wasn’t enjoying my cricket any more. I felt as if I 
was just hanging on, both with my batting and as a captain.” Just like Hussain 
and Vaughan, he made the mistake of thinking he could set himself new goals – 
he wanted to play 100 Tests – and that they would be enough to sustain his 
game, but he found instead that they confused his thinking and caused him to go 
on too long.

There is no urgent need for Cook to quit. But that doesn’t mean he has to 
leave it until either he or the team are in crisis. He is a proud man, and 
stubborn. Those qualities have served him well. But he has an opportunity to do 
something none of his predecessors could, and engineer a graceful end to his 
own captaincy and a smooth transition to the next man. Then he can take up a 
place in the slips, serve as the team’s elder statesman, on hand with advice 
when needed. It would be some accomplishment if he can pull it off, and, more 
to the point, it would be such a shame if he waited until he fell out of love 
with the game, as Hussain, Vaughan, and Strauss all did before him.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.
 