
Water is a life source no matter where you live. But in places where water 
infrastructure is lacking or in disrepair due to natural disaster, conflict or 
climate change, collecting and storing water is a significant development 
challenge.

The ancient practice of rainwater collection has been through something of a 
“renaissance” over the last few decades,according to Unicef 
<https://www.unicef.org/eapro/Harvesting_the_rain_p1-14.pdf> [pdf]. 

The benefits of erecting large storage tanks in water-deficient areas are 
clear; they collect low-impurity rainwater and don’t contribute to groundwater 
depreciation. But there is a rather befuddling logistical challenge standing in 
the way of making it efficient. When shipping heavy tanks over long distances, 
the main commodity being transported is air.

This is the precise issue that GreenCo Water <https://greencowater.com/>, an 
Australian company, set out to address when they designed their Pak Flat Tank. 
It’s a 1,000-litre water tank that packs down flat for efficient delivery, and 
instead of the usual concrete, the tank is made out of plastic. Weighing just 
20 kilograms, each tank can be put in back of a car – or carried by a single 
person – and be assembled in situ in just a few minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-flatpack-water-tank-a-micro-solution-with-a-macro-impact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae26032da4aec48de15479d14397e82b3cc05352%2F0_207_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20flatpack%20water%20tank%3A%20'a%20micro%20solution%20with%20a%20macro%20impact'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-flatpack-water-tank-a-micro-solution-with-a-macro-impact%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20flatpack%20water%20tank%3A%20%27a%20micro%20solution%20with%20a%20macro%20impact%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-flatpack-water-tank-a-micro-solution-with-a-macro-impact%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae26032da4aec48de15479d14397e82b3cc05352%2F0_207_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
 The Pak Flat tank is a 1,000-litre plastic water tank that packs down flat for 
efficient delivery. It can be carried by a single person, and assembled in 
situ. Photograph: GreenCo Water 
“The idea came from an observation that there was a need for a reliable and 
durable water tank, but also one that could be shipped easily,” says Alex 
Pocock, manager of finance and operations for GreenCo Water. “By virtue of 
creating that, you can ship 10 times the number of tanks, so that’s very much 
cost-effective. It can sit available in warehouses and can be transported by 
any means possible – plane, shipping container, truck or vehicle – as soon as 
it’s needed.”


After two years of trials and 40 different iterations, the product was last 
week awarded theAidex Aid Innovation Challenge 
<http://www.aid-expo.com/aid-innovation-challenge-2016>, which seeks to find 
the “next big invention to impact the delivery of aid”.

Years of the floods: building homes to withstand the weather – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2015/apr/21/flood-cyclone-resistant-buildings-asia-gallery>
The company estimates that 1,200 tanks can be packed into a C-17 cargo plane, 
amounting to 1.2m litres of water storage in a single delivery. Other benefits 
include the fact that plastic is less susceptible to cracking than concrete – 
caused by seismic activity, for example – and it is deployable in all kinds of 
environments, “from sub-Saharan to sub-zero”.

In addition, once delivered the tank can be relocated quite easily; assembly 
does not require specialist knowledge or complicated written instructions. By 
comparison, aUnicef manual 
<https://www.unicef.org/eapro/Harvesting_the_rain_p1-14.pdf> [pdf] detailing 
how to construct a cement rainwater jar spans 10 pages and includes dozens of 
complicated diagrams and captions.

Several aid and humanitarian organisations are already using the tanks, 
including Oxfam Australia in its disaster relief efforts in Fiji and Rotary 
International in Vanuatu in the wake ofCyclone Pam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyclone-pam> – the strongest storm to ever 
be recorded in the South Pacific. Oxfam GB now stocks the tanks in its UK 
warehouse and says they were recently deployed to camps for internally 
displaced people in Yemen.

“The tank is an innovative departure from the other options Oxfam has always 
favoured,” says Justin Hartree, Oxfam’s equipment quality officer. “It gives a 
better option for situations where a small volume of water is needed or space 
is limited. We would promote its use for health posts and clinics, schools, 
staff compounds, and for use on towers or other raised platforms such as roofs. 
To store larger volumes it is simple to link a number of tanks together.”


As the impacts of climate change intensify, water becomes not just a scarce 
resource, but a potential driver of conflict.Some have suggested that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/07/water-supplies-in-syria-deteriorating-fast-due-to-conflict-experts-warn>
 the roots of the ongoing Syrian war can be found in the country’s 
mismanagement of water. The need to deploy water solutions quickly to deprived 
areas is unlikely to recede anytime soon. But for the increasing chorus of 
critics of the so-called “foreign aid industrial complex 
<https://medium.com/@DichterThomas/is-there-a-foreign-aid-industrial-complex-1be4e9c03047#.87wiisome>
”, the Pak Flat Tank – by its nature a hand-out and not a solution that uses 
local labour or resources – might not be the most sustainable solution, despite 
its ingenuity.


How capturing rain could save Mexico City from a water crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/06/capturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis>
The tanks function in a similar way to a conventional water tank. That their 
so-called “disruptive” nature comes from the delivery mechanism – not their 
actual function – is indicative of the kinds of solutions the development 
sector often needs, says Pocock. In other words, the tanks “represent a micro 
solution with a macro impact”.

He adds: “It’s a simple product but the shortage of water is such a prevalent 
problem that so often people in remote areas have to work for half a day to get 
water. This is a readily deployable solution that doesn’t require ongoing 
maintenance. That’s why we’re proud of it.”


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 