
When I was a kid, it was easy to recall all of the greatest moments of Spanish 
international football – there were so few of them. You had the famous "Zarra's 
goal 
<http://news.oneindia.in/2006/02/24/spain-pays-tribute-to-record-breaking-zarra-1140803677.html>
" of 1950 against England ("The perfidious Brits", as the Francoist 
broadcasters put it). Then, there was the no less momentous 1964 "Marcelino's 
goal <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TQ1o5QrtPpE>" against the USSR (guess what 
the broadcasters said) … And that's about it. Yet those goals had been endowed 
with a historical meaning: Telmo Zarra, we were informed, had avenged the 
Spanish Armada of 1588, while Marcelino Martínez had single-handedly defeated 
Communism.

My generation had its own goal too. Regrettably, it was the goal that never 
was: the infamous "Cardeñosa's goal <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vDwHYCaf9vY>
". You're forgiven if it doesn't ring a bell. It went like this. In 1978, and 
in bold defiance of the laws of geometry, Julio Cardeñosa squandered a ball 
right in front of an almost deserted Brazilian goal. Though what he did was 
arguably more difficult than scoring, Cardeñosa (who was, in fact, a wonderful 
player) saw his name turn into a byword for clumsy failure. Worse, he became 
the symbol of an alleged crisis of confidence in post-Francoist Spain. The 
cause? Pundits had no doubt about it: discomfort with the national symbols 
among the political left and conflicting national loyalties in Catalonia and 
the Basque country were to blame. The symptoms: a reluctance to wave the 
Spanish flag and the inability to remember the lyrics of the national anthem 
(to this day, most Spaniards believe it has no words, which is not true, though 
if you know them you'd think ignorance is bliss).

So, what would be the meaning of "Iniesta's goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/11/world-cup-final-holland-spain1>
", the one that has just conquered the World Cup for us? For most supporters it 
means nothing more than fun. Thousandshave been celebrating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/12/world-cup-2010-spain-celebrates>
 in the streets, living the sheer excitement of a mass party, as they should. 
But open a Madrid newspaper and you'll get a far less spontaneous line: Andrés 
Iniesta's goal is a rebuff to those who doubt Spain's economic probity. Even 
more obsessively: It's a victory of "unity" over the "disloyal demands" of 
self-government in Catalonia. Some are already envisaging a reborn Spain where 
everybody will be waving the flag without hesitation in a never-ending World 
Cup final. And there are plenty of flags these days, no doubt.

But things are a bit more complex than this narrow nationalistic view 
supposes. Up to eight men in the Spanish outfit play for Barcelona, five happen 
to be Catalans and four of them are part of the unofficialCatalonia national 
team <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalonia_national_football_team>, which is 
seeking recognition by Fifa to compete in its own right. Their kissing of the 
Catalan flag during the closing ceremony in Johannesburg offers a much more 
nuanced view on the subject of loyalties and symbols in modern Spain.

As for the economy, the sad fact is that Spain's currency remains the Euro, 
not football. Unfortunately, Paul the octopus'sprediction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jul/12/paul-psychic-octopus-wins-world-cup>
 that Spain would beat Germany seems to have referred solely to the pitch, not 
the stock market. There are still those who stick to the theory that success in 
sports can boost consumer confidence. The minister of industry is among them; 
he said that after the Spanish win the government may revise favourably its 
growth forecast. True, in 2006 a report estimated that Germany's World Cup 
would increase its GDP by 0.7%. Also true – it never happened.

So, what is the symbolism of "Iniesta's goal", then? Well, what if it doesn't 
have any? Maybe goals, the hybrid of chance and talent, don't have a historical 
meaning after all. Maybe the explanation of Spain's recent string of successes 
in sport is far simpler than those disquieting ideas about "unity" and 
"national purpose": there were never so many good players before. That's all. 
I, for one, prefer it that way. To my generation, at least, it would be a 
relief to learn that Zarra was not exacting revenge for the shipwrecked Armada. 
That the fall of the Berlin Wall could have happened without the help of 
Marcelino. That we, the children of Cardeñosa, are not doomed to be such a 
helpless lot forever.
 