
Tonight at the O2 Arena in London, Dermot O’Leary hosts the only TV awards 
ceremony voted for by the public: the NationalTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> Awards. Whether that means the 
NTAs are more valid than the snooty Baftas, or a waste of time because ratings 
already tell us what’s popular, is up to you. Either way, everyone nominated in 
this, the NTAs’ 21st year, wants to win … but who will? And in the spirit of 
every awards ceremony being an excuse for an argument, who should win?

Comedy

Will win: Peter Kay’s Car Share 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/apr/30/peter-kay-car-share-in-car-tv-film-genre>

Should win: Peter Kay’s Car Share

Kay’s remarkable comeback, the sunny but finely judged two-hander Car Share, 
should walk a weak category that’s missing the winner from the past three 
fecking years, Mrs Brown’s Boys. Car Share was a mainstream, primetime hit on 
BBC1 that had, in its portrayal of two carpooling colleagues (Kay and Sian 
Gibson), subtle romance beneath the broad, crowd-pleasing gags. A talent we 
thought we might have lost returned in triumph.

Also nominated: Birds of a Feather, Benidorm, Not Going Out.

Drama

Will win: Downton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>

Should win: Doctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>

The satisfyingly box-ticking finale of Julian Fellowes’s Sunday-night fondue 
will probably see it sneak home. Downton won this in 2012, 2013 and 2015. But 
should the show that interrupted the run,Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who>, come back for another 
upset? Last year it got over a rocky start and some chat about falling ratings 
to deliver a quietly superb series of episodes, with Peter Capaldi on ace form.

Also nominated: Broadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch>, Casualty

New drama

Will win: Poldark <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark>

Should win: Poldark <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark>

T’int right, t’int fair, t’int proper, t’int just. Is what we’ll say if the 
Beeb’s barnstorming tale of romance, skulduggery and the economics of the 
18th-century tin industry doesn’t win here. It’s a tough category, though:
Doctor Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/10/doctor-foster-review-suranne-jones-bertie-carvel>
 gained momentum, Broadchurch-style, through its run and Humans was a cracker, 
albeit not with the ratings muscle to trouble the big two.

Also nominated: Ordinary Lies

Entertainment programme

Will win: I’m a Celebrity… Get Me out of Here! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/i-m-a-celebrity>

Should win: Ant & Dec’s Saturday Night Takeaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>

Who is Lady Colin Campbell and what is her accent?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/nov/18/who-is-lady-colin-campbell-and-why-does-she-sound-like-rastamouse-doing-an-irish-accent>
IACGMOOH wins an NTA every year and probably will again, fuelled by the antics 
of self-proclaimed countess Lady Colin Campbell. NTA kings Ant & Dec have a 
second horse in the race with the consistently excellent Saturday Night 
Takeaway. Unless 2016 continues its bid to be the most depressing cultural year 
ever by giving Celebrity Juice a prize, this one’s on its way to their 
mantelpiece(s).

Also nominated: The Graham Norton Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/graham-norton>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fnational-television-awards-2016-who-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7639582e36babb6fa9bd04ef2a15d7a367e10927%2F0_0_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20National%20Television%20Awards%202016%3A%20who%20should%20win%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fnational-television-awards-2016-who-should-win%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20National%20Television%20Awards%202016%3A%20who%20should%20win%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fnational-television-awards-2016-who-should-win%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7639582e36babb6fa9bd04ef2a15d7a367e10927%2F0_0_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 Ant & Dec always win best TV presenter. Photograph: ITV UK 
Talent show

Will win: Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>

Should win: Strictly Come Dancing

The X Factor <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> imploded 
in 2015: it would be odd and embarrassing for ITV if a show that looks 
terminally ailing is named the best in its genre by a public that increasingly 
refuses to watch it. The way is clear, then, for a strong Strictly to make it 
three wins in four years.

Also nominated: The Voice, Britain’s Got Talent

TV presenter

Will win: Ant & Dec

Should win: Mel & Sue

The running joke at the NTAs: Ant & Dec always win. The last time they didn’t, 
Tony Blair was prime minister and the NTA talk show prize was a fight between 
Parky and Des O’Connor. It was ages ago. However, their category is usually 
called “Entertainment presenter” and involves the perky Geordies effortlessly 
murdering Keith Lemon and Dermot O’Leary. Now it’s rebranded as simply “TV 
presenter”: enter the mighty Mel & Sue, brimful of confidence and cake after 
Bake Off’s best series ever.

Also nominated: Rylan Clark-Neal, Graham Norton

Drama performance

Will win: Aidan Turner, Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark>

Should win: Aidan Turner, Poldark

Mighty 2015 winner Sheridan Smith is a nominee again here: Britain adores her, 
but it didn’t adore her stodgy ITV drama Black Work. David Tennant fans might 
also not rouse themselves to vote for him inBroadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> series two. That leaves 
Aidan Turner to gallop home for his broody, musky turn in Poldark. If the NTAs 
are about capturing the imagination of the ordinary telly-guzzler, Turner’s the 
one.

Also nominated: Suranne Jones (Doctor Foster)

International

Will win: Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>

Should win: Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>

Which is better: Game of Thrones or The Big Bang Theory? Finally we have an 
answer, as the NTAs’ most incongruous pairing duke it out. It’s an interesting 
test of how far Thrones’s appeal has travelled: people who like it, love it, 
and in 2015 it was as ruthless and gossip-worthy as ever. But there are still 
hordes of punters who don’t have Sky and haven’t bothered with the box set. 
Could Big Bang’s vehement fandom spring a surprise? Probably not.

Also nominated: Orange Is The New Black

Daytime

Will win: The Chase

Should win: Pointless

The NTAs’ desire to constantly rejig its categories means super-heavyweight 
daytime champ This Morning now resides in the new “Live magazine show” 
shortlist. Richard Osman and Alexander Armstrong are in with a shout, then, 
although The Chase is not far behind Pointless in the teatime cult stakes and 
might have a bit more support among NTA voters.

Also nominated: The Jeremy Kyle Show, The Paul O’Grady Show

Challenge show

Will win: The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>

Should win: The Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off>

With higher ratings than ever and perhaps the most popular winner ever in 
Nadiya Hussain, the cheering and unifying GBBO deserves every gong it gets and 
is untouchable here. The other nominees are either ageing stalwarts or, in the 
case of Bear Grylls: Mission Survive, a show most voters will have to do a 
quick Google to remember.

Also nominated: MasterChef, The Apprentice

Wednesday’s best TV – The Town That Took on the Taxman; Empire of the Tsars: 
Romanov Russia with Lucy Worsley; The National Television Awards; Comic Strip 
Presents: Red Top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/20/wednesdays-best-tv-the-town-that-took-on-the-taxman-empire-of-the-tsars-romanov-russia-with-lucy-worsley-the-national-television-awards-comic-strip-presents-red-top>
Live magazine show

Will win: This Morning

Should win: This Morning

Penny Lancaster’s never-ending question to Sarah Harding last week (brace 
yourself, then search for it on YouTube) was a strong start to Loose Women’s 
campaign for the 2017 prize. This year, though, This Morning must be miles 
ahead of its ITV sister. The Beeb’s efforts in this area remain stiff and 
cheesy.

Also nominated: BBC Breakfast, The One Show

Serial drama

Will win: Coronation Street

Should win: EastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders>

Flip a coin: Corrie or EastEnders? It’s Coronation Street’s turn, and it’s won 
more often of late. Easties, though, had the better big events in its 30th 
anniversary year, climaxing with the reveal of who killed Lucy Beale.

Also nominated: Emmerdale, Hollyoaks

Factual entertainment

Will win: Gogglebox

Should win: Gogglebox

Last year Gogglebox triumphed over Top Gear, and the appeal of C4’s review 
show has only grown since then. Meanwhile, Top Gear as we know it no longer 
exists. Unless Jeremy Clarkson’s army of men’s rights activists can organise 
themselves to leave a mischievous turd in the NTAs’ buffet, the sofa-bound 
critics have it.

Also nominated: DIY SOS: The Big Build, Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs

The National Television Awards <http://www.nationaltvawards.com/>, 7.30pm ITV 
on Wednesday.
 