
When Alex Ross <http://www.therestisnoise.com/> started writing The Rest is 
Noise in 2000 he never expected that a book about 20th-century classical music 
would go on to sell 250,000 copies and win literary prizes around the world – 
including theGuardian First Book Award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/03/guardian-first-book-alex-ross-rest-is-noise>
. Now the book's extraordinary success has scaled new heights with the 
announcement of a year-long festival at London'sSouthbank Centre 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/> which aims to bring it to life.

The Rest is Noise festival will take in almost 100 concerts, films and 
debates, starting on 19 January 2013 with a performance by the London 
Philharmonic. Conducted byVladimir Jurowski 
<http://www.lpo.co.uk/about/jurowski.html>, the orchestra will play a Richard 
Strauss programme including the final scene of Salome – the opera whose 
premiere in 1906 isthe "year zero" moment of Ross's book 
<http://www.therestisnoise.com/2007/01/chapter-1-the-g.html>.

Ross, classical music critic for the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/bios/alex_ross/search?contributorName=alex%20ross>
, said: "I can only describe myself as blissfully bewildered that Southbank 
Centre have taken inspiration from my book and built this sprawling, teeming 
festival."

The festival will be divided into 12 chronological themes, from The Big Bang: 
A New Century, a New World in January to New World Order: No More Rules in 
December; other themes include Berlin in the 20s and 60s Weekend: the West Does 
Revolution. It will be accompanied by a TV series on BBC4.

Speaking at the launch of the Southbank Centre's 2012/13 classical music 
season, director Jude Kelly said the festival was initially conceived four 
years ago, when she read a proof copy of Ross's book, which was published in 
2007. Kelly said the festival would take in several art forms and aim to 
involve audiences "hostile to 20th-century music" while giving those already 
highly committed to it "another route in".

"We'll have these weekends which will take you through the 20th century and 
focus on moments when the art movements were emerging – how music was immersed 
with visual arts and dance, where that fitted in with literature, and actually 
commenting on those major moments in history will be poets, dancers, 
choreographers, musicians, so I'm using it as a way of getting contemporary 
artists to come together and talk," said Kelly. "I think that classical music 
is a little bit on the outer edge at the moment in terms of that sense of being 
part of the contemporary world of art-making and I want to shift that."

"Last year I collaborated with the Australian Chamber Orchestra on a pair of 
concerts based on my two books," said Ross. "No one has proposed anything on 
the scale of what Southbank have come up with. I believe that the London 
audience is well primed for it; 20th-century music is better integrated into 
mainstream programmes than it is in New York, where hundred-year-old pieces by 
Schoenberg still cause rumblings of unease."

Ross said he is planning three lectures at the festival "that will give an 
overview of 20th-century styles and ideas, with the aid of dozens of recorded 
excerpts and images".

Apart from The Rest is Noise, next year will see the debut of a new work by 
the composerSteve Reich <https://www.theguardian.com/music/steve-reich> based 
on two songs by Radiohead,Everything in its Right Place 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VrpGhEVyrk0> and Jigsaw Falling into Place 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoLJJRIWCLU>. Radio Rewrite, which will be 
performed by 13 musicians from the London Sinfonietta on 5 March 2013, came 
about after the band met Reich in Poland in September.

"It was the first time he'd met them as musicians and spoken to them at 
length," said Andrew Burke, chief executive of the London Sinfonietta. "Jonny 
Greenwood played [Reich composition]Electric Counterpoint 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2PZaen25MnU> – Steve saw this guy was seriously 
interested in his music and Steve became seriously interested in theirs."

Reich's pulsing, minimalist music has inspired musicians across the musical 
spectrum from jazz to techno. Everything in its Right Place opened Radiohead's 
experimental 2000 album Kid A, while Jigsaw Falling into Place comes from 
2007's In Rainbows. "I don't think Steve will be quoting these songs directly – 
I don't think that's his style," said Burke. "How he uses the songs as a 
starting point for what he does is going to be part of the excitement. But 
ultimately I'm most excited by the fact that we've got a new work by Steve 
Reich."

The Southbank's Centre's 2012/13 season will also feature a joint concert 
between the Russian National and London Philharmonic orchestras, a centenary 
celebration of the Polish composerWitold Lutosławski 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2431&State_2905=2&composerId_2905=966>
, and a four-day festival of Welsh culture organised by baritone Bryn Terfel. 
The Faenol Festival was originally held in Bangor, butcancelled due to poor 
ticket sales 
<http://www.dailypost.co.uk/news/north-wales-news/2010/08/05/bryn-terfel-s-faenol-festival-cancelled-due-to-poor-ticket-sales-55578-27000029/>
, while the decision to award it £250,000 of funding wascriticised by some 
local MPs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/10521278>.
 