
A man took a razor blade and very carefully cut open his nose lengthways. His 
aim was to remove the cartilage and replace it with that of a chicken. Finally, 
he thought, he’d feel so much better. In America a man took a hammer to his 
face. Somebody cut the ends of their fingers off. Across the world people are 
standing in bathrooms with knives, quietly hating themselves. Self-surgery is 
one of the hallmarks ofbody dysmorphic disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/09/body-dysmorphic-disorder-charity-video-robert-pattinson>
 (BDD), where a person has a distorted view of how they look. A nose, a hand. A 
place to focus on, and to hate.

Most of us care about our appearance. Walking to work, reflective surfaces 
distract us. We make small adjustments, conceal, straighten. We like to be seen 
from particular angles, and profess to hate our arms. But it is the point at 
which these concerns become an obsession – when the worry interferes with a 
person’s life, when they can’t leave the house because they’re stuck looking in 
the mirror, when relationships fail and work falters, that’s when it becomes a 
disorder. And that’s when the Maudsley hospital gets involved.

The Maudsley, in London, is the world’s oldest psychiatric institution. Today 
this imposing red-brick building on a shallow hill is surrounded by smaller 
units – they take up a city block alongside a railway line – and it’s in one of 
these squat buildings at the back that I wait for doctors Laura Bowyer and 
Bruce Clark. The walls of theMichael Rutter Centre for Children and Adolescents 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Services/clinics/MapsAndDirections/DefaultView.aspx?id=103928>
 (named after the “father of child psychology”) are lime green and heavy with 
leaflets – family therapy, bulimia, missing people – and parents sit with their 
children, and the children sit with their phones.

On web forums Zoe found validation. ‘People would say I was right, that I was 
ugly, that I was fat’

This is the only clinic in the country to treat BDD in the young; they 
recently became the first in the world to publish a randomised control trial of
cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2014/jan/23/psychological-therapies-mental-illness-dodo-bird-verdict>
 or body dysmorphic disorder in children and adolescents. Studies on adults, 
while still fairly scarce, are more common. While their trial on treating 
adolescents was taking place, researchers in Sweden were conducting the largest 
study of body dysmorphic patients yet, finding that they could benefit from 
courses of CBT sessions online. Both studies agree that CBT works – all agree 
they have a cure. The problem now is finding the patients.

BDD is fairly common – it’s estimated that up to one in 50 people are 
suffering to varying degrees. “Another way to think about it,” says Clark, “is 
that if you look around a double-decker bus, it’s likely there’s somebody with 
BDD travelling in the same direction.”

The Body Dysmorphic Disorder Foundation <http://bddfoundation.org/> lists a 
number of famous people who may have had BDD, including Andy Warhol, Franz 
Kafka, Sylvia Plath and Michael Jackson, his face, after multiple surgeries, an 
Edvard Munch-ish scream. It’s estimated that up to 20% of people who receive 
cosmetic surgery have it. In 2001 a survey of plastic surgeons in the US found 
that 84% said they’d operated on a patient who they came to realise had BDD, 
and of them, the majority said they had a poor outcome – the patient wasn’t 
satisfied. There are recorded cases of surgeons murdered by patients who had 
BDD.

But comparatively little has been published about the disorder, and even less 
about the disorder in young people. Very few sufferers declare their symptoms, 
and not all psychiatrists (let alone GPs) are trained to spot them. More 
commonly, the practitioners who see people with BDD first are cosmetic 
surgeons. Patients rarely believe they’re mentally ill – they just believe 
they’re ugly.

Zoe, 19, has the cheeky beauty of a Disney star. After Laura Bowyer introduces 
us, as her mother and I settle into NHS sofas, as she begins to describe her 
life, I find my eyes drifting across her face in search of the feature she so 
hates. I’m at a loss – she is symmetrical, she is clear-skinned, she is… 
“beautiful”. Zoe was 13 when a classmate first called her ugly. She began, she 
says, “scrutinising myself, trying to improve myself, to avoid being ridiculed 
at school”. But there were limits to what she could improve. “The verbal abuse 
was specific to being a black woman. They talked about my ‘disgusting hair’, 
things like that. These are things I can’t change.” At 14 she was diagnosed 
with anorexia, and with treatment started getting better, then worse.Anorexia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/anorexia> and BDD, while related, are 
quite distinct. Most people with BDD aren’t preoccupied with their weight; 
instead they most commonly focus on their skin, hair or nose (in that order). 
And while anorexia is most commonly seen in women, the demographics for BDD are 
not only evenly distributed across gender lines but across the world. Every 
language, I’m reminded, has a word for ‘ugly’.

When Zoe moved school for her A-levels, she presented her mother with a typed 
list of the surgeries she required. Liposuction, fat transfers, ear pinning, a 
chin alteration, knee surgery. “She was quite aggressive,” her mother says 
quietly. “She would throw things. It was a dark time.” She looks down at her 
hands, where her knuckles are white from gripping. When Zoe was referred to 
Bowyer with BDD she was 17 and hadn’t left the house for three months. Zoe hid 
her face with a headscarf, and had used acid solutions bought online to bleach 
her skin. “I felt trapped in my body,” Zoe says. “I felt like my skin was 
crawling. I itched. I never felt clean. I spent hours looking in the mirror, 
and after a while my face would shift.” At home she broke the mirrors. “I’d 
type into Google: ‘Are my friends lying?’” On the anorexia forums she would 
find validation. “People would agree – they’d say I was right, that I was ugly, 
that I was fat.” At her worst, after three hours online, and four in front of 
the mirror, “I didn’t want to live. Because I knew nobody would ever love me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fthe-ugly-truth-about-body-dysmorphia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5765e487742c26bc895cb338510bc268311a4c2%2F0_0_5642_3387%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ugly%20truth%20about%20body%20dysmorphia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fthe-ugly-truth-about-body-dysmorphia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ugly%20truth%20about%20body%20dysmorphia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F06%2Fthe-ugly-truth-about-body-dysmorphia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5765e487742c26bc895cb338510bc268311a4c2%2F0_0_5642_3387%2F5642.jpg>
 ‘The morbidity is so high. Half the people with this disorder will be 
hospitalised’: Bruce Clark and Laura Bowyer at the Michael Rutter Centre in the 
Maudsley hospital. Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer 
Bruce Clark is clinical director of Child and Adolescent Mental Health 
Services (CAMHS) 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/for_parents/services_children_young_people/camhs> 
in the UK, and a consultant child psychiatrist. As I climb the stairs to his 
office with Laura Bowyer, a young woman runs across the corridor, screaming. I 
pause as her carer gently guides her through a door. Despite the internal chaos 
he must deal with daily, Clark is calm and jolly – his office upstairs is 
welcoming, if galley-like. With three of us seated, there is not room to open 
the door.

Before we met, he recommended I read the work of Dr Katharine A Phillips. A 
professor of psychiatry at Brown Medical School, she’s the best-known authority 
on BDD and author ofThe Broken Mirror 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/broken-mirror.html>, a book that draws on her 
evaluations of 900 people with BDD. She revised the book in 2005. I emailed her 
to ask if there was anything important she’d learned since then.

“Perhaps the newest information,” she told me, “is on visual processing in 
BDD. This exciting work suggests that people with BDD have abnormalities in 
visual processing, in that they tend to overfocus on tiny details of a visual 
stimulus and are less able to see the ‘big picture’ than people without BDD.” 
When they look in the mirror, they’re seeing something different. She describes 
people who pick at unnoticeable marks on their skin until they have scars, 
people who run through the traffic when they think someone is staring at them. 
While Clark and Bowyer admit they’re still far from knowing the cause, they 
agree with Phillips’s tracing back of problems to a combination of genetic, 
emotional and neurobiological foundations, explaining that while childhood 
trauma (and indeed media pressure) can trigger it, it’s likely that “the genes 
a person is born with provide an essential foundation for BDD to develop,” 
noting that in about 20% of cases another member of the family also has the 
disorder.

If people tell me I’m fine, it makes me feel more crazy and lied to... I only 
see details, while others see a person

Clark became passionate about BDD in part because, he realised, it was so 
hidden. “Yet the morbidity is so high. Half the people with this disorder will 
be hospitalised,” he says, “and around a quarter take their own life. It’s a 
grim picture.”

The young people they treated were in trouble. They were threatening their 
parents and truanting school, they were stealing money for treatments they 
thought would fix their faces. “Today,” says Clark, “there’s this ease of 
access to the idea of surgery. The advertising images for cosmetic surgery are 
the same as those for a spa. You can clearly see the path, from the spa, to 
Botox, to a nose job. It’s just another shop.”

One of the things Clark was most shocked by was the role of the internet in 
these young people’s disorders. Like Zoe, patients had posted photos online, 
asking for reassurance that they were as disfigured as they believed. And in 
the comments below, cosmetic surgeons had responded. Clark found the website 
one of his patients had described. “American clinics were advertising the 
procedures they’d suggest, to a child. And she read it as evidence that she 
didn’t have BDD, because she thought they were agreeing she was ugly.”

There is a Reddit page called “Am I ugly?” At first glance it’s the place 
where tact has come to die. “So there’s this thing that bothers me…” writes a 
21-year-old man, alongside a selection of selfies. “It’s shadows. Shadows and 
lighting. How do I know if I’m ugly or not in a world that constantly changes 
shadows and lighting? I back up a bit, and suddenly become a monster with saggy 
skin.”

I saw no cosmetic surgeons advertising their services here – typically 
commenters suggest users improve their appearance by smiling more or cutting 
their hair – but I did see the occasional post from a young person 
acknowledging they have BDD. One man, Joonas Broodin, who has suffered from BDD 
since he was 12, toldVice he frequents the page for support. After he posted a 
photo, a user agreed that his brow and nose looked “heavy”. Broodin welcomed 
the comment. “I’m grateful to hear people point out some of the details I’ve 
been obsessing over for nearly 18 years,” he said. “In the past if I pointed 
out the things I obsess about and people told me: ‘No, I don’t see it, you’re 
fine,’ it made me feel more crazy and lied to... I only see details,” he 
realised, “while others see a person. ”

At the Maudsley they’re focusing on two things. Identifying BDD in children, 
and then treating it. They’re working to adapt traditional CBT techniques, and 
helping GPs and cosmetic surgeons understand what to look for.

Talking to Clark and Bowyer, I sense their frustration. Finally there is a 
recognised successful treatment for this common yet sometimes fatal illness, 
one that if it’s dealt with in adolescence might prevent years of pain and 
thousands of deaths, and yet the patients aren’t being diagnosed. Which is 
remarkable if only because screening requires no brain scans, no blood tests. 
In fact, Clark says, it hangs on four questions. “Are you very concerned about 
the appearance of some parts of your body that you consider particularly 
unattractive?” That’s number one. “Is your main concern with your appearance 
that you aren’t thin enough or that you might become too fat?” Two. “What 
effect has your preoccupation with your appearance had on your life?” Three.

It was around this point in the questionnaire that a doctor who’d trained at 
Clark’s clinic, when interviewing a patient who had attempted suicide, 
discovered she was distraught about the appearance of her labia. She had never 
discussed it with anybody before. She was successfully treated by Bowyer. Four. 
“How much time do you spend thinking about your defects per day?”

It is difficult to sit in a room with a young woman as she calmly lists the 
ways she detests herself. Zoe’s mother, a librarian who vibrates with strength, 
brought her up alone. She gave her Margaret Atwood books she thought Zoe might 
connect with “when I could no longer reach her”. She describes the guilt she 
felt, and the anger, and the times when she felt like “giving up”.

But today, as long as Zoe sticks to her medication and uses “the tools I’ve 
been given”, including “feminism, which gave me confidence”, and CBT, Zoe can 
see a future. She wants to be a designer. “But selling only things that won’t 
make people feel insecure.” She giggles: “Is that possible?” Her mum puts her 
hand on Zoe’s knee, and waits just a moment too long before saying yes.

For information on BDD in young people, call the BDD and Related Disorders 
Service at the Maudsley (020 3228 5222)
 