
It is hard to imagine anyone buying The Independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/theindependent> and therefore places the 
paper's future existence in jeopardy. The fact that its owner has failed to 
find a buyer after months of seeking one suggests that its newsprint days are 
coming to an end.

Though the financial losses have been significantly reduced over the past 
three years - down from more than £20m to just below £9m - the Indy's 
circulation has fallen to a level that no longer makes the paper a viable 
proposition.

Given that the Independent's newsstand sale is just over 43,000, it is 
sobering to reflect that there are 41,000 newspaper retail outlets in Britain. 
TheIndependent on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/independent-on-sunday> is not much better 
with 47,000 newsstand sales.

Both titles are therefore in danger of relinquishing their right to call 
themselves national newspapers. They face oblivion because they are losing 
circulation on a weekly basis. With year-on-year double-digit percentage falls 
there is not even a prospect of sales plateau, let alone a reverse.

Those circulation realities make them unattractive to any potential buyer. 
However, the spin-off daily title,i <https://www.theguardian.com/media/i>, and 
the increasingly popular website may appeal to a risk-taking entrepreneur with 
deep pockets.

According to a person familiar with the situation at Independent Print, the 
company set up byAlexander Lebedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alexander-lebedev> to run the titles, i does 
trade at a profit with a cover price of 20p an issue.

It couldn't do so without the editorial content provided by the staff of the 
Indy itself, of course. But its success in attracting 300,000 buyers a day, in 
company with the website's growing audience, could pique the interest of a 
would-be press owner.

This scenario would allow The Independent title to live on with a digital-only 
presence.

What is less clear is the future for the paper's long-suffering editorial 
staff. Today's news will hardly have come as a shock to them after many months 
of speculation about Lebedev's intentions and his occasional tweets hinting at 
his difficulties in supporting the title.

Even so, they have laboured hard to produce the paper in a persistently 
morale-sapping climate of cutbacks, rumours and declining sales.

They will take little heart from the bookmaker, Paddy Power, naming the Daily 
Express and Daily Star owner,Richard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond>, as the 5-2 favourite to 
acquire the Independent.

The Daily Mail & General Trust is second favourite in a predictable group of 
runners and riders that includes every current national press publisher plus 
Richard Branson and BT. The Guardian group is a 66-1 rank outsider.

In truth, it is much more likely that a buyer - if one can be persuaded to 
take the risk - will come from abroad.
 