
Alex Rodriguez <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alex-rodriguez> is sorry.

The New York Yankees <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees> 
slugger met with team officials on Tuesday and offered a full apology for his 
part in the Biogenesis performance enhancing drugs scandal and his attacks on 
the franchise.

Just weeks after secretly meeting new Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> Commissioner Rob Manfred in a bid 
to “get on the same page”, A-Rod’s goodwill tour took him to Yankee Stadium 
where the 39-year-old met owner Hal Steinbrenner, team president Randy Levine, 
general manager Brian Cashman and assistant general manager Jean Afterman along 
with his counsel Jim Sharp. After their little chat, the Yankees released the 
following statement: “Alex initiated the meeting and apologized for his actions 
over the past several years. It was an honest and frank discussion on all of 
the issues. As far as the Yankees are concerned, the next step is to play 
baseball in spring training”

And so there you have it – after two long years, Rodriguez says “my bad” to 
his bosses and moves on to his next hurdle - the A-Rod show of remorse press 
conference (one we’ve seen before actually 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/18/sports/baseball/18yankees.html>) that we’re 
waiting for down in Tampa in roughly two weeks time. If he nails it, and gives 
the publicwhat they really want <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KniUNdVZvH4> 
to hear, will the baseball community forgive A-Rod and allow him to neatly push 
aside his checkered past?

Unlikely, and for good reason(s), a few of which are listed below.

We’re talking about the player who declared an all-out war  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/27/alex-rodriguez-new-york-yankees-twitter-injury>
onMajor League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/04/alex-rodriguez-lawsuit-mlb-witch-hunt>
, his team and even his own players’ union while fighting off a year-long, PED 
suspension he would eventually serve.

A player who admitted to federal investigators that he made monthly payments 
of $12,000 for PED’s, only a few weeks after dropping his suspension battle 
againstMLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb>.

A player who sued the New York Yankees team doctor, Chris Ahmad and New York 
Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, for allegedly misdiagnosing 
his 2012 hip injury.

A player who was once old to “shut the fuck up” by his general manager, Brian 
Cashman, aftersignaling via twitter, not via the team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/27/alex-rodriguez-new-york-yankees-twitter-injury>
, that he was ready to rejoin the team after rehabilitation.

A player whose timeline of transgressions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/alex-rodriguez-career-peds-steriods>
 spans way beyond his involvement with the Biogenesis PED scandal.

No, none of this will ever go away. 

However, there can still be (some sort of) peace in our time between Alex 
Rodriguez and the New York Yankees franchise, and Tuesday’s statement proved 
that both parties are on board with such a sentiment. Why? Because there’s much 
more at stake than the $61m A-Rod is owed for the next three seasons.

The New York Yankees are an organization whose fan base is increasingly less 
fanatical about the team on the field. The retirement of icon Derek Jeter 
resulted in a spike in attendance and television ratings, but with the 
“core-four” of the former captain, Jorge Posada, Andy Pettitte and Mariano 
Rivera grazing on golf courses, New York are desperate for another showpiece to 
bolster their bottom line while trying to bring back electricity and playoff 
baseball to the Bronx.

We have no idea what Alex Rodriguez, who has had both of his hips surgically 
repaired, can contribute on the field in 2015, so much so that New York 
re-signed Chase Headley to occupy his third base position. We do know that 
despite the scandal and uncertainty that is A-Rod, he remains the single most 
interesting personality in Major League Baseball.

And it isn’t even close. 

Masahiro Tanaka, Jacoby Ellsbury, Carlos Beltran, Mark Teixeira, Brett 
Gardner, Brian McCann, CC Sabathia, Dellin Betances - good players, most of 
which will almost definitely be more productive on the field. Publicity 
machines they are not. So yes, the intrigue surrounding an A-Rod comeback is 
exactly what the franchise needs to stay relevant.

That’s right - the Yankees need A-Rod, who, believe it or not, right now, is 
the face of the Bronx Bombers. If they didn’t need him they would have already 
swallowed the $61m by releasing him.

They need A-Rod to swipe away the cobwebs and surpass Willie Mays for fourth 
on the all-time home run list with his 661st blast (even if the Yankees are 
reportedly refusing to pay him additional “milestone bonus payments” for moving 
up the ranks 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/a-rod-meets-yankees-apologizes-organization-article-1.2110236>
). They need him to compete for a job at third base. They need him to get 
caught with strippers, be admonished for playing in illegal poker games, say 
awkward things at bizarre times and to regularly land on the front and back 
pages of New York’s tabloids. They need him to bring interest to a team in 
transition, one with question marks across the pitching rotation.


The feeling is, of course, mutual - A-Rod badly needs the Yankees. One 
undisputed fact about Rodriguez - the man loves the game, deeply, that despite 
dragging the sport thoughthe baseball mud <http://baseballrubbingmud.com/>. He 
doesn’t want to play out the career in obscurity and he doesn’t want to wind up
like his recent training partner, Barry Bonds 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/mlb-big-league-stew/a-rod-tells-barry-bonds---i-want-to-take-your-record-174221685.html>
, who hit 28 home runs as a 42-year-old and then couldn’t get a job. A-Rod 
always wants to be in the middle of it, and that can only happen in New York.

If A-Rod fails, both the slugger and his franchise will pay the price - 
Rodriguez loses his limelight, New York lose $61m and a whole lot of attention. 
There’s also the possibility of A-Rod being unable to hold up physically, 
meaning the team could find relief by recouping some of that cash via insurance.

Yes, the Yankees brass mostly detest Rodriguez 
<http://nypost.com/2015/02/10/why-a-rod-yankees-peace-likely-will-turn-ugly/>, 
but there are millions of reasons he’s still in pinstripes - they’re ideal 
partners, and now, somewhat improbably, they’re back in business, together.
 