
The title of Oliver Stone's Untold History of the United States, the 10-part 
documentary series that starts its UK run this Friday (Sky Atlantic, 9pm) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/apr/15/oliver-stone-america-went-wrong>, 
is carefully calculated to maximise on the celebrity of the film director, 
possibly surprising viewers at finding such a big-screen name in the 
small-screen listings.

Stone's attempt to correct what he sees as US-centric teaching of 20th-century 
history in American schools is full of arresting connections – sauerkraut was 
renamed liberty cabbage in the US during the first world war and french fries 
became freedom fries during the "war on terror" – and the British screening of 
his series is subject to its own intriguing connection: this week's 
announcement thatthe American drama Bates Motel 
<http://www.aetv.com/bates-motel> has been bought for broadcast in the UK by 
the Universal Channel.

The A&E network series, a prequel to Alfred Hitchcock's 1960 horror movie 
Psycho 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/filmblog/2012/jul/23/my-favourite-hitchcock-psycho>
, may look like TV cashing on a celluloid classic, but Hitchcock himself was a 
pioneer of easy traffic between the screen media – and Stone can be seen as 
following his example.

Either side of making Psycho, Hitchcock was working in television, directing a 
half-hour drama and fronting the series Alfred Hitchcock Presents (1955-61) and 
The Alfred Hitchcock Hour (1962). This ecumenical attitude was not entirely 
artistic:as depicted in the recent film Hitchcock 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/jan/11/hitchcock-the-girl-truth-master-suspense>
, about the making of the horror movie, the director had financial problems 
caused by having, due to studio scepticism, to part-fund the
film himself. But Hitchcock, as a populist and a self-advertiser (he had long 
made cameo appearances in his movies), was also drawn to the possibility that 
the younger art form offered of bringing his work and himself to simultaneous 
audiences of millions.

In appearing as a presenter and host, Oliver Stone is directly following 
Hitchcock, although his participation in Untold History is only vocal, 
consisting of almost hour-long monologues on voice-over. But, in common with 
his cinematic near-contemporary,Martin Scorsese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>, Stone has seen TV as an 
opportunity for documentary rather than fiction.

Before his current factual project, the director of Nixon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/61568/nixon> and JFK 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77907/jfk> had presented America 
Undercover <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0388574/>, a show devoted to exposé 
documentaries, while the director ofTaxi Driver 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36313/taxi.driver> and Goodfellas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/37702/goodfellas> has regularly 
contributed small-screen documentaries, usually on the subject of music, 
includingThe Blues <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Blues_%28film%29> and 
Living in the Material World 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Living_in_the_Material_World>. True, Scorsese 
directed the opening episode ofBoardwalk Empire 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/boardwalk-empire> but he withdrew to 
the production side afterwards.

But the movie director who has done most to suggest an artistic equality 
between TV and cinema is David Lynch. HisTwin Peaks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2010/mar/21/twin-peaks-twenty-years-on> 
(ABC, 1990-91) challenged two powerful beliefs: that TV drama was most suited 
to realism - Lynch worked within a police procedural structure but introduced 
weirdness and surrealism – and that good directors only worked in television as 
an apprenticeship for Hollywood. Twin Peaks significantly reduced cinematic 
snobbery against broadcasting, not least because its picture-house spin-off – 
Lynch'sTwin Peaks: Come Fire Walk With Me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/82658/twin.peaks.-.fire.walk.with.me> 
(1992) – was a flop, while the first series of the TV drama, in which Agent 
Cooper investigates the disappearance of Laura Palmer, remains a recognised 
classic which had huge influence in freeing TV drama from the tyranny of linear 
narrative. Eventually, Lynch himself proved too far ahead of executive taste 
with his next intended TV project,Mulholland Drive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/90677/mulholland.drive>, which was 
rejected when the network saw pilot material and Lynch was forced to turn it 
into a feature film.

It may be significant that Lynch is also an artist: a profession in which 
there is less of a hierarchy between different sizes and styles of art: the 
movie theatre and the living room were simply different canvases to him. In the 
cases of two other directors with substantial credits in both sizes of image, 
there was also a strong element of gratitude. Steven Spielberg andAnthony 
Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anthonyminghella> had both begun in 
television, the former learning his craft on episodes of Marcus Welby MD and 
Columbo, while the latter was script editor on Phil Redmond's children's show 
Grange Hill and wrote for Inspector Morse before making his debut as a 
writer-director with Truly Madly Deeply, made by the BBC as a cinema-TV hybrid.

Partly as a result of these CVs – and also because they belonged to the first 
generation to grow up with TV as a standard part of life - neither directed 
ever succumbed to the disdain for the goggle-box that is common in Hollywood. 
Both returned there even after winning Oscars, attracted by the greater space 
that TV offers for storytelling. Poignantly, Minghella's final directing work, 
screened after his death in 2008, was on the BBC1 Sunday night dramaThe No 1 
Ladies Detective Agency <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00j7zmj>. Spielberg's 
work for the medium includes the impressive war epicsBand of Brothers 
<http://www.hbo.com/band-of-brothers/index.html> and The Pacific 
<http://www.hbo.com/the-pacific/index.html>, although he has risked lowering 
the value of his name in TV credits with looser executive-producer attachments 
to trash such asSmash <http://www.nbc.com/smash/>.

So, while some movie purists may regard Bates Motel as a vulgarisation of a 
classic film, it follows a model of cross-pollination established by Hitchcock 
and which sensible directors, including Spielberg and Stone, now follow.
 