
Out in the industrial wilds of Fish Island, a strip of London wasteland wedged 
between the borders of Hackney and Tower Hamlets, one half ofthe Very Best 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/jul/09/very-best-mtmtmk-album-stream>
 takes me on a walk through his neighbourhood. "That's whereMahiki 
<http://www.mahiki.com/> are opening their massive club for the Olympics 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/olympics-2012>," says the group's Swedish 
producer Johan Karlberg, pointing to several storeys of windowless brick 
warehouse, surrounded by storage units and low-key live/work studios. Less than 
a mile from the main Olympic site but at least several million pounds away from 
anything resembling the cheesy Mayfair party palace made famous by Wills, Harry 
and the cast ofMade In Chelsea 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2011/may/07/grace-dent-tv-od-made-in-chelsea>
, it's an unlikely arrival – set for probable success – in a deserted part of 
the city. Which, as unwieldy cultural metaphors go, is as good a way as any to 
describe the Very Best's place in pop.

The story of how the group first met sounds like the set-up for a crap gag: a 
Frenchman walks into an east London junk shop, meets a music-making Malawian, 
introduces him to his Swedish pal and – boom! – a band is born. It's not much 
of a punchline, I say to Karlberg, but the joke's on me. "It's pure random 
coincidence that we ever happened," he insists. "Me and Etienne [Tron 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/jul/23/paul-morley-showing-off-radioclit1>
, Karlberg's ex-partner in DJ-production unit Radioclit] were living together 
and he moved out. I was looking for a new house with friends and I found two 
places on parallel roads. I went for the one that was nowhere near as nice and 
I was never sure why."

The crummier choice of digs meant that Tron ended up walking past the 
aforementioned junk shop every time he went to visit Karlberg. On one occasion, 
when he'd gone in to haggle over a bike, he met the shop's owner, Esau 
Mwamwaya. The pair got chatting, ended up at a house party thrown by Karlberg, 
and wound up in the studio the next day – a cosmic serendipitous jam. "I still 
find it weird," says Karlberg, enthusiastic to pinpoint the exact moment his 
life took a Sliding Doors-style swerve. "Especially because I had these cool 
neighbours, too. They set me up on a blind date who ended up being my wife."

Casually dressed in purple Levi's cutoffs and carrying a family-size bottle of 
Fanta ("I've stopped drinking booze"), he can talk up a storm about his nerdy 
obsession withDavid Attenborough 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough> and spirituality, 
telling me how he walks along the Lea Valley canal most days for creative 
inspiration. Sometimes, he's even been known to jump in among the beer cans and 
pungent algae: "Come on, I'm Swedish! We swim in anything."

'My first squat, these kids held my friend at knifepoint for eight hours, 
listened to his records and smoked weed all day, and then suddenly left. It 
freaked him out'
 Johan Karlberg 
Now 32, Karlberg emigrated from Linköping when he was 19, moving around on the 
London squat scene with a group of friends for several years. Did he meet any 
particularly creative people? "Mostly junkies," he laughs. "I was just very 
young and naive. The first house we were in, in Kentish Town, these kids held 
my friend at knifepoint for eight hours. They listened to his records and 
smoked weed all day and then suddenly left. It freaked him out."

"Messing around" with Mwamwaya from the autumn of 2006, Radioclit figured they 
would produce an album for him. Esau was a drummer who had picked up gigs with 
local bands back in Malawi before settling in the UK for almost a decade, but 
the real revelation was his voice – a deep, rich, euphoric instrument in its 
own right. "I just started singing but they thought it was too good," Esau 
tells me, radiating charm even down a crackly phone line from Malawi. The group 
ended up releasing a couple ofmixtapes 
<http://www.gorillavsbear.net/2011/05/08/the-very-best-super-mom-mixtape/> 
online and spent most of the following year working on an album as the buzz 
began to build. Mwamwaya appeared on the cover of a US magazine, and MIA and
Vampire Weekend <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/vampire-weekend> offered their 
services. Released at the tail-end of 2009,Warm Heart Of Africa 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/sep/06/very-best-warm-heart-africa> 
plotted a musical map between kwaito beats, Caribbean soca rhythms and French 
synth pop. It could easily have been a genre-splitting earache; instead it 
quietly crept up on assorted end-of-year lists.

But instead of blowing up and riding the hype, the band were foolishly 
overlooked by the public at large. The following year saw Vampire Weekend face 
a sneering backlash while MIA was ridiculed for "trufflegate". Soon, those 
up-and-coming New York buzz bands stopped referencingGraceland 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/19/paul-simon-graceland-acclaim-outrage>
, presumably slipping the album back into the parental record collection. The 
nascent Afropop scene vanished almost as quickly as it had appeared.

Two years on, though, and the Very Best have returned with MTMTMK. Africa is, 
to put it crudely, in fashion. The high street is rammed withKeith Haring 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2012/may/04/keith-haring-google-doodle>
-like prints and so-called west African patterns (that actually originate in 
Dutch textile mills).Afrobeats 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2012/jun/23/eight-afrobeats-artists> 
went mainstream this year when Nigerian star D'Banj, signed to Kanye West's 
label and scored a UK top 10 hit. Oh, and 25 years since he released it, Paul 
Simon is touring Graceland, including this summer's gig for 45,000 people in 
London's Hyde Park.

"This younger generation of artists are easier with their identities now," 
says Mwamwaya. "They will talk about being British Nigerian or Sudanese or 
Ghanaian; they are proud of these roots." He's encouraged by the fact that 
"African" is becoming a less acceptable way to lump the individual cultures of 
some 50 countries together. Now 34, he moved back to Malawi in 2008, where he 
lives with his wife and two young children. "I do miss London," he says. "I 
want to play there and see the audience go mad!" It's wishful thinking at the 
moment, though: Mwamwaya has ongoing UK visa issues after overstaying on his 
original visit.

'It was a crazy time in Malawi … There wasn't enough diesel so the cabbies 
couldn't always drive us home from the studio and we just worked late, late, 
late'
 Esau Mwamwaya. Photograph: Jeff Fusco/Getty 
"This is our clubby album, it feels good," he says. "The last album was a bit 
slow to play live, and we had to use the remixes." As brilliantlynow as MTMTMK 
sounds – it's hard to think of another record that embodies the global pop 
spirit of an Olympic summer so vividly – it wasn't made without its share of 
drama. First came the departure of Etienne Tron, who abruptly left Londonand 
the Very Best following the release of the first album. "There's not much to 
it, really," sighs Karlberg. "It was time to call it quits. He moved back to 
Paris with his wife and had a kid, but we still talk, it's cool."

Then difficult second album syndrome kicked in. "We started making MTMTMK in 
the summer of 2010 and it was almost a disaster," says Karlberg. Sessions in a 
Swedish studio proved frustrating, and a follow-up trip to New York saw the 
Best spend all their money without making the right tunes: "I thought the label 
were going to demand their money back. It was only on the last song we did, 
Moto, that we finally clicked. We knew that's how we wanted it to sound."

Karlberg flew to Lilongwe, Esau's remote hometown in Malawi, where six weeks 
of work finally paid off. "It was a crazy time politically: there were mass 
demonstrations in Malawi and problems for everyone," explains Mwamwaya. "There 
wasn't enough diesel so the cabbies couldn't always drive us home from the 
studio and we just worked late, late, late." Recorded against the backdrop of 
political turmoil, putting dark lyrics about child soldiers over an unlikely 
bounce of joyful beats, MTMTMK countsBaaba Maal 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/baaba-maal>, Amadou & Mariam 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/video/2012/may/27/amadou-and-mariam-room-london-video>
 and K'Naan among its long list of collaborators.

"It all happened fairly organically," Karlberg tells me. "When we started, 
everyone else was getting a lot of shit for borrowing African rhythms, but 
everyone has borrowed everything else from day one. It's funny, because it's 
always white people judging other white people, making this form of political 
correctness come off as a more colonial attitude than anything else. If Paul 
Simon hadn't gone to Africa, would those artists have the same exposure now?"
 