
For years, Belarusians have been divided over whether the future of their 
country should involve closer relations withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> or the European Union.

Belarus is tied to Russia politically, economically and even linguistically. 
Under Moscow's sphere of influence, maintaining the country's independence has 
involved a careful balancing act forPresident Alexander Lukashenko since he 
came to power 20 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/09/-sp-belarus-remains-revolution-behind>
.

But in a poll published by the Institute for Independent Social and Economic 
Political Research (IISEPS) <http://www.iiseps.org/reliz/27/lang/en> in 
December 2013, 36.4% of Belarusians were in favour of closer ties with Russia, 
against 44.6% in favour of the EU. In March, as the crisis in Ukraine 
escalated, that figure changed to 51.5% in favour of further integration with 
Russia, over 32.9% choosing integration with the EU.

With opinion divided in the way, it is perhaps unsurprising that Belarusian 
nationals have reportedly been appearing as volunteers on both sides of the 
conflict inUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>.

Fighting for Ukraine

Earlier this month, Belarusian and Ukrainian media reported that a Belarusian 
military unit called Pahonia <http://charter97.org/en/news/2014/7/9/106313/> 
has been training in the Volyn region of north-western Ukraine, in preparation 
for combat with pro-Ukrainian forces battling pro-Russian separatists in the 
country's east.


The would-be fighters did not reveal their names, fearing potential pressure 
fromthe KGB, Belarus's state security agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/14/belarus-dissidents-defy-kgb-harassment>
, for themselves and those they left at home. But Ukrainian officials say many 
Belarusians have contacted them to join the unit.

Deputy head of the Volyn City Council, Igor Guź, told the Belarusian news 
agency BelaPAN that the unit was formed as part of an initiative of theRight 
Alliance nationalist youth organisation <http://aljans.org/#_1>, which has 
cooperated with Belarusian opposition youth groups for years.

All of the volunteers are less than 30 years-old and many are believed to work 
with Belarusian NGOs.The Malady Front 
<http://www.charter97.org/en/news/2013/10/28/78582/>, an opposition 
organisation, also told BelaPAN that some of its members have made their way to 
Ukraine.

“After we announced the unit's formation, about 50 people showed up and 
contacted us to join it," Guź said. "Sure, there are members of theBelarus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> KGB among them, but we will figure 
out a way of how to deal with it [later].”

In an interview with the Russian Rosbalt news agency <http://www.rosbalt.ru/>, 
an anonymous Pahonia fighter said they had crossed the Belarus-Ukraine border 
legally. If questioned on their return home about what they were doing in 
Ukraine, they will answer that they were working in Kiev, the volunteer said.

“We don’t tell anyone about it, people would not understand. Only our closest 
relatives know that we went to war,” he added.

It is not known whether any of these volunteers have seen combat yet, but 
Semion Semenchenko 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b525af9a-e191-11e3-9999-00144feabdc0.html#axzz38ULMZxGW>
, leader of the pro-Ukrainian Donbass volunteer battalion, had previously 
confirmed that 15 Belarusians joined them in order to fight against pro-Russian 
forces.

The Pahonia volunteers have said they decided to help Ukrainians in the fight 
against Russia because they believe Belarus may face the same threat in the 
future:

"When Georgians said that Ukraine will be the next, nobody believed them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/14/georgia-lesson-for-ukraine-crimea-referendum-trick>
. [Lukashenko] is quite smart, but Moscow will do away with him sooner or 
later. And we hope our Ukrainian brothers will help us just as we help them 
now. We are not being paid any money here," an anonymous volunteer said.

When Georgians said that Ukraine will be the next, nobody believed them

Anton Herashchenko, aide to Ukraine's minister of internal affairs, told 
independent Belarusian radio station Euroradio that “there indeed are 
Belarusian citizens who want to fight against the terrorists in Ukraine", but 
said "Ukrainian legislation does not allow for the use of foreign units." He 
said if they still wanted to fight, "they can easily obtain Ukrainian 
citizenship.”

Fighting for the separatists

There have also been reports of Belarusians on the other side of the conflict. 
They too seek to keep their identities under wraps, after the KGBthreatened 
criminal cases 
<http://belsat.eu/en/wiadomosci/a,20811,ministry-of-interior-belarusian-fighters-in-ukraine-might-be-subject-to-criminal-sanctions.html>
 against them for being mercenaries.

In May, Ukrainian security services were said to have detained a Belarusian 
citizen named Aleh Šabalin, who was accused of having links to pro-Russia 
radical groups andcarrying out preparations for a terrorist act 
<http://charter97.org/en/news/2014/6/5/101417/>. Belarus's foreign ministry 
denied he had been detained 
<http://en.belapan.com/archive/2014/06/05/en_media_mid_v6/>, and said that he 
had been a witness in the case, not the accused. Later reports said he and 
othershad been released <http://charter97.org/en/news/2014/7/10/106385/>. It is 
not possible to independently verify the claims.


However, Natallia Krasouskaja 
<http://www.belsat.eu/en/wiadomosci/a,20839,i-kill-people-battle-frenzy-of-belarusian-female-sniper-on-prorussian-terrorists-side-video-eng-subs.html>
 has become perhaps the most high-profile person claiming to be Belarusian in 
the pro-Russian camp. In YouTube videos, she claims she is from Barysaŭ, in the 
Minsk region, and came to Ukraine in May to support the separatist forces.

Showing her Belarusian passport and addressing Lukashenko, she proclaims in 
one video thatthe self-declared Donetsk People's Republic (DNR) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/19/ukraine-donetsk-pro-russia-militants>
 has the backing of the Belarusian people.

The Belarusian authorities are not as enthused. As Krasouskaja notes in a 
later dispatch, the Belarusian KGB called her mother to inform her that they 
have filed a criminal case against her. She added that other Belarusian 
nationals in the DNR forces have also had criminal cases opened against them.

Lukashenko’s rhetoric

Meanwhile, back in Belarus, it seems that Minsk is trying to learn as much as 
possible from the Ukraine conflict, and protect itself against any such 
violence within its own borders.

On the international stage, Lukashenko performs a balancing act between his 
country's allegiance with Russia and its PresidentVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, while asserting Belarusian 
sovereignty, and maintaining good relations with Ukraine, despite Moscow's best 
efforts to prevent this.

For example, though Belarus did move towards closer ties with Moscow by 
joining the Eurasian Economic Union of former Soviet states in May, itrefused 
to join Russia's trade war with Ukraine 
<http://belarusdigest.com/story/split-eurasian-union-belarus-refuses-join-russias-trade-war-ukraine-18462>
 this month. Whenever he speaks about either side of the conflict in Ukraine, 
Lukashenko tends to be ambiguous, mainly urging all sides to end the fighting 
and restore Slavic unity.

At home, fear of combatants returning as 'agents of foreign influence' is 
leading Belarusian authorities to tighten security measures in an attempt to 
ensure stability, particularly ahead of the2015 presidential election 
<http://belarusinfocus.info/p/6271>. Belarus has not had free elections since 
Lukashenko was voted in in 1994, but opposition groups are active and the
situation in Ukraine may be an unwelcome complication 
<http://belarusinfocus.info/p/6271>.

In July the government amended its anti-terrorist legislation, which includes 
a section on financing terrorism, increased penalties for the recruitment of 
mercenaries as well as for training individuals with the purpose of having them 
participate in terrorist acts.

Lukashenko’s speeches have become increasingly loaded with security rhetoric 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/shocking-belarusian-president-speaks-belarusian-lukashenka/25443432.html>
. He has been urging the authorities to strengthen Belarusian sovereignty on 
the basis of a strong economy and a heightened level of international 
authority, as he seeks to retain full control of the domestic agenda.

On 22 April, in his annual address 
<http://belarusdigest.com/story/lukashenkas-state-nation-address-top-5-messages-17618>
 to the nation, Lukashenko ordered Belarusian security services to closely 
monitor and control those who promotes the “Russian issue” in Belarus, and 
immediately curb these kinds of discussions, regardless of who starts them.


A version of this article first appeared on BelarusDigest 
<http://belarusdigest.com/>
 