
“The effect of the war has been greatly to increase the interest which 
newspaper readers take in world affairs,” states an Observer memo from the 
1940s. It was against this backdrop that the Observer Foreign News Service 
(also known as the OFNS or by its cable address ‘Servob’) was born. A variety of
internal memos 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f1%2f2%2f1%2f1%2f2%2f1%2f3>
,promotional material 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f6%2f1%2f1%2f2%2f8>
 and staff memoirs held in theGNM Archive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> help us to better understand how this 
early syndication service worked.


Under the influence of 1940s foreign editor David Astor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/dec/08/uknews> the Observer had begun 
to specialise in foreign news, facilitated by an expanding network of overseas 
correspondents and London-based diplomatic writers with “specialised knowledge 
of lands from which news is hard to obtain, such as the USSR and Spain”. Like 
much of the Observer’s output, its foreign news coverage was bold and 
interpretive. Yet after the end of the second world war the cost of maintaining 
this network became increasingly expensive for a newspaper that was only 
published once a week.


It is hoped that our service will prove of great advantage to high-quality 
newspapers all over the world.
OFNS proposal, c1946 
A news syndication service seemed like the answer. By selling specially 
commissioned articles produced during the week by overseas staff correspondents,
stringers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stringer_%28journalism%29> and its 
London based specialists to other newspaper publishers who signed up to an 
annual contract, the Observer could ensure a regular supply of high quality 
coverage for its own foreign desk. The enterprise was not to be profit-making, 
instead the income would be reinvested to improve the service. In return each 
subscriber would enjoy the exclusive right in its circulation area to publish 
material written for both for the Observer and the OFNS, in effect enjoying 
“the services of its own expert reporters in half a dozen capitals for an 
outlay appreciably less than the cost of maintaining one such correspondent 
single-handed”.

A trial of the service began in July 1946 with six clients based in the UK, 
South Africa, Australia and New Zealand. Material from overseas correspondents 
was received by cable or telephone and a small London based team was tasked 
with de-cabling and subediting the 12 to 15 weekly despatches and arranging 
their delivery to the London offices of the subscribing newspapers or to 
overseas head offices by airmail or cable.


Wherever O’Donovan goes for The Observer, he goes for the Foreign News 
Service, too.
OFNS promotional booklet, c1960s 
Perhaps the key feature of the OFNS was that it did not try to “beat the clock 
with snaps and rushes, bulletins and flashes”. Rather than competing with 
international wire agencies which provided ‘spot’ news focusing on day-to-day 
happenings, the OFNS sought to offer its subscribers news and features which 
provided “a continuous and coherent picture of world events, interpreting and 
explaining the consequence and significance of the main developments”. Indeed 
the obituary of correspondentPatrick O’Donovan 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1443692149312/Patrick-O'Donovan-obituary_.pdf> 
recalls that he “travelled about and described what was going on as if he was 
an explorer, in the process making large numbers of readers aware of the 
convulsions that were taking place or would continue to take place as the 
imperial powers withdrew or were forced out”.


The OFNS was also bought on the strength of the Observer’s ‘stars’ who, 
alongside journalists, included “authors, university professors and men who 
have acquired special knowledge in government employment”. The ‘stars’ were 
thus prominently displayed in promotional materials. Besides O’Donovan, 
significant contributors in the early years of the service includedPhilip 
Toynbee <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philip_Toynbee>, Colin Legum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/jun/15/theobserver1>, Nora Beloff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-march>
,Lejos Lederer 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1443621850207/Lejos-Lederer-obituary_the-.pdf>, 
Edward Crankshaw 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1443691999786/Edward-Crankshaw-obituary_t.pdf> and 
Robert Stephens 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1443692149466/Robert-Stephens_the-Observe.pdf>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fofns-servob-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443629571859%2Fc8fb2eff-8395-4958-ae47-4cba7eb2bd52-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20Foreign%20News%20Service%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20November%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fofns-servob-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20Foreign%20News%20Service%3A%20teaching%20resource%20from%20the%20GNM%20Archive%20November%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fgnm-archive%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fofns-servob-gnm-archive-teaching-resource%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443629571859%2Fc8fb2eff-8395-4958-ae47-4cba7eb2bd52-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The centrefold of an OFNS promotional brochure from the 1960s features 
biographies of the big name contributors of the day. Photograph: Robin 
Christian for the Guardian 
The Observer and the OFNS also periodically commissioned notable writers to 
“undertake special tours abroad”. These included regular writer for the Observer
Lord Beveridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/07/william-beveridge-hated-term-welfare-state>
 who in January 1947, five years after writing the famousBeveridge report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2014/jul/07/-sp-beveridge-report-revisited-where-now-for-the-welfare-state>
, “was specially engaged to make a months tour of the British, French and 
American zones of Germany”. This resulted in a fascinating series of cables 
whichfeatured in the Observer 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1443621803243/Contrasts-in-Germany_the-Ob.pdf> and 
were also despatched through OFNS.


A downloadable schedule 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1443626578582/OFNS-specimen-output,-1947.pdf> of 
OFNS output for two weeks in 1947 provides an indication of the range of 
articles dispatched in these early days. With article titles such as ‘New 
evidence of Nazi atrocities in Poland,’ ‘The UN Assembly’s debate on Palestine’ 
and ‘Transatlantic air travel today’ it offers a snapshot of world affairs in 
the late 1940s.

The OFNS thus helped Astor to further build the Observer’s international 
reputation for independent coverage of foreign affairs at a time when many 
newspapers were still predominantly concerned with local and national news. In 
‘The Observer: A short history of the world’s oldest newspaper’Stephen Pritchard
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephenpritchard> sums up that “the 
Observer challenged readers’ assumptions of Britain’s place in the world, its 
relations with the emerging nations of Africa and the Middle East and it asked 
hard questions about living in a postwar world dominated by two nuclear 
superpowers”.


Nora Beloff - foreign correspondent: teaching resource of the month from the 
GNM Archive, March 2013
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-march>
By the 1960s the service was sending 25 to 30 despatches a week by airmail or 
cable to over 100 clients worldwide. Commonwealth countries such as Canada, 
Australia, India, New Zealand, Malaysia and Nigeria were particularly well 
represented amongst the service’s subscribers. While the OFNS did have clients 
in the United States, it initially found the market there more difficult to 
penetrate. This was attributed to US papers requiring more up to date news than 
the OFNS provided, greater competition and the fact that British colloquialisms 
seemed less well understood there than in other English speaking countries.

In the 1970s and 80s more newspapers began to recruit foreign correspondents, 
resulting in an increasingly competitive environment for the OFNS worldwide. 
For example Eric Silver, Israel correspondent for the Guardian and the 
Observer, remembers in anoral history recording 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f83&pos=4>
 held in the GNM Archive that the Yom Kippur War of 1973 led to more Middle 
East correspondents. The Observer responded by expanding its syndication 
services beyond foreign news to also include features, pictures, theObserver 
Magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/observer-colour-magazine-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
, books, newsletters, educational resources andPrestel 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prestel>. In the 1980s OFNS also modernised by 
moving the distribution of its dispatches to high speed wire.


In 1993 the Observer was purchased by Guardian Media Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gmg>, owner of the Guardian newspaper. The OFNS 
continued to operate despite being merged with the Guardian’s syndication 
department. To celebrate 50 years of the OFNS in 1996, former editors and 
significant contributors attended an anniversary party held at the National 
Liberal Club. Now renamed the Observer News Service, 25-30 articles are still 
sent out to subscribers each week via the internet, although no stories are 
currently commissioned specifically for the service. This is complemented by a 
separate Observer Sports Service. These products are both part ofGuardian 
Syndication <http://syndication.theguardian.com/> which is responsible for the 
commercial re-licensing of all GNM content.

The GNM Archive <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive> holds a selection of 
material associated with the early days of the Observer Foreign News Service. 
Please seethis page <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/jun/06/3> for 
further information on the archive collections and how to access them.

Further reading:

Researching the history of the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/sep/02/1>

OFNS memorandum 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f1%2f2%2f1%2f1%2f2%2f1%2f3>

OFNS publicity 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OBS%2f6%2f1%2f1%2f2%2f8>
 <https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2002/sep/02/1>

Eric Silver oral history 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=OHP%2f83>

Jim Arlow memoir 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=MEM%2fJDA>

Papers of Alistair Matheson 
<http://guardian.calmview.eu/CalmView/Record.aspx?src=CalmView.Catalog&id=AMA>

Nora Beloff - foreign correspondent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-march>

Foreign news coverage in the 1930s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/2015/jan/02/foreign-news-coverage-in-the-1930s-teaching-resource-from-the-gnm-archive-january-2014>

Reporting Gallipoli
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/01/reporting-gallipoli>
 