
Australians love sport. Each year, 43% of us attend at least one sporting 
event, like a football match. But what is surprising is that each year, twice 
as many Australians – 86% – visit a cultural event or facility.

While we might see ourselves as sporting nuts, these Australian Bureau of 
Statistics figures indicate we spend more time in movie theatres, museums and 
other places of culture than we do cheering in grandstands.

In 2016, as we think about ways to create the jobs of the future, there are 
real opportunities for communities across the nation to embrace the arts as a 
way to attract tourists.

The 70% drop in Australia Council grants for individual artists is staggering 
| Alison Croggon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/19/the-70-drop-australia-council-grants-artists-funding-cuts>
Just as Australians are happy to travel interstate to watch their favourite 
sporting teams in action, people will also travel to see their favourite band 
or exhibition. They’ll drive for hours to see a major music or literary 
festival.

With domestic airfares now very affordable, that creates opportunities for 
communities big and small.

Canberra provides a great example. With its broad range of national 
institutions, including the National Art Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery 
and the National Library, tourism generates $2bn worth of business a year and 
provides 16,400 jobs in the national capital.

Local tourism promotion aims to attract visitors for big art-related events, 
such as the National Gallery’s upcoming Versailles: Treasures from the Palace 
exhibition and then entice them to stick around to enjoy the city’s other 
tourism offerings.

While Canberra has a head start because it is the home to so many national 
institutions, the diversity of the arts means there are opportunities for 
everyone.

In January more than 20,000 people will converge on the New South Wales town 
of Parkes for the annual Elvis festival, which will go for five days and has 
become an important part of the regional economy.

Byron Bay’s annual Bluesfest contributes $28.4m of economic activity to the 
Byron shire each year. In the same way, the Woodford folk festival contributes 
$21m to the Queensland economy.

Recent years have also seen the development of major concerts in vineyards in 
communities like the Hunter valley in NSW, where people come to hear the music 
and stock up on local wines on their way home.

Yet despite these success stories, the Coalition government has cut funding to 
the arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/19/the-70-drop-australia-council-grants-artists-funding-cuts>
, reducing the potential for the emergence of new artistic events that can be 
used to lift local tourism and become international attractions,such as Mona in 
Tasmania. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/09/on-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet>

The Australia Council was the main funding body for the arts in Australia, 
providing a unique approach towards arts funding by working independently from 
the government where possible.

The introduction of convoluted alternatives to the Australia Council by the 
Abbott-Turnbull government, such as the now defunctNational Program for 
Excellence in the Arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-takes-100m-from-australia-council-to-establish-arts-excellence-program>
 and its successor,the Catalyst program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/20/george-brandiss-arts-excellence-fund-slashed-and-renamed-catalyst>
, ripped more than $100m in funding from the Australia Council.

That make no sense.

In 2012-13 the arts employed 200,000 people and contributed $4.2bn to 
Australia’s GDP. If you take into account the revenue generated through the 
production and distribution of Australian films, the numbers are even higher.

David Walsh of Mona: on art, sex and why (gallery) size matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/09/on-the-origin-of-art-david-walsh-launches-monas-most-ambitious-exhibition-yet>
Indeed, 50% of all domestic screen projects that are distributed globally 
depend on support from Screen Australia, an organisation funded entirely by the 
federal government.

It’s time for the government to lift support for the arts, rather than viewing 
it as an easy target for spending cuts.

We need to be more strategic. We need to encourage communities to better align 
artistic endeavours with tourism promotion.

In addition to providing jobs, a well-funded arts sector is also important for 
our Australian culture, which is shaped by the artists, actors and musicians 
that we pay to see perform. Their works speaks to us about our nation and our 
culture.

But just as importantly, our artists, musicians, authors and others involved 
in the arts present Australian stories to the world.

At the grassroots level, the arts – just like sport – strengthen communities 
by bringing people together.

It’s time for our governments to enhance their support for the arts – not just 
for the development of Australian culture, but also a means for creating jobs 
in our tourist sector.
 