
Wednesday 16 June 1976 was a day that would change South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, when some 10,000 black 
children and teenagers took to the streets of Soweto to protest against being 
forced to study in Afrikaans, the language of their white oppressors.

As apartheid police responded to the march with force, the protest turned 
violent. By the end of the day, around 176 young people had been killed and 
thousands more injured when police fired live ammunition into the crowd.

Thirteen-year-old Hector Pieterson was one of the first to die. A photograph 
of his limp body being carried by a fellow student, flanked by his sister 
Antoinette Sithole, has come to immortalise this bleak day in South African 
history.

Speaking to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/jun/14/southafrica.gideonmendel> in 
2006, Sithole recalled the horrors of the day: “While I was talking to [Hector] 
there was another shot. We ran back into hiding. When I emerged, he wasn’t 
there [...] I could see the body frame and then I saw blood coming from his 
mouth. We ran to the clinic, but we could see he was finished. There and then I 
understood he was dead.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fsoweto-uprising-16-june-share-experiences-pictures-perspectives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f5735a68d287654eb27e85db8dd9340998b1b47%2F0_169_1648_2128%2F1648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Soweto%20uprising%3A%20share%20your%20experiences%2C%20pictures%20and%20perspectives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fsoweto-uprising-16-june-share-experiences-pictures-perspectives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Soweto%20uprising%3A%20share%20your%20experiences%2C%20pictures%20and%20perspectives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fsoweto-uprising-16-june-share-experiences-pictures-perspectives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f5735a68d287654eb27e85db8dd9340998b1b47%2F0_169_1648_2128%2F1648.jpg>
 South African photojournalist Sam Nzima, with the photo he took of Hector 
Pieterson. Photograph: Gianluigi Guercia/AFP 
As the international community reacted to the brutal images emerging from 
Soweto, the events of 16 June were pivotal in galvanising the anti-apartheid 
movement. They also cemented the African National Congress’s (ANC) role in 
leading the struggle against white-minority rule.

In the 40 years since, apartheid has been dismantled and the ANC under Nelson 
Mandela has been elected to power. The 16th of June isnow marked as National 
Youth Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/jun/18/youth-day-south-africa-soweto-gallery>
, to honour the children who lost their lives. But how much has life changed 
for South Africa’s young people? We want your help telling this story.

Last year, the country was rocked by nation-wide university protests held 
under the banner of the#FeesMustFall 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23FeesMustFall&src=typd> movement. Students were 
protesting against the government’s plans to raise the cost of tuition, but 
also the failing education system andworsening youth unemployment 
<http://www.bdlive.co.za/national/labour/2015/06/29/youth-unemployment-has-worsened-since-2008-stats-sa-report-shows>
. As they marched, the demonstrators consciously invoked the memory of the 
Soweto student uprisings.

Were you there? Do you have an experience to share?


Were you there on the 16 June, protesting and marching? Did you witness the 
violence? And how do you feel about SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> now, 40 years on?

We want to hear from you, and include your memories, photographs and any other 
materials that capture the spirit of this pivotal moment in the struggle 
against apartheid. Fill in the form below, click on the blue ‘contribute’ 
buttons or, if you prefer, email basia.cummings@theguardian.com



 