
In the 1970s, when we were in school, food allergies were rare. But Australian 
children now have the highest rate of food allergy in the world. Up toone in 10 
infants <http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(16)00381-X/abstract> and 
two in 10 school-aged children have a proven food allergy.

In the 14 years to 2012 there was a 50% increase in hospital visits 
<http://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(15)00702-2/abstract> for 
anaphylaxis, the most severe allergic reaction. Infants and toddlers accounted 
for much of this increase.

The most common food allergies are to nine main food proteins: cow’s milk, 
soy, egg, wheat, peanut, tree nuts, sesame, fish and seafood. Egg and peanut 
allergies are the most common in infants and toddlers.

Altering gut microbes of babies could prevent asthma and allergies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/12/altering-gut-microbes-of-babies-could-prevent-asthma-and-allergies>
New research published today in the Journal of the American Medical Association
 <http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.12623> shows 
the early introduction of egg (from four to six months) and peanuts (from four 
to 11 months) is linked to lower rates of egg and peanut allergy.

The researchers analysed the combined results of trials investigating whether 
food allergens in babies’ diets prevent the development of allergies to these 
foods. They concluded there was “moderate” certainty that early introduction of 
egg or peanut was associated with lower risks of egg and peanut allergy.

They also found that early introduction of gluten (wheat) was not associated 
with an increased risk of coeliac disease.

The researchers used the term “moderate” certainty because the review is based 
on a mix of studies with different designs and of varying quality. Feeding 
studies can also be difficult to “blind 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2947122/>”; for some studies 
participants and researchers knew who was given egg or peanut, so were open to 
some bias.

As a result the authors say more work needs to be done to better understand 
the precise optimal timing for introducing eggs and peanuts.

Nonetheless, these findings affirm the recently updated Australian infant 
feedingconsensus guidelines <>. These state that when parents introduce solids 
– at about six months but not before four months – they should also introduce 
previously avoided foods such as peanut and egg. This should occur in the 
baby’s first year of life.

The problem is, there have been so many changes to guidelines over the last 
few decades that parents are no longer sure what to believe.

In Australia, dietary recommendations aiming to reduce the risk of food 
allergies began to appear in the early 1990s. They recommended infants avoid 
certain foods such as egg and peanut. These guidelines were largely based on 
outcomes of trials focusing on the mother avoiding allergens during pregnancy 
and while breastfeeding.

In 2008, a number of research projects (including our own 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20920771>) questioned whether these older 
studies were flawed because they had not adequately adjusted the results to 
account for the fact that those with a family history of allergies adhere to 
recommendations better than those without, thus biasing the result.

These new studies accounted for this fact. We found, paradoxically, that 
earlier introduction of foods such as egg and peanut, at about six months, 
appeared to protect against food allergy. This has resulted in a complete 
rethink in our approach to preventing food allergy.

(Note that these findings relate to the prevention of food allergies, not the 
management, which remains unchanged.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> with food allergies should 
continue to avoid those foods.)

Based on this research, feeding guidelines began stating that earlier 
introduction did not increase the risk of food allergy and may indeed be 
protective.

These recommendations were strengthened this year after research trials tested 
the effect <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa1414850#t=article> of 
eating common allergens (in particular, peanut) in the first year of life 
compared with completely avoiding them. Theguidelines now recommend 
<http://www.allergy.org.au/images/pcc/ASCIA_guidelines_infant_feeding_and_allergy_prevention.pdf>
 that exposure to egg, peanut and other foods frequently associated with food 
allergy should occur in the first year of life to offer protection.

It’s still not clear if this approach alone will prevent the whole food 
allergy epidemic. Some children will still develop food allergies despite 
following the feeding guidelines.

Gluten wars: skepticism over self-diagnosis and the illness we can't explain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/08/gluten-free-diet-celiac-disease-self-diagnosis>
We know the tendency to develop allergic disease is inherited but 
environmental factors, including the microbiome, vitamin D levels, migration 
effects, the number of siblings and exposure to pets also all appear to play 
influential roles, as does the presence of early onset eczema. Research trials 
are investigating the role these factors play in the development of food 
allergy risk.

In the meantime, experts agree there appears to be a window of opportunity in 
the first year of life where exposure to foods such as peanut and egg decreases 
the risk of allergy to these foods. Diet diversity remains an important part of 
a healthy diet.

• For the most recent infant feeding guidelines and information about 
introducing solid foods to infants, visitthe Australasian Society of Clinical 
Immunology and Allergy <http://www.allergy.org.au/patients/allergy-prevention> 
website

• This article was originally published on The Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/au>
 