
Last week, I made a shocking discovery: some leftwing activists have developed 
a sinister new superpower that enables them to control other people’s actions 
by brainwaves alone. Their first victim was Brendan Eich,appointed then 
un-appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/03/mozilla-ceo-brendan-eich-resigns-prop-8>
 as head of Mozilla, after his financial support for the campaign against gay 
marriage (and in support ofPat Buchanan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/02/controversial-mozilla-ceo-made-donations-right-wing-candidates-brendan-eich>
) came to light. To outsiders like me, it seemed as if a high-profile firm had 
made a decision about its leadership; that its employees and users had engaged 
in vigorous debate about that decision; and that the company had decided to 
reverse it.

But it turned out that opponents of Eich’s new role hadn’t just been voicing 
their opinions. Somehow, by means I’ve yet to understand, they’dforced him to 
resign. That was the phrase used again and again, including in a piece entitled 
The Culture of Shut Up 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/04/the-culture-of-shut-up/360239/>
, by the former Obama speechwriter Jon Lovett, with which the internet declared 
itself richly pleased. “We need to stop telling each other to shut up. We need 
to get comfortable with the reality that no one is going to shut up,” Lovett 
wrote, correctly. But he didn’t mean that Eich’s raucous critics should be 
tolerated. He meant that the Culture of Shut Up had silenced Eich, by forcing 
him to resign. And not just Eich. Lovett listed many more victims, including
celebrity chef-and-alleged-racist Paula Deen 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paula_Deen#Racial_epithet_controversy> and Phil 
Robertson of Duck Dynasty, who, I’m told, is a man on a television show who is
cross about gays <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phil_Robertson#GQ_comments>.

And all that happened before Brandeis University bunglingly offered then 
withdrew an honorary degree for Ayaan Hirsi Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/09/brandeis-withdraws-honorary-degree-ayaan-hirsi-ali-college>
.

Oh, man.

There’s a case that Hirsi Ali should have got that degree. There’s certainly a 
case that, once offered, it shouldn’t have been insultingly withdrawn. (If 
Brandeis wants to debate its honorary degrees among students, staff and others, 
it should do so before it awards them in the first place.) But again it’s been 
striking to watch critics of that decision respond as if certain that something 
much more sinister had taken place. In the New York Times, Ross Douthatcompared 
it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/13/opinion/sunday/douthat-diversity-and-dishonesty.html>
 to a Harvard undergraduate’s hare-brained plan to abolish academic freedom. 
And on FoxNews.com – which, admittedly, is FoxNews.com – columnist Zev Chafets 
reached forthe most staggeringly obnoxious analogy 
<http://www.foxnews.com/opinion/2014/04/10/ayaan-hirsi-ali-victim-honor-killing-brandeis-style/>
 he could think of, describing the withdrawal of the degree as an “honor 
killing”. Yes, you read that right. In deciding not to bestow the degree – 
while extending an open invitation to Hirsi Ali to speak on campus – Brandeis 
was basically guilty of murdering her.

Deep breaths, everybody. Consider the following abstract scenario. An 
organization makes a decision; a vigorous debate follows; as a result, the 
decision is rethought. Is that a cowardly caving to pressure, or is it exactly 
how democratic culture’s supposed to work? Clearly, it might be either, 
depending on the details. But it’s striking how Eich and Hirsi Ali’s supporters 
just assume that what happened must have been the former. Whereas, being 
non-telepathic, I honestly have no idea whether the Brandeis andMozilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mozilla> decision-makers underwent a 
sincere change of view, or still secretly think their first decision was right.

Obviously, you can use speech in ways that undermine free speech: you can 
threaten violence, or shout so loudly as to drown out other voices, or campaign 
in favor of laws that would restrict free speech. But to the best of my 
knowledge, these reprehensible tactics haven’t been a significant feature of 
these disputes. The pundits’ main objection seems to be that the debates 
resulted in a concrete change of policy with which they disagreed.


What's going on? Here’s one hypothesis. For years, a certain kind of media 
commentator has been happy to pontificate on the virtues of free speech, safe 
in the knowledge that it’s them (I should really say “us”) who’d be doing most 
of that speaking, via columns and books and broadcasts. But technology has 
changed that forever. Now you can assume that any decision with public 
ramifications will triggerTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> hashtags, a Facebook protest 
page and more besides, as people who formerly lacked a megaphone make 
themselves heard.

Lovett’s right: in this transformed environment, we all need to remember to be 
kinder to each other. It’s also crucial that organisations learn not to succumb 
to the tiniest pressure, executing screeching U-turns the moment a few people 
complain on social media, because a few people always will. Andrew Sullivan is 
guilty of the slippery slope fallacy, I’d say, inworrying 
<http://dish.andrewsullivan.com/2014/04/04/dissents-of-the-day-63/> that the 
Eich debate – which concerns a top Silicon Valley role of major public 
consequence, and leadership of many gay employees – might lead to an 
ideological litmus test for all jobs. But we definitely mustn’t let that 
happen, either.

Yet I can't help wondering if something else ought to happen, too: namely, 
that pundits who claim to be devoted to free speech should grow a thicker skin. 
The social media cacophony – open to everyone, vigorous, sometimes rude – is 
precisely the vision they’ve been championing for decades. So it’s a little 
depressing to see how rapidly they succumb to attacks of the nerves when it 
actually occurs, then results in decisions they don’t like.


We do need to stop telling each other to shut up. But shouldn't that include 
resisting the instinctive urge to scold people you’d previously never have 
heard from to begin with?
 