
The crises keep coming for Jacob Zuma, and if some in South Africa believe he 
will ride them out, others wonder how many lives he has left. Today it was the 
call for a full judicial inquiry into allegations of corruption at the top 
level of government by the recently departed public protector, Thuli Madonsela,
whose report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/jacob-zuma-protest-pretoria-south-africa-report>
 warned of serious concerns that the president allowed the billionaire Gupta 
family to influence the selections of cabinet ministers. The document, entitled 
State of Capture, explains much of the opposition to Mr Zuma: the belief that 
his leadership has led to a huge expansion inpatronage politics 
<http://afraf.oxfordjournals.org/content/114/455/226>, not only raising moral 
and legal concerns but damaging the country’s capacity to develop. It comes 
days after the chief prosecutordropped fraud charges 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-safrica-gordhan-idUSKBN12V0W7?il=0> against 
the widely respected finance minister, Pravin Gordhan, who had dismissed them 
as politically motivated. Earlier this year, Mr Zuma was forced to apologise 
after South Africa’s top courtruled that he had breached the constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/jacob-zuma-ordered-repay-upgrades-nkandla-home-south-african-state-funds>
 in refusing to repay government funds used in an £11m upgrade to his 
private residence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-south-africa-a-presidents-failings-and-his-countrys-successes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F686ee833d7bdab47084da05c9a39671e1d692372%2F0_19_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20South%20Africa%3A%20a%20president%E2%80%99s%20failings%20and%20his%20country%E2%80%99s%20successes%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-south-africa-a-presidents-failings-and-his-countrys-successes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20South%20Africa%3A%20a%20president%E2%80%99s%20failings%20and%20his%20country%E2%80%99s%20successes%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-south-africa-a-presidents-failings-and-his-countrys-successes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F686ee833d7bdab47084da05c9a39671e1d692372%2F0_19_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘The ANC will not regain support as long as Mr Zuma is in charge.’ Photograph: 
Herman Verwey/AP 
All of this comes at a cost for ordinary South Africans, further denting a 
stagnant economy, and miring a political class in infighting when it could be 
tackling the country’s immense challenges, notably its enduring poverty and 
inequality. Street protests will not determine Mr Zuma’s future, but they are 
indicative of the pressures he faces. African National Congress politicians 
know their remaining moral authority is haemorrhaging and that the bleeding 
cannot be stopped while Mr Zuma is in charge. The condemnations are gathering 
force: this week the Nelson Mandela Foundation – which has previously shunned 
political statements – warned that the wheels are coming off the state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/nelson-mandela-foundation-jacob-zuma-south-africa>
 thanks to his political meddling for private interests.

Nor – and this should concentrate the party’s minds – can the ANC stem its 
loss of political support, which has already cost it control of major citiesin 
this year’s local elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/south-africans-deliver-stinging-rebuke-to-anc>
. It will not regain this support as long as Mr Zuma is in charge. His 
previously solid rural support base is showing signs of weakening and even his 
closer supporters may be thinking again – patronage networks can last only as 
long as there are prizes to distribute. Whether internal opposition to Mr Zuma 
is coherent enough for rivals to challenge him directly remains to be seen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-south-africa-a-presidents-failings-and-his-countrys-successes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1e028ac40a04cd3a184bb23cb953b518a66d942%2F161_328_1826_2281%2F1826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20South%20Africa%3A%20a%20president%E2%80%99s%20failings%20and%20his%20country%E2%80%99s%20successes%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-south-africa-a-presidents-failings-and-his-countrys-successes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20South%20Africa%3A%20a%20president%E2%80%99s%20failings%20and%20his%20country%E2%80%99s%20successes%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-south-africa-a-presidents-failings-and-his-countrys-successes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1e028ac40a04cd3a184bb23cb953b518a66d942%2F161_328_1826_2281%2F1826.jpg>
 Thuli Madonsela on her last day in the office of the public protector in 
Pretoria, South Africa, 14 October 2016. Photograph: STR/EPA 
Whatever the president’s future, there is cause for optimism as well as 
concern. The apparently endless controversies surrounding him are testimony to 
what South Africa has got right as well as what Mr Zuma and his friends have 
got wrong. Tellingly, the president dropped his legal attempt to block the 
report’s release: the country still has strong courts, a vibrant media and a 
lively civil society – as evidenced by the student protests that led to the 
scrapping of fee increases. Its institutions have so far stood up to Mr Zuma 
and pushed back to maintain their independence. South Africa’s constitution has 
played an important role in all this, as have parts of the ANC. So too have 
individuals such asMs Madonsela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/22/search-successor-public-protector-thuli-madonsela-south-africa>
, much admired for her tenacity in the face of intense political pressure. A 
growing number of people are dismayed and distressed by Mr Zuma’s actions, but 
these struggles are a powerful reminder of why institution-building matters.
 