
There are sterling reasons for getting excited about 14 November. It's the day 
Eurostar <https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurostar> moves to its new St 
Pancras home, but the 20 minutes it shaves off journey times to Paris and 
Brussels is only the tip of the iceberg. The launch last year of the TGV Est 
high-speed link brought Alsace and the Champagne region within easy reach of 
Paris, which means that in the time it would take you to get from Paddington to 
Penzance you can be sipping a speciality beer in a Belgian cafe or shopping in 
a French fleamarket.

Mark Smith of seat61.com, the essential website for people planning a rail 
trip in Europe, says: 'More and more people seem to be trying out train travel 
to Europe as a low-carbon, low-stress alternative to the hassle of flying.'

From mid-November, people living in central and northern England and Scotland 
will find crossing the Channel significantly quicker. Timetables are simple, 
and through tickets are easy to buy. Next month, ski trains will start, 
including one from Gare du Nord that has couchettes and a disco carriage. No 
baggage reclaim and short check-in times are other great reasons to celebrate 
train travel this winter. Here is our pick of weekend breaks, all of which 
require only one change of train. Journey times include transfer times.

1 ANTWERP, BELGIUM

Time: 2hrs 58minutes 

Thanks to the diamond trade and a large art school, Antwerp is particularly 
good at jewellery. You'll also find fabulous fashion designers (the Antwerp 
Six, which include Dries Van Noten, all have their bases there). It's easy to 
walk around, and the clubs are very good, thanks to the art school population - 
don't miss the Cafe d'Anvers. With a charming cathedral and gorgeous medieval 
architecture, it's also the place to indulge in some Rubens - the cathedral 
houses four of his early works, and he makes a strong showing in the Rockoxhuis 
museum and his former home, the Rubenshuis. Wonderful artisanal chocolate 
(easily as good as the stuff sold in Brussels) and superb mussels make it a 
great weekend choice.

Where to stay: The Hotel 't Sandt (00 32 3 232 9390; www.hotel-sandt.be), 
fashioned from a rococo building that used to be a soap factory, is suitably 
stylish and has doubles from €160, including breakfast.

Departure board: on Friday, take the 4.05pm Eurostar from St Pancras, arriving 
after one hour and 51 minutes in Brussels. You have 29 minutes to change 
platforms and board the Thalys 9353 service at 7.25pm arriving at Antwerp's 
Berchem station at 8.03pm.

Cost: from £59 return.

2 REIMS, FRANCE 

Time: 3 hours 42 minutes 

Self-drive holidays make little sense when alcohol is involved. Reims is a 
classic French city with churches, chateaux and great restaurants as well as a 
good choice of markets and food shops. And then there are the city's champagne 
houses, including Taittinger and Mumm (both of which offer tours that end in 
tastings).

Where to stay: Les Crayeres (00 33 3 2682 8080; www.lescrayeres.com) offers 
high-end hedonism with a three Michelin-starred restaurant just down the 
(predictably grand) staircase. Despite its setting in a 17-acre park of verdant 
loveliness, it is walking distance from the main Champagne houses; doubles 
start at €290 a night, not including breakfast. Alternatively, there are a 
number of more reasonably priced hotels, including Hotel de la Paix (00 33 3 
2640 0408; www.bestwestern-lapaix-reims.com), on rue Buirette, which has 
doubles from €115, room only.

Departure board: Take the 7.30am Friday Eurostar to Paris, arriving 10.56am. 
You then need to walk from the Gare du Nord to the Gare de l'Est, but it's 
clearly signposted and will only take five minutes. There, board the 11.27am 
TGV 2723, arriving Reims 45 minutes later. You can also get to Reims by 
changing at Lille, but connection times are far longer.

Cost: from £79 return.

3 AACHEN, GERMANY

Time: from 3 hours 53 minutes

The city known to Francophones as Aix-la-Chapelle is a blend of thermal waters 
and gingerbread'n'mulled wine-style Christmas markets (we're in Germany, if 
only just). There's a large amount of history to mull, as well as admirable 
beer (it's very close to Belgium). Aachen's cathedral, built on Roman 
foundations, is a Unesco World Heritage site. You'll also find the thermal 
waters that persuaded Charlemagne to make Aachen his capital in 794. The water 
at Carolus Thermen (www.carolus-thermen.de) comes in a variety of temperatures 
and pools, plus restaurants and massages. Prices start from €10 for 
two-and-a-half hours.

Where to stay: The Sofitel Aachen Quellenhof (00 49 241 91320; 
www.accorhotels.com) is in a mansion built for the Kaiser in the First World 
War. It features its own thermal spa, with ice grotto, Turkish bath and sauna. 
Doubles from €120.

Departure board: Take the 4.05pm Eurostar from St Pancras, arriving in 
Brussels at 6.56pm. Change platforms and take the Thalys 9453 service departing 
7.22pm, arriving at Aachen at 8.58pm.

Cost: from £69 return.

4 TOURS, FRANCE

Time: 4 hours 17 minutes

On the banks of the Loire, Tours has a medieval heart of half-timbered houses, 
a grand gothic cathedral and an abundance of chateaux. Trawl the 30 markets for 
everything from food to antiques, see the cedar planted by Napoleon in the 
garden of the Musée des Beaux-Arts, then head to Place Plumereau for an 
alfresco lunch. A short bus ride to the east is Vouvray, where you can walk 
among the vines, and visit the cellars where the grapes are turned into the 
famous wine.

Where to stay: Fifteen minutes by taxi from the station, in a village right on 
the river half-way between Tours and Vouvray, is the Hotel Les Hautes Roches 
(00 33 247 528 888; www.leshautesroches.com). It's quite unique, an 
18th-century former monastery built from the limestone cliff.

Departure board: Take the 12.30pm Friday Eurostar to Paris, arriving 3.50pm. 
You then need to take Metro line 4 south to Gare Montparnasse, where you pick 
up the 4.45pm TGV 8347, arriving in Tours at 5.47pm. This connection is 
recommended on Eurostar's website, but 55 minutes to change stations (14 Metro 
stops) may be a little stressful. However the five other daily Eurostar-TGV 
connections from London to Tours all allow slightly longer, between 75 and 94 
minutes.

Cost: from £79 return.

5 THE HAGUE, THE NETHERLANDS

Time:4 hours 21 minutes 

The Netherlands will really shine as a rail destination in about a year's 
time, when a new high-speed train line opens across the country. In the 
meantime, the Hague, a city usually overshadowed by Amsterdam, is a two-hour 
trip from Brussels and a delight to visit (you'll find none of your stoner 
hen'n'stags here). As well as a growing reputation for trying international war 
criminals, it has art galleries (including one devoted to the phantasmagoric 
art of Maurits Escher), excellent restaurants, bracing beach walks and boutique 
hotels.

Where to stay: The Paleis Hotel (00 31 70 362 4621; www.paleishotel.nl) is 
opposite the Royal Palace. A 17th-century building, complete with underground 
passages linking it with a nearby convent, it has 20 rooms, all in a style that 
could be described as Marie Antoinette with added comfort (good beds and wifi); 
double rooms from €139 a night.

Departure board: Take the 8.05am Eurostar to Brussels, arriving at 10.56. The 
11.25am Thalys 9321 then takes two hours to reach the Hague.

Cost: from £59 return.

6 LYON, FRANCE

Time:4 hours 56 minutes

In the heart of the Rhone valley, Lyon is one of France's great gastronomic 
cities. It has an art scene that rivals Paris in reputation, a network of 
medieval and 19th-century underground passages, genuinely engrossing museums 
and an endless selection of restaurants. A general vibrancy includes some fine 
markets: at Les Halles, chefs, residents and tourists come to stock up at Mere 
Richard's cheese shop and Colette Sibilia's charcuterie.

The bo-bo (bohemian bourgeois) area of Croix Rousse has an organic market on 
Saturday mornings while the quaysides have a craft and flea market on Sunday 
mornings. Antique-hunting is an especially serious business here - the Cite des 
Antiquaires by the Tete d'Or park is vast. Of all the museums, the most 
unmissable is the Institut Lumiere (00 33 4 7878 1895; 
www.institut-lumiere.org), which charts the Lumiere brothers' influential 
forays into film-making in the 1890s and is housed in the family mansion.

Where to stay: The College Hotel (00 33 4 7210 0505; www.college-hotel.com), 
housed in a converted school, has taken an educational theme and runs with it: 
all-white rooms have lockers that act as wardrobes; it also make copious use of 
blackboards and vintage text books, all with a disciplined sense of humour; 
doubles from €105.

Departure board: Take the Friday 9.25am Eurostar, arriving Paris at 12.47. You 
have 43 minutes to take the RER line D to Gare de Lyon, from where TGV 6625 
departs at 1.30pm, arriving at Lyon's Part-Dieu station at 3.21pm.

Cost: from £99 return.

7 STRASBOURG, FRANCE 

Time: 5 hours 11 minutes

The extension of the high-speed TGV Est line has brought this city closer and 
it's far more interesting than its status as home of the European Parliament 
would suggest. Alsace is strong on foie gras: in addition there are canals to 
cycle around, a lively student population and the ridiculously pretty Petite 
France area to explore. Jean Arp, founder of the Dadaist movement, came from 
Strasbourg and the Museum of Modern and Contemporary Art fetes him and his 
contemporaries.

Where to stay: The Hotel du Dragon (00 33 3 8835 7980; www.dragon.fr) is cool 
without being cold; and this 32-room hotel is well placed for La Petite France. 
Doubles from €79, room only.

Departure board: Take the 8.32am Friday Eurostar to Paris, arriving 11.47. It 
is a short walk from Gare du Nord to Gare de l'Est, where you catch the TGV 
2055, departing 12.24, arriving in Strasbourg 2 hours 19 minutes later. Again, 
it's possible to change at Lille, but Gare de l'Est has more and faster trains.

Cost: from £89 return.

OVERNIGHT DELIVERY

 On longer journeys, travelling on a sleeper service makes often makes more 
sense. Book yourself into a private berth and wake up in your chosen city.

8 BERLIN, GERMANY

Time: 11 hours 36 minutes

Berlin is currently the most exciting European city for pretty much everything 
from fashion to music and art. You could, theoretically, do away with the need 
for a hotel room on the Saturday night by clubbing till dawn, returning on the 
sleeper on Sunday night. Realistically, however, booking a hotel room is a good 
idea.

Where to stay: Ku'damm 101 (00 49 520 0550; www.kudamm101.com) does the 
crossover between club and hotel far better than hotels in New York or Miami. 
In the desirable Wilmersdorf area, it has large loft-style rooms with colour 
schemes varying by floor according to Le Corbusier's colour series. Doubles 
from €119.

Departure board: Take the 7.35pm Eurostar (any weekday) to Brussels, arriving 
at 10.32pm. From Brussels, the DB NachtZug 243 leaves at 11.41pm, arriving at 
Berlin Hauptbahnhof at 8.11am.

Cost: from £134pp return in a six-berth couchette through Rail Europe.

9 VENICE, ITALY

Time: 18 hours 23 minutes

From the UK, take an afternoon Eurostar to Paris, stop for a couple of 
aperitifs (the Terminus Nord is a classic French bistro) followed by an 
overnight train from Gare de Bercy (a minuscule station close to Gare de Lyon), 
waking up in Venice's Santa Lucia station next morning.

Where to stay: The Hotel Al Ponte Antico (00 39 041 241 1944; 
www.alponteantico.com) is a three-star hotel on the Grand Canal close to the 
Rialto, with a terrace overlooking the canal. Doubles start at €190.

Departure board: Take the 2.05pm Eurostar to Paris, arriving 5.26pm. To reach 
Gare de Bercy from Gare du Nord, take the RER line B or D then Metro line 14 to 
Bercy, from where the station is a few minutes' walk. Or a taxi from Gare du 
Nord should cost less than €20. The Stendhal sleeper leaves at 8.28pm, arriving 
at Verona at 7.25am and Venice at 9.28am.

Cost: £111pp return in a six-berth couchette through Rail Europe, as before.

10 BARCELONA, SPAIN

Time: 15 hours 54 minutes

One of Europe's best overnight trains, the Trenhotel Joan Miro travels from 
Paris to Barcelona. There are a variety of accommodation options on board, 
including Gran Classe sleepers - pure train luxury where cabins have their own 
showers, and the price includes dinner and breakfast.

Where to stay: Just down the road from Franca tation, the Market Hotel in 
Passatge Sant Antoni Abat (00 34 93 325 1205, www.markethotel.com.es) has 
double rooms (with typically pared-down Barcelona decor of black, white and 
red) from €88, including breakfast.

Departure board: Take the 3.30pm Eurostar, arriving at 6.56pm. The sleeper 
leaves Gare d'Austerlitz (Metro line 5) at 8.32pm, arriving in Barcelona at 
8.24am.

Cost: from £162pp return in a four-berth couchette through Rail Europe, as 
before.

· All tickets featured are available from Rail Europe (0844 848 4070; 
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk/>); you can also book many of 
them with Eurostar (0870 518 6186;eurostar.com 
<http://www.eurostar.com/dynamic/index.jsp>). European Rail (erail.co.uk 
<http://www.erail.co.uk>) can tailormake luxury short breaks for individuals to 
destinations as diverse as Chantilly in France and the seaside resort of Sitges 
in Spain. Railbookers (0844 482 1010;railbookers.com 
<http://www.railbookers.com/>) specialises in railpackages across Europe. Great 
Rail Journeys (01904 521936;greatrail.com <http://www.greatrail.com/>) offers 
escorted tours by train, including several Christmas markets. Ffestiniog Travel 
(01766 512400;festtravel.co.uk <http://festtravel.co.uk/>) offers both guided 
and individual trips.
 