

Torture porn? A still from the original Hostel.

The angriest man in the blogosphere this week has surely been David Poland, 
author ofThe Hot Blog <http://www.mcnblogs.com/thehotblog>, and among the first 
lucky individuals to see Eli Roth's torture porn opus Hostel Part 2. Not that 
Poland was invited to a screening of the as-yet unreleased horror sequel - 
instead, he bought a$5 pirate DVD from a man in the street in Seattle 
<http://www.mcnblogs.com/thehotblog/archives/2007/06/hostel_ii_oh_th.html> 
"calling out gently 'Movies - I got movies.'"

But Poland's ire wasn't provoked by shoddy picture quality. Instead, it was 
the base nature of Roth's film-making that enraged him - and one scene in 
particular involving actress Heather Matarazzo, its contents being memorably 
described as "disgusting, degrading, misogynistic, soulless shit."

"And at that moment," Poland went on, "for me this was no longer just about a 
stupid, masturbatory, poorly directed piece of horror porn. Eli Roth became a 
little less human to me [...] I never did respect Roth's work. Now, if he and I 
crossed paths, I would refuse to shake his hand."

Poland's problem, and in this it is hard to argue, seems to be not just with 
the film itself, but also Roth's media spin of his work as some kind of 
quasi-feminist reclamation of images of women in peril, a nauseating old 
chestnut if ever there was one. That said, Roth is nothing if not a hustler, 
well aware that as long as people are talking about him, he'll be hearing a 
ker-ching down the line - and in that respect, Hot Blog, the readers that have 
filled its comment boxes, the blogs that have weighed in on the issue and, of 
course, now me too have all only helped make that ker-ching louder.

(On a secondary note, for me one of the weirder aspects of the whole episode 
is that the offending scene revolves around Matarazzo, chipmunky star of Todd 
Solondz's mid-90s breakthrough Welcome to the Dollhouse, who always seemed set 
for greater things than becoming one of Eli Roth's meat puppets. Still, her 
presence does raise the issue of who ultimately might be the more repulsively 
misanthropic film-maker alive - Roth or Solondz?)

Meanwhile, Screen Grab has an inspired post 
<http://www.nervepop.com/nerveblog/screengrabblog.aspx?id=107e11977#11977> 
about what could perhaps best be called imaginary friend movies and the serial 
killer flick Mr Brooks. Starring Kevin Costner as the parodically upstanding 
citizen of the title, the film follows his (largely unsuccessful) struggle to 
suppress his murderous id - an id given the human form of William Hurt, with 
who Costner enjoys philosophical chit-chats en route to and from slayings. 
"This summer's new cult comedy classic might be Mr Brooks," the blog remarks. 
"Whether it ultimately makes the weight will depend on whether it sticks around 
in theaters long enough for somebody to see it."

Elsewhere, thankfully free of bloodlust and the id, Twitch has news 
<http://www.twitchfilm.net/archives/010298.html> of three gifted European 
film-makers joining forces - the incomparable Aki Kaurismaki, Norway's Bent 
Hamer (Factotum) and Dágur Kari, director of 2003's fine Icelandic character 
study Noi Albinoi. The idea is that each will contribute a half hour of footage 
to a full feature - although anthologies of this kind don't have a particularly 
happy history, I'd personally rather watch thirty minutes of Kaurismaki than 
ninety of most film-makers anyway.

And filed under Miscellaneous, we have: Film Fatale on the somewhat dubious 
United 300 
<http://www.mcnblogs.com/filmfatale/2007/06/united_300_wins_mtv_prize_1.html> 
(not coming to a cinema near you soon); Flickhead onClaude Chabrol at the beach 
<http://flickhead.blogspot.com/2007/06/day-at-beach.html>; and lastly, the 
return after a long absence of Face Knife, offering up a handyguide to this 
summer's blockbusters <http://www.thefaceknife.org/?page_id=107>, in handy 
print out-and-cut-out-and-keep form. Fun for all the family indeed.
 