
Post-colonial Africa is in its fourth generation. Over the past few decades, 
each generation has had a specific role to play: the first generation fought 
for, and gained, independence from their colonisers. The second generation, 
marked by greed and corruption, largely destroyed all that the first had fought 
for. The third was tasked with cleaning up the mess made by the second.

So where does that leave us – Africa's fourth post-independence generation? It 
is up to us to build large-scale prosperity for Africa for the first time in 
its post-colonial history. Although much remains to be done, the second 
generation's mess has largely been cleaned up and Africa is the most stable it 
has been in decades. Inter- and intra-state conflictis declining 
<http://afraf.oxfordjournals.org/content/111/443/179.full#fn-5> and trade is 
booming. Africa's5 % annual GDP growth 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2014/04/07/africas-growth-set-to-reach-52-percent-in-2014-with-strong-investment-growth-and-household-spending>
 isfour times that of the EU 
<http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/tgm/table.do?tab=table&init=1&plugin=1&language=en&pcode=tec00115>
, and between 2011 and 2015, African countries will account forseven of the ten 
fastest-growing 
<http://www.pwc.com/us/en/view/issue-16/strategies-win-african-business.jhtml> 
economies in the world.

In many African countries, reliance on foreign aid is declining while foreign 
investment is pouring in. Across the continent, people are healthier, better 
educated, and more connected with each other and the rest of the world than 
ever.

Our generation's challenge is to find a way to capitalise on these 
unprecedented changes and achieve transformative growth. Africans everywhere 
are seizing the opportunity to propel Africa forward and establish ventures 
capable of addressing the continent's unique challenges and opportunities. 
Consider Alpesh Patel, the Ugandan-born chief executive and founder ofMi-Fone 
<http://www.mi-fone.mobi/en/>, the first African mobile phone company. Mi-Fone 
has a presence in15 African countries <http://www.mi-fone.mobi/en/#About> and 
is leading cultural change by launching the firstAfro emoticons 
<http://www.itnewsafrica.com/2014/03/first-afro-emoticons-launched-by-oju-africa/>
, becoming the first company to address the lack of diversity in the world of 
Emojis.

Investors are recognising the role of entrepreneurship in building Africa's 
prosperity. This year, members of the African Leadership Network (ALN), a 
community of influential young African leaders, pooled $2m to address 
early-stage entrepreneurs' greatest challenge – access to capital. With these 
funds, ALN is launchingALN Ventures 
<http://www.africanleadershipnetwork.com/whatwedo/alnventures.aspx?Page=VE>, a 
pan-African accelerator programme that identifies and supports entrepreneurs 
who have scalable private ventures. It connects them with funding, coaching, 
mentoring and strategic skills to enable them to grow their ventures from local 
startups into regional powerhouses that will create jobs and catalyse Africa's 
prosperity.

Such developments are driving Africa's renaissance. People everywhere are 
replacing their outdated notions of a continent ridden with poverty, violence, 
and despair with one of opportunity, drive and innovation. Africa's success 
story is finally becoming mainstream – yet sustained growth is not inevitable. 
Policy environments at both the national and global levels must be favourable 
to entrepreneurs. Nationally, entrepreneurs must be enabled to build their 
businesses through clear ules and regulations and concerted efforts to tackle 
corruption.

There have been some successes in this area. Rwanda, devastated by genocide 
only 20 years ago, hasrocketed 
<http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/rwanda> to 32nd worldwide 
on the World Bank's "ease of doing business" ranking. Botswana, 30th on
Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index 
<http://www.transparency.org/country#BWA>, is one of the world's least corrupt 
countries. And at the international level, trade and investment agreements must 
reduce protectionism and allow African businesses to participate fully in the 
global economy. These improvements must spread in order to support 
entrepreneurs, scale up innovations and make a real impact on ordinary 
Africans' lives.

Despite the continued challenges of achieving positive change within the 
African context, I have full faith in this fourth generation: a brilliant and 
diverse community of innovators, leaders and visionaries. Every day, we are 
coming up with original and impactful ways of realising our shared purpose of 
unlocking Africa's full potential. If we don't do it, who will?

Fred Swaniker is founder of the African Leadership Network 
<http://www.africanleadershipnetwork.com/common/index.aspx>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 