
What would be on your list of ingredients for a perfect summer seaside 
village? A sandy beach, of course, preferably in a picturesque bay. Then 
perhaps one tea room, one shop, one small hotel (with sea views, naturally), 
one ancient church, one coastal path along the cliffs, one friendly pub, and, 
if it's not too greedy, one romantic castle. Stir together before placing in a 
warm micro-climate. Hey presto, you have just imagined Manorbier. And despite 
its Gallic-sounding name, you only have to travel to south-west Wales to enjoy 
it.

I have a confession to make: this was not my first trip to the village. Since 
coming here in 2002 to stay in a cottage – and being thoroughly smitten – I've 
managed to return at least once a year. So, as the 349 bus pulled out of 
Haverfordwest and prepared to describe a glorious arc acrossPembrokeshire 
<http://www.visitpembrokeshire.com/>, the anticipation mounted with each town 
and village we passed along the way.

It's some build up, too. Haverfordwest's castle 
<http://www.haverfordwest-town-museum.org.uk/castle.asp> is as impressive as it 
is scandalously unheeded. The long high bridge over the Daugleddau had me 
swivelling my head from side to side as I tried to take in the magnificent 
views both up and down river. Pembroke, with its rather more famous castle also 
boasts a couple of churches converted into two vast antique curio emporia in 
which I've spent many a happy hour. There's the village of Lamphey, home to the 
best jam doughnuts in the land. Then, finally, the long sweep of road past the 
football pitch and we were in Manorbier.

Writing at the end of the 12th century, the chronicler Giraldus Cambrensis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerald_of_Wales> (Gerald of Wales) called the 
place "the pleasantest spot in Wales". Were he to return today, he would no 
doubt be gratified to see that nothing has changed to alter that opinion. 
Looking around at the castle on one hill, the church on another, and the sea 
below the two, I was already buzzing at the thought that I was about to spend 
what is as near to a perfect day as can be had.

I checked in at the comfortable Castlemead Hotel – a former "gentleman's 
residence" whose secluded sun-trap of a garden has views of the bay – and 
sauntered along to the shop-cum-post office run by a mother and daughter, which 
has miraculously escaped the recent closures. I bought an ice-cream and headed 
for a footpath that dives down through woods to the ivy-clad tower of a 
medieval dovecote. The doves have long since flown. Around here the jackdaw is 
king – a large flock lives in the castle walls and swoops around each day at 
dusk, adding an air of drama to the otherwise untrammelled scene.

The beach is the domain of another congregation clothed in black – surfers. 
Manorbier Bay is very popular with the wet suit set but there's still plenty of 
room for rockpoolers and bucket-and-spaders. The locals are very proud of their 
beach's long held Blue Flag status. I climbed up the coastal path to view it 
all from theKing's Quoit 
<http://www.megalithic.co.uk/article.php?thold=-1&mode=flat&order=0&sid=1398>, 
a Neolithic burial chamber high above the bay. I suspect it's bordering on 
sacrilege but there has been the odd occasion when I've crawled underneath the 
cromlech's large capstone when caught out in a shower. Today, however, the sun 
cloaked everything in early summer warmth and I was glad of the breeze as the 
path took me out of the bay and along the coast.

The 186-mile  Pembrokeshire Coast Path 
<http://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/trail.asp?PageId=33> leads the walker through 
ascents and descents totalling 35,000 feet, and the section around Manorbier 
makes its own contribution to the slopefest. To the west, it undulates away to 
Swanlake Bay, where cream teas on the lawn of a farm await; the 
film-set-beautiful Stackpole Quay; and unspoilt Barafundle Beach which can only 
be reached on foot and is often lauded as the best beach in Britain 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/tm_objectid=14297946&method=full&siteid=50082&headline=welsh-beach-most-beautiful-in-britain-name_page.html>
. But I was wandering east to gaze down on a landscape that I imagine would not 
look out of place on Jupiter – the old red sandstone shoreline is carved into 
enormous ruts by the sea, resembling saw cuts made by a drunken carpenter.

On the other side of the bracken topped headland, the Norman church with its 
bright white tower has the best views of the bay and the castle. If you've seen 
the filmI Capture the Castle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QLpKo__1160&feature=related>, the latter will 
need no introduction, for this is the fortress in which Romola Garai comes of 
age while curing Bill Nighy's character of his writer's block. And it's just as 
spectacular as it looks on screen, with spiral staircases, tower roofs, and 
ancient nooks and crannies aplenty.

All that remained to complete my day was a stroll along to Chives tea room for 
a bite to eat before crossing the road to the Castle Inn. Sunday night is quiz 
night here but be warned – people who are smart enough to live in the finest 
seaside village in Britain are unlikely to be fazed by a question on the small 
print in the Treaty of Versaille.

Getting there

First Bus No 349 runs from Haverfordwest to Tenby via Manorbier; All day bus 
pass – Adult £5.25, Child £2.40, Family £10.50; firstgroup.com 
<http://www.firstgroup.com/ukbus/wales/swwales/home/index.php>; +44 (0)1792 
582233.
Castlemead Hotel. Doubles from £80; castlemeadhotel.com 
<http://www.castlemeadhotel.com>; +44 (0)1834 871358.
Manorbier Castle. Open Easter to September; Adult £3.50, Child £1.50; 
manorbiercastle.co.uk <http://www.manorbiercastle.co.uk>; +44 (0)1834 871394. 

· Dixe Wills is the author of Places to Hide in England, Scotland and Wales 
(Icon Books £7.99)
 