
Immediately after his 10,000m triumph, Mo Farah was asked by the BBC's 
trackside reporter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DcXjzP5oFwQ> what it takes 
to win gold. "It's the grafting and hard work," he said, "120 miles, week in, 
week out – long distance is a lonely event."

Consciously or not, Farah was echoing a phrase that first drifted into the 
mind of writerAlan Sillitoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/25/alan-sillitoe-obituary> one 
chilly November morning in 1959. Before his death in 2010, Sillitoe recalled: 
"I was staring out of the window when this figure wearing shorts and vest came 
jogging past. I wrote at the top of the page: The Loneliness of the Long 
Distance Runner. I didn't know what it meant. I thought I might write a poem."

What came out wasn't a poem but a piece of short fiction unlike any other: a 
torrent of uncensored prose expressing the thoughts of Colin Smith, a 
17-year-old borstal boy with a talent for running. "If I had the whip hand," 
Colin says, "I'd take all the cops, governors, pen-pushers, army officers, 
Members of Parliament, stick them up against a wall and let them have it, like 
they'd have done with blokes like us."

For many, the image of Sillitoe's runner is indelibly associated with Tom 
Courtenay, pounding through the bleak yet beautifully framed landscapes ofTony 
Richardson's classic film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XXMS5ZXKvYA>. One of 
the landmark achievements ofthe British New Wave 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/445176/index.html>, the film is 50 this 
year. But Sillitoe's proletarian parable shows no signs of ageing: playwright
Roy Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/07/roy-williams-sucker-punch-interview>
 has now created a stage version, updating the action to the aftermath oflast 
year's Tottenham riots in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/aug/06/tottenham-riots-protesters-police>.

In Sillitoe's book, Colin is sent down for robbing a bakery. Williams's 
adaptation, presented byPilot Theatre <http://www.pilot-theatre.com/>, finds 
him convicted for looting a Greggs. This is not Williams' first foray into 
sport and social disturbances: his 2010 dramaSucker Punch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/20/sucker-punch-theatre-review> set 
the rivalry between two north London boxers against the background ofthe 1985 
riots on the Broadwater Farm estate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/aug/07/tottenham-riot-broadwater-farm>
. "I was actually quite wary of focusing on the riots, or even young people 
again," Williams says. "But then when everything erupted, I felt I had to 
respond."

Sillitoe's story seemed the perfect vehicle: the famously ambiguous conclusion 
(in which Colin deliberately loses the race) leaves it up to the reader to 
decide whether this is an act of rebellion against the established order, or a 
capitulation. "It was precisely how I felt when I saw the TV images of young 
people going out on a looting spree," Williams says. "I've almost exclusively 
made that generation the subject of my plays, and seeing them behave like that 
brought tears to my eyes. I mean, I love them, and I want to fight for 
them, but I also feel the urge to slap them sometimes."

Williams has not made any major revisions to the story, but adapted some of 
the dialogue and brought the references up to date. He has, however, made one 
significant alteration. In Sillitoe's story, Colin is white; in Williams's 
version, he is black. Does he think this will influence the audience's 
perception of the character? "I don't think it alters it at all," Williams 
counters. "It just seemed right. That's partly down to my own inclination to 
see young, strong, black characters on stage. But it is a play about a race, 
rather than a 'race play'."

The alterations were made with the consent of Sillitoe's widow, Ruth, who 
oversees the writer's estate.Tom Courtenay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-courtenay> also accepts that certain 
aspects of the story may be due for revision. "A friend pointed out recently 
that a young offender's institution would certainly not be exclusively 
Anglo-Saxon, and maybe not quite so much like a public school," he says.

Courtenay came from a working-class background in Hull and was freshly out of 
drama school when Richardson cast him. "Tom was perfect," Sillitoe said. "I 
actually felt Tom was closer to my image of Colin than Albert Finney had been 
as Arthur inSaturday Night and Sunday Morning 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f6gY5a8n1Hg>. He had that lean, hungry, aware 
look." Yet despite having given the definitive performance, Courtenay claims 
not to have had much in common with the character. "I couldn't empathise with 
him much at all. His working-class upbringing I could identify with – but I 
didn't share his rebelliousness or his hatred of society. It was the romantic 
side of his character that appealed to me – the way he uses his talent as a 
means of escape. I really wasn't an angry young man at all."

The film was shot entirely on location, in quasi-documentary style, with a 
minimum of takes. Richardson used borstal inmates as extras, but could not gain 
permission to film in a real remand home:Ruxley Towers 
<http://surrey.greatbritishlife.co.uk/article/ruxley-towers-claygate--historic-surrey-homes-10042/>
, a Victorian mock-castle in Surrey, had to substitute. "I still see the tower 
all the time, driving past," Courtenay says. "It gives me the shivers."

Richardson's portrayal of a young offenders' institution now seems mild in 
comparison with films such asAlan Clarke's Scum 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0079871/>; at the time, it revealed a shocking 
level of brutality and privation that came as a shock to contemporary cinema 
audiences. The film's sustained attack on the political establishment upset the 
censors: one report described the film as "blatant and very trying communist 
propaganda". But it also remains remarkable for its technical 
innovation: Richardson's use of hand-held cameras and improvisation was ahead 
of its time – though Courtenay points out that the low budget left its mark. 
"If you look at the scenes in which I'm running, sometimes I'm wearing socks 
and at other times I'm not," he says. "That was because they put in some of the 
earlier test footage, which they didn't have to pay me for."

Courtenay's haphazard running style – all fierce facial contortions and 
flailing arms – might best be described as untutored. "Time magazine wrote that 
I had studied[runner Emil] Zátopek <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6--kiYKx9kA>
," Courtenay laughs. "But I wasn't an athlete at all. I never had to run for 
more than 70 yards in front of the camera."

Elliot Barnes-Worrell, who plays Colin in the stage version, will not have it 
so easy. While the film required Sillitoe to pad out his original story with 
additional scenes and characters, Williams' script unfolds in real time, over 
the course of the race. The set features an 8m treadmill (the only one of its 
kind in the country), on which Barnes-Worrell will be required to run for 
approximately half the show. "That's averaging out as the equivalent of 5km per 
night," he says, "so I get a genuine sweat on."

Fortunately, Barnes-Worrell, who is making his professional debut, happens to 
be a member of the alternative London running club,Run Dem Crew 
<http://www.rundemcrew.com/about>. "It started as a group who were looking for 
the camaraderie of a running club without all the cliques and Lycra," he says. 
Throughout his time at drama school, Barnes-Worrell ran 10km, four times a 
week. "But I had to leave the crew in order to prepare for this part," he says. 
"Running solo is very different. Then it's just you, your heartbeat, your 
thoughts."
 