
In the geopolitics of oil production, predictions are always risky. However 
important it may be, the price of crude is never the single factor driving 
events. That a global shakeup will occur if the spectacular tumble in prices 
persists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/oil-price-forecast-fall-20-dollars-barrel-morgan-stanley>
 is, however, a fairly safe bet. Witness how record highs and lows in oil have 
affected international relations and political developments over the last four 
decades.

The oil shocks of the 1970s reshaped the global landscape and lent new 
significance to the Middle East. When prices collapsed in the mid-1980s, the 
Soviet Union’s final demise owed much to the collapse in its export revenues. 
Saddam Hussein’s 1990 invasion of Kuwait derived in part from an ambition to 
capture new lands at a time of financial stringency. InAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/algeria>, another country dependent on oil 
revenues, that same price collapse – which reduced the price of crude to below 
$10 a barrel – contributed to an election victory for Islamists, then a coup, 
and then civil war. All of this makes it difficult to draw clearcut conclusions 
about strategic winners and losers. Of course, the liberal democracies of the 
west benefited from the end of the Soviet bloc, but it is hard to argue that 
low oil prices in the Arab and Muslim world led to much peace and stability.

The Guardian view on the economic and environmental impact of falling oil 
prices | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/13/the-guardian-view-on-the-economic-and-environmental-impact-of-falling-oil-prices>
One safe observation today is that the slump in global oil prices has notably 
dimmed hopes that emerging powers might continue their growth and 
modernisation, simultaneously becoming solid stakeholders in a stable 
international order. Too many had based their ambitions on the high commodity 
prices that are now in freefall. As the head of the IMF, Christine Lagarde, 
commented this week,now they face a “new reality” of slow growth and worrying 
uncertainty 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/e9c830a0-b945-11e5-bf7e-8a339b6f2164.html>. To take 
one example: Brazil, formerly described as a champion of the global south, is 
now reeling because of its challenged economy – made worse by acorruption 
scandal centred on its oil giant Petrobras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/04/petrobras-chief-resigns-brazil-corruption-scandal>
. Brazil is a democracy; instability there is unwelcome news. Nor will low oil 
prices help the new government in Nigeria, Africa’s number one oil-producer, at 
a time when jihadi networks are spreading across that region and beyond.

But if a falling oil price hurts those countries the west would view warmly, 
it also has the power to hurt those it would regard as adversaries. In Russia,
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> appears 
determined to re-establish his nation as a major power through military 
adventurism on the European continent and in the Middle East. Now he will 
increasingly find himself confronted with a complex financial equation. A 10% 
cut in public spending has just been announced, a clear sign of stress from the 
double whammy of international sanctions and low commodity prices in an economy 
that depends on crude at $100 a barrel. Regimes similarly affected by the 
falling oil price might want to turn to their sovereign wealth funds to 
compensate, but those are not unlimited.

Venezuela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> is another example of 
the pitfalls of what is sometimes called the resource curse, over-dependency on 
oil at the expense of modernisation and diversification. There will be regional 
consequences as Venezuela’s “Bolivarian” model struggles, not the least of 
which will be felt by Cuba, long supported by Venezuelan subsidies and now 
opening a new chapter of relations with the US.

But nowhere are the geopolitical consequences of low oil prices more 
unpredictable than in the Middle East. ForSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, orchestrating the price drop, 
it is a key factor that might weaken its regional rival Iran as the latter 
returns to the oil export market. But low prices also represent a domestic 
challenge to the Gulf dynasties. That might eventually discourage belligerence; 
but in the short term it could fuel it as insecure regimes seek to deflect 
attention from domestic tensions. Russia could well respond that way, and 
China’s reaction is equally unpredictable. Among the knowns and the unknowns, 
it is certain that too little oil revenue can be as damaging as too much.
 