
There are two possible approaches to A Clockwork Orange and it’s best to 
address this up front. There’s the novel, written in 1961 by Anthony Burgess; a 
short, brilliant, dystopian polemic intended, he said, as “a sort of tract, 
even a sermon, on the importance of the power of choice”. The second, Stanley 
Kubrick’sA Clockwork Orange, is the brilliant cinematic adaptation; a 
controversial masterpiece, released in 1971, that everyone remembers. But the 
book, not Kubrick’s script, is the essential text, a stunningly original novel 
that opened many literary doors for the work of subsequent British writers such 
as Martin Amis, JG Ballard and Will Self, and a volume bursting with linguistic 
energy that continues to startle and inspire generations of new readers.

According to the Burgess scholar, Andrew Biswell, A Clockwork Orange was 
originally set in 1980 and is animated by an internal debate with another great 
dystopia,Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four (no. 70 in this series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/19/100-best-novels-1984-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four-robert-mccrum>
. Burgess’s novel – sometimes described as “a novella” – also addresses, but in 
less ideological terms, the corruptions of state power while also debating free 
will and human responsibility. Self-consciously trangressive (the title 
probably comes from some cockney slang for “queer”, though not in any sexual 
sense),A Clockwork Orange tells the story of Alex, a Beethoven-mad thug with a 
lovely internal monologue. Eloquent in Nadsat, his teen argot, a heady mix of 
Russian, romany and rhyming slang, Alex narrates his career as the leader of a 
gang of “droogs”, Peter, Georgie and Dim. It is often said that these brutes 
derive from the mods and rockers, but Biswell shows conclusively that a deeper 
inspiration comes from Burgess’s wartime experience.

A brilliant and sinister opening of horrific “ultra violence” describes the 
gang on the rampage: terrorising a school teacher, beating a drunk, carving up 
a rival gang, stealing a car, and ransacking a country cottage, having tortured 
a harmless literary man and gang-raped his wife. After the sick brio of this 
opening, the novel settles into Alex’s subsequent incarceration in State Jail 
84F and the mind-altering aversion therapy inflicted on him by the authorities. 
It also explores, with some subtlety, the relationship of free will and 
individual responsibility in Burgess’s inimitable style.

A Clockwork Orange ends with Alex admitting: “I was cured, all right.” This is 
followed by a quasi-redemptive final chapter that was cut from the US edition, 
and consequently ignored by Kubrick in his script.So the book and the film go 
forward together, like dysfunctional, conjoined twins. 
<http://www.bookrags.com/criticism/burgess-anthony/7/#gsc.tab=0>

A note on the text 


According to his biographer, Andrew Biswell, Burgess began planning a series 
of novels about imaginary futures in 1960. In “the earliest surviving plan” for 
the novel, Burgess sketched a book of about 200 pages, divided into three 
sections of 70 pages apiece. He himself liked to say he wrote the book in three 
weeks, to make money. Whatever the truth, and with Burgess you never quite know 
what’s for real and what he’s invented on the spur of the moment, the first 
draft ofA Clockwork Orange was completed in the English south coast town of 
Hove in 1962. It’s interesting to note that a generation earlier Graham Greene 
similarly explored the themes of evil, as expressed in teenage rebellion and 
social delinquency, in his own “south-coast” entertainment,Brighton Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/06/brighton-rock-graham-greene-review>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgmm5jeeH8mY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgmm5jeeH8mY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgmm5jeeH8mY&media=>
Burgess had returned to Britain in 1959 after some years abroad in Malaya to 
find, to his dismay, that much had changed. A vibrant and violent youth 
culture, with coffee bars, pop music and teenage gangs, had become the subject 
of newspaper headlines and widespread middle-class “state-of-the-nation” 
anxiety.

Actually, a lot of the source material in A Clockwork Orange dates to the 40s, 
not the 50s or 60s. Burgess said that the novel’s inspiration was his pregnant 
first wife Lynne’s beating by a gang of drunk American servicemen stationed in 
England during the war. She subsequently miscarried. Burgess attributed his 
arresting title to various possible origins: he often claimed that he had 
overheard the phrase “as queer as a clockwork orange” in a London pub in 1945.

Later, on television in 1972, once his novel had become notorious, he said, 
more vaguely that “the title is... a phrase which I heard many years ago”. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JH3IZSM7J2U> He said he fell in love with it 
and wanted to use it as a book title. He resisted suggestions that he had made 
it up: “The phrase ‘as queer as a clockwork orange’ is good old east London 
slang. Now, obviously, I’ve given it an extra meaning. I’ve implied an extra 
dimension. I’ve implied the junction of the organic, the lively, the sweet – in 
other words, life, the ‘orange’ – and the mechanical, the cold, the 
disciplined. I’ve brought them together in this kind of oxymoron.” We have also 
to record several sources stating that there is “no other record of the 
expression being used before 1962”.

The book has three parts, each with seven chapters – an intentional nod to the 
age of 21 as the age of majority. The 21st chapter was omitted from the 
editions published in the US before 1986, sacrificing philosophical 
completeness for narrative convenience. When Burgess first sold the book to an 
American publisher, WW Norton, he was told by his editor, Eric Swenson, a man I 
used to know, that US audiences would never go for this final chapter in which 
Alex sees the error of his ways, decides he has lost the thrill of violence, 
and resolves to turn his life around. Burgess allowed Swenson to cut the 
redemptive final chapter from the US version, so that the tale would end on a 
darker note, with Alex succumbing to his violent, reckless nature.

Stanley Kubrick’s film adaptation, which Burgess used to refer to as 
“Clockwork Marmalade”, was based on this US edition. Kubrick called chapter 21 
“an extra chapter”, claimed that he did not read the full version until he had 
finished his screenplay, and never gave serious consideration to using it. In 
my recollection of the writer, Burgess spent his last years regularly 
denouncing the film version of his novel and all those associated with the 
contract, including his literary agent, the late Deborah Rogers.

Burgess was an extraordinary man, a mixture of polymath and charlatan. Life 
around him was never dull and he was one of the most original people I’ve ever 
encountered.

Three More from Anthony Burgess

The Long Day Wanes: A Malayan Trilogy (1956-1959); Inside Mr Enderby (1963); 
Earthly Powers (1980).

A Clockwork Orange is available from Penguin (7.99). Click here to order it 
for £5.99 <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/clockwork-orange-4.html>
 