
It’s good to talk. Particularly in this post-truth world. Last weekend the 
cast of Hamilton on Broadwaytried to have a conversation with vice-president 
elect Mike Pence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/trump-vs-hamilton-actors-rejects-claim-mike-pence-was-harassed>
, and were told they were rude and should apologise by Donald Trump. Yet 
Britain’s ex-culture minister Ed Vaizey has complained that the arts suffer 
from “leftwing groupthink 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/ed-vaizey-arts-world-suffers-from-left-wing-groupthink/>
” and only talk to each other, claiming “everyone in the arts community 
reinforces each other’s thinking and cold-shoulders people with different 
points of view”.

Carol Ann Duffy to collaborate in Brexit-inspired National Theatre production
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/carol-ann-duffy-to-collaborate-in-brexit-inspired-national-theatre-production>
Broadening the conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/nov/21/hamilton-broadway-shows-mike-pence-donald-trump>
 has never seemed so crucial in the wake of both the results of the British 
referendum on EU membership and the election of Donald Trump. If so many feel 
so disaffected, so unheard and as if their lives are not understood by those 
who hold the power, what can the arts do about it and how can they play a 
central role in changing that feeling of disempowerment within their own 
communities?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mike%20Pence%20booed%20at%20Hamilton%20musical%3A%20'We%20are%20anxious%20you%20will%20not%20protect%20us'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mike%20Pence%20booed%20at%20Hamilton%20musical%3A%20%27We%20are%20anxious%20you%20will%20not%20protect%20us%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fmike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video&media=>
Mike Pence booed at Hamilton musical: ‘We are anxious you will not protect us’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-told-at-hamilton-we-are-anxious-you-will-not-protect-us-video>
The arts and theatre have often been seen as elite. Vikki Heyward recently 
observed that “if you look like a club and behave like a club 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/magazine/article/bursting-some-bubbles>, the 
chances are that you area club 
<http://www.jakeorr.co.uk/blog/2015/01/theatre-is-not-a-club-so-why-do-we-make-it-feel-that-way/>
.” It means that if the accusation of being a club isn’t true then, as Heywood 
suggests, arts organisations will have to “prove it,” and that means 
challenging how they work, where they work and who they work with and serve, 
and of course whothey don’t currently serve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/nov/04/theatres-must-look-beyond-their-regular-audiences>
.


As Rufus Norris remarked after the Brexit result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/26/brexit-vote-arts-national-theatre-rufus-norris-eu-referendum>
, “art always responds to the time … And this has been a huge wake-up call for 
all of us to realise that half the country feels that they have no voice. If we 
are going to be a national organisation we must speak to and for the nation. 
Our principal response initially is to listen: to listen to that voice and art 
will follow from that.”


Theatre needs to change the way it's accessed, and face up to unpalatable 
truths. Anything else is cosmetic

It may indeed, and I hope it does both at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/carol-ann-duffy-to-collaborate-in-brexit-inspired-national-theatre-production>
 and beyond, but what theatre in general also needs to do is to change the way 
it is accessed by both audiences and artists, how it is structured, how it is 
resourced andwhat kinds of work are resourced or not resourced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/nov/12/islington-community-theatre-brainstorm-bbc-iplayer>
, valued and not valued. That may well require facing up to some unpalatable 
truths about how theatre is perceived by the vast majority of people and how it 
might not just change that perception but the on the ground reality. Anything 
else is merely cosmetic. The purpose of change should not be to help theatres 
or arts organisations to survive (although that might be a byproduct and a 
helpful one at time of more bad news including asignificant drop in lottery 
monies 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/ps18m-drop-funding-arts-lottery-sales-plummet>
 available) but to allow the greatest number of people access to the arts and 
the benefits – and joy – they bring to communities and individuals. One of the 
best moments of my theatregoing life was watching Royal de Luxe’sSea Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/17/sea-odyssey-giant-spectacular-liverpool>
 and seeing a woman weeping with joy that this glorious spectacle had come to 
her and the north Liverpool streets where she lived.


Rufus Norris: ‘I’m not a visionary. I don’t have to have all the ideas’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/31/rufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview>
We live in a time of unprecedented change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> bringing daily cultural 
and political disruptions, but artistic expression itself is a form of 
disruption. We need to embrace the possibilities change brings, not sit around 
hoping that eventually we will get back to normal. We need to talk about how to 
achieve this but we need to take action. Next year’sNo Boundaries conference 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/news-and-jobs/no-boundaries-2017>, taking place 
simultaneously in Hull and Manchester, has contributors fromRufus Norris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/31/rufus-norris-national-theatre-artistic-director-interview>
 toJess Thom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/dec/23/i-have-tourette-syndrome-and-heres-why-i-want-you-to-laugh-video>
 considering the nature of this disruption and how the arts can help shape a 
socially responsible and cohesive society in a climate of often unsettling 
change. The costs of attending No Boundaries can be prohibitive (which is why 
it tends to be dominated by those from funded institutions) but there is a
ballot for free delegate passes <http://nb2017.coquo.co.uk/booking/> aimed at 
early-career artists.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Ftheatre-must-speak-to-the-nation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff88128d183828a2173bdb8618d3761b608c33f43%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theatre%20must%20speak%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20and%20listen%20to%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Ftheatre-must-speak-to-the-nation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theatre%20must%20speak%20to%20the%20nation%20%E2%80%93%20and%20listen%20to%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Ftheatre-must-speak-to-the-nation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff88128d183828a2173bdb8618d3761b608c33f43%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 Giant Murder Investigation … a Fun Palace show in Deptford, south London, 
2014. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Earlier still in the year comes Devoted and Disgruntled 
<http://www.devotedanddisgruntled.com/>, the annual event produced by 
Improbable Theatre usingopen space technology 
<http://www.openspaceworld.com/brief_history.htm>, which itself disrupts the 
notion of a traditional conference or talking show in the democratic way it 
allows everyone a voice, whether you run a major producing house or have never 
been to the theatre. This year it takes place in Bristol on the weekend of 
14-15 January, and it feels more urgent and necessary than ever. Because one of 
the things that Devoted and Disgruntled is particularly good at is not just 
talking but inspiring action. The brilliantFun Palaces 
<http://funpalaces.co.uk/>, a movement that understands that creativity within 
the community can engender change, was born out of a session at Devoted and 
Disgruntled, and over the years it has influencedArts Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england> thinking and helped 
to shape local and national policy.

There is never a better time to reimagine the future than in times of chaos. 
We must gather together. We must show up

Whether you are an audience member or don’t think the arts are for you, a 
student, an artist, an administrator, or a critic, Devoted and Disgruntled is a 
place to share what you know, discuss and debate, reframe your own thinking and 
start to bring about change that extends beyond theatre itself. As Improbable’s
Phelim McDermott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/25/how-we-made-satyagraha> says: 
“We have the means to reimagine the future. There is never a better time to do 
that than in times of chaos. We must gather together. We must connect. We must 
show up.” If theatre and the arts really want to step up in uncertain times, we 
will.

 