
"A hit, a very palpable hit." How often have I heard that cry go up while 
watching the climactic duel betweenHamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jun/03/hamlet-review> and Laertes, 
which up to now has largely constituted all I know about fencing. And, just as 
the wrestling match is invariably the best bit inAs You Like It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/may/22/as-you-like-it-globe-review>, so 
the final duel is something we all look forward to in Shakespeare's greatest 
tragedy.

But, after watching our Olympic women's foilists in training, I've learned a 
lot more: about what one competitor called the search for "calm control", about 
the sacrifices they make for their sport, and about the urge to rescue it from 
its elitist image.

First, however, I had to learn a few basics. Weapons come in three kinds: the 
foil, the epee, the sabre. Our 10-strong Olympics team, comprising six women 
and four men, all specialise in one particular weapon.Fencing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/fencing> is also both an individual and a 
team sport: individual bouts are based on a best-of-five hits, while the group 
event is rather like a relay-race in which each competitor inherits the 
previous person's points, up to a maximum of 15. Confused? Even the most ardent 
fencers admit their sport's arcane rules work against its popularity.

But watching our top women's foilists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/12/london-2012-british-fencing-olympics>
 – Anna Bentley, Sophie Troiano and Natalia Sheppard – training at the Lee 
Valley athletics centre is an eye-opener. ForgetErrol Flynn and Basil Rathbone 
roaming all over Nottingham Castle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L10fR31jC1w> 
in the big sword-fight in Robin Hood. This is a physically confined sport in 
which action is restricted to the piste: a long narrow mat that, to the naked 
eye, looks about the length of a cricket pitch.

There is a concealed aggression about the way fencers lunge at their opponents 
to score a hit. I had expected the balletic element in fencing, with its 
parries and feints. What startled me was the speed and daring with which a 
foilist pursues her opponent, often to the edge of the piste, to land a crucial 
hit. This is the stuff of drama, with the mask adding an element of mystery to 
each performer. When a move failed, one of the women constantly let out a huge 
cry of "Grrrr" in agonised frustration. Something that was once a mortal combat 
is now a skilled sport, but whatHarold Pinter called the "hidden violence" of 
cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/may/27/michael-billington-cricket-theatre-link>
 could equally be applied to fencing.

The women behind the mask, however, turned out to be great friends and good 
company. Bentley, at 31, is our senior women's foilist and a practised 
competitor. "I started fencing at 11," she says, "largely because my brother 
did it and I just had to beat him. You'd be astonished at how many people take 
up fencing because of sibling rivalry. I kept at it while working in the House 
of Lords, providing information to peers about European Union legislation – but 
the day London won the Olympics, I was so overcome with emotion I decided on 
the spot to give up the day-job and devote myself to fencing."

Troiano, 25, shows the same monastic dedication. "I started fencing aged 
eight," she says, "with a Saturday-morning club in Wimbledon. I continued at 
Oxford where I did a four-year biochemistry degree. Now I live at home with my 
parents and do a three-hour return journey every day to Lee Valley, but it's 
worth it: what I adore about fencing is the body is forced to respond to an 
extreme mental challenge."

Both are acutely aware of the need to make fencing less exclusive, and talk 
about an initiative called Go Fence, set up by the British Fencing Association, 
which aims to extend the sport's appeal beyond the narrow worlds of private 
clubs and fee-paying academies and into state schools: this venture that has 
already met with success in the London boroughs of Camden and Newham. They also 
ruefully point out that it is only in the past 12 months that the women's 
fencing team, thanks to funding from UK Sport and sponsorship from Beazley, has 
had the organised back-up that enables them to compete at the same level as the 
men.

In rare off-duty moments, the women say they watch comedy DVDs of Miranda and 
Fawlty Towers to help them relax. It's nice to think that, if the women's 
foilists do well against the top teams from Italy, Russia and South Korea, 
we'll have Miranda Hart and John Cleese to thank for it.

Anna Bentley's favourites

Film Jaws

Book Catch-22

Bands Pink Floyd/Stone Roses

Sophie Troiano's favourites

Film The Notebook

Books Anything by Malcolm Gladwell

Singer David Guetta
 