
America was once a great nation – the greatest nation. A nation where mice and 
men once went to the moon. But now? Now, as our 239th birthday rolls around, 
we’ve devolved into nothing more than a mass of spineless, vegetarian techies – 
as evidenced by the mind-numbing guacamole debate.

Peas out: Barack Obama joins online outcry against guacamole recipe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/01/guacamole-peas-barack-obama-outcry>
Trouble began, as it so often does, with the New York Times, which published a 
small article declaring peas a great addition to guacamole 
<http://cooking.nytimes.com/recipes/1015047-green-pea-guacamole>. The internet 
whimpered as loud as possible; the debate began to “trend.” Eventhe president 
and other politicians began to meddle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/07/01/obama-and-bush-agree-peas-out-of-guacamole/?_r=0>
. I offered a moment of silence for my once great nation and then thanked the 
Lord, yet again, that I live in Texas.

Here, in God’s country, we have meaty debates; debates with consequences, 
soaked in blood and sauce. While the media elite in East Coast havens of 
patrician taste (or lack thereof) snipe on social media about a so-so vegan 
side dish, Texans have real fights over barbecue – perhaps more so when, come 
January, we’ll be able to walk around carrying a spare rib in one hand and a 
sidearm in the other. Here,we have brisket thieves 
<http://www.mysanantonio.com/news/local/article/Suspected-brisket-bandit-arrested-following-6198869.php>
 and even our lesser arguments, about tacos,involve actual cannons 
<http://www.texasmonthly.com/daily-post/taco-cannon-controversy-continues>.

Why? Because it’s our First Amendment right backed by our Second Amendment 
right.

But more importantly, barbecue is a debate that matters. There really is a 
difference between wet barbecue and dry rub and between various kinds of 
smoking methods; there’s also only one right one. This guacamole debate, on the 
other hand, is just further proof of and warning against the bourgeois 
simpletons attempting to ground our country into a bland mush.

Guacamole’s origins were actually auspicious, having been invented for kings 
by the society that understood the need for mass human sacrifices. That culture 
had balls, andnamed its greatest export, āhuacatl, after just that – “testicles”
 <http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=avocado>. Even later, when people 
started throwing around the bastardized “avocado”, the nickname was still 
“alligator pears”.

The recipe, essentially unchanged for more than 400 years, is five basic 
ingredients. And yes, while everyone has their own little twist, a personal 
guacamole recipe is like one’s sexual proclivities: unique, enjoyable perhaps, 
but never discussed in public. These citified folk, however living with their 
loose morals, their public brands and hectic metropolitan hashtag-lives betray 
the quiet simplicity that once was guacamole.

Guacamole’s initial genius (its simplicity) is also, ironically, the reason 
for its destruction by the meddling class: they can’t just leave good enough 
alone. Blame the Spanish – the original gentrifiers – for kick starting 
guacamole’s emasculating decline. Like Cinco de Mayo, Guacamole was long ago 
appropriated by white people and its gentrified form abandoned in disgust by 
its originators. In all my three years inTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, I’ve seen as many Latinos eating 
guacamole as I’ve seen Latinos on Twitter whimpering about guacamole, which is 
to say none.

Peas in guacamole: the taste verdict on the controversial recipe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/jul/02/peas-in-guacamole-the-verdict-on-the-new-york-times-innovation>
The evidence of guacamole’s demise is all around, and the trouble, the 
gentrification, most likely began byofficially christening the sixteenth of 
September as “Guacamole Day” 
<http://www.food.com/food-holidays/guacamole-day-0916>. Only bored gringos 
(northern Yankees, most likely) and carpetbagging advocacy groups come up with 
such ideas.

Further damage was done to guacamole by the creation of the health food 
industrial complex, the shadowy cabal that proclaimed meat bad and organic 
products de rigueur. Then came the “hip” abbreviation, “guac” – stop saying it. 
It sounds fowl, like a sick duck gagging, and is no doubt propaganda from the 
health food industrial complex, whose previous efforts at rebranding vegetable 
mush as “veggie patties” still haunts middle America.

Those of us with a sense of national pride and a respect for a country founded 
on beef being what’s for dinner weeped as America’s hamburger joints were 
deposed and places like Chipotle became the healthy option of choice. It’s 
there, where the intelligentsia declared their fast food loyalty, that 
guacamole really became commodified and meaningless. No longer was it a simple 
and quick addition to a Super Bowl party. Instead, it was turned into a coveted 
“free extra scoop”, slopped on an already heaping pile of tasteless, organic 
foodstuffs.

The guacamole’s decline – from simple and tasteful with a respectful past, to 
overwrought, bland and meaningless – mirrors that of our own society. That both 
President Obama and the Texas GOP agree on the peas-in-guacamole debate means 
there is no serious debate to be had. It is merely a ruse, ginned up by 
health-conscious elite on social media, meant to distract from the important 
issues, like: When will America be great again?

We will be great again when we can return to simpler, more traditional times, 
when we declare our independence from the trending whims of the ruling elites. 
We will be great again when we can have a meaningful debate about the best kind 
of bacon.
 