
The home secretary, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, has been given a 60-day 
deadline by the high court to obtain guarantees from US authorities in order to 
extradite a terror suspect to America.

The removal of Haroon Aswat, 39, will depend on assurances from the US that he 
will not be placed in a prison that would result in a significant deterioration 
in his mental and physical health.

Lawyers for Aswat have told the high court that he is mentally ill and could 
face potential confinement inADX Florence 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ADX_Florence>, a "supermax" US jail. Aswat, from 
Batley in West Yorkshire, was transferred from prison to Broadmoor psychiatric 
hospital in 2008 suffering with paranoid schizophrenia.

His extradition was blocked last year by judges in the European court of human 
rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights>, who 
ruled that he could face inhumane treatment as there were no guarantees over 
where he would be detained.

Aswat, an aide of the already deported radical preacher Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-hamza>, is accused of conspiring with 
him to establish a jihad training camp in Oregon between June 2000 and December 
2001. He faces 11 terrorism charges but denies involvement.

Hamza was extradited to America in 2012 with four other terrorism suspects 
following legal battles against extradition. He has gone on trial in the United 
States this month.

The home secretary has now been given the deadline of 4pm on 13 June to obtain 
assurances from the US authorities over how Aswat will be treated if extradited 
to America for trial. Failure to do so will result in the decision to extradite 
being quashed.

The Strasbourg judges found extradition would be a violation of article 3 of 
the European convention on human rights, which protects against inhuman and 
degrading treatment. They expressed concern that it was uncertain in what 
prison or detention facility, such as ADX Florence, Aswat would be held in 
America, before or after trial.

The ECHR judges said there was "a real risk that the applicant's extradition 
to a different country and to a different and potentially more hostile prison 
environment would result in a significant deterioration in his mental and 
physical health, and that such a detention would be capable of reaching the 
article 3 threshold".

May announced in September 2013 her decision not to withdraw her extradition 
order, despite the European court ruling.

Two judges, Mr Justice Mitting and the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas, gave 
judgment. Mitting concluded: "The only means by which the basic concerns of the 
Strasbourg court can be answered are that the United States offers an assurance 
to the secretary of state that, upon arrival in the United States, [Aswat] will 
immediately be transferred to a psychiatric referral centre and kept there", or 
an equivalent centre, until trial.

Giving his reasons, Thomas 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Admin/2014/1216.html> said there had been 
a failure by the home secretary to give "the kind of assurances envisaged in 
the judgment of the Strasbourg court".

"It is entirely a matter for the government of the United States whether they 
wish to give any such assurances but it seems to us that it is only with the 
provision of such assurances that, in the light of the judgment of the 
Strasbourg court in this particular case, extradition of the claimant would be 
compatible with article 3."
 