
Snow and high winds in Scotland have put Katherine Garrett-Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/07/scottish-independence-alliance-trust-register-england>
 in the mood for this week’s World Economic Forum in Davos – the event is held 
1,500 metres up a mountain in the Swiss ski resort. The chief executive of 
Dundee-based Alliance Trust is one of six people co-chairing this year’s 
gathering, and she has put leadership values and corporate trust at the top of 
her agenda.

World leaders such as François Hollande of France and Italy’s Matteo Renzi 
will be attending, plus businesspeople including Jack Ma, founder of Chinese 
web provider Alibaba, and celebrities such as William Adams, better-known as 
Will.i.am.

Of the 2,500 delegates just 17% are female. However Garrett-Cox, 47, who has 
been at the helm of the 127-year-old investment trust since the onset of the 
banking crisis in 2008, has seen some improvement in the gender balance since 
she first came a decade ago, when it was “pretty woeful”.

The theme for this year’s five-day gathering is a “new global context”. 
Garrett-Cox says: “The world is an incredibly fragile and somewhat fragmented 
place, so leaders need to think about how they manage their businesses within 
that.

“One thing that concerns me a lot is an increasing sense of nationalism and 
federalism. That is depressing... in a world that is increasingly connected.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavos-2015-fragile-world-leadership-garrett-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421427572115%2F8e40f197-ad82-4073-a725-58d607e1cdc7-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20of%20our%20fragile%20world%20is%20good%20business%20practice%2C%20says%20Davos%20co-chair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavos-2015-fragile-world-leadership-garrett-cox%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking%20of%20our%20fragile%20world%20is%20good%20business%20practice%2C%20says%20Davos%20co-chair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fjan%2F18%2Fdavos-2015-fragile-world-leadership-garrett-cox%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F16%2F1421427572115%2F8e40f197-ad82-4073-a725-58d607e1cdc7-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The village of Davos, altitude 1,500m. Photograph: /Getty Images 
At Davos, which she says is always inspiring, she will bump into the bosses of 
some of the companiesAlliance Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alliancetrust> invests in, such as Eric 
Schmidt of Google or Tidjane Thiam of Prudential. Alliance, which was in the 
FTSE 100 when she took charge but dropped out four years ago, positions itself 
as a responsible long-term investor, maintaining that it must also consider 
climate change, quality of life, sustainable consumption and resilience.

“Organisations need to take account of more than just the numbers when they 
are managing businesses,” says Garrett-Cox. “Some people fail to recognise that 
this is not soft fluffy stuff ... This is good business practice.”

Alliance Trust is cautious about investing in investment banks: “First, the 
business models are complicated to unpick and, to be quite candid, we are not 
convinced that some of the cultural changes we want to see in those 
organisations are yet taking place.”

Nor is it keen on natural resources companies – although the trust has held 
discussions with companies involved in fracking and in drilling for oil in the 
Arctic. But, she says, the sliding oil price – it’s down 60% since last summer 
– could be good news for the environment: “[The lower oil price] will put a lot 
of pressure on people managing those organisations, because it’s simply not 
economic to get the oil out of the ground with the price where it is.”

Garrett-Cox had a string of high-profile jobs before joining Alliance Trust: 
head of US equities at Hill Samuel at 26, chief investment officer at Aberdeen 
Asset Management, and chief executive at Morley, later Aviva Investors. Her 
position at Alliance has been threatened during the six years since she became 
chief executive. She saw off an attempt by activist investor Laxey Partners to 
overhaul the company, although at the end of last year she herself made changes 
to the fund management team overseeing £2.6bn of assets to try to bolster its 
performance.

Its shares trade at a 12% discount to the value of the assets, but Garrett-Cox 
says few companies can beat its track record for paying dividends. She shrugs 
off challenges to her position, for which she was paid £1.4m in salary and 
bonuses last year: “All chief executives have to be quite resilient... It’s 
important not to get knocked off your path for short-term considerations.”

She was appointed chief investment officer of Aberdeen Asset Management in 
2000 and there were gasps when she announced shortly afterwards that she was 
pregnant with her second child and would be off for four months. Now a mother 
of four, she says such an attitude would not greet female bosses these days.

She thinks more should be done to increase the number of women in boardrooms, 
but adds: “Personally I have never felt any great discrimination. People talk 
about a glass ceiling; I have not experienced that. I think sometimes it’s a 
convenient excuse for people who are not moving as quickly as they want.”

Once Davos is over, she will be “fizzing with excitement” after being inspired 
by unscheduled chats in corridors as well as well as by the formal meetings. 
And she will useDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos> to “spread 
the word” about Alliance Trust.

HOW TO HAVE A GOOD DAVOS

Get the right badge

Davos is invitation-only, but there is a strict hierarchy, denoted by the 
colour of your badge. Davos staff wear blue ones, the media orange, technicians 
purple. The colour determines where in the centre you can go. A coveted white 
badge means access all areas, but white badge with hologram means really 
important player.

Get a helicopter

It is three hours by train from Zurich airport to Davos, 5,000ft up in the 
Swiss mountains and buried in snow. It takes three trains, although and there 
is a coach, too, and limos for hire - but the fastest route is by helicopter. 
The sound of their rotors reverberates around the mountains when the really 
important people arrive.

Get good medical insurance

Stories of falls resulting in broken limbs are part of every Davos.

Sorry, but buy Swiss francs a week ago

The Swiss National Bank’s move to allow the currency to float freely has made 
a trip to pricey Davos even more expensive. Even before the 30% rise in the 
Swiss franc leaped against the euro, Davos was already a place designed for 
company expenses. But as most of the hotels in the Swiss resort require payment 
in advance, at least the price of a room for the night has not spiralled 
upwards.

Get the party invites in

After the daily events in the conference centre, the parties start across the 
town. They have staggered starts, taking place before and after each evening’s 
the array of dinners.
 