
The government has "finally woken up from its post-election slumber", notes 
Caroline de la Soujeole 
<http://www.globalservicesmedia.com/global-services/news/173864/outsourcing-soars-public-services?WT.rss_f=News&WT.rss_a=Outsourcing+Soars+in+Public+Services>
, from investment bank Seymour Pierce, "and is open for business … determined 
to find new, efficient ways of delivering services rather than cutting them". 
Huh. Who ever heard of a government that could cause this much damage while 
still asleep? But that is by no means the most wrong part of a short but 
entirely wrong statement.

By "open for business", the analyst means the government is outsourcing public 
services – at a huge rate. The value of such contracts has risen from£9.6bn in 
2008 to £20.4bn in 2012 
<http://www.socialenterprise.org.uk/uploads/files/2012/12/the_shadow_state_3_dec1.pdf>
. Seymour Pierce estimates that public sector outsourcing could hit (deep 
breath) £101bn by 2014-15.

You can see the existing contracts wherever you look 
<https://online.contractsfinder.businesslink.gov.uk/> – helping unemployed 
people find jobs has been entirely privatised. It's known as the "welfare 
market", a peerless example of double-speak in which people's welfare is 
ignored and market forces dominate. The Work Programme doesn't work at all on 
its own terms – though if, as I suspect, the true aim is to destroy the 
standing and the self-esteem of the unemployed, it is working quite well. 
That's worth between £3bn and £5bn over five years.Atos has £3bn worth of 
contracts, also over five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/aug/28/atos-3bn-government-contracts-paralympics?INTCMP=SRCH>
. The UK Border Agency issued contracts worth £1.7bn, all to three companies 
and running for five years. Probation services are outsourcing 60% of their 
work, valued at about £600m a year.

This is all based on the principle that the public sector is inherently 
inefficient. Hand it over to private companies and they will swoop in with 
their efficiency, their economies of scale, their incentives and their 
competitiveness, winnowing it down into a dart of perfectly targeted public 
spending.

In practice, when they say efficiency, that generally means lower wages. 
When they say economies of scale, that generally means constructing the 
contracts in such a way as to leave only the largest companies eligible to bid 
for them. When they say incentives, look closely and you will mainly see 
perverse incentives. And when they say competition, what you're actually left 
with is four or five – sometimes only three – companies, who barely compete 
with one another at all but instead operate as an unelected oligarchy.

Most public services are not about producing microchips, they're about human 
relationships – care work, parole, job-seeking, even assessing whether or not a 
disabled person is really disabled; they are about one human being spending 
time with another. The economist Ha-Joon Chang'sfamous example of the pitfall 
of efficiency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/aug/29/ha-joon-chang-23-things> is that 
it mainly means making things faster – and yet if you played a minuet at three 
times the speed, would that improve it?

A much less romantic example, but one that exists across the country, is being 
given a bath by a careworker. Your local authority has signed a contract for 
care work that's much lower than they were previously paying in-house. Now your 
bath has to be undertaken by someone who doesn't have time to take her coat 
off. You probably don't know her, because staff turnover averages 30% in this 
sector. Whoever she is, she's probably having to claim housing benefit and 
in-work benefits, so the public purse is paying one way or another anyway. 
Who wins from all this humiliation, the low-wage trap, and the isolation? Who 
wins when a waste management company takes over a contract and bin men are 
simply paid 25% less than the bin men three miles away? The shareholder, the 
private equity firm that bought out the waste management outfit and sold it on: 
not you, not us.

However, it is wrong to suppose that outsourcing only erodes wages at the 
bottom. It is a classless foe, and attacks people right up the pay spine 
(except at the top). According to Harry Fletcher, of the National Association 
of Probation Officers, when Serco won the probation services contract in London 
it did so by massively underbidding the public sector with a view to stripping 
out 100 of the 550 jobs. Not to worry, you might think – the others will be 
covered byTupe legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2012/nov/23/what-is-tupe-transfer>
 that protects employees when ownership is transferred; pay, terms and 
conditions will be unaffected.

But possibly not – when Liberata won the education maintenance allowance and 
adult learning grant contract from a number of local authorities in 2007, 
scores of people were transferred from the public sector. It turned out their 
pensions weren't always protected. Then the company "restructured", a process 
that trumps Tupe, and the "scheme leader" tier was simply removed, which meant 
a pay cut for many of the most qualified staff.

Then it turned out that Liberata couldn't handle the contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/nov/19/grant-firm-fired-liberata-capita>
, but by this time it was so large that the only other company capable of 
taking it on was Capita. When the present government came in and canned EMA, 
citing "unaffordability", the galling thing was that private sector bungling 
had made it quite expensive. So a government scheme that the data showed had a 
positive effect on young people's life-chances was trashed; skilled people were 
left unemployed; unskilled people, unemployable. And Capita probably walked 
away with a wedge because the coalition broke the contract. "Probably," I say, 
because this comes under the umbrella of so-calledcommercial confidentiality 
<http://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=4464>, so we will probably never 
know.

What happens when these firms, with their inexorable expansionist logic, bite 
off more than they can chew? We pay anyway. We paid G4S; we will pay it again 
when its prisons catch fire. We will pay A4e when it finds no jobs, we will pay
Serco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup> when its probation 
services fail. We will pay because even when they're not delivered by the 
public sector, these are still public services, and the ones that aren't too 
big to fail are too important. What any government creates with massive-scale 
outsourcing is not "new efficiency", it is a shadow state; we can't pin it down 
any more than we can vote it out. All we can do is watch.

Twitter: @zoesqwilliams <https://twitter.com/zoesqwilliams>
 