
The collections that regional museums hold are often extraordinary. The 
pre-Raphaelite collection atBirmingham Museum & Art Gallery 
<http://www.birminghammuseums.org.uk/bmag> is arguably the best in the world. 
But the vast majority have no funds for buying art. While many have friends 
groups and some are lucky enough to have the occasional major donor, our 
museums struggle to acquire the contemporary art that can draw in new and 
younger audiences, such as Tate Modern’s five million visitors a year.


Southampton Art Gallery has been outstanding for decades in the way that it 
has used generous bequests to keep up with contemporary art, such as work by
Bridget Riley <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bridget-riley>, Eva 
Rothschild and Nigel Cooke. If core funding to a gallery is cut beyond a 
certain point, the institution becomes almost unable to accept philanthropic 
support, because the key contact for donors is often the dynamic and empowered 
curator. In one extreme case, curators are even afraid to acquire new work in 
case it draws the attention of cash-strapped councillors to their valuable 
collection. Northampton Museum’scontroversial sale of the Egyptian sculpture of 
Sekhemka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/29/sale-of-northamptons-sekhemka-statue-sets-dangerous-precedent>
 this year is a precedent that looms large.

In September, Walsall Council announced its intention to cut funding to the 
New Art Gallery by 25% a year for the next four years, effectively condemning 
it to closure. Designed by Stirling Prize winning architectsCaruso St John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/04/liverpool-philharmonic-renovation-newport-street-gallery-gagosian-review>
, it holds a major private bequest of the artist Jacob Epstein’s personal 
collection that includes work by Modigliani and Lucian Freud, alongside 
masterpieces by artists such as Van Gogh, Monet and Constable.

We need to support galleries and allow them to innovate, free from 
asphyxiation through successive core funding cuts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fgreat-works-award-regional-museums-galleries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9b8031d0677be59b4d09db4e8352b0574b0d157%2F0_0_3312_4684%2F3312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20isn't%20austerity%2C%20it's%20asphyxiation%3A%20can%20regional%20galleries%20survive%20the%20cuts%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fgreat-works-award-regional-museums-galleries%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20isn%27t%20austerity%2C%20it%27s%20asphyxiation%3A%20can%20regional%20galleries%20survive%20the%20cuts%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fgreat-works-award-regional-museums-galleries%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9b8031d0677be59b4d09db4e8352b0574b0d157%2F0_0_3312_4684%2F3312.jpg>
 The Laing’s new acquisition … Glenn Brown’s In the end we all succumb to the 
pull of the molten core. © Glenn Brown. Courtesy Gagosian 
Without core public funding, there would be no context in which to locate 
private philanthropy. This week the Baltic in Gateshead is fundinga new 
commissioning prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/11/baltic-centre-international-award-emerging-artists-gateshead>
, just before theHepworth Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hepworth-wakefield> announces the 
first winner ofits prize for sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/20/hepworth-sculpture-prize-review-medalla-barlow-marten-claydon>
. In this period of such straitened finances for arts institutions, it is 
fantastic to see two of our strongest regional institutions showing the way by 
mobilising new funds, especially private funds.


The Contemporary Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Society 
sits within a network of 70 museums and purchases for them on a regular basis. 
We know their collections, their riches, the result so often of extraordinary 
gifts, but we also know what is missing. We need to support them and allow them 
to innovate, free from asphyxiation through successive core funding cuts. And 
innovate they must. An unforeseeable consequence of the boom in the art market 
of the past two decades has been that museums have been unable to keep up with 
artists who have established glittering international reputations.

We can’t turn the clock back on that situation, but thanks to the relationship 
we have with the Sfumato Foundation, we are able to address it. Last December 
we threw down a gauntlet to our Museum Members and asked them to make a case 
for why a particular artist should be considered a glaring omission from their 
collection. In a period of austerity and constraint, it seemed no bad thing to 
provocatively ask museum curators to think as ambitiously as they could. Eight 
museums applied tothe new Great Works scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/11/regional-museums-chance-buy-renowned-british-art>
, and every one made a strong case for an acquisition that would in some sense 
re-define their collection. We were looking for an acquisition that would make 
the greatest impact on the museum and the relationship with their audiences.


Regional museums given chance to buy renowned British art
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/11/regional-museums-chance-buy-renowned-british-art>
The 2016 Great Works award has been of a painting by Glenn Brown to the Laing 
Art Gallery in Newcastle. Glenn Brown is acknowledged as one of the most 
important painters working today. While his paintings draw on the long 
historical tradition of painting, his own practice, with its preparatory work 
undertaken digitally, feels 100% of this moment.


This is the latest in a long line of acquisitions by the Contemporary Art 
Society, from the first Picasso for a UK museum in 1933, the first Matisse, the 
first Francis Bacon in the late 40s, through to the first Antony Gormley and 
Damien Hirst more recently. This latest gift is very much due to Glenn Brown’s 
own generosity. The Laing’s is a collection that he knows and has held in great 
affection since he was a young man and so it is particularly meaningful to him 
that a painting of his should take its place on these walls.


As far as we are aware, the only paintings by Glenn Brown in a public 
collection in this country were acquired by the Arts Council Collection in the 
mid-1990s, so this is of national significance too. At the Laing Art Gallery 
Glenn Brown’s painting will join an extraordinary collection that includes 
masters of the Italian Renaissance, Botticelli and Raphael, as well as great 
figures in British painting such as Burne-Jones, Holman Hunt, Gainsborough and 
later 20th-century figures Auerbach and Kitaj.


More than flat caps and whippets: exhibition to celebrate best of the north
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/05/more-than-flat-caps-and-whippets-exhibition-to-celebrate-best-of-the-north>
In 2018 Glenn Brown will curate an exhibition at the Laing while 
Newcastle-Gateshead hosts theGreat Exhibition of the North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/05/more-than-flat-caps-and-whippets-exhibition-to-celebrate-best-of-the-north>
, bringing together major loans of his own work with a selection of 
masterpieces from the museum’s collections.


Leeds Art Gallery and Plymouth Museum are closed this year while they undergo 
ambitious redevelopment,Manchester’s Whitworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/11/whitworth-art-gallery-refurbishment>
 and York Art Gallery have recently reopened to much acclaim. There is now a 
broad acceptance that the arts boost economies, enhance lives and build the 
reputations of cities, so through this time of financial and political 
uncertainty we must collectively hold our nerve and believe that public 
investment will continue to be essential to the cultural life of this country.

 