
Spector, On tour

For long-time indie rock trier Fred McPherson, Spector feels like the 
last-chance saloon. A mixture of smug fop meets Harry Potterish nerd, he fronts 
a similarly conflicted band, beset by vulnerability but convinced of greatness. 
Some were drawn to the band’s debut album Enjoy It While It Lasts, with its 
romantic exertions in the late-Britpop idiom, but the demand for a new LP, Moth 
Boys, was a surprise even toSpector <https://www.theguardian.com/music/spector>
. Unswerving from their original plan, the band still play strident synth-pop, 
atop which McPherson swoons theatrically. It’s a sound that demands a 
specialised audience – perhaps this will be the time they find it.

Thekla, Bristol, Tue; The Institute, Birmingham, Wed; The Rescue Rooms, 
Nottingham, Thu; touring to 29 Oct

JR

Friedrich Cerha day, London

To anyone with an interest in the history of 20th-century music, Friedrich 
Cerha will always be known as the man who completed the score of Alban Berg’s 
Lulu, fleshing out what the composer had left unfinished in the third act and 
enabling the work – one of the greatest operas of the last 100 years – to be 
performed as Berg intended. Outside of his native Austria, that achievement has 
tended to obscure Cerha’s own work as a composer with an output that covers 
almost every genre. Cerha turns 90 next February, and the Wigmore Hall is 
paying an early tribute with a day devoted to his music that includes a healthy 
sprinkling of premieres. There are two concerts of chamber music, from members 
of Ensemble Modern and the Boulanger Trio, before the composer-chansonnier HK 
Gruber joins the Ensemble for Cerha’s folk-inspired Keintate, along with the 
first performance of his instrumental Piccola Commedia.

Wigmore Hall, W1, Sat

AC

Jamie xx, London & Manchester

As musical architect of the xx, Jamie Smith has built some exquisite, 
melancholy pieces. The minimalist work he makes with Romy Madeley Croft and 
Oliver Sim is meditative and beautiful, but something you’d associate with 
staying inside. His debut solo album In Colour, however, is redolent of 
hedonistic and communal activity, a club scene of dynamic electronic music. 
Smith’s work can be transformative (he remixed Gil Scott-Heron’s LP I’m New 
Here to great effect), and here he flings open the doors for a record that 
traverses UK garage, minimal electronics and old-school rave; an encounter 
that’s both joyous and nostalgic.

O2 Academy Brixton, SW9, Thu; Albert Hall, Manchester, Fri; touring to 17 Oct

JR

A$AP Rocky, Birmingham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fthis-weeks-new-live-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444315340942%2Ffa035fcf-2591-47ad-959e-7fcbc22afcff-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20live%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fthis-weeks-new-live-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20live%20music&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fthis-weeks-new-live-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444315340942%2Ffa035fcf-2591-47ad-959e-7fcbc22afcff-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A$AP Rocky. Photograph: Taylor Hill/Getty Images 
In the traditional street-to-business-class narrative of hip-hop, A$AP Rocky 
is something of an anomaly. Blessed with good looks and an attractively sleepy 
flow, New York’s Rakim Mayers gives the impression of having progressed from 
up-and-comer to kingpin with seemingly no grind whatsoever. There have been 
potholes along the way, like the recent death of his mentor A$AP Yams, the 
brains behind Rocky’s Harlem-based A$AP Mob, but his latest LP, 
At.Long.Last.A$AP, doesn’t break the woozy step. It does, however, display some 
interesting new influences, not least British busker Joe Fox, whose chance 
encounter in London turned into a full-blown collaboration, helping Rocky write 
(among several other songs) Holy Ghost, the best song Oasis never wrote. Live, 
things are less smooth than the records: when the mood takes him, Rocky will 
even take to playing Nirvana’s Smells Like Teen Spirit.

Genting Arena, Fri; touring to 19 Oct

JR

Colin Towns Mask Orchestra, On tour

Colin Towns was his own music teacher, often studying classical scores in the 
back of a Transit van between gigs as a keyboardist with the various rock bands 
Ian Gillan formed after Deep Purple. He subsequently became a successful 
composer of film and television scores, but a teenage devotion to jazz never 
left him – in the 90s Towns funded an ambitious big band he called the Mask 
Orchestra, a broth of Stravinsky-esque drama and vivid orchestral jazz, echoing 
Gil Evans and George Russell, with a narrative urgency worthy of West Side 
Story. The Mask Orchestra’s 2015 edition, formed for this short tour, includes 
Chick Corea saxophonist Tim Garland, Troyka guitarist Chris Montague and 
pianist Andrew McCormack, with a repertoire that showcases Towns’s evocative 
theatre music, much of it written since the millennium.

Royal Northern College of Music, Manchester, Thu; Turner Sims Hall, 
Southampton, Fri

JF

London Sinfionetta: Feldman – For Samuel Beckett, Londo

Morton Feldman often compared his compositions to the Asian rugs he collected, 
which contained irregular symmetries (a repeating pattern on one side would not 
match the opposite edge). Written in the year of his death and scored for a 
non-standard orchestra of 23 players, For Samuel Beckett was one of many works 
inspired by or written in collaboration with other writers, painters and 
artists, and contains almost an hour of gently discomfiting chord clusters. A 
master of low volume, Feldman was also a terrific conversationalist: his 1960s 
radio happenings with John Cage are funny and poignant discussions about 
vintage music. Also being performed are two world-firsts: a piece by Apartment 
House affiliate Laurence Crane, Chamber Symphony No 2 (The Australian), and 
young Mexican composer Marisol Jiménez’s XLIII – Memoriam Vivire.

St John Smith Square, SW1, Sat

JLA
 