
If you want a sobering flavour of where Britain is heading, set aside banking, 
the Leveson inquiry, our relationship with Europe and whatever else – and 
considera Guardian story by Patrick Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/25/breadline-britain-growth-food-parcels?intcmp=239>
 that appeared last week. It was about food banks, the charitable set-ups that 
supply emergency parcels to people who have fallen between society's cracks. 
FareShare, a charity that sits at the heart of all this, says it is 
experiencing "ridiculous growth" in demand, and expects that trend to continue 
for at least five years; over the last 12 months, it claims to have sent out 
8.6m meals.

Spend any time around a food bank – and I have, in Inverness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2011/may/03/inverness-scottish-elections>
 andLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2011/jun/13/faith-liverpool-frontline-big-society-video?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3486>
 – and it quickly becomes clear that their core constituency is based around 
two groups of people: refugees who have either recently arrived in the UK or 
opted to go underground; and people who have suddenly had their benefits 
stopped.

Thanks to the increasingly cruel regime that now applies to benefits – which, 
we now know, David Cameron wants to make yet crueller – the latter seem to be 
increasing in number by the week, pushed into their predicament by a system 
that can summarily ruin lives, but offer only the most sluggish remedies by way 
of appeal. By and large, they remain invisible, but their fate is starting to 
intrude on the news media: last week,a man set himself alight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/29/man-on-fire-birmingham-job-centre?newsfeed=true>
 outside a Birmingham jobcentre, reportedly thanks to a "dispute over benefit 
payments", an episode that occurred just as the Guardian was revealing rising 
concerns about suicides among people faced with so-called benefits "sanctions". 
For an intimate picture of the misery and anxiety that lies behind all this, 
have a look atthis film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2012/jun/20/human-cost-of-welfare-reform-video?INTCMP=SRCH>
 by my colleague John Domokos, partly centred on a family reduced to fretting 
over their last dregs of electricity, and apparently surviving on a diet 
founded on budget baked beans. The benefits system refuses to understand that 
one of them is a carer, whose obligations to his ill wife mean that he cannot 
always make his appointments at the jobcentre.

Which brings us to revelations that appeared over the weekend, and the latest 
news about the government's increasingly brutal welfare-to-work drive. Thanks to
research by Corporate Watch <http://www.corporatewatch.org/?lid=4371> and an 
article in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jun/30/david-cameron-work-firms-benefits?newsfeed=true>
, we know that the private companies involved in the government's Work 
Programme have been pushing for unbelievable numbers of people to have their 
benefits cut, aiming at figures that even the ever-more stringent Jobcentre 
Plus regime has refused to sign off. Meanwhile, there's a clear sense that in 
the context of a flatlining economy, the Work Programme's targets – indeed, its 
entire logic – are proving impossible: the scheme's core presumptions were 
based on economic growth of over 2%, and a revived job market. Given their 
non-appearance, the companies involved look they're getting desperate, and in 
the absence of any convincing carrot, frantically reaching for the stick.

In the context of the firms' returns, all this leaves an impossibly nasty 
taste. The best example is the welfare-to-work outfit A4e. This year, it has 
been blitzed with all those allegations of fraud; I've also reported on
allegations of a "champagne culture" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/mar/06/champagne-culture-claims-emma-harrison-a4e>
, company events held in upscale foreign locations, and the dizzying lifestyle 
led by its former chair and public face, Emma Harrison, who last year paid 
herself a dividend of £8.6m. And what apparently lies at the heart of all this 
opulence, and the activities of a firm that claims to be "social purpose company
 <http://www.mya4e.com/>" with "one sole aim, to improve people's lives around 
the world"? Over six months, 10,000 requests were made for its "customers" to 
have their benefits cut, of which only 3,000 were granted by Jobcentre Plus. 
Similar statistics for other companies abound: Working Links referred nearly 
12,000 cases for sanctions, Serco managed just over 9,000, and G4s came in at 
7,780. Such is the upshot of the stock warning that appears on most of the 
correspondence sent to Work Programme participants: "If you do not attend this 
appointment, your benefits could be affected." And how.

This is yet another one of those stories that come with a head-spinning sense 
of how much Britain has changed, under this government and its predecessor. 
Rewind 15 years, and imagine the spectacle of hugely profitable private firms 
pushing for thousands of people to be propelled into borderline destitution: 
the result would have been acres of coverage, and molten anger. And now? Even 
backbench Lib Dems are predictably silent, and Labour restricts its criticisms 
of a system it invented to technocratic hand-wringing, focused not on any kind 
of moral outrage, but whether everything's working, and how much it all might 
cost ("Chaos at DWP is stalling the government's reforms … the welfare bill is 
going through the roof" was the response to Cameron's welfare proposals of Liam 
Byrne, a man for whom the adjective "blank" might have been invented). Even the 
trade unions are bizarrely quiet. The reality is something to which mainstream 
politics cannot admit, and which bumps up against a cross-party accent on 
welfare being the last resort of malingerers: that people are living in fear 
and going hungry, and a cold state machine seems to have been designed to put 
them there.

Now, incidentally, we hear word that plenty of police officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jul/01/reading-the-riots-police-fears?INTCMP=SRCH>
 are of the opinion that last year's riots could easily be repeated. One 
hesitates, of course, to be alarmist. But as more and more people feel the 
cruelties of a policy that makes no sense – that people must be kicked into 
work, even if jobs don't exist – has anyone considered that the two things 
might be connected?
 